
                             2201 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 16, 1997, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: he; Pg. 60

LENGTH: 1137 words

HEADLINE: Mom's woe leading to eye treatment

BYLINE: BY TAMSIN CARLISLE

BODY:


   For a decade, Julia Levy watched as her mother suffered from progressively
worsening age-related macular degeneration, the leading cause of blindness among
the elderly. By the time her mother, Dorothy Coppens, died last year at age 92,
she was almost completely blind.

   Unlike most adult children of macular degeneration victims, Levy was in a
position to try to do something about the crippling eye disease. The
immunologist is president and chief executive officer of QLT Photo Therapeutics
Inc., a Vancouver, Canada, company that started out developing cancer drugs.

   As Levy watched the disease slowly destroy her mother's ability to read,
recognize faces and live on her own, she observed that macular degeneration and
cancer share an important similarity: They both involve the formation of new
abnormal tissue.

   In the case of macular degeneration, the culprits are flawed blood vessels
that bleed under the retina, causing irreversible damage to the light-sensitive
membrane at the back of the eye. What's more, Levy concluded, there was reason
to hope that her company's experimental cancer drug, BPD, might alleviate the
eye disease.

   Medical researchers at Harvard University and the Massachussets Eye & Ear
Infirmary encouraged Levy, who is also a University of British Columbia
professor of microbiology, to pursue her theory. In 1995, QLT teamed up with
CIBA Vision, a unit of Switzerland's Ciba-Geigy Ltd., to develop a therapy for
macular degeneration using the BPD drug, also called benzoporphyrin derivative.

   QLT and CIBA Vision are in the final stages of testing the therapy on a large
group of patients at 22 locations in the United States, Canada and Europe. The
U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved a protocol for these Phase III
clinical trials after earlier tests on smaller patient groups showed promising
results.

   "We have enrolled almost 600 patients in these trials in only 10 months,"
said Neil Bressler, a professor of ophthalmology at Johns Hopkins University who
is coordinating the year-long Phase III trials. This indicates "the large number
of AMD patients waiting for an effective treatment for this debilitating
condition."

   Of course, it's too soon to say how effective the treatment will be over
time, or how frequently patients will need treatments repeated. One side-effect
is extreme sensitivity to sunlight for a short period of time. And Joan Miller,
an assistant professor of ophthalmology at Harvard who helped Levy develop the
treatment, cautions that individual responses to the treatment have been a mixed
bag.

   Another potential therapy that uses low-level radiation is also in clinical
trials, but they're at an early stage and, according to medical journals, have
shown inconclusive results. In addition, some scientists theorize that gene
therapy might one day be used to control the visual deterioration caused by the
disease.

   Macular degeneration is three to four times more common as a cause of
blindness in people over 65 than either diabetic damage or glaucoma. "We
estimate there are 200,000 people in the U.S. each year who develop the blinding
complications of the disease," Bressler said.

   For Levy, her mother's illness wasn't the first time that the experience of a
family member helped shape the 61-year-old scientist's research. One summer
years earlier, she became intrigued by the light-activated compounds produced by
certain plants after her children developed strange marks on their skins that
"looked like oven burns."

   "I knew this must be coming from a plant, but the strange thing was that the
kids only got rashes when the sun was out," said Levy, who had been vacationing
with her family on one of the many pristine small islands off British Columbia's
coast.

   With help from a colleague at the University of British Columbia's botany
department, she determined that the offending substance came from the leaves of
cow parsley, a wild plant that's common along the northern Pacific coast. The
substance, a relative of both BPD and QLT's previously approved cancer drug,
Photofrin, can attack and destroy certain types of human tissue including skin
cells, but only when "turned on" by exposure to light. That discovery led Levy
to found QLT and focus on photo-activated drugs.

   QLT's experimental treatment for macular degeneration makes use of this
property in BPD. But laser light, rather than sunlight, is used to activate the
BPD at a specific location in the eye.

   Because the drug is absorbed faster by the unwanted new blood vessels than by
other tissue in the eye, the medication can theoretically help clear away these
vessels without destroying healthy tissue. This could make BPD an appealing
alternative to the only treatment currently available, which uses heat-producing
lasers to burn away abnormal blood vessels.

   Heat-laser treatment sometimes contains the problem by slowing down the
subsequent formation of new vessels, but the burning process causes additional
retinal scarring and immediate visual impairment, said Bressler. "You're giving
someone poor vision to prevent terrible vision," he noted.

   If patients are pinning their hopes on QLT's drug, so is QLT itself. In
September, investors were disappointed when an FDA panel recommended that the
agency approve the company's Photofrin drug for treating lung cancer in its
early stage, but not in its late stage. QLT's stock, which is traded on the
Nasdaq Stock Market and the Toronto Stock Exchange, fell below $ 18 a share, a
sharp decline from its peak of $ 28.50 in February. This has given new urgency
to QLT's drive to diversify the application of its cancer-treatment technology
to other diseases.

   Though more testing of the treatment remains to be done, some early users are
enthusiastic. One patient, a computer software engineer in Boston who was told
at age 33 that she was going blind with a rare form of macular degeneration that
affects younger people, told QLT that she went "from not being able to read the
headlines on a newspaper to driving my car in just 10 days."

   Wilford Wilson, a retired ophthalmologist and eye surgeon in northern
California, said the disease forced him to give up his surgical practice in
1983. By last year, he found himself shunning groups of people because he
couldn't distinguish faces.

   But the 69-year-old physician said BPD therapy since then has produced a
dramatic improvement. He said he received standard eye drops to dilate the eye's
pupil and was injected in the arm with a dye (the light-sensitive drug). At
timed intervals, a doctor shone a special type of laser onto his eye's macula, a
small area near the retina's center where the new blood vessels cause their
damage.

   Within 24 hours, Wilson said, he could read easily and recognize people. "It
was the difference between night and day."

GRAPHIC: A team of researchers is hoping to develop a therapy for macular
degeneration, which causes irreversible damage to the light-sensitive membrane
at the back of the eye.  ; WALL STREET JOURNAL

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1997


                             2202 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1997 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                        November 14, 1997, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: 'U' team finds new way to insert healthy genes into defective DNA

BYLINE: Jim Dawson; Staff Writer

BODY:

    A team of University of Minnesota geneticists has resurrected a 15
million-year-old segment of DNA that could provide a new and more efficient way
to repair damaged cells in humans and other animals.

    Perry Hackett, a professor of genetics and cell biology at the university,
said the reconstructed DNA segment, dubbed "Sleeping Beauty," eventually could
be used to transport normal genes into cells containing defective forms of the
genes that cause such illnesses as hemophilia or cancer. A paper detailing
Sleeping Beauty's creation is in today's issue of the journal Cell.

    The DNA segment, called a transposon, was re-created by two of Hackett's
post-doctoral students, Zsuzsanna Izsvck and Zoltcn Ivics.  The unique
transposon has the ability to carry a healthy gene past the natural barriers in
a cell and attach it to the chromosomes inside a cell's nucleus. The chromosomes
carry the genetic code, or blueprints, for living things, including humans.

    Current methods for adding material to a chromosome involve inserting the
genetic material in a type of virus known as a retrovirus, and then having the
retrovirus break through the cell's natural defenses, carrying the genetic
material with it.

    That method, and other methods involving bathing cells in solutions of
altered DNA, are not very efficient, with only one in 10,000 to 100,000 cells
actually incorporating the new DNA segments.  Scientists think the new method
could be dramatically more efficient.

    "Sleeping Beauty has the potential to revolutionize nonviral approaches to
gene transfer and gene therapy," said Scott McIvor, director of the university's
gene therapy program.

    Izsvck and Ivics, now working for European science centers, discovered that
the DNA in salmon contained a mutated form of a transposon.  Through a
complicated genetic process they worked their way back through time with the
mutated gene, removing the mutations and rebuilding the gene as it once was
millions of years ago.

    Their reconstructed transposon worked.  It carried new gene sequences into
the nucleus of human and other animal cells (all in petri dishes in labs) and
inserted them into the DNA.

    Although the work is promising for gene therapy, Hackett sees it as a tool
that could be used for many purposes.  "Let's say you need a human protein
product," he said.  Using transposons, "you might get a cow or a goat to produce
it in milk. Or you might have certain proteins produced in the eggs of
chickens," he said.

    The purpose of transposons in nature isn't known, but it is believed that
they could be "parasitic DNA segments," rogue genes that don't do anything more
than find a comfortable home on a strand of DNA and live there.


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1997


                             2203 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 13, 1997, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. 3, Part B

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: Tower charity featuring lofty goal

   Amy Wood (left) and Mary Ullmann Japhet hold the official Tower Climb T-shirt
at the base of the Tower of the Americas, site of Saturday's 12th annual
fund-raiser to fight cystic fibrosis.

BODY: Saturday's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation fund-raiser isn't for wimps.

   But if you're up to the challenge - climbing 950 steps to the top of the
Tower of the Americas - you'll get both a breathtaking view of the city and the
eternal appreciation of cystic fibrosis sufferers.

   The 12th annual Lyda Tower Climb is to get under way at 9 a.m. Saturday at
the tower in HemisFair Park.

   Last year, 430 participants made it to the top, raising $50,000 in the
process, said Beth Morgan, the foundation's director of special events.

   "We're hoping to exceed that this year," she said.

   The money raised will go toward the fight against cystic fibrosis, a
congenital disease that causes mucus to build up in the lungs. About 30,000
children are born each year with the condition, and only half will live to age
27.

   Research has produced new drugs that are proving effective in prolonging the
life expectancy of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Morgan said.

   The foundation also is funding research into gene therapy, which holds
long-term promise, she said.

   The local chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation raises about $400,000
annually, Morgan said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CHARLES BARKSDALE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2204 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 13, 1997, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. 3, Part B

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: Tower charity featuring lofty goal

   Amy Wood (left) and Mary Ullmann Japhet hold the official Tower Climb T-shirt
at the base of the Tower of the Americas, site of Saturday's 12th annual
fund-raiser to fight cystic fibrosis.

BODY: Saturday's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation fund-raiser isn't for wimps.

   But if you're up to the challenge - climbing 950 steps to the top of the
Tower of the Americas - you'll get both a breathtaking view of the city and the
eternal appreciation of cystic fibrosis sufferers.

   The 12th annual Lyda Tower Climb is to get under way at 9 a.m. Saturday at
the tower in HemisFair Park.

   Last year, 430 participants made it to the top, raising $50,000 in the
process, said Beth Morgan, the foundation's director of special events.

   "We're hoping to exceed that this year," she said.

   The money raised will go toward the fight against cystic fibrosis, a
congenital disease that causes mucus to build up in the lungs. About 30,000
children are born each year with the condition, and only half will live to age
27.

   Research has produced new drugs that are proving effective in prolonging the
life expectancy of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Morgan said.

   The foundation also is funding research into gene therapy, which holds
long-term promise, she said.

   The local chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation raises about $400,000
annually, Morgan said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CHARLES BARKSDALE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2205 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 13, 1997, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. 3, Part B

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: Tower charity featuring lofty goal

   Amy Wood (left) and Mary Ullmann Japhet hold the official Tower Climb T-shirt
at the base of the Tower of the Americas, site of Saturday's 12th annual
fund-raiser to fight cystic fibrosis.

BODY: Saturday's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation fund-raiser isn't for wimps.

   But if you're up to the challenge - climbing 950 steps to the top of the
Tower of the Americas - you'll get both a breathtaking view of the city and the
eternal appreciation of cystic fibrosis sufferers.

   The 12th annual Lyda Tower Climb is to get under way at 9 a.m. Saturday at
the tower in HemisFair Park.

   Last year, 430 participants made it to the top, raising $50,000 in the
process, said Beth Morgan, the foundation's director of special events.

   "We're hoping to exceed that this year," she said.

   The money raised will go toward the fight against cystic fibrosis, a
congenital disease that causes mucus to build up in the lungs. About 30,000
children are born each year with the condition, and only half will live to age
27.

   Research has produced new drugs that are proving effective in prolonging the
life expectancy of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Morgan said.

   The foundation also is funding research into gene therapy, which holds
long-term promise, she said.

   The local chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation raises about $400,000
annually, Morgan said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CHARLES BARKSDALE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2206 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 13, 1997, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. 3, Part B

LENGTH: 199 words

HEADLINE: Tower charity featuring lofty goal

   Amy Wood (left) and Mary Ullmann Japhet hold the official Tower Climb T-shirt
at the base of the Tower of the Americas, site of Saturday's 12th annual
fund-raiser to fight cystic fibrosis.

BODY: Saturday's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation fund-raiser isn't for wimps.

   But if you're up to the challenge - climbing 950 steps to the top of the
Tower of the Americas - you'll get both a breathtaking view of the city and the
eternal appreciation of cystic fibrosis sufferers.

   The 12th annual Lyda Tower Climb is to get under way at 9 a.m. Saturday at
the tower in HemisFair Park.

   Last year, 430 participants made it to the top, raising $50,000 in the
process, said Beth Morgan, the foundation's director of special events.

   "We're hoping to exceed that this year," she said.

   The money raised will go toward the fight against cystic fibrosis, a
congenital disease that causes mucus to build up in the lungs. About 30,000
children are born each year with the condition, and only half will live to age
27.

   Research has produced new drugs that are proving effective in prolonging the
life expectancy of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Morgan said.

   The foundation also is funding research into gene therapy, which holds
long-term promise, she said.

   The local chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation raises about $400,000
annually, Morgan said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CHARLES BARKSDALE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2207 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 13, 1997, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO ; Pg. 3, Part B

LENGTH: 197 words

HEADLINE: Tower charity featuring lofty goal

   Amy Wood (left) and Mary Ullmann Japhet hold the official Tower Climb T-shirt
at the base of the Tower of the Americas, site of Saturday's 12th annual
fund-raiser to fight cystic fibrosis.

BODY: Saturday's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation fund-raiser isn't for wimps.

   But if you're up to the challenge - climbing 950 steps to the top of the
Tower of the Americas - you'll get both a breathtaking view of the city and the
eternal appreciation of cystic fibrosis sufferers.

   The 12th annual Lyda Tower Climb is to get under way at 9 a.m. Saturday at
the tower in HemisFair Park.

   Last year, 430 participants made it to the top, raising $50,000 in the
process, said Beth Morgan, the foundation's director of special events.

   "We're hoping to exceed that this year," she said.

   The money raised will go toward the fight against cystic fibrosis, a
congenital disease that causes mucus to build up in the lungs. About 30,000
children are born each year with the condition, and only half will live to age
27.

   Research has produced new drugs that are proving effective in prolonging the
life expectancy of cystic fibrosis sufferers, Morgan said.

   The foundation also is funding research into gene therapy, which holds
long-term promise, she said.

   The local chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation raises about $400,000
annually, Morgan said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CHARLES BARKSDALE / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2208 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              November 13, 1997, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A4, HEALTH UPDATE COLUMN

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH UPDATE

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


ASTHMA

Lower doses of steroids found to control condition

   Modest doses of inhaled steroids combined with other drugs control asthma as
well as or better than high doses of steroids, while reducing the risk of side
effects from long-term use, two studies found.

   Asthma afflicts 14 million to 15 million Americans, killing more than 5,000
people a year.

   One study showed that after a year of treatment, patients getting formoterol,
an inhaled airway-relaxing type of drug, and low doses of budesonide had fewer
symptoms, better lung function and more asthma attack-free days than those
getting moderate doses of budesonide alone. However, the higher dose of
budesonide was more effective at preventing the most severe attacks.

   The combination of formoterol and a moderate dose of budesonide proved to be
the best treatment.

   In the other study, researchers from the Imperial College School of Medicine
in London found that a

   combination of budesonide and theophylline was just as effective as high-dose
treatment with the inhaled steroid alone and was considerably cheaper.

LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE

Sufferers must wait longer to learn fate of new drug

   Thousands of Lou Gehrig's disease sufferers must wait up to six more months
to learn the fate of a long-awaited experimental drug since its maker this week
made the unusual move of gaining more review time from the government.

   Patients have clamored for Myotrophin since 1996 and recently began protests
outside Food and Drug Administration offices.

   But the agency has received conflicting studies, one that concluded
Myotrophin works modestly and another that found it didn't work at all.

   Scientists in May urged the agency to reject the drug. The agency's deadline
to decide was Tuesday - but at the last minute, Cephalon Inc., the manufacturer,
formally withdrew and then immediately refiled its Myotrophin application. The
unusual move extends the agency's deadline six more months.

   About 30,000 Americans suffer Lou Gehrig's disease, formally known as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

MENTAL HEALTH

Removing therapy limits would not raise cost much

   Managed care providers would see only a slight increase in their costs if
they were to remove current limits on therapy for patients with mental health
problems, a study concludes.

   Twenty-four managed care plans that provided unlimited mental health coverage
with minimal co-payments were studied, and researchers estimated that removing
the typical $ 25,000 annual limit on such therapy would have increased yearly
costs by only $ 1 per enrollee.

DIET DRUGS

Heart-valve problems rise in pill-takers, paper says

   Patients taking appetite suppressants are more likely than those not on the
drugs to suffer from significant heart-valve leaks, the Wall Street Journal
reported Wednesday.

   A study found significant heart-valve problems in 25 percent of 226 patients
taking a variety of diet pills, the paper said. Just 1 percent of an 81-person
control group who hadn't taken the drugs had similar problems.

CANCER

Discovery links enzyme to cells' ability to spread

   Israeli scientists said Wednesday they had found a new type of enzyme that is
linked to the ability of cancer cells to replicate and spread to other organs in
the body.

   Although it is only one of many factors involved in the development of the
disease, the scientists said that if further tests were successful it could have
long-term applications for diagnosis or in gene therapy.

   Researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel - writing
in the scientific journal Nature - said the DAP kinase, or enzyme, regulated the
death and growth of cancer cells.

   "When tumor cells lose that kinase they become more aggressive and
metastasise. When the normal levels of the kinase are restored by genetic
manipulations, we can reduce the metastatic properties of the cells," said Adi
Kimchi, one of the researchers.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1997


                             2209 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   November 11, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for heart fuels new venture; Human Genome, St.
Elizabeth's form Vascular Genetics; Development is mission; Deal aims to tap
huge potential market in coronary field

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Human Genome Sciences Inc., the Rockville-based gene discovery company, said
yesterday that it will launch a new venture with St. Elizabeth's Medical Center
in Boston to develop and market a promising gene therapy treatment for heart and
other vascular diseases.

   The new company, Vascular Genetics Inc., will focus on clinical development
of a gene discovered by Human Genome, which the company found in laboratory
studies and holds the promise for triggering growth of new blood vessels,
opening up circulation in blocked areas.

   Genes carry the DNA codes not only for characteristics of the body, but for
many of its myriad functions.

   The company is also being founded by Cato Holding, a Research Triangle,
N.C.-based company that specializes in managing clinical drug trials, and Dr.
Jeffrey Isner, a cardiologist at St. Elizabeth's. He invented the method for
delivering the gene into muscle tissue.

   "This company offers the quickest route to clinical development and clinical
validation of this gene," said Dr. William Haseltine, chairman and chief
executive officer of Human Genome.

   Haseltine said the deal marked an important milestone for publicly held Human
Genome, which has deals with several major pharmaceutical developers for access
to its rich storehouse of genetic information.

   "This is the first time we have unlocked the assets we have in gene therapy,
and it could well prove a model for future deals," he said.

   Yesterday, shares in Human Genome rose $ 1.31 to close at $ 42.31.

   The new venture joins a growing list of companies seeking to develop gene
therapy treatments for the vascular disease market.

   Among the others: privately held GenVec of Rockville, which has a deal worth
an estimated $ 100 million to jointly develop a gene therapy product to treat
common cardiovascular diseases with Warner-Lambert's Parke-Davis pharmaceutical
division; Genzyme Transgenics Corp. of Framingham, Mass.; and CaridoGene
Therapeutics Inc. of Princeton, N.J.

   At stake is a huge potential market. In the United States alone, there are
500,000 coronary bypass operations annually and more than 100,000 procedures to
restore circulation to blocked limbs. An estimated 200,000 more are afflicted
with peripheral vascular disorders, such as atherosclerosis.

   The gene that Vascular Genetics will attempt to develop into a marketable
treatment is known as vascular endothelial growth factor-2, or VEGF-2.

   Haseltine said Human Genome's studies on the gene found that it is
responsible for triggering the production of a naturally occurring protein
responsible for blood vessel growth.

   If fully developed and cleared for medical use, injections of the gene might
prove useful in heart disease patients needing coronary bypass surgery or
procedures to correct poor circulation caused by ulcers and disease.

   "We have assembled a team with a combination of skills to get this developed
in the shortest period of time possible," said Haseltine.

   The announcement of the Vascular Genetics deal comes one day after Isner told
heart disease experts attending a meeting of the American Heart Association in
Orlando, Fla., that his team of researchers had seen dramatic results in a small
group of heart disease patients treated with a similar gene to the one Human
Genome discovered.

   The treatment not only improved circulation in all but one patient, but
reduced pain and enabled the patients greater freedom of movement, Isner
reported.

   Isner, who is also a professor at Tufts University School of Medicine, said
that it is too early to tell whether the treatment could serve as a primary
treatment for heart disease.

   But he believes gene therapy for cardiovascular diseases could one day
"become routinely available."

   Under the agreement, Human Genome will provide Vascular Genetics with about $
600,000 in start-up loan funds.

   Human Genome holds 19.9 percent of the new company's stock, and warrants for
the purchase of an additional 5.1 percent equity stake.

   The company also has the option to buy all of the stock in Vascular Genetics,
and would receive royalties on sales of any treatments commercialized.

   Pub Date: 11/11/97

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1997


                             2210 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 11, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Company Is Set

BODY:

   A new company has been formed to pursue a gene therapy that could form new
blood vessels and heal ulcers in patients with blocked arteries.

   The concern, Vascular Genetics Inc., is being formed by Human Genome Science
Inc., St. Elizabeth's Medical Center of Boston, the Cato Holding Company and Dr.
Jeffrey M. Isner. The concern will try to commercialize the work of Dr. Isner,
who is chief of cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's as well as professor
of pathology and medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine.

    The formation of Vascular Genetics follows the presentation of data this
week at the American Heart Association's annual scientific sessions, in which
Dr. Isner showed that gene therapy with vascular growth factors could result in
the formation of new blood vessels.

   The new company will have rights to a gene discovered by Human Genome
Sciences, VEGF-2, that has been shown to stimulate blood vessel growth in animal
studies.

   Cato, a contract research organization, will contribute general management
and administration, regulatory services, and clinical development strategy for
the potential products.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2211 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   November 11, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z27

LENGTH: 1061 words

HEADLINE: The Wild World of Genes

BYLINE: Lawrence G. Proulx, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Unzipped Genes: Taking Charge of

   Baby-Making in the New Millennium

   By Martine Rothblatt

   Temple University Press, Philadelphia

   201 pages; $ 49.95 cloth, $ 18.95 paper

   Eugenics is as close to a taboo as one can find in science today. Find
someone who calls himself a eugenicist and you're likely to have found someone
most people would call a kook.

   At the same time, there are plenty of geneticists, embryologists, fertility
consultants, reproductive endocrinologists and genetic counselors. The federally
funded Human Genome Project is methodically cataloguing every nucleotide in
every gene in our bodies. In vitro fertilization is a commonplace. And gene
therapy is the hot synonym for hope in medical research.

   There is, obviously, an important difference between the eugenicists of the
past and the biotechnologists of the present. No one is standing up today for
the sterilization of the "subpar" or the removal of "human rubbish." The crude
recommendations of so-called negative eugenics are not for discussion.

   Nonetheless, science is marching on, as they used to say, and accumulating
knowledge and know-how that eugenicists hardly dared to dream of. When genes can
be altered or substituted in a petri dish, and "defective" or undesirable
fertilized eggs can be identified and selectively killed, many of the grosser
tactics of the eugenicists may seem less immoral than old-fashioned.

   Today, even objections to cloning often have a pro forma ring. The European
Commission's bioethics committee denounced the implantation of human clones in
women but not research on human cloning and not the largely transferable
research on animal cloning. President Clinton called for a cloning ban and then
clarified his call: "I want to make clear that there is nothing inherently
immoral or wrong with these new techniques -- used for proper purposes." And
public commentators generally have told the public not to get in a Luddite-like
sweat over it.

   In "Unzipped Genes: Taking Charge of Baby-Making in the New Millennium,"
Washington lawyer Martine Rothblatt has rolled up her sleeves and plunged her
hands deep into this science's bucket of promise and peril. There is nothing
warm and fuzzy about this book. Some of it will be dismissed as radical
nonsense. But Rothblatt is uncommonly forthright in looking this science in the
eye: She has the courage to take its development as a foregone conclusion and to
openly celebrate its creative potentials while she proposes safeguards against
its dangers.

   The book will shock many readers, not only because of the wildness of some of
Rothblatt's recommendations but also for what it takes as a given: Science
fiction is being made into living fact. Ready or not, here it comes.

   In her preface, Rothblatt calls herself "a biotechnology convert" and states
that we both "cannot survive" without it and "cannot survive its unethical use."
She bases her ethics on the principles of "freedom of expression, prohibition of
discrimination and protection from disease." In creating children, she argues,
people should be allowed virtually limitless freedom, including the freedom to
use the entire gamut of human genes and even genes transplanted from other
species. (For experiments in design that venture too far afield, "tort law
provides a fairly solid remedy": wrongful life or wrongful birth suits by
children against "doctors, hospitals and even their parents for bringing them
into the world in such disastrous condition that they would prefer to be dead.")
Governments must act, however, to educate against discrimination by sex or race,
say, and take the necessary steps to prevent "democidal holocausts," that is,
the elimination of unwanted types by the exclusive selection of other types. At
the same time, she relishes the science's potential ability to eliminate
everything from horrible hereditary diseases to wrinkles.

   The greatest promise, in Rothblatt's eyes, lies in the coming technological
capacity to make reproduction a fully informed and conscious creative act. She
embraces the "Every child a wanted child" standard more closely than anyone I've
ever heard of, and she audaciously -- many will prefer to say preposterously --
offers a proposition directly aimed at implementing it.

   "Inocuseeding" is Rothblatt's plan. By it she means the universal
vasectomizing of all teenage males, just after they've surrendered a couple
samples of sperm for cryo-preservation. (With time and progress, this procedure
may be able to be effected just after birth, with circumcision, vasectomy and
the banking of future sperm cells all done together.) Inocuseeding will
guarantee, she argues, that children aren't made by accident, and besides its
good effects on child design it will bring vast benefit to the women of the
world, who now are so vulnerable to unintended pregnancy and the costs and
illnesses that can come with it.

   Inocuseeding is a sort of immunization, she argues. Compulsory vaccination
has long been deemed moral and legal. She cites the 1905 Supreme Court ruling in
Jacobson v.  Massachusetts, in which a man's unwillingness to be vaccinated
against smallpox was held to be less important than the State's right to protect
citizens from disease. This country vigorously promoted and accepted
vaccinations against polio, a disease that affected only a fraction of the
number harmed by unwanted pregnancy. In Rothblatt's eyes, any pregnancy a woman
does not fully want is a disease, and "it causes no harm to men to implement
universal inocuseeding, but potentially saves nearly every woman from one or
more bouts with a life-threatening, career-derailing, mentally traumatic
disease." While inocuseeding "may not seem as 'romantic' as the ancient 'pump
and squirt' approach, neither is buying plastic-wrapped, pasteurized meat in the
frozen food section as 'romantic' as eating a fresh-killed, blood-soaked,
fly-covered animal."

   There was a time when many Americans snarled at having to carry around a
numbered identity card for Social Security. Now they are more or less
indifferent while the inmost secrets of their physical being are identified and
science aims directly at mastery of reproduction.

   "Unzipped Genes" sketches out an ethical map of territory that many people
might vainly prefer not to enter. It's a startling welcome to the future.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2212 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   November 11, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: Human Genome, Partners Create Joint Venture; Firm to Develop Drugs for
Vascular Diseases

BYLINE: Beth Berselli, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Human Genome Sciences Inc., a Rockville biotechnology firm, announced
yesterday that it has created a company to develop and commercialize gene
therapy drugs to treat vascular diseases.

   Vascular Genetics Inc. is a joint venture between HGS, cardiologist Jeffrey
Isner of Boston, Cato Holding Co. of Research Triangle Park, N.C., and St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center of Boston. The parties said Vascular Genetics will
initially focus on developing a gene called "vascular endothelial growth factor
2," or VEGF-2, which is believed to grow new blood vessels in humans.

   The new company will be based in Research Triangle Park, with clinical
research to be conducted across the country.

   HGS discovered and characterized the gene about three years ago. Research by
Isner at St. Elizabeth's hospital showed that VEGF gene therapy could be used to
grow vessels to bypass obstructions of blood flow in a person's legs, thus
reducing the need for amputation.

   In a report presented at the American Heart Association meeting in Orlando
last weekend, Isner said the gene therapy also could work in the human heart by
generating new blood vessels to create a natural bypass around blocked coronary
arteries. This could be useful for heart patients for whom balloon angioplasty,
bypass surgery or drugs designed to restore blood flow don't work or present
high risks.

   The collaboration is expected to shorten the time needed to bring the gene
therapy to market, the parties said. "We think this vehicle offers the most
direct and quickest way to bring, and to conduct, the clinical trials," said
William A. Haseltine, chairman and chief executive of HGS.

   Haseltine said human clinical trials for the gene therapy should begin in the
first half of 1998.

   Analysts praised the venture.

   "This is yet another method for Human Genome Sciences to generate value from
its core genome database," said Matthew Murray, senior biotech analyst at Lehman
Brothers Inc. in New York.

   Investors also reacted favorably, sending HGS's shares on the Nasdaq Stock
Market up $ 1.31 1/4 yesterday to close at $ 42.31 1/4 share.

   Under terms of the agreement, HGS will transfer its rights to VEGF-2 to
Vascular Genetics, and St. Elizabeth's will assign rights to the gene delivery
technology developed by Isner. Vascular Genetics also has the option to select
as many as two additional HGS-discovered genes related to treating vascular
diseases.

   Cato, a contract research organization, will hold 40.1 percent of the equity
in Vascular Genetics, and Isner and St. Elizabeth's will each hold 20 percent.
HGS will control 19.9 percent of the company and will receive warrants to buy an
additional 5.1 percent interest.

   HGS will receive undisclosed royalties on net sales from products developed
and commercialized by Vascular Genetics. It also has the option to manufacture
VEGF-2 and the two other genes and would receive a manufacturing fee.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2213 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: Doctors grow new arteries for patients with heart illness; Gene
therapy avoids amputating legs, new studies say

SOURCE: FROM WIRE REPORTS

BODY:


   BOSTON -- Boston researchers have used gene therapy for the first time to
grow new arteries in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing
blocked blood vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that would otherwise
have been amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart disease patients who undergo leg bypass surgery every year,
but also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts said.

   The leg treatment halted gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation in
all but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients to
move around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of the St. Elizabeth's Medical Center
in Boston told an Orlando, Fla., meeting of the American Heart Association
yesterday.

   In a second study also reported yesterday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart-disease patients to bypass artery blockages. About 50 percent
of such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene therapy, but all of
the treated bypasses remained open after nine months, researchers said.

   The two projects "are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease," said Dr. Valentine Fuster of
Mount Sinai Hospital, president of the American Heart Association. The two
studies are "the first applying gene therapy to cardiovascular disease in humans
with success," he added.

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness. In most cases it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy
one, but in some instances, such as these, it might involve shutting a gene off
or producing a therapeutic protein.

   Despite its much-vaunted prospects, proponents have had relatively few
successes -- in large part because they have not been able to get replacement
genes into a large enough number of the patients' cells and to get them to work
for long enough.

   Both the approaches used in these two studies required only a brief period of
treatment to alter the course of the disease permanently.

   "This is the first time that gene therapy has been proven to work," said
Isner.

   "In all the previous 200 attempts at genetic engineering, it has never been
shown to have any lasting effect on the body, and many people thought genetic
engineering was just pie in the sky," he added. "We have answered that."

   Isner said he has asked the federal Food and Drug Administration for
permission to start the therapy on patients with blockages in their hearts,
which biologically are virtually identical to clogged leg arteries. He hopes to
begin those experiments by early next year.

   "Since this gene therapy works in the leg, it should work in the heart," he
said.

   He predicted that the therapy could become as common as heart bypass
operations and angioplasty. "The ability to grow new blood vessels, whether in
patients' legs or in their hearts, will become another therapeutic option," he
said.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of thei distance from the heart. Because of the reduced flow
in their legs, the patients had severe skin ulcers, gangrene and intense resting
pain that typically required heavy narcotic treatment. All other attempts at
treatment had failed and the next step, without treatment, would have been
amputation.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF, which stimulates the
growth of blood vessels. They injected the DNA into muscles at four sites along
the leg at the beginning of the treatment and once again four weeks later.

   The VEGF injections stimulated new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow
of blood through the legs. All of the patients had an improved ability to walk,
reduced pain and improved ulcer healing. In eight of the 10 treated legs, that
improved blood flow could be verified by magnetic resonance imaging. Angiograms
confirmed evidence of new vessels in seven of the 10 treated limbs.

   Pub Date: 11/10/97

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1997


                             2214 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 10, 1997 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 002

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: DNA injected into patientsto grow new blood vessels

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   ORLANDO, FLA. - Doctors in Boston have become the first to successfully use
gene therapy in a clinical setting, reporting yesterday they have been able to
grow new blood vessels in patients by injecting DNA into their muscles.

   So far, the researchers at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center have used the
procedure to grow vessels to bypass blockages of blood flow in the legs of about
20 patients. They intend to try the procedure on coronary arteries within the
next couple of months.

   "There have been more than 200 trials of gene therapy, but we have not seen
any evidence until now of any clinical success," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner, the St.
Elizabeth's cardiologist who presented the results yesterday at the American
Heart Association's 70th Scientific Sessions.

   "This is the first evidence of a successful application," he said.

   In the treatment, the gene or DNA that produces the growth factor that
stimulates the creation of blood vessels during development of the embryo is
injected into muscles in patients' legs.

   Isner said new blood vessels were able to be grown in 16 of 20 patients who
received the experimental injections, and the vessels are working successfully
to deliver blood. It took only a few weeks for the new vessels to appear.

   "The leg arteries are working," he said, noting that blood pressure tests
have confirmed it. "We are improving blood flow into the limbs."

   In addition, some patients reported toenail growth for the first time in
years.

   The patients' leg arteries were so badly blocked that they had been scheduled
to undergo amputations. Since having the procedures, all but one of the
patients' legs have been saved.

   "Since this gene therapy works in the leg, it should work in the heart,"
Isner said. An upcoming trial is expected to find out. If it works, the
treatment could eventually replace bypass surgery and angioplasty as the
first-line treatment for clogged coronary arteries.

   But Dr. R. Sanders Williams, a cardiologist and molecular geneticist at the
University of Texas, urged caution on the heart studies. He said injecting DNA
into the heart muscle could prove dangerous since the heart muscle cannot repair
itself as the leg muscle can. The injections can cause muscle damage.

   Still, he said the findings are impressive.

   Isner's study was one of two gene therapy studies presented at the
conference. Another, by researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital, is using
gene therapy to try to prevent the blockages that often occur in graft arteries
following bypass surgery.

   In their treatment, doctors Michael Mann and Victor Dzau soak the veins to be
grafted in a solution that contains a short segment of DNA that is intended to
reduce the growth of new cells lining the grafted vein. The growth of the cells
renders them susceptible to the formation of plaque.

   So far, the doctors have tried the procedure on 40 patients who were having
bypass surgery to get around blocked leg vessels. A report on the first four
patients was presented yesterday.

   The grafts on all four patients remain open nine months after the procedure,
but it is too soon to say if it is the procedure that is responsible for the
success rate. A major study of 1,000 patients will be started soon.


LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1997


                             2215 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 898 words

HEADLINE: Boston groups show gene therapy success;
Researchers able to grow blood vessels

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   Two groups of Boston scientists yesterday reported the first successes in
using gene therapy to treat humans with severe cardiovascular disease, the
nation's leading killer.

   The researchers treated patients with severely clogged leg arteries, a
painful condition that afflicts as many as 200,000 Americans and often leads to
amputation. Soon they plan to try the new approaches in patients with coronary
artery disease, which puts nearly 14 million Americans at risk for heart
attacks.

   "These reports are opening the door to genetic therapy in heart disease,"
said Dr. Valentin Fuster, president-elect of the American Heart Association,
which featured the research at the opening of its 70th annual scientific
sessions here.

   Other leading specialists said the new reports are a surprising demonstration
that genetic engineering can be used to grow new blood vessels - easing the
effects of decades of artery-clogging buildup - and to prevent vein grafts from
reclogging after bypasses, the leading surgical treatment for atherosclerosis.

   "This is tremendously exciting," said Dr. R. Sanders Williams, chief of
cardiology at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.
"It's the first wave of many gene therapy approaches to come."

   In gene therapy, researchers try to engineer patients' DNA to treat or cure
an illness. Some strategies involve replacing defective genes. But in others,
such as in these two studies, doctors attempt to block or induce a particular
gene for a therapeutic effect.

   The two Boston reports, from St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and from Brigham
and Women's Hospital, which is affiliated with Harvard Medical School, use
different strategies to tackle the same problem.

   In one, reported by Dr. Iris Baumgartner of St. Elizabeth's, the researchers
injected patients' leg muscles with short stretches of DNA containing the
genetic code for vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that stimulates
the growth of new blood vessels.

   The gene was injected in the form researchers call "naked DNA," meaning it
was not encapsulated in a harmless virus or other delivery vehicle. Earlier
experiments had shown that the injected DNA only persisted about three weeks
within blood vessel cells, but two injections in multiple leg sites, spaced a
month apart, apparently were enough to increase blood flow in most of the
diseased legs.

   In 15 of 20 patients injected so far, the growth-factor gene found its way
into patients' existing blood vessel cells and stimulated the growth of enough
new vessels to result in significant improvement of their symptoms. The
scientists documented the growth of new blood vessels through ultrasound scans,
magnetic resonance imaging, and stronger ankle pulses.

   The improvement in some patients was dramatic. Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, chief of
cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's, said in an interview that doctors
had recommended below-the-knee amputations for six of the first 9 patients
treated with gene therapy, the only results formally presented here. The
experimental therapy has so far avoided amputation in all but two patients.

   One of those patients still benefited from the treatment, Isner said.
Initially, the 39-year-old woman suffered from gangrene in both feet because of
severely restricted blood flow; gene therapy halted the gangrene in one leg but
failed in the other leg because it was too far advanced. "Without this therapy
she would have been a double amputee," Isner said.

   The remaining eight patients all experienced varying benefits. For instance,
skin ulcers healed or markedly improved in four of seven patients with such
sores. Six patients who suffered from severe leg pain at rest reported less use
of pain killers. Five were able to walk longer distances.

   Researchers from Brigham and Women's focused on a problem that affects
patients who have vein grafts surgically implanted to bypass severely obstructed
arteries in the legs or heart. Within a year, as many as 30 percent of such
grafts become clogged again among patients with severe leg disease, said Dr.
Victor J. Dzau, chairman of medicine at Brigham and Women's.

   Reclogging occurs, Dzau explained, because the thin-walled vein grafts are
quickly damaged by the high blood pressures they encounter when they are used as
arteries. In response, cells lining the vein walls undergo abnormal growth, the
first step in atherosclerosis.

   The Harvard group blocked this abnormal growth by bathing the vein grafts in
a solution containing a "decoy" molecule that blocks the activation of
growth-promoting genes. The five-minute treatment takes place in the operating
room after the section of vein is removed from the patient's leg and before it
is stitched into place as an arterial bypass graft.

   In animal experiments, the decoy strategy blocked abnormal cell growth, which
permitted the vein grafts to thicken over time and become more artery-like. In a
human trial that began last January, said Dr. Michael Mann of Harvard, the vein
grafts remain clear in the four patients evaluated thus far.

   Another 41 patients have had the procedure at Brigham and Women's, but these
patients were randomly assigned to the gene therapy, and neither patients nor
surgeons will know results for at least two years. The Harvard researchers are
planning a national trial of the technique that will enroll 2,000 patients.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1997


                             2216 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: USE OF GENE THERAPY TO GROW NEW ARTERIES OFFERS HOPE FOR;
HEART-DISEASE, BYPASS PATIENTS

BYLINE: Los Angeles Times

BODY:


   For the first time, researchers have used gene therapy to grow new arteries
in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing blocked blood
vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that would otherwise have been
amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart-disease patients who undergo leg bypass surgery every year,
but also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts said.

   The leg treatment halted gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation in
all but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients to
move around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston told a meeting of the American Heart Association in Orlando, Fla.,
Sunday.

   In a second study, also reported Sunday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart-disease patients to bypass artery blockages. About 50 percent
of such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene therapy, but all of
the treated bypasses remained open after nine months, researchers said.

   The two projects "are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease," said Dr. Valentine Fuster of
Mount Sinai Hospital, president of the American Heart Association. The two
studies are "the first applying gene therapy to cardiovascular disease in humans
with success."

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness.

   In most cases, it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy one, but
in some instances, such as these, it might involve shutting a gene off or
producing a therapeutic protein.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of the distance from the heart.

   Because of the reduced flow in their legs, the patients had severe skin
ulcers, gangrene and intense resting pain that typically required heavy narcotic
treatment. All other attempts had failed and the next step, without treatment,
would have been amputation.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF, which stimulates the
growth of blood vessels.

   The VEGF injections stimulated new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow
of blood through the legs.

   All of the patients had an improved ability to walk, reduced pain and
improved ulcer healing.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1997


                             2217 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 10, 1997, MONDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could help heart patients

BYLINE: BY THOMAS H. MAUGH II

BODY:


   Boston researchers have for the first time used gene therapy to grow new
arteries in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing blocked
blood vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that would otherwise have been
amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart disease patients who undergo leg bypass surgery every year,
but also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts said.

   The leg treatment halted gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation in
all but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients to
move around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston told an Orlando, Fla., meeting of the American Heart Association on
Sunday.

   In a second study also reported Sunday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart disease patients to bypass artery blockages. About 50 percent
of such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene therapy, but all of
the treated bypasses remained open after nine months, researchers said.

   The two projects "are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease," said Dr. Valentine Fuster of
Mount Sinai Hospital, also president of the American Heart Association.

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness. In most cases it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy
one, but in others it might involve shutting off a gene or producing a
therapeutic protein.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of their distance from the heart. Because of the reduced flow
in their legs, the patients had severe skin ulcers, gangrene and intense resting
pain that typically required heavy narcotic treatment.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein that stimulates the growth of blood vessels. The injections stimulated
new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow of blood through the legs. All of
the patients had an improved ability to walk, reduced pain and improved ulcer
healing.

   Patients who are at an earlier stage of disease and still can be treated with
bypasses are the focus of the second study, reported by Dr. Michael Mann of
Harvard and Dr. Victor J. Dzau of Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston. The
conventional treatment in such patients is to surgically implant a vein to
bypass the obstructed leg artery. These doctors said they hope to try the same
procedure during heart bypasses within the next year.

GRAPHIC: LOS ANGELES TIMES

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1997


                             2218 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 10, 1997, MONDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: Impotence pills raise great expectations;
New therapies promise less pain, more spontaneity

SOURCE: MITCH MANDEL; RODALE IMAGES

BYLINE: BY LAURAN NEERGAARD

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Prostate cancer surgery left Alfred Pariser impotent for a year, until
experimental pills restored the Los Angeles man's sexual function in a mere 20
minutes.

   "My wife said it was like I was Tarzan," said Pariser, 58, who entered a
study of the drug Viagra after rejecting a standard treatment -- injections of
drugs into the penis -- as "too scary."

   Doctors say millions of men are about to get a revolution in impotence
treatment from the first oral medicines that promise to restore sexual function.
The closest of three pills in the pipeline, Viagra, could be sold as early as
April.

   "Therapies are going to be less invasive, more spontaneous," said Dr. Irwin
Goldstein of Boston University.

   Between 10 million and 20 million American men suffer impotence at some point
in their lives. Impotence increases with age, and some 80 percent is caused by
disease, particularly diabetes and heart conditions that restrict blood flow,
Goldstein said. Impotence also can be psychological or a side effect of certain
drugs.

   Impotence is highly treatable, but there are drawbacks: penile implants
require surgery; vacuum-style devices that force blood into the penis interrupt
lovemaking; injecting drugs into the penis or inserting a drug-carrying pellet
into the urethra can be painful, and the injections sometimes cause hours-long
erections.

   Now three experimental pills promise to erase the discomfort:

   Pfizer Inc.'s Viagra, or sildenafil, blocks an enzyme found mainly in the
penis that breaks down a chemical produced during sexual stimulation. The longer
that chemical, called cyclic GMP, stays around, the better chance of an
erection.

   In clinical studies of several thousand men, Viagra helped about 80 percent,
said Dr. Harin Padma-Nathan of The Male Clinic in Santa Monica, Calif., who
helped test all three drugs. The Food and Drug Administration has promised a
quick review of Viagra, meaning it could be sold by April.

   Unlike injection drugs, Viagra doesn't cause erections unless the man is
sexually stimulated.

   "If I take the pill and . . . my wife suddenly has a headache, or her mother
calls and she's no longer in the mood, nothing happens to me," Pariser said.
"This drug is the most natural, normal thing you can take."

   Viagra was a failed heart drug investigated again after some heart patients
unexpectedly reported erections. About 10 percent of patients report mild side
effects such as headache or flushing.

   While Viagra works in the penis, Tap Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s apomorphine
"works completely in the brain," Padma-Nathan said.

   Apomorphine affects chemicals in the brain region associated with initiating
erections. But it also causes serious nausea and vomiting, making it a turnoff
for romance.

   But Tap created a version that dissolves under the tongue, which gets the
drug into the body so slowly that it doesn't cause nausea, Padma-Nathan said.

   The drug is 70 percent effective in the psychologically impotent, and studies
in disease-caused impotence are concluding now, he said. Tap had planned to seek
FDA approval in 1999, but Padma-Nathan said the drug works well enough that the
company may act sooner.

   Vasomax is an oral version of a current injection drug that dilates penile
blood vessels. Trials show it can help about 40 percent of men with moderate
impotence. Manufacturer Zonagen Inc. is expected to seek FDA approval by year's
end.

   Padma-Nathan expects easier treatments to persuade half of impotence
sufferers to seek help, up from the mere 5 percent to 10 percent who do today.

   But scientists are pursuing even easier treatments. Animal experiments
promise that gene therapy may one day allow men to battle impotence over long
periods by taking just two or three shots a year, said Dr. George Christ of the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

GRAPHIC: Three developing drug therapies for impotence seek restored sexual
function without side effects in convenient, pill form. ; ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1997


                             2219 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      November 10, 1997 Monday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy grows arteries New treatments aid heart patients

BYLINE: By Thomas H. Maugh II, Los Angeles Times

BODY:
 BOSTON - Researchers have for the first time used gene therapy to grow new
arteries in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing blocked
blood vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that otherwise would have been
amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart-disease patients who undergo leg bypass surgery every year but
also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts said.

   The treatment halted gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation in all
but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients to move
around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston told a meeting of the American Heart Association Sunday.

   In a second study also reported Sunday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart-disease patients to bypass artery blockages.

   About 50 percent of such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene
therapy, but all of the treated bypasses remained open after nine months,
researchers said.

   The two projects "are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease," said Dr. Valentine Fuster of
Mount Sinai Hospital, president of the American Heart Association.

   The two studies are "the first applying gene therapy to cardiovascular
disease in humans with success," he added.

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness. In most cases it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy
one, but in some instances, such as these, it might involve shutting off a gene
or producing a therapeutic protein.

   Despite its much-vaunted prospects, proponents have had relatively few
successes - in large part because they have not been able to get replacement
genes into a large enough number of the patients' cells and to get them to
persist long enough.

   Both the approaches used in these two studies required only a brief period of
treatment to permanently alter the course of the disease.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of the distance from the heart.

   Because of the reduced flow in their legs, the patients had severe skin
ulcers, gangrene and intense resting pain that typically required heavy narcotic
treatment. All other attempts at treatment had failed and the next step, without
treatment, would have been amputation.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF, which stimulates the
growth of blood vessels.

   They injected the DNA into muscles at four sites along the leg at the
beginning of the treatment and once again four weeks later.

   The VEGF injections stimulated new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow
of blood through the legs.

   All of the patients had an improved ability to walk, reduced pain and
improved ulcer healing. In eight of the 10 treated legs, that improved blood
flow could be verified by magnetic resonance imaging. Angiograms confirmed
evidence of new vessels in seven of the 10 treated limbs.

   Blood pressure in the legs also improved. At the beginning of the study,
blood pressure at the ankles was only one-third that in the arms.

   After treatment, pressure had increased to half that of the arms, a
significant increase.

   Only one of the patients' legs had to be amputated; a 39-year-old woman with
severe atherosclerosis in both legs.

   At the start of the study, "the front half of one foot was already black due
to the onset of gangrene," Isner said, "but it had affected only the toe of the
other leg."

   Therapy was applied to both legs and halted the gangrene in the least
affected one but failed in the other leg, "because it was too far gone," he
said.

   Isner's team is planning to enlarge the trial to include other centers and is
applying to the Food and Drug Administration to conduct similar trials to
circumvent coronary arteries.

   Patients who are at an earlier stage of disease and still can be treated with
bypasses are the focus of the second study, reported by Dr. Michael Mann of
Harvard and Dr. Victor J. Dzau of Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston. The
conventional treatment in such patients is to surgically implant a vein -
usually the saphenous vein from the leg - to bypass the obstructed leg artery.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2220 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  NOVEMBER 10, 1997 Monday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: GENES MAY CAUSE HEART TO FIX ITSELF

BYLINE: DANIEL Q. HANEY Associated Press

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   Heart researchers working with gene therapy said Sunday that humans someday
soon may grow their own coronary bypasses.

   Injecting extra genes into the heart will trigger it to sprout new blood
vessels, the researchers said. These could work as well as the ones surgeons
stitch into place during coronary bypass surgery, now performed more than
300,000 times a year in the United States.

   So far, doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with
dangerously clogged arteries in the legs. It seems to have spared some from
amputations.

   For several years, scientists have talked about manipulating genes to cure a
variety of human ills.

   "This is the first time that any gene therapy has been shown to be clinically
successful," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

   Reports by Isner and another team working on a different gene therapy
approach were presented Sunday at a meeting of the American Heart Association in
Orlando, Fla. If their promising but preliminary findings stand up to more
rigorous testing, gene therapy may someday be an important way to control heart
disease, the nation's biggest killer.

   "This is opening a door to genetic therapy in cardiovascular disease," said
Dr. Valentin Fuster of Mt. Sinai Medical Center in New York City, incoming
president of the heart association.

   So far, 20 patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have
received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes
vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood vessel
development during growth in the womb.

   Of these, Isner said 16 have responded by growing new blood vessels that
carry blood around the blockages.

   Isner said MRI scans and X-rays show improved circulation, and the blood
pressure in the patients' legs has increased -- something that never happens by
itself in such cases.

   He said he has asked the federal Food and Drug Administration for permission
to start the therapy on patients with blockages in their hearts, which
biologically are virtually identical to clogged leg arteries. He hopes to begin
those experiments by early next year.

   Drs. Michael Mann and Victor J. Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital in
Boston are using gene therapy to try to make traditional bypass surgery work
better.

   Over time, about half of the blood vessels used to reroute blood in the heart
or the legs become clogged. Their goal is to alter the grafts genetically so
this does not happen.

   Working on patients with bad legs, the doctors remove a piece of vein
intended for bypass and bathe it in a solution containing a short segment of
genetic material.

   The DNA's purpose is to soak up a natural protein, called a transcription
factor. This, in turn, ordinarily turns on a gene that makes the cells lining
the vessel walls start to grow.

   The bypass operation using this kind of gene therapy was successful in four
of the first five patients treated since January, but it is too soon to know
whether it will protect their blood vessels.

   To help answer this question, the researchers have performed the procedure on
41 more patients and hope eventually to do it on 2,000 people. They will be
randomly assigned to get either gene therapy or a dummy look-alike.

   The doctors said they hope to try the same procedure during heart bypasses
within the next year.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2221 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                    November 10, 1997, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 943 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy provides help for heart patients

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II

BODY:

   Boston researchers have for the first time used gene therapy to grow new
arteries in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing blocked
blood vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that would otherwise have been
amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart disease patients every year who undergo bypass surgery in
their legs, but also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts
said.

   The leg treatment halted gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation in
all but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients to
move around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of the St. Elizabeth's Medical Center
in Boston told an Orlando, Fla., meeting of the American Heart Association on
Sunday.

   In a second study also reported Sunday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart-disease patients to bypass artery blockages. About 50 percent
of such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene therapy, but all of
the treated bypasses remained open after nine months, researchers said.

   The two projects "are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease," said Dr. Valentine Fuster of
Mount Sinai Hospital, president of the American Heart Association. The two
studies are "the first applying gene therapy to cardiovascular disease in humans
with success," he added.

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness. In most cases it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy
one, but in some instances, such as these, it might involve shutting a gene off
or producing a therapeutic protein.

   Despite gene therapy's much-vaunted prospects, proponents have had relatively
few successes - in large part because they have not been able to get replacement
genes into a large enough number of the patients' cells and to get them to
persist long enough.

   Both of the approaches used in these two studies required only a brief period
of treatment to alter the course of the disease permanently.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of their distance from the heart. Because of the reduced flow
in their legs, the patients had severe skin ulcers, gangrene and intense resting
pain that typically required heavy narcotic treatment. All other attempts at
treatment had failed, and the next step, without treatment, would have been
amputation.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF, which stimulates the
growth of blood vessels. They injected the DNA into muscles at four sites along
the leg at the beginning of the treatment and once again four weeks later.

   The VEGF injections stimulated new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow
of blood through the legs. All of the patients had an improved ability to walk,
reduced pain and improved ulcer healing. In eight of the 10 treated legs, that
improved blood flow could be verified by magnetic resonance imaging. Angiograms
confirmed evidence of new vessels in seven of the 10 treated limbs.

   Blood pressure in the legs also improved. At the beginning of the study,
blood pressure at the ankles was only one-third that in the arms. After
treatment, pressure had increased to half that of the arms, a significant
increase.

   Only one of the patients' legs had to be amputated - in a 39-year-old woman
with severe atherosclerosis in both legs. At the start of the study, "the front
half of one foot was already black due to the onset of gangrene," Isner said,
"but it had affected only the toe of the other leg." Therapy was applied to both
legs and halted the gangrene in the least affected one, but failed in the other
leg "because it was too far gone," he said.

   Isner's team is planning to enlarge the trial to include other centers and
are applying to the Food and Drug Administration to conduct similar trials to
circumvent coronary arteries.

   Patients who are at an earlier stage of disease and still can be treated with
bypasses are the focus of the second study, reported by Dr. Michael Mann of
Harvard University and Dr. Victor J. Dzau of Brigham & Women's Hospital in
Boston. The conventional treatment in such patients is to implant a vein
surgically - usually the saphenous vein from the leg - to bypass the obstructed
leg artery.

   The problem is that a vein is not an artery. It is thinner and weaker because
blood pressure is lower in veins. When veins are exposed to the higher pressures
in the arterial system, the pressure triggers a complex set of changes called
neointimal hyperplasia that leaves the veins especially susceptible to
atherosclerosis, a buildup of deposits on the insides of arteries. An estimated
30 percent of such grafts fail in two to five years and 50 percent within 10
years.

   Working in animals, Mann and Dzau found a way to alter this process. Treating
the tissue with a short segment of DNA called a transcription factor decoy
inhibits the genes that trigger neointimal hyperplasia, allowing the tissue to
take a different pathway in which only useful muscle tissue is produced. Once
the tissue enters this pathway, moreover, the process is "irreversible," Mann
said, and the risk of atherosclerosis is permanently reduced.

   "Basically, we're trying to manipulate the biology of a vein and make it
behave more like an artery," Mann said.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2222 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IN PATIENTS GROWS NEW ARTERIES

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Boston researchers have for the first time used gene therapy to grow new
arteries in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing blocked
blood vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that would otherwise have been
amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart disease patients who undergo leg bypass surgery every year,
but also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts said.

   The leg treatment halted both gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation
in all but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients
to move around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St.  Elizabeth's Medical Center
in Boston told an Orlando meeting of the American Heart Assn. on Sunday.

   In a second study also reported Sunday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart disease patients to bypass artery blockages.  About 50% of
such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene therapy, but all of the
treated bypasses remained open after nine months, researchers said.

   The two projects "are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease," said Dr.  Valentine Fuster of
Mt. Sinai Hospital, president of the American Heart Assn. The two studies are
"the first applying gene therapy to cardiovascular disease in humans with
success," he added.

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness. In most cases it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy
one, but in some instances, such as these, it might involve shutting a gene off
or producing a therapeutic protein.

   Despite the therapy's much-vaunted prospects, proponents have had relatively
few successes--in large part because they have not been able to get replacement
genes into a large enough number of the patients' cells and get them to persist
long enough.

   The approaches used in these two studies required only a brief period of
treatment to permanently alter the course of the disease.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of their distance from the heart.  Because of the reduced
flow in their legs, the patients had severe skin ulcers, gangrene and intense
resting pain that typically required heavy narcotic treatment. All other
attempts at treatment had failed and the next step, without treatment, would
have been amputation.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein called vascular endothelial growth factor or VEGF, which stimulates the
growth of blood vessels. They injected the DNA into muscles at four sites along
the leg at the beginning of the treatment and once again four weeks later.


   *

   The VEGF injections stimulated new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow
of blood through the legs. All of the patients had an improved ability to walk,
reduced pain and improved ulcer healing. In eight of the 10 treated legs, that
improved blood flow could be verified by magnetic resonance imaging. Angiograms
confirmed evidence of new vessels in seven of the 10 treated limbs.

   Blood pressure in the legs also improved. At the beginning of the study,
blood pressure at the ankles was only one-third that in the arms.  After
treatment, pressure had increased to half that of the arms, a significant
increase.

   Only one of the patients' legs had to be amputated--in a 39-year-old woman
with severe atherosclerosis in both legs. At the start of the study, "the front
half of one foot was already black due to the onset of gangrene," Isner said,
"but it had affected only the toe of the other leg." Therapy was applied to both
legs and halted the gangrene in the least affected one, but failed in the other
leg "because it was too far gone," he said.

   Isner's team is planning to enlarge the trial to include other centers and
are applying to the Food and Drug Administration to conduct similar trials to
circumvent coronary arteries.

   Patients who are at an earlier stage of disease and still can be treated with
bypasses are the focus of the second study, reported by Dr.  Michael Mann of
Harvard and Dr. Victor J. Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. The
conventional treatment in such patients is to surgically implant a vein--usually
the saphenous vein from the leg--to bypass the obstructed leg artery.

   The problem is that a vein is not an artery. It is thinner and weaker because
blood pressure is lower in veins. When veins are exposed to the higher pressures
in the arterial system, the pressure triggers a complex set of changes called
neointimal hyperplasia that leaves the veins especially susceptible to
atherosclerosis, a buildup of deposits on the insides of arteries. About 30% of
such grafts fail in two to five years and 50% within 10 years.

   Working in animals, Mann and Dzau found a way to alter this process.
Treating the tissue with a short segment of DNA, called a transcription factor
decoy, inhibits the genes that trigger neointimal hyperplasia, allowing the
tissue to take a different pathway in which only useful muscle tissue is
produced. Once the tissue enters this pathway, moreover, the process is
irreversible, Mann said, and the risk of atherosclerosis is permanently reduced.

   "Basically, we're trying to manipulate the biology of a vein and make it
behave more like an artery," Mann said.

   Mann reported on the team's studies with the first four patients they have
treated. When the saphenous vein was removed from the patients' legs, it was
bathed for about 10 minutes in a solution containing the DNA for the
transcription factor decoy and then implanted in the normal fashion. Nine months
later, all the grafts are still unobstructed and show no evidence of neointimal
hyperplasia, he said.

   The team has enrolled 40 more patients in a large, double-blind clinical
trial in which patients will receive either treated or untreated bypasses. The
trial will eventually include 2,000 patients, he said, and should demonstrate
"whether the technique will actually succeed."

   They are also planning to study the treatment in coronary artery bypasses.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2223 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         November 10, 1997 Monday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 6

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: Progress made in gene therapy
 Scientists hope to make hearts grow own bypasses

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Orlando, Fla.

BODY:

   Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they have found a way to make
bad hearts grow their own bypasses.

   The idea is to inject extra genes directly into the heart that will trigger
it to sprout new blood vessels within two to three weeks. If all goes well,
these will work at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during
coronary bypass surgery.

   Doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with dangerously
clogged arteries in the legs, where it seems to have spared some from threatened
amputations.

   For several years, scientists have talked about manipulating genes to cure a
variety of human ills. But until now, there has been little firm evidence that
it will do any good.

   "This is the first time that any gene therapy has been shown to be clinically
successful," said Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

   Reports by Isner and another team working on a different gene therapy
approach were presented Sunday at a meeting of the American Heart Association.

   So far, 20 patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have
received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes
vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood vessel
development during growth in the womb.

   Of these, Isner said 16 had responded by growing new blood vessels that carry
blood around the blockages.

   Isner said he had asked the Food and Drug Administration for permission to
start the therapy on patients with blockages in their hearts.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2224 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 10, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1419 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Gives Blood a Path Around Leg Blockages, Researchers Say

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Gene therapy has prompted patients with hopelessly blocked blood vessels in
their legs to grow their own bypasses, researchers said yesterday. Most patients
in a small study saw a dramatic reversal of the predictably downhill course of
that type of cardiovascular disease.

   The results, reported at the scientific meeting of the American Heart
Association in Orlando, Fla., by Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Hospital
and the Tufts University School of Medicine near Boston, covered 10 patients.
Although that is not a large number, some experts said the study was a rare
demonstration of a clinical benefit from gene therapy and might be pivotal.

    Dr. Isner and his colleagues injected genes into legs, eliciting the growth
of a web of hairlike blood vessels that rerouted blood around the blockages and
could be seen with X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging.

   As a result, he reported, three patients who had been scheduled for
amputations avoided them entirely because blood flow improved so markedly. For
six other patients, severe and unrelenting pain lessened; two of them, who had
been scheduled to lose legs, each lost a toe to amputation. In some cases,
gangrene cleared up. Only one of the 10 patients failed to respond.

   A paper describing the results has been accepted for publication in the
journal Circulation, Dr. Isner said.

   In addition to using a small number of patients, the study lacked a group
that received a placebo for purposes of comparison. Medical experts urged that
the work be repeated in a large study with such controls. Until then, said Dr.
R. Sanford Williams, chief of cardiology at the University of Texas Southwestern
School of Medicine in Dallas, "we have to be extremely cautious and avoid giving
false hope."

   Nonetheless, some experts said, the results were compelling. The patients,
after all, were in the final stages of a devastating disease. There was
essentially no chance that their conditions would improve on their own. And
never before, some experts said, had gene therapy actually resulted in the
clinical improvement of a disease.

   "This could be a pivotal study," said Dr. James Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Dr. Stuart H. Orkin, a professor of pediatric medicine at the Harvard Medical
School, said, "It is one of the first, if not the first, times that gene therapy
has resulted in a clinical improvement."

   Dr. Orkin is co-chairman of a committee convened by Dr. Harold Varmus,
director of the National Institutes of Health, to advise him on gene therapy
research.

   And despite his trepidation about giving false hope, Dr. Williams said, he
found the results thrilling. In fact, he added, when some of the patients'
histories are described, "you have to say, 'Wow.' "

   Each year 30,000 to 40,000 Americans develop such severe blockages in their
leg arteries that they have excruciating pain or ulcers on their legs that do
not heal. Those patients, unlike people with blocked coronary arteries, cannot
be treated with drugs, because none are effective for their condition.

   Instead, they face eventual amputations, as the lack of blood flow leads to
infections and gangrene. But amputations are very risky.

   Dr. Isner said that 20 percent of those patients died in the hospital and
that 40 percent died within a year of the surgery. His patients, Dr. Isner said,
had the most to gain and the least to lose from gene therapy.

   The study exploited the remarkable properties of a gene known as the vascular
endothelial growth factor, or vegF, that is thought to be the body's signal to
grow new blood vessels. The idea was to inject vegF genes directly into muscle
cells near the blockage and allow the muscles to take up the gene and use it to
make vegF protein. About 5 percent of the billions of genes that Dr. Isner
injected actually went into muscle cells and were used by them.

   Upon taking up the genes, the muscle cells secreted the vegF protein, which
made its way to nearby blood vessels. Normally, vegF would not avidly attach
itself to cells that line the blood-vessel walls. But when a vessel is blocked,
the cells just beyond the blockage, which are starved for blood, become very
sticky for vegF. And so the vegF proteins presumably attached themselves to the
exact sections of the blood vessels where they were needed.

   With vegF stuck to their surfaces, the cells started to sprout a network of
threadlike blood vessels. When that happens, for reasons that are still
mysterious to researchers, the new vessels wind their way around the blockage
and form an alternative pathway for blood.

   Any vegF that did not attach to cells near the blockage was swept away by the
bloodstream and degraded. The muscle cells secreted vegF only for several weeks,
just long enough for the body to grow its bypasses.

   "When we began our study," Dr. Isner said, "we had no idea what dose of gene
therapy was going to work or if the way we were injecting the genes was
appropriate or if the sites we were injecting were appropriate. I have to admit,
we really lucked out."

   In fact, he added, he lucked out with the very first patient who had the
genes injected into her leg muscle. Before that, Dr. Isner had tried inserting a
thin tube into the diseased vessel and then placing vegF directly onto the
vessel wall. Although some new vessels sprouted, the symptoms were not markedly
improved.

   But in September 1996, Nancy Perez, a 33-year-old schoolteacher from the
Bronx, went to see Dr. Isner. Ms. Perez said in an interview that her problems
had begun several years earlier, when she noticed a cramp in her left calf. The
pain, sporadic at first, became worse and worse until, she said, "I couldn't
walk more than 10 feet."

   It turned out that Ms. Perez had severe obstructions in the blood vessels of
her leg. As is often the case with this condition, no one knew why the blockages
occurred. And there was little that medicine could do for Ms. Perez. She had
seven bypass operations to try to increase blood flow to her leg, to no avail.

   By the time she went to see Dr. Isner, she had gangrene in a toe, a large
sore on the front of the calf that would not heal, and she was in a wheelchair
and in constant pain.

   "I couldn't sleep and I couldn't walk," Ms. Perez said.

   Despite powerful pain-killing drugs, Ms. Perez said, the pain was
unrelenting. Worst of all, her doctor had said he needed to amputate the leg.

   When Dr. Isner considered Ms. Perez for gene therapy, he found that her blood
vessels were so deteriorated that he could not place a catheter in them to
insert the genes. He decided to inject the genes into the muscle of her leg
instead, a much simpler method and one that worked in laboratory animals but
whose chances of success in humans seemed problematic.

   About a month after Ms. Perez had been injected, she noticed that she needed
less pain medication. When Dr. Isner examined her with X-rays and magnetic
resonance imaging, he found that she was growing new vessels and that more blood
was passing through her leg.

   A year later, Ms. Perez is back at work and is no longer taking pain
medications. The sore on the leg has healed, and the gangrene has disappeared.
She walks more than a mile a day.

   Dr. Isner switched to the muscle injections and found that, if anything, they
were better than the direct application of genes onto a blood vessel wall. And,
he reported, other patients had similar improvements.

   Could that have occurred by chance? Dr. Valentin Fuster, president-elect of
the American Heart Association and director of the cardiovascular institute at
the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, said it was extremely unlikely that
the patients would have improved on their own.

   Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, chief of the cardiology division at the University of
Michigan School of Medicine, said, "The chance of spontaneously having a
recovery like this is next to none."

   Dr. Fuster is looking toward the future. The "spectacular aspect of the
study," he said, is that it provides great hope that vegF injections may also
allow people with blocked coronary arteries to grow bypasses.

   That is exactly what Dr. Isner wants to do next. He is applying to the Food
and Drug Administration to treat patients with heart disease with vegF. He would
inject the genes directly into the heart. When he tried that with pigs, they
grew functioning bypasses.

   But, of course, Dr. Isner said, "it is sort of a leap when you go to
patients."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1997


                             2225 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 10, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

HEADLINE: INSIDE

BODY:


   Economic Angst in Seoul
Asia's economic turmoil has shaken South Koreans, who worry that their
once-mighty economy will be the next to fall. Page A3.

Turning Down Benefits
More Americans are being offered health insurance through work, but many turn it
down. Page A24.


   Bypassing Blocked Arteries
In a small study, gene therapy helped patients with hopelessly blocked blood
vessels to grow their own bypasses. Page A24.

Defying the Juggernaut
Netscape, which until recently appeared to be in decline, is proving to be a
tough competitor in a Microsoft-dominated world. Page D1.

Sharpton Weighs Next Race
The Rev. Al Sharpton is being urged to oppose a House Democrat who backed Mayor
Giuliani. Page B3.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1997


                             2226 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 10, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

After Days of Deal-Making Trade Bill Is Still in Limbo
Still short of votes after working through the weekend, President Clinton and
his Republican allies decided early this morning to delay for a second time a
House vote on expanded trade negotiating authority to the President. The
decision potentially gave Mr. Clinton another few days to salvage legislation he
has called crucial to the economic health of the country. But it was not clear
how Mr. Clinton could round up the votes that had eluded him all weekend.    A1

Clinton Urges Stand on Iraq
President Clinton urged the United Nations to take "very strong and unambiguous
action" to force Iraq to comply with international weapons inspections. The
President also warned Iraq not to follow through on threats to attack American
spy planes on United Nations missions. Iraq halted the inspection teams for a
seventh day. The Security Council is to meet today to consider its response.
A1


   Asia's Next Economic Crisis
There are growing whispers in international financial circles that South Korea,
one of the most miraculous of Asia's miracle economies, could become "the next
Thailand." The country has found itself floundering in a turbulent sea of
bankruptcies, bad debts and tight credit.   A3

No Meeting for Netanyahu?
In an apparent sign of Washington's displeasure with the pace of peace talks, no
meeting has been planned between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel and
President Clinton next week during Mr. Netanyahu's scheduled visit to the United
States. Mr. Netanyahu's aides sought to play down the omission, but Israeli
leaders have rarely visited without a call on the President.   A6

Turkey Frees a Critic
The Turkish Government yielded to intense pressure and released a blind social
critic, Esber Yagmurdereli, who began serving a 23-year prison term last month.
Turkey said it was releasing him on health grounds, but the Anatolian news
agency said the sentence had been "suspended for one year."   A5

Buenos Aires's Honest Mayor
Promising to curb corruption, Fernando de la Rua became the first elected Mayor
of Buenos Aires last year, a post previously appointed by the President. Since
then, he has carried out a crackdown virtually unprecedented in a country where
bribes, payoffs and kickbacks are part of everyday life.   A11

Budget Battle in Mexico
Mexico's President, Ernesto Zedillo, could face the greatest fight of his
presidency this week from opposition lawmakers who want to challenge his
economic policies. The opposition, which has control of Congress for the first
time in modern history, said it wants to make sweeping changes in Mr. Zedillo's
budget for 1998, including pay increases and tax cuts.   A10

NATIONAL   A14-28

Major Civilian Cuts Planned for Pentagon
Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen plans to trim thousands of civilian jobs
at the Pentagon and transfer thousands more military personnel out of their
headquarters and into the field, officials said. The reductions, which are to be
announced today, are part of what the officials said would be a sweeping plan to
reorganize the Pentagon. Altogether, the plan could save as much as $6 billion a
year in the Pentagon's budget, which this year totals about $250 billion.   A1

Unabom Trial to Begin
As the trial begins this week against Theodore J. Kaczynski on charges that he
was the Unabomber, his lawyers must contend with an extraordinary trove of
prosecution evidence found in his cabin, including detailed entries from his
journals like "I mailed that bomb."   A1

Confirmation in Doubt
Republicans said they were holding up confirmation of President Clinton's
nominee for Surgeon General, Dr. David Satcher, because of concerns among
conservative senators that he was not sufficiently opposed to certain types of
late-term abortion. The nomination of Dr. Satcher, now the director of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, had at first been well received
among members of Congress.   A22

R.N.C. Campaign Details
Bank documents that have emerged following the Senate hearings on campaign
finance abuses reveal new details of a plan by the Republican National Committee
to pour $4 million into 1996 Congressional races through an allied group that
may have operated outside Federal election laws.   A27

Spending Bills Combined
The Senate voted to consolidate the three remaining Federal spending bills for
1998 into a single piece of legislation, and to strip out or soften most of the
issues that have stalled the measures and drawn veto threats from President
Clinton. In the House, Republican leaders and the White House agreed to a
compromise over a controversial method of estimating the population in 2000.
A28

Gene Therapy Works in Study
Gene therapy has prompted patients with hopelessly blocked blood vessels in
their legs to grow their own bypasses, researchers reported. Some experts said
the study was a rare demonstration of a clinical benefit from gene therapy and
might be pivotal.   A24

Rights Nomination Called Dead
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, seeming sure that he had the Republican votes on the
Judiciary Committee to scuttle the nomination of Bill Lann Lee to the nation's
top civil rights job, said that the nomination was "dead." Mr. Lee, 48, a
Chinese-American lawyer from Los Angeles, has been bidding to become the first
Asian-American to be named Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights.   A22

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-5

Lottery Winner Spreads the Wealth
Eleanor Boyer's selflessness was the lesson of the day at the Church of the
Immaculate Conception in Somerville, N.J., even though she moved away from the
television cameras quickly, saying: "Now that's enough, all right? I want to
pray a little bit." Ms. Boyer, 72, won $11.8 million (before taxes) in the New
Jersey Lottery last week and is giving it away, about half of it to the church
she has worshiped in all her life, and the rest to the rescue squad, the
volunteer fire department and some of the other groups that serve the town she
grew up in.   A1

Dorothy Day Up for Sainthood
John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, said that he
would take the first steps toward proposing sainthood for Dorothy Day, the
legendary advocate for social justice and servant of the poor who co-founded the
Catholic Worker movement in 1933. Followers of Miss Day, who was born in
Brooklyn and who died in Manhattan in 1980, gathered over the weekend to
commemorate the centennial of her birth.   B2

Sharpton May Run for Congress
The Rev. Al Sharpton, encouraged by several Democratic officials, is considering
a run for the seat in Congress held by Representative Edolphus Towns, a Brooklyn
Democrat who crossed party lines to support Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.   B3

Tribe Makes Casino Work
The tiny Oneida Indian Nation is proving with its Turning Stone casino that
location and image are not everything when it comes to satisfying the demand for
high-stakes gambling. The casino is in the middle of farm land, it does not
serve alcohol and it has no slot machines. But gambling industry analysts say
that Turning Stone, the state's only casino, is among the country's most
successful, with annual revenues of several hundreds of millions.   B1

BUSINESS DAY   D1-16

Netscape Shining Again
Netscape, the company that fueled the Internet revolution, had until recently
appeared to be in decline under the assault by Microsoft corporation. But
Netscape's star has regained some of its luster lately, prompting a reassessment
of the outlook for the company.   D1

Business Digest   D1

OBITUARIES   B8

Leon Forrest
The writer and teacher who explored black American history in his complex epic
novels was 60. Mr. Forrest was perhaps best known for his last novel, "Divine
Days" (1993), a narrative about seven days in 1966 on the South Side of Chicago.

   B8

SPORTSMONDAY   C1-10

ARTS   E1-8

EDITORIAL   A36-37

Editorials: Cycles of campaign reform; rebuild CUNY, but fairly; Verlyn
Klinkenborg on landscapes of the New West.
Columns: Anthony Lewis, Thomas L. Friedman.

Bridge   E6

Crossword   E6

Chronicle   B5

Weather   B6

GRAPHIC: Photos.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1997


                             2227 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      NOVEMBER 10, 1997 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: DISEASED HEART MAY GROW BYPASS / GENE-THERAPY RESEARCHERS ALREADY HAVE
EXPERIMENTED ON CLOGGED LEG ARTERIES.

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   Researchers tinkering with gene therapy think they have found a way to make
diseased hearts grow their own bypasses.

   The idea is to inject directly into the heart extra genes that will trigger
it to sprout new blood vessels within two to three weeks. If all goes well,
these will work at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during
coronary bypass surgery.

   So far, doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with
dangerously clogged arteries in the legs, where it seems to have spared some
from threatened amputations.

   Reports by Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston and
another team working on a different gene-therapy approach were presented
yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart Association. If their promising but
preliminary findings stand up to more rigorous testing, gene therapy someday may
prove be an important way to control heart disease, the nation's biggest killer.

   "This is opening a door to genetic therapy in cardiovascular disease," said
Valentin Fuster of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City, incoming
president of the heart association.

   So far, 20 patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have
received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes a
protein that prompts blood vessel development during growth in the womb.

   Isner said 16 of the 20 patients who received the injections had grown new
blood vessels that carry blood around the blockages.

   Several of the patients have been spared the need for leg amputations. Others
have been freed of constant pain. Several have found that their toenails have
started to grow again for the first time in years.

   Isner said exams showed improved circulation, and the blood pressure in the
patients' legs had increased, something that never happens by itself in such
cases.

   He said he had asked the Food and Drug Administration for permission to start
the therapy on patients with blockages in their heart arteries, which
biologically are virtually identical to clogged leg arteries. He said he hopes
to begin those experiments by early next year.

   Michael Mann and Victor J. Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston are
using gene therapy to try to make traditional bypass surgery work better.

   Over time, about half of the blood vessels used to reroute blood in the heart
or the legs become clogged. Their goal is to alter the grafts genetically so
that does not happen.

   Working on patients with bad legs, the doctors remove a piece of vein
intended for bypass and bathe it in a solution containing a short segment of
genetic material. The DNA's purpose is to soak up a natural protein, called a
transcription factor. This, in turn, ordinarily turns on a gene that makes the
cells lining the vessel walls start to grow.

   This growth is part of the process that leads to the development of fatty
plaque that eventually clogs up the blood vessel.

   The bypass operation using this kind of gene therapy was successful in four
of the first five patients treated since January, but it is still too soon to
know whether it will protect their blood vessels.

   To help answer this question, the researchers have performed the procedure on
41 more patients and hope eventually to do it on 2,000 people at several
hospitals.

   The doctors said they hoped to try the same procedure during heart bypasses
within the next year.

   Experts said they believed other attempts at gene therapy to treat heart
disease also would prove useful.

   "There are literally hundreds of gene-therapy concepts. This is the first
wave that is bubbling over into clinical use," said Sanders Williams of the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2228 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                      NOVEMBER 10, 1997 Monday PM EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 390 words

HEADLINE: PUMPED ABOUT DISCOVERY / DOCS: SHOT COULD HELP HEARTS HEAL ON OWN

BYLINE: Danile Q. Haney, Associated Press

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they have found a way to make
bad hearts grow their own bypasses.

   The idea is to inject extra genes into the heart that will trigger it to
sprout new blood vessels within three weeks. If all goes well, these will work
at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during coronary bypass
surgery.

   So far, doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with
dangerously clogged arteries in the legs, where it seems to have spared some
from threatened amputations.

   For several years, scientists have talked about manipulating genes to cure a
variety of human ills. But until now, there has been little firm evidence that
it will do any good.

   "This is the first time that any gene therapy has been shown to be clinically
successful," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

   Reports by Isner and another team working on a different gene therapy
approach were presented yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association. If their promising but preliminary findings stand up to more
rigorous testing, gene therapy may someday prove to be an important way to
control heart disease, the nation's biggest killer.

   "This is opening a door to genetic therapy in cardiovascular disease," said
Dr. Valentin Fuster of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City.

   So far, 20 patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have
received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes
vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood vessel
development during growth in the womb.

   Of these, Isner said 16 have responded by growing new blood vessels that
carry blood around the blockages.

   Several of the patients have been spared the need for leg amputations. Others
have been freed of constant pain. Several even have found that their toenails
have started to grow again for the first time in years.

   Isner said MRI scans and X-rays show improved circulation, and the blood
pressure in the patients' legs has increased - something that never happens by
itself in such cases.

   He said he has asked the federal Food and Drug Administration for permission
to start the therapy on patients with blockages in their hearts, which
biologically are virtually identical to clogged leg arteries.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2229 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   November 10, 1997, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-11

LENGTH: 791 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY USED TO GROW NEW ARTERIES

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, LOS ANGELES TIMES

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:


   Boston researchers have for the first time used gene therapy to grow new
arteries in the legs of patients with severe heart disease, bypassing blocked
blood vessels and restoring circulation to limbs that would otherwise have been
amputated.

   The unprecedented ability to grow new blood vessels could benefit not only
the 100,000 heart disease patients who undergo leg bypass surgery every year,
but also the 500,000 who undergo coronary artery bypasses, experts said.

   The leg treatment halted gangrene and ulcers caused by poor circulation in
all but one of the 10 patients studied, eliminated pain and enabled patients to
move around more freely, Dr. Jeffrey Isner of the St. Elizabeth's Medical Center
in Boston told an Orlando, Fla., meeting of the American Heart Association
yesterday.

   In a second study also reported yesterday, Harvard researchers said they had
successfully used gene therapy to prevent blockage in veins grafted into the
legs of four heart-disease patients to bypass artery blockages. About 50 percent
of such bypasses become blocked themselves without the gene therapy, but all of
the treated bypasses remained open after nine months, researchers said.

   The two projects ''are opening a door that is quite interesting and quite
meaningful for future treatment of heart disease,'' said Dr. Valentine Fuster of
Mount Sinai Hospital, president of the American Heart Association. The two
studies are ''the first applying gene therapy to cardiovascular disease in
humans with success,'' he added.

   Gene therapy involves the manipulation of a patient's DNA to treat or cure
illness. In most cases it involves replacing a defective gene with a healthy
one, but in some instances, such as these, it might involve shutting a gene off
or producing a therapeutic protein.

   Despite its much-vaunted prospects, proponents have had relatively few
successes - in large part because they have not been able to get replacement
genes into a large enough number of the patients' cells and to get them to
persist long enough.

   Both the approaches used in these two studies required only a brief period of
treatment to permanently alter the course of the disease.

   Isner and his colleagues studied 10 patients with severe atherosclerosis.
This disease clogs arteries throughout the body, and legs are especially
vulnerable because of their distance from the heart. Because of the reduced flow
in their legs, the patients had severe skin ulcers, gangrene and intense resting
pain that typically required heavy narcotic treatment. All other attempts at
treatment had failed and the next step, without treatment, would have been
amputation.

   The team treated the patients with DNA that served as the blueprint for a
protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF, which stimulates the
growth of blood vessels. They injected the DNA into muscles at four sites along
the leg at the beginning of the treatment and once again four weeks later.

   The VEGF injections stimulated new blood vessels to grow, improving the flow
of blood through the legs. All of the patients had an improved ability to walk,
reduced pain and improved ulcer healing. In eight of the 10 treated legs, that
improved blood flow could be verified by magnetic resonance imaging. Angiograms
confirmed evidence of new vessels in seven of the 10 treated limbs.

   Blood pressure in the legs also improved. At the beginning of the study,
blood pressure at the ankles was only one-third that in the arms. After
treatment, pressure had increased to half that of the arms, a significant
increase.

   Isner's team is planning to enlarge the trial to include other centers and
are applying to the Food and Drug Administration to conduct similar trials to
circumvent coronary arteries.

   Patients who are at an earlier stage of disease and still can be treated with
bypasses are the focus of the second study, reported by Dr. Michael Mann of
Harvard and Dr. Victor J. Dzau of Brigham & Women's Hospital in Boston. The
conventional treatment in such patients is to surgically implant a vein usually
the saphenous vein from the leg - to bypass the obstructed leg artery.

   The problem is that a vein is not an artery. It is thinner and weaker because
blood pressure is lower in veins. When veins are exposed to the higher pressures
in the arterial system, the pressure triggers a complex set of changes called
neointimal hyperplasia that leaves the veins especially susceptible to
atherosclerosis, a buildup of deposits on the insides of arteries. An estimated
30 percent of such grafts fail in two to five years and 50 percent within 10
years.

   ''Basically, we're trying to manipulate the biology of a vein and make it
behave more like an artery,'' Mann said.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1997


                             2230 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     November 10, 1997 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: PATIENTS ABLE TO GROW OWN BYPASSES

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ORLANDO, FLA.

BODY:

   Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they have found a way to make
bad hearts grow their own bypasses.

   The idea is to inject extra genes directly into the heart that will trigger
it to sprout new blood vessels within two to three weeks. If all goes well,
these will work at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during
coronary bypass surgery.

   So far, doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with
dangerously clogged arteries in the legs, where it seems to have spared some
from threatened amputations and others from constant pain. Biologically,
blockages in the heart are virtually identical to clogged leg arteries.

   For several years, scientists have talked about manipulating genes to cure a
variety of human ills. But until now, there has been little firm evidence that
it will do any good.

   "This is the first time that any gene therapy has been shown to be clinically
successful," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

   Reports by Isner and another team working on a different gene therapy
approach were presented yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association. If their preliminary findings stand up to more rigorous testing,
gene therapy may someday prove to be an important way to control heart disease,
the nation's biggest killer.

   So far, 20 patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have
received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes
vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood vessel
development during growth in the womb.

   Of these, Isner said, 16 have responded by growing new blood vessels that
carry blood around the blockages.

   Isner has asked the federal Food and Drug Administration for permission to
start the therapy on patients with blockages in their hearts. He hopes to begin
those experiments by early next year.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2231 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               November 10, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A8

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY COULD HELP HEARTS GROW THEIR OWN BYPASSES, SCIENTISTS SAY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: ORLANDO, FLA.

BODY:


   Scientists tinkering with gene therapy believe they have found a way to make
bad hearts grow their own bypasses.

   The idea is to inject extra genes directly into the heart that will trigger
it to sprout new blood vessels within two to three weeks. If all goes well,
these will work at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during
coronary bypass surgery.

   So far, doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with
dangerously clogged arteries in the legs, where it seems to have spared some
from threatened amputations.

   For several years, scientists have talked about manipulating genes to cure a
variety of human ills. But until now, there has been little firm evidence that
it will do any good.

   "This is the first time that any gene therapy has been shown to be clinically
successful," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

   Reports by Isner and another team working on a different gene therapy
approach were presented Sunday at a meeting of the American Heart Association.
If their promising but preliminary findings stand up to more rigorous testing,
gene therapy someday may prove be an important way to control heart disease, the
nation's biggest killer.

   "This is opening a door to genetic therapy in cardiovascular disease," said
Dr. Valentin Fuster of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City, incoming
president of the heart association.

   Twenty patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have received
injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes vascular
endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood vessel development
during growth in the womb. Of these, Isner said 16 have responded by growing new
blood vessels that carry blood around blockages.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2232 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            November 10, 1997 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 645 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy work aims to make hearts grow their own bypasses

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they have found a way to make
bad hearts grow their own bypasses.

    The idea is to inject extra genes directly into the heart that will trigger
it to sprout new blood vessels within two to three weeks. If all goes well,
these will work at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during
coronary bypass surgery.

    So far, doctors from Boston have tried the gene therapy on people with
dangerously clogged arteries in the legs, where it seems to have spared some
from threatened amputations.

    For several years, scientists have talked about manipulating genes to cure a
variety of human ills. But until now, there has been little firm evidence that
it will do any good.

   "This is the first time that any gene therapy has been shown to be clinically
successful," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

    Reports by Isner and another team working on a different gene therapy
approach were presented yesterday at a meeting of the American Heart
Association. If their promising but preliminary findings stand up to more
rigorous testing, gene therapy may someday prove an important way to control
heart disease, the nation's biggest killer.

    "This is opening a door to genetic therapy in cardiovascular disease," said
Dr. Valentin Fuster of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York City, incoming
president of the heart association.

    So far, 20 patients with severely clogged arteries in their legs have
received injections of laboratory-made versions of the human gene that makes
vascular endothelial growth factor, a protein that prompts blood vessel
development during growth in the womb.

    Of these, Isner said 16 have responded by growing new blood vessels that
carry blood around the blockages.

    Several of the patients have been spared the need for leg amputations.
Others have been freed of constant pain. Several even have found that their
toenails have started to grow again for the first time in years.

    Isner said MRI scans and X-rays show improved circulation, and the blood
pressure in the patients' legs has increased - something that never happens by
itself in such cases.

   He said he has asked the federal Food and Drug Administration for permission
to start the therapy on patients with blockages in their hearts, which
biologically are virtually identical to clogged leg arteries. He hopes to begin
those experiments by early next year.

   Drs. Michael Mann and Victor J. Dzau of Brigham and Women's Hospital in
Boston are using gene therapy to try to make traditional bypass surgery work
better.

    Over time, about half of the blood vessels used to reroute blood in the
heart or the legs become clogged. Their goal is to alter the grafts genetically
so this does not happen.

   Working on patients with bad legs, the doctors remove a piece of vein
intended for bypass and bathe it in a solution containing a short segment of
genetic material. The DNA's purpose is to soak up a natural protein, called a
transcription factor. This, in turn, ordinarily turns on a gene that makes the
cells lining the vessel walls start to grow.

    This growth is part of the process that leads to the development of fatty
plaque that eventually clogs up the blood vessel.

    The bypass operation using this kind of gene therapy was successful in four
of the first five patients treated since January, but it is still too soon to
know whether it will protect their blood vessels.

    To help answer this question, the researchers have performed the procedure
on 41 more patients and hope eventually to do it on 2,000 people at several
hospitals. They will be randomly assigned to get either gene therapy or a dummy
look-alike.

    These doctors said they hope to try the same procedure during heart bypasses
within the next year.

    Experts said they believe other attempts at gene therapy to treat heart
disease will also prove useful.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2233 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: FDA

BYLINE: Compiled from Tribune wires

BODY:


   Overhaul clears Congress

   WASHINGTON - Culminating years of work, Congress on Sunday approved
legislation that will bring basic changes to the Food and Drug Administration
and accelerate the approval of lifesaving drugs.

   The House passed the measure by voice vote just hours after Senate approval,
which also came on a voice vote. The bill now heads to President Clinton, who is
expected to sign it.

   The bill expands patient access to new drugs for life-threatening illnesses,
provides for accelerated approval of some drugs and medical devices and allows
the Health and Human Services secretary to accredit independent third-party
groups to speed up reviews of low-risk devices.  HEART DISEASE  Gene therapy
tried

   ORLANDO - Scientists tinkering with gene therapy think they can make bad
hearts grow their own bypasses.

   The idea is to inject extra genes into the heart, which triggers growth of
new blood vessels within two to three weeks. If all goes well, these will work
at least as well as the ones surgeons stitch into place during bypass surgery.

   In preliminary use, the gene therapy seems to have spared some patients from
amputations.

   Reports on the gene therapy approach were presented Sunday at a meeting of
the American Heart Association.

   If the findings stand up to more rigorous testing, gene therapy may prove to
control some effects of heart disease, the nation's biggest killer.  CENSUS
Compromise reached

   WASHINGTON - The White House and Republican congressional leaders Sunday
compromised on a method for conducting the 2000 census that would allow the
administration to experiment with statistical sampling to achieve a more
accurate count but give Republicans time to challenge the technique in court.

   The compromise - which could affect the future political makeup of the House
- helped clear the way for final passage of a $ 32 billion
Commerce-Justice-State spending bill.

NOTES: IN BRIEF NEWS OF THE NATION

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2234 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        November 10, 1997 Monday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 463 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY LETS BLOOD BYPASS LEG BLOCKAGES

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA 1997, The New York Times

BODY:

   Gene therapy has prompted patients with hopelessly blocked blood vessels in
their legs to grow their own bypasses, researchers said Sunday. Most patients in
a small study saw a dramatic reversal of the predictably downhill course of that
type of cardiovascular disease.

   The results, reported at the scientific meeting of the American Heart
Association in Orlando, Fla., by Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Hospital
and the Tufts University School of Medicine near Boston, covered 10 patients.
Although that is not a large number, some experts said the study was a rare
demonstration of a clinical benefit from gene therapy and might be pivotal.

   Isner and his colleagues injected genes into legs, eliciting the growth of a
web of hairlike blood vessels that rerouted blood around the blockages and could
be seen with X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging.

   As a result, he reported, three patients who had been scheduled for
amputations avoided them entirely because blood flow improved so markedly. For
six other patients, severe and unrelenting pain lessened. Two of them, who had
been scheduled to lose legs, each lost a toe to amputation. In some cases,
gangrene cleared up. Only one of the 10 patients failed to respond.

   A paper describing the results has been accepted for publication in the
journal Circulation, Isner said.

   In addition to using a small number of patients, the study lacked a group
that received a placebo for purposes of comparison. Medical experts urged that
the work be repeated in a large study with such controls.

   Until then, said Dr. R. Sanford Williams, chief of cardiology at the
University of Texas Southwestern School of Medicine in Dallas, "we have to be
extremely cautious and avoid giving false hope."

   Nonetheless, some experts said, the results were compelling. The patients,
after all, were in the final stages of a devastating disease. There was
essentially no chance that their conditions would improve on their own. And
never before, some experts said, had gene therapy actually resulted in the
clinical improvement of a disease.

   "This could be a pivotal study," said Dr. James Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Dr. Stuart Orkin, a professor of pediatric medicine at the Harvard Medical
School, said, "It is one of the first, if not the first, times that gene therapy
has resulted in a clinical improvement."

   Orkin is co-chairman of a committee convened by Dr. Harold Varmus, director
of the National Institutes of Health, to advise him on gene therapy research.

   And despite his trepidation about giving false hope, Williams said, he found
the results thrilling. In fact, he added, when some of the patients' histories
are described, "you have to say, 'Wow.' "

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1997


                             2235 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    November 10, 1997, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: Doctors use gene therapy to grow vessels that skirt clogged arteries

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

DATELINE: ORLANDO, Fla.

BODY:

   ORLANDO, Fla. -- Doctors said Sunday that they have used gene
therapy to grow blood vessels in humans for the first time.

   The scientists, who grew new vessels to bypass clogged leg arteries,
ultimately hope they will be able to grow vessels to restore blood
flow to hearts deprived of blood by arteries that are choked with
plaque and cholesterol.


   Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University, Boston, and his colleagues
grew the new veins in nine people by injecting them with "naked
DNA" -- a stripped-down, synthetic replica of the gene that prompts
blood vessels to grow in human embryos. Most people were injected
in one leg; one was injected in two. Six had been recommended
for amputations.

   Within three weeks, Isner says, newly visible vessels had sprouted
in eight of the 10 treated legs, successfully bypassing the blockage.
Two legs had to be amputated.

   Isner is now awaiting Food and Drug Administration approval to
attempt to rescue a blood-starved heart.

   Isner decided to work on blood vessels in the leg because the
experiments were too risky to try in the chest, at least at first.
There was another crucial reason: As many as 200,000 people in
the USA suffer from poor leg circulation, which can lead to skin
ulcers, disability, even amputations.

   The development, reported at the American Heart Association's
70th Scientific Sessions, represents the first successful application
of gene therapy in cardivascular disease.

   "Gene therapy is an opening door in cardiovascular disease,"
said Valentin Fuster of Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.

   In a separate study, Michael Mann and Victor Dzau of Harvard Medical
School say they have used a different form of gene therapy to
prevent blockages in veins used to bypass clogged leg arteries.
They put the grafts in a bath containing DNA. The DNA sequence
is meant to stop cells inside the veins from multiplying and blocking
blood flow.

   "We're trying to manipulate the biology of the vein to make it
behave more like an artery," Mann said.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1997


                             2236 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

               November 8, 1997, Saturday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: CAIRO TO LEAVE CHOC FOR RESEARCH POST;
 MEDICINE: THE PEDIATRICIAN WILL HEAD A TEAM AT GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY. THOUGH
NATIONALLY KNOWN FOR HIS CANCER WORK, HIS PRACTICES HAVE BEEN SCRUTINIZED.

BYLINE: MARCIDA DODSON, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: ORANGE

BODY:


   Dr. Mitchell Cairo, a nationally renowned pediatric cancer researcher whose
practices recently came under scrutiny, will leave Children's Hospital of Orange
County for Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., officials announced
Friday.

   Cairo, who has been with CHOC since 1981, will direct a 40-person research
team, starting up a state-of-the art pediatric cancer research laboratory at the
university's Lombardi Cancer Center.

   The laboratory, which has been at CHOC for the last five years, will be
funded with a $ 2.8-million grant over three years by the Irvine-based Pediatric
Cancer Research Foundation.

   While at CHOC, Cairo gained national attention for his research into new
techniques to battle cancer in the very young. In 1995, he was the first in
Southern California to perform an experimental transplant of umbilical cord
blood to treat leukemia.

   He used that technique when he treated Michelle Carew, daughter of baseball
Hall of Famer Rod Carew, in her much-publicized but unsuccessful battle against
leukemia last year.

   But Cairo's reputation was tarnished earlier this year by a federal audit's
findings that in eight cases, CHOC's research team failed to follow procedure in
obtaining consent from patients or their families for experimental treatments.
Cairo later characterized them as "minor consent issues" that were not serious
enough to be considered research misconduct.

   Nonetheless, the audit resulted in Cairo's suspension for six months as the
hospital's head investigator for Children's Cancer Group, a national research
collaborative.

   A few months earlier, CHOC stripped Cairo of several key posts and succeeded
in pressuring him to step down as chairman of a medical group he led for years.
An internal peer review was begun. A hospital spokesman said Friday that any
information about the review's status is confidential.

   With Cairo's departure, CHOC will lose a $ 5.5-million grant awarded last
year by the National Institutes of Health to develop alternative treatments to
bone marrow transplants for leukemia.

   Cairo said medical equipment, along with the remaining funds, will have to be
returned to the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute within NIH, which will
decide how to reallocate the grant. Cairo said he is proposing to the NIH that
the grant be transferred to his laboratory in Georgetown.

   In his new post, Cairo will become a professor of pediatrics, medicine and
pathology, director of pediatric stem cell transplantation, cellular and gene
therapy, and director of all children's cancer and treatment programs at the
Lombardi Center.

   "This is clearly an opportunity to extend my professional career, to relocate
to a more academic center," Cairo said. "It's a unique opportunity to interact
with the international community, with the NIH and everything else in that the
Washington, D.C.  area offers."

   He said he regrets leaving patients and the "superb" staff at CHOC, "but with
this new opportunity maybe I can contribute more."

   Cancer patients at the hospital in Orange will continue to benefit from
Cairo's research through the establishment of a consortium of the Lombardi
Center, CHOC and possibly two Los Angeles-area hospitals, said foundation
president Don Roberson. Advances and information derived from the research in
Georgetown will be shared with the other hospitals, he said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dr. Mitchell Cairo

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2237 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           November 4, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL , Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 624 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY A NEW TOOL IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS RESEARCH

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Like many other boys their age, Christopher and Aaron George enjoy baseball
games and Cub Scout activities.

   But a change in the weather keeps the brothers off the baseball field, and
they can't go on a Cub Scout outing without one of their parents to give them
medication.

   Christopher, 9, and Aaron, 6, have cystic fibrosis - the most common fatal
genetic disease in the United States, affecting 30,000 children and adults.

   ''Christopher feels it is totally unfair,'' said his mother, Tina George, of
Buckeye Lake. ''He wants to know why he can't do things and why he has to take
so much medicine.''

   Still, she and her husband, Terry, said they are hopeful.

   ''I have been told that things look really good for my kids,'' Mrs. George
said. ''I truly believe there will be a cure.''

   In the past, advances have been limited to treating symptoms of cystic
fibrosis. As with other diseases, though, researchers are turning to gene
therapy.

   Cystic fibrosis causes the body to produce an abnormally thick, sticky mucus
that clogs the lungs and can lead to fatal infections. The mucus also can block
the pancreas, preventing enzymes from reaching the intestines to digest food.

   Treatments include striking the back and chest to loosen mucus, antibiotics
to fight infection and pills to open airways. In some patients who have scarred
lungs from chronic infections, a lung transplant is the only option.

   Many now believe that gene therapy will lead to a cure.

   The responsible gene, known as the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator -
or CFTR - was discovered in 1989. Since then, researchers have charted more than
600 mistakes that can occur within the gene.

   The next step was to clone the gene and figure out a way to use it to repair
or replace its defective relative.

   Children's Hospital is one of the first centers to participate in a study of
cystic fibrosis gene therapy. Researchers are using a cold virus to deliver the
working gene to the lungs of those with the disease.

   ''This is a horrible, killing disease,'' said Dr. Karen McCoy, chief of
pulmonary medicine at Children's. ''There is no effective curative therapy.''

   The University of Pennsylvania asked Children's to participate in this
first-phase study using adult patients.

   ''This is a safety study,'' McCoy said. ''We want to know if you can do this
to people without hurting them.''

   Researchers enter the lungs with a bronchoscope and squirt the virus onto a
small section.

   ''We look at a CT scan and pick a spot located in a place that will be easy
for us to make the virus stay,'' McCoy said. ''Then we put in the CFTR virus and
hold it there until it is absorbed.''

   So far, Children's has implanted the virus in three adults, with plans to
include five more.

   The study's next phase will focus on documenting how well the therapy works.
Every study has three phases.

   One in 29 people in the United States - more than 10 million total - are
unknowing, symptomless carriers of the defective gene. A child must inherit one
copy of the gene from each parent to have cystic fibrosis.

   A baby born to two carriers has a 25 percent chance of contracting the
disease.

   Nationwide, one in every 2,500 white children has the disease; in blacks, one
in 20,000. In Ohio, about 1,313 people have cystic fibrosis.

   Cathy Steffen, a clinical social worker at Children's, works with families of
cystic fibrosis patients. The average life expectancy for patients, she said,
has increased to 31 years, from 29 in 1994.

   ''We attribute that to better care and treatment,'' Steffen said. ''At this
point, it is really open-ended. With the rate of advancements, they are hopeful
that a child diagnosed in 1997 will have a normal life expectancy.''

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1997


                             2238 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   November 04, 1997, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Earnings

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Coach USA - based its increased revenues in the third quarter on acquisitions
and continued strong internal growth.

   Qtr. to Sept. 30 1997 1996

   Revenues 143,382,000 93,629,000.

   Net income 11,661,000 11,687,000.

   Per share 0.57 0.66.

   Houston-based Coach USA is the largest provider of motorcoach tour and
charter services and one of the largest providers of motorcoach commuter and
transit services in the United States.

   Highlands Insurance Group said its increase in third-quarter earnings
reflected additional premiums from American Reliance, formerly Vik Brothers
Insurance, which was acquired April 30.

   Qtr. to Sept. 30 1997 1996

   Revenues 130,728,000 47,814,000.

   Net income 6,744,000 1,233,000.

   Per share 0.42 0.11.

   Highlands Insurance Group is a property and casualty insurer.

   Battle Mountain Gold Co.  reported a turnaround in third-quarter earnings
resulting primarily from the ownership restructuring of certain assets. The
average gold price of $ 332 per ounce was down from $ 388 per ounce a year
earlier, offset partly by lower operating costs. The year-ago quarter was
affected by asset write-down costs and merger expenses.

   Qtr. to Sept. 30 1997 1996

   Revenues 90,200,000 91,000,000.

   Net income 23,500,000 (49,000,000).

   Per share 0.10 (0.21).

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.) Battle Mountain Gold is a gold mining
company.

   GeneMedicine said it has about $ 30 million on hand to fund its gene therapy
research.

   Qtr. to Sept.30 1997 1996

   Revenues 1,526,143 1,451,646.

   Net income (2,979,792) (2,737,141).

   Per share (0.22) (0.21).

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.) GeneMedicine is a developer of gene
therapy products designed for the treatment or prevention of serious diseases.

   Fortune Natural Resources Corp. reported a net loss even though its oil and
gas revenues increased 5 percent.

   Qtr. to Sept. 30 1997 1996

   Revenues 1,095,000 1,053,000.

   Net income (362,000) (175,000).

   Per share (0.03) (0.02).

   (Figures in parentheses are losses.) Fortune is an independent oil and gas
company.


LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1997


                             2239 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    NOVEMBER 4, 1997, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 369 words

HEADLINE: Drug, Gene Therapy Firms Unite
 Arris to acquire Sequana for $ 166 million

BYLINE: Lois Kazakoff, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    South San Francisco-based Arris Pharmaceutical Corp. said yesterday it will
buy San Diego-based Sequana Therapeutics Inc. and create a new company capable
of discovering the genetic basis of disease and designing drugs to treat it.

   The acquisition, which calls for Arris to swap 1.35 common shares for each
Sequana share, is valued at $ 166 million.

   Sequana, a genomics company, identifies promising targets for gene therapies.
Arris, a drug discovery company, designs protease inhibitors to treat
genetic-based disease, including cardiovascular disease, cancer and infectious
diseases, including AIDS.

   ''The merger is a logical extension of both companies' technologies,'' said
David Stone, a biotech analyst with Cowen & Co.'s office in Boston.  ''You can't
be in drug discovery research without gene research.''

   Stone predicted such mergers will become a trend in the biotechnology
industry.

   Coincidentally, Sequana also announced yesterday that it had lined up the
Parke-Davis division of Warner-Lambert as a corporate partner in its search for
new treatments for schizophrenia and manic depression. The five-year agreement
is valued at up to $ 103 million, excluding royalties, said Kevin Kinsella,
Sequana president and CEO.

   Arris said it will take a ''substantial'' charge related to the purchase of
Sequana, which is expected to be completed next year. Without the charge,
analysts estimated Axys Pharmaceuticals Inc., the name of the new company, would
have a net loss of $ 10 million for fiscal year 1998.

   Based in South San Francisco, Axys will have a research staff of 325 and will
retain the existing facilities of both companies.

   Arris CEO and President John Walker will lead the new company while Kinsella
said he will move on to other interests.

   Analysts praised the merger and the new management structure.

   Rachel Leheny, securities analyst for Hambrecht & Quist in New York, said
''Kevin Kinsella is a venture capitalist who did his job of getting the
technology to a point where he could move on. John Walker is more of a
nuts-and-bolts manager and well-positioned to take the helm.''

   Arris' stock closed at $ 11.06, down 88 cents. Sequana's stock rose $ 2.69 to
$ 13.94.


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1997


                             2240 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     November 2, 1997, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1084 words

HEADLINE: My California museum

BYLINE: By Alex Beam, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Having spent the past year in California, I can testify that it is rich in
many things: luxuriant redwood groves, toll-free interstate highways, and
whole-foods supermarkets comparable in acreage and bounty to the state of Rhode
Island. But California, in the Union for barely a hundred years, is museum-poor.
The state's two grandest galleries are named after a priapic oil baron (J. Paul
Getty) and a sleazy KGB fellow-traveler (Armand Hammer). The beautifully
appointed Oakland Museum recounts the history of the Golden State - the world's
seventh largest economy, mind you - in just three rooms.

    As you can see, there is ample scope for California museum entrepreneurship.
Welcome to My California Museum.
Exhibit 1: History This won't take a second. Before the Gold Rush, the Spanish,
the Mexicans, and a few Americanos dozed around the missions and ranchos,
keeping the local Indians down in the name of "civilization." The Russians and
the Eskimos killed off all the sea otters, then gold was discovered and no one
cared about the otters anymore. The railroad barons enslaved the Chinese. Riding
the newly laid rails, the people we now deride as kooks moved to California from
God-fearing, tranquil backwaters in Ohio and Illinois.

    Adios, Californios! Hello, Walt Disney!
Exhibit 2: Technology It's everywhere. In Palo Alto, where I lived, the 20-room
Hotel California had its own Web site (hotelcalifornia.com). The local dry
cleaner had its own Web site (dcimg.com/index.html). At the press conference
celebrating the release of Black Panther activist Geronimo Pratt, who had been
wrongfully imprisoned for 27 years, former Panther chief of staff David Hilliard
urged bystanders to check out the group's new site
(blackpanther.org/index.html). Not to be outdone by the dry cleaners and the
hoteliers, I soon had my own Universal Resource Locator:
(www-leland.stanford.edu/alexbeam/)
ARTIFACT I: This Customer Review card plucked from the bulletin board of the
Bookshop Santa Cruz:

   Author: Terence McKenna

   Title: Food of the Gods

   MUST READ!

   REAL VALUELUTIONARY sic

   GAIAN MIND! HOLY GRAIL!

   Comments: This anthropologist and botanist historically reviews the foods
that doom our dominant culture and the suppressed plants that can actually save
our consciousness in ecoevolution vs. our psycogeopolitcal sic pathologies of
habit & addiction.
Exhibit 3: Earthquakes The definitive account of a latter-day California
earthquake comes from the January 17, 1994, diary of manic filmmaker James
Toback. Scrambling to escape the devastation of the Northridge quake, Toback
bumps into singer Tony Bennett in the the lobby of his hotel:

   "I launched into riffs on the death of California as a viable state, watching
earnest nods of affirmation from the man, who, with 'I Left My Heart in San
Francisco,' was probably more responsible for the elevation of the image of the
state than any other 20 singers this century."

   With the help of a $ 100 bill, Toback bribes his way onto overbooked Flight 1
departing Los Angeles for Manhattan. While 72 Angelenos perish on the ground
below, he and celeb seatmates Matthew Modine and Penelope Ann Miller bemoan the
fact that they will be arriving too late to attend a party to which all three of
them have been invited.
Exhibit 4: Language In California, one learns to speak with considerable care.
While enjoying dinner with the former state senator from Humboldt County, one of
the nation's leading mariculture (as in marijuana) regions, I joshed him about
his "doper" constituents. "Not 'dopers,' " he corrected me, " 'growers.' "

   I don't know when I first started speaking like a Californian. At another
dinner, my hostess was debating whether to take her 2-year-old son to see the
Cirque du Soleil. I thought the phantasmagorical combination of dance, new
music, and pantomime might be lost on little Harry. And I heard myself say: "I
don't want to sound negative, but I'm not sure that show would be appropriate
for your son." Yet what I meant to say, was: "Don't waste 50 bucks on
artsy-fartsy bilge for the kid."
ARTIFACT II: This color-Xeroxed flyer was posted outside a bakery in Portola
Valley, a Santa Clara hill town with an Arabian/Thoroughbred-to-humans ratio of
about 4 to 1:

   Single Professionals! Networking Potlucks!

   You'll enjoy a wide range of topics with 125-plus single professionals (ages
35-65), including international trade, venture capital, entrepreneurial
projects, parapsychology & integrated healing. Special guests will include a
famous Tibetan lama, a London cancer researcher, several gene-therapy
researchers, a songwriter, a poet, a hypnotherapist, and an international
psychic.

    Prompts conversation!  Exhibit 5: California, Crucible of Culture "The
apparent flattery the East Coast pays California is that the future begins
here," writes essayist Richard Rodriguez. "Hula-Hoops, Proposition 13 Prop 2 1/2
to us, college sit-ins, LSD, Malibu Buddhism, skateboards, beach boys, silicon
chips. California, the laboratory, New York, the patent office." A European
executive confirmed this view to The Wall Street Journal: "All things start in
California and spread to New York, then to London, and then throughout Europe."

    Smoothies in Sarajevo? It's only a matter of time.
ARTIFACT III: Letter to the Palo Alto Daily News, September 28, 1996:

   Dear Editor: There is a serious safety hazard which exists at most Palo Alto
public parks and school playgrounds. . . . Palo Alto is almost alone among
Northern California communities by failing to take action to address this
problem. . . . I ask that the city and school district take immediate action. .
. . The hazards are well documented - it is now time to act before a tragedy
strikes in Palo Alto.

    The menace? Children's soccer goals.
Exhibit 6: Nature Two friends of mine from Portland, Oregon, were traveling to
Yosemite and jokingly braced themselves for a "genuine California experience."
To them, that meant crowded parking lots, yahoos trampling down trails and
greenery, and limited access to the backwoods they simply drove into in Oregon.

    California has successfully oversold itself. There are hardly any orange
groves left in Orange County. The few remaining California condors now have
numbers painted on the bottom of their wings, like World War I-era biplanes. And
nature is coming indoors. Disney's "imagineers" are building a theme park called
"California's Outdoor Adventure." Can a digital Yosemite be far behind?

GRAPHIC: CARTOON, ILLUSTRATION BY MARK KSENIAK

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1997


                             2241 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              November 2, 1997, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: Designer genes not farfetched

BYLINE: BY TIM FRIEND

BODY:


   In the new movie "Gattaca," science has made it possible to engineer a class
of genetically superior human beings. Race and ethnic backgrounds are no longer
causes for discrimination. People are judged only by their genes.

   Those who are conceived naturally in the heat of passion, called "faith
children," are the dregs of this new society, destined to clean the toilets and
polish the marble floors of the genetic upper class. Only those children whose
parents selected their traits from a library of genes with the aid of a genetic
counselor are provided with opportunity and success.

   To borrow a line from the movie: "Your genes are your resume."

   Farfetched?

   Today's leaders in genetics and reproductive medicine say the ability to
remove chance from our genetic hand of cards is closer than we think. The basic
difference between the fiction and the fact is a matter of degree and time.

   "This is the kind of world that might exist when our grandchildren are
grown," says gene therapy pioneer French Anderson, 60. "The basic science is
already here, but we will not have the efficiency and safety to ethically
perform the gene transfers for another 10 to 15 years."

   The other technical deterrent is that the local gene bank does not have on
deposit the complex sets of genes that guide intelligence, good behavior and
perfect mental hygiene, adds Anderson, director of the gene therapy laboratory
and professor of biochemistry and pediatrics at the University of Southern
California School of Medicine.

   But gene discoveries are being made almost daily. Partial coding exists in
databases for more than half of all human genes.

   The discoveries of whole genes involved in human disease are reported almost
weekly. And while essentially all complex traits such as intelligence and
behavior involve multiple genes, they eventually will be discovered and perhaps
one day be available from genetic counselors like entrees on a menu.

   Parents already assist and override nature to have healthy children. Prenatal
tests exist for at least 200 diseases.

   The tools used by the reproductive specialists to make babies for infertile
couples and to screen embryos for diseases, combined with the techniques being
developed to replace disease genes, will become the tools for designing babies,
Anderson says.

   He was an unpaid consultant for "Gattaca" director and screenwriter Andrew
Niccol.

   "I was asked to evaluate the science and see if there was anything absurd
about it," Anderson says. "I was very impressed with it."

   Though the film does not show how it's done, the most probable method
scientists will use to rid embryos of diseases and enhance their mental and
physical potential is "germ-line" gene therapy.

   With this method, genes are introduced at the earliest stages of embryonic
development and incorporated permanently into the DNA. The germ line is the
embryo's reproductive cells (the sperm and the egg). Genes incorporated into the
germ line will be passed on to future generations.

   "We do this in animals, but the technique is very inefficient and crude,"
Anderson says. "One has to engineer large numbers of eggs in order to get a few
which have the trait you want. The majority of the eggs or pre-embryos are
deformed, and that isn't acceptable in humans."

   Anderson says three criteria should be met before germ-line therapy is
performed routinely on people:

   An efficient means of transferring genes must be developed in monkeys, and
the result must be reproducible and reliable and produce healthy offspring.

   Experience is needed in hundreds of human patients in carefully controlled
gene studies to make sure that introducing genes into the body does not cause
unexpected long-term problems such as cancer.

   Society must understand the significant implications of changing the natural
gene pool.

   Meeting these criteria, Anderson predicts, will take 10 to 15 years.

   Meanwhile, the first example of gene enhancement is just around the corner. A
salve containing genes to promote hair growth is expected to be submitted soon
to the Food and Drug Administration.

   The manufacturer, Anticancer Inc. of San Diego, will apply for approval to
treat hair loss associated with chemotherapy. But once approved, the salve can
be prescribed for any reason.

   "Enhancement engineering is starting to take place, but it is coming through
the back door," Anderson says.

   The same "off-label" applications can be expected when the techniques become
more efficient for performing germ-line gene therapy to correct disease genes in
human embryos. Once the technology is there, society has to decide whether it
wants to evolve into a genetic caste system a la "Gattaca."

   "Maybe in a hundred years people will take genes like vitamins," Anderson
says. "But, my God, we aren't ready now."

GRAPHIC: Ethan Hawke plays a genetically inferior man in the new science fiction
movie "Gattaca." ; GANNETT NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1997


                             2242 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       October 31, 1997 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-02

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: Model for sickle cell hailed Mice may help speed treatment

BYLINE: By Warren E. Leary, The New York Times

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Two groups of scientists have developed genetically engineered
mice that they say represent the first true animal model for sickle-cell
disease, an advance that should speed research on new treatments for the
incurable blood condition.

   Scientists said the development, culminating more than a decade of intense
research, has for the first time produced animals that mimic the full range of
symptoms seen in people with the hereditary disease.

   The mice, which have been genetically altered to produce the human blood
components involved in the disease, should make it possible to screen and test
many new compounds as potential treatments and to examine different types of
genetic therapy intended to cure the condition, experts said.

   "This is a major advance that a lot of labs have been trying to achieve for
more than a decade," said Dr. Alan Schechter, a sickle-cell expert at the
National Institutes of Health. "This is probably as good a mouse model you could
ever have for sickle-cell disease. The work by both groups has really pushed the
state of the art."

   Two papers describing the development of the mouse models are being published
today in the journal Science. The mice were developed by teams from the
University of Alabama in Birmingham, led by Dr. Timothy Townes and Dr. Thomas
Ryan, and from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of
California at Berkeley, led by Dr. Chris Paszty and Dr. Edward Rubin.

   Using molecular biology techniques, scientists in recent years have created a
number of sickle-cell mouse models by putting human genes responsible for making
hemoglobin into the animals. Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying molecule in red
blood cells, and a defective form of this substance, called sickle hemoglobin,
is responsible for sickle-cell disease.

   Although earlier mouse models were able to produce sickle hemoglobin, the
animals did not exhibit the range of symptoms seen in sickle-cell disease.
Experts believe this is because the mice also continued to produce normal mouse
hemoglobin and this protected the animals from the disease.

   With the new model mice, researchers made animals that only produce human
hemoglobin, mostly of the sickling variety responsible for diseased blood cells,
according to the papers.

   Hundreds of thousands of people worldwide are born with sickle-cell disease.
In the United States, sickle-cell disease mainly afflicts African-Americans and
Hispanics, but it is also seen in some people of Mediterranean and East Indian
heritage. Experts estimate that more than 70,000 Americans have sickle-cell
anemia, the most prominent of several forms of the disease.

   The genetic disease results in red blood cells containing an abnormal form of
hemoglobin that can cause them to stiffen and contort into jagged shapes when
deprived of oxygen. These sickle-shaped cells can block and damage blood vessels
and cause adverse changes to their linings.

   People get sickle-cell anemia when they inherit a sickle hemoglobin gene from
both parents, but other forms of sickle disease can result from getting a sickle
hemoglobin gene from one parent and a gene for another abnormal hemoglobin from
the other.

   According to their papers, the Alabama and California groups took a similar
approach to creating their models.

   But getting the final sickle-cell mice resulted from an unusual collaboration
between the research groups.

   Paszty said in an interview that while attending a meeting in 1995, the two
groups learned that they had produced similar knockout mice, each making half of
the chemical components needed to produce hemoglobin.

   Rather than spend additional years trying to make mice the rival team had
already produced, the two groups decided to share their knockout animals.

   "It just made sense to cooperate and not duplicate each other's work," Paszty
said.

   Working separately, the groups developed very similar sickle-cell mice at
about the same time, he said, and decided to publish their results at the same
time.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1997


                             2243 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 31, 1997, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: Gene-Altered Mice Are Called First True Sickle Cell Model

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30

BODY:

   Two groups of scientists have developed genetically engineered mice that they
say represent the first true animal model for sickle cell disease, an advance
that should speed research on new treatments for the incurable blood condition.

   Scientists said the development, culminating more than a decade of intense
research, has for the first time produced animals that mimic the full range of
symptoms seen in people with the hereditary disease.

    The mice, which have been genetically altered to produce the human blood
components involved in the disease, should make it possible to screen and test
many new compounds as potential treatments and to examine different types of
genetic therapy intended to cure the condition, experts said.

   "This is a major advance that a lot of labs have been trying to achieve for
more than a decade," said Dr. Alan N. Schechter, a sickle cell expert at the
National Institutes of Health. "This is probably as good a mouse model you could
ever have for sickle cell disease."

   Two papers describing the development of the mouse models are being published
on Friday in the journal Science. The mice were developed by teams from the
University of Alabama in Birmingham, led by Dr. Timothy M. Townes and Dr. Thomas
M. Ryan, and from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University
of California at Berkeley, led by Dr. Chris Paszty and Dr. Edward M. Rubin.

   Using molecular biology techniques, scientists have created a number of
sickle cell mouse models by putting human genes responsible for making
hemoglobin into the animals. Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying molecule in red
blood cells, and a defective form of this substance, called sickle hemoglobin,
is responsible for sickle cell disease.

   Although earlier mouse models were able to produce sickle hemoglobin, the
animals did not exhibit the range of symptoms seen in sickle cell disease.
Experts believe this is because the mice also continued to produce normal mouse
hemoglobin and this protected the animals from the disease.

   With the new model mice, researchers made animals that only produce human
hemoglobin, mostly of the sickling variety responsible for diseased blood cells,
according to the papers.

   Hundreds of thousands of people worldwide are born with sickle cell disease.
In the United States, sickle cell disease mainly afflicts African-Americans and
people of Hispanic descent, but it is also seen in some people of Mediterranean
and East Indian heritage. Experts estimate that more than 70,000 Americans have
sickle cell anemia, the most prominent form of the disease.

   The genetic disease results in red blood cells containing an abnormal form of
hemoglobin that can cause them to stiffen and contort into jagged shapes when
deprived of oxygen. These sickle-shaped cells can block and damage blood vessels
and cause adverse changes to their linings.

   People get sickle cell anemia when they inherit a sickle hemoglobin gene from
both parents, but other forms of sickle disease can result from getting a sickle
hemoglobin gene from one parent and a gene for another abnormal hemoglobin from
the other.

   According to their papers, the Alabama and California groups took a similar
approach to creating their models. They used genetic engineering to add human
genes for sickle hemoglobin to some animals, producing transgenic mice that
produce the abnormal human protein. They also developed a strain of mice in
which genes for their normal hemoglobin were "knocked out," or deleted. Then the
transgenic and knockout mice were bred, eventually producing offspring that had
all their mouse hemoglobin genes replaced by the mutant human ones.

   Getting the final sickle cell mice resulted from a collaboration between the
research groups.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1997


                             2244 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    OCTOBER 31, 1997, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: Mice May Hold Key to Sickle Cell Disease
 They can mimic symptoms and undergo tests

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    After 50 years of frustration in the fight against sickle cell disease, two
teams of scientists have finally created a breed of genetically engineered mice
that mimic all the human symptoms of the devastating hereditary disorder.

   The achievement offers medical researchers the first opportunity to conduct
experiments that are impossible in humans as they develop and test new therapies
for treating the disease. Ultimately, it could lead to ways to prevent the
illness through gene therapy.

   The mice were created by scientists at the University of California's
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of Alabama in a
collaboration that has taken nearly 10 years of trial- and-error work.

   Two separate reports on their achievements are being published today in the
journal Science. Dr. Chris Paszty heads the Berkeley group, and Dr. Tim M.
Townes is the leader of the Alabama team.

   Independent experts have called their work indispensable for finding
effective drugs against sickle cell disease, whose crippling symptoms can be
eased but never eliminated.

   An estimated 100,000 babies are born with the genetic disorder each year
throughout the world -- most of them in Africa or of African descent. Among
African Americans, about 1 in 375 children has the invariably fatal disease, and
the limited treatments now available in countries with good medical care have
increased the average life span of sufferers to 40 years.

   In sickle cell disease, the deformed red blood cells are unable to carry
oxygen through blood vessels because their abnormal shape blocks their passage.
The result can be severe anemia, recurrent episodes of pain, and severe
infections and strokes caused by blocked blood supplies to the brain.

   The oxygen-carrying protein molecule in red blood cells, called hemoglobin,
is made up of two chains, known as alpha and beta.  Paszty's Berkeley team of
genetic engineering specialists first managed to eliminate the gene for the
mouse alpha chain from their animals. At the same time, the Alabama group was
able to eliminate the gene for the beta chain in their mice.

   After creating these animals, known to scientists as ''knockout mice,'' the
research teams decided to exchange their mice to avoid duplicating their work,
and then bred them separately to create colonies of knockout mice into which
they introduced the complete set of genes for human sickle cell disease.

   ''It was a big gamble,'' Paszty said in an interview yesterday, ''and the
outcome of all the work was very uncertain from the beginning. But both our
teams succeeded, and now our lab has a colony of 50 mice running around
downstairs -- all of them carrying the human sickle cell genes.''

   So powerful are the human genes in the mice, Paszty said, that most of the
baby mice born in the colony quickly sicken, and three- quarters of them die of
the human disease before reaching adulthood.

   Paszty and his colleagues are now pursuing their work to create ''knockout
mice'' that carry the human genes for many other severe hereditary diseases that
are caused by abnormal hemoglobin, and expect to report on their progress soon.

   In humans, the gene for causing red blood cells to take on their abnormal
sickled shape can be carried by both men and women. If two parents carry a
sickling gene, children born to the couple will have a 1 in 4 chance of
developing full-scale sickle cell disease, while half the children will develop
''sickle cell trait'' that does not lead to disease, but places the offspring of
those children at risk.

   Commenting in the Science article, Dr. Mary Fabry of the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine in New York said the new breed of mice will be
''indispensable'' for testing new drugs and gene therapy strategies for
controlling the disease. Dr. Franklin Bunn at Harvard Medical School hailed the
work as ''a critically important advance.''

    ABOUT THE DISEASE

   .

   Sickle cell disease is an inherited blood disorder most common in people with
African ancestry, with a lesser incidence among those with Middle Eastern and
Mediterranean ancestry.

   About 100,000 people are born with it each year; about 1 of 375 African
Americans is born with the disease.

   For the disease to occur, a defective gene must be inherited from each
parent.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1997


                             2245 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         October 31, 1997 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: ALTERED MICE EXPECTED TO AID SICKLE CELL RESEARCH

BYLINE: By WARREN E. LEARY 1997, The New York Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Two groups of scientists have developed genetically engineered mice that they
say represent the first true animal model for sickle cell disease, an advance
that should speed research on new treatments for the incurable blood condition.

   Scientists said the development, culminating more than a decade of intense
research, for the first time has produced animals that mimic the full range of
symptoms seen in people with the hereditary disease.

   The mice, which have been genetically altered to produce the human blood
components involved in the disease, should make it possible to screen and test
many new compounds as potential treatments and to examine different types of
genetic therapy intended to cure the condition, experts said.

   "This is a major advance that a lot of labs have been trying to achieve for
more than a decade," said Dr. Alan Schechter, a sickle cell expert at the
National Institutes of Health.

   Two papers describing the development of the mouse models are being published
today in the journal Science. The mice were developed by teams from the
University of Alabama at Birmingham, led by Dr. Timothy Townes and Dr. Thomas
Ryan, and from the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of
California at Berkeley, led by Dr. Chris Paszty and Dr. Edward Rubin.

   Using molecular biology techniques, scientists in recent years have created a
number of sickle cell mouse models by putting human genes responsible for making
hemoglobin into the animals. Hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying molecule in red
blood cells, and a defective form of this substance, called sickle hemoglobin,
is responsible for sickle cell disease.

   Although earlier mouse models were able to produce sickle hemoglobin, the
animals did not exhibit the range of symptoms seen in sickle cell disease.
Experts believe this is because the mice also continued to produce normal mouse
hemoglobin and this protected the animals from the disease.

   With the new model mice, researchers made animals that only produce human
hemoglobin, mostly of the variety responsible for diseased blood cells,
according to the papers.

   The genetic disease results in red blood cells containing an abnormal form of
hemoglobin that can cause them to stiffen and contort into jagged shapes when
deprived of oxygen. These sickle-shaped cells can block and damage blood vessels
and cause adverse changes to their linings.

   According to their papers, the Alabama and California groups took a similar
approach to creating their models. They used genetic engineering to add human
genes for sickle hemoglobin to some animals, producing transgenic mice that
produce the abnormal human protein. They also developed a strain of mice in
which genes for their normal hemoglobin were "knocked out," or deleted. Then the
transgenic and knockout mice were bred, eventually producing offspring that had
all their mouse hemoglobin genes replaced by the mutant human ones.

   But getting the final sickle cell mice resulted from an unusual collaboration
between the research groups.

   Paszty said that, while attending a meeting in 1995, the two groups learned
that they had produced similar knockout mice, each making half the chemical
components needed to produce hemoglobin.

   "We had succeeded in making mice with genes that made alpha-globin and they
had produced beta-globin knockouts," he said.

   Rather than spend additional years trying to make mice the rival team had
already produced, the two groups decided to share their knockout animals.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1997


                             2246 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      OCTOBER 28, 1997 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: NEW PILLS MAY IMPROVE TREATMENT OF IMPOTENCE

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Millions of impotent American men are about to get a treatment revolution:
new pills that promise to restore sexual function without the discomfort and
embarrassment of traditional therapies.

   The first oral medicine for impotence - a drug that can cause erections
within 20 minutes of swallowing the pill - could be sold by April, impotence
specialists said yesterday.

   "Some of these drugs are very potent, very unique," said Dr. Harin
Padma-Nathan of the University of Southern California and director of The Male
Clinic in Santa Monica, Calif. "We could combine them in a cocktail, . . . some
to work in the brain and some to work locally, for the best effect."

   Between 10 million and 20 million American men suffer impotence at some point
in their lives. Impotence increases with age, and about 80 percent is caused by
disease, particularly diabetes and heart conditions that restrict blood flow,
said Dr. Irwin Goldstein of Boston University. Impotence also can be
psychological or a side effect of certain drugs.

   Now three experimental pills promise to erase the discomfort associated with
existing treatments for impotence - most of which require painful injections or
implants - doctors told reporters meeting at the National Institutes of Health:

   Sildenafil. Pfizer Inc.'s Viagra, or sildenafil, blocks an enzyme found
mainly in the penis that breaks down a chemical produced during sexual
stimulation. The longer that chemical, called cyclic GMP, stays around, the
better chance of an erection.

   In clinical studies of several thousand men, Viagra helped about 80 percent,
said Padma-Nathan, who helped test all three drugs. The Food and Drug
Administration last week promised a quick review of Viagra, meaning it could be
sold by April.

   Viagra was a failed heart drug investigated again after some heart patients
unexpectedly reported erections. About 10 percent of patients report mild side
effects such as headache or flushing.

   Apomorphine. While Viagra works in the penis, Tap Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s
apomorphine "works completely in the brain," Padma-Nathan said.

   Apomorphine affects chemicals in the brain region associated with initiating
erections. Doctors discovered the effect in 1869, but found the drug better for
poison victims because it also caused serious nausea and vomiting.

   But Tap created a "sublingual" version - it dissolves under the tongue - that
gets into the body so slowly that it doesn't cause nausea.

   The drug is 70 percent effective in the psychologically impotent, and studies
in disease-caused impotence are concluding now, Padma-Nathan said. Tap had
planned to seek FDA approval in 1999, but Padma-Nathan said yesterday that the
drug works well enough that the company may act sooner.

   Vasomax. Vasomax is an oral version of a current injection drug that dilates
penile blood vessels. Trials show it can help about 40 percent of men with
moderate impotence. Manufacturer Zonagen Inc. is expected to seek FDA approval
by year's end.

   This first generation of easier impotence treatment could persuade more men
to seek help, from the 5 percent to 10 percent who do today to half of patients,
Padma-Nathan said.

   Animal experiments promise that gene therapy may one day allow men to battle
impotence over long periods by taking just two or three shots a year, said Dr.
George Christ of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2247 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 28, 1997 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 737 words

HEADLINE: Pills to offer new hope for impotent men

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Millions of impotent American men are about to get a treatment revolution -
new pills that promise to restore sexual function without the discomfort and
embarrassment of traditional therapies.

    The first oral medicine for impotence - a drug that can cause erections
within 20 minutes of swallowing the pill - could be sold by April, impotence
specialists said yesterday.

    "Some of these drugs are very potent, very unique," said Dr. Harin
Padma-Nathan of the University of Southern California and director of The Male
Clinic in Santa Monica, Calif. "We could combine them in a cocktail . . . some
to work in the brain and some to work locally, for the best effect."

   Patients who have tried the experimental pills say they work easily.

    "My wife said it was like I was Tarzan," said Alfred Pariser of Los Angeles,
who was impotent for a year following prostate cancer surgery until he tried
Viagra, the drug that works in 20 minutes.

    Between 10 million and 20 million American men suffer impotence at some
point in their lives. Impotence increases with age, and some 80 percent is
caused by disease, particularly diabetes and heart conditions that restrict
blood flow, said Dr. Irwin Goldstein of Boston University. Impotence also can be
psychological or a side effect of certain drugs.

    Impotence is highly treatable, but there are drawbacks: penile implants
require surgery; vacuum- style devices that force blood into the penis interrupt
lovemaking; injecting drugs into the penis or inserting a drug-carrying pellet
into the urethra can be painful, and the injections sometimes cause hours- long
erections.

    Now three experimental pills promise to erase the discomfort, doctors told
reporters meeting at the National Institutes of Health yesterday:

    Pfizer Inc.'s Viagra, or sildenafil, blocks an enzyme found mainly in the
penis that breaks down a chemical produced during sexual stimulation. The longer
that chemical, called cyclic GMP, stays around, the better chance of an
erection.

    In clinical studies of several thousand men, Viagra helped about 80 percent,
said Padma-Nathan, who helped test all three drugs. The Food and Drug
Administration last week promised a quick review of Viagra, meaning it could be
sold by April.

    Unlike injection drugs, Viagra doesn't cause erections unless the man is
sexually stimulated.

   "If I take the pill and . . . my wife suddenly has a headache or her mother
calls and she's no longer in the mood, nothing happens to me," Pariser said.
"This drug is the most natural, normal thing you can take."

    Viagra was a failed heart drug investigated again after some heart patients
unexpectedly reported erections. Some 10 percent of patients report mild side
effects such as headache or flushing.

    While Viagra works in the penis, Tap Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s apomorphine
"works completely in the brain," Padma-Nathan said.

    Apomorphine affects chemicals in the brain region associated with initiating
erections. Doctors discovered the effect in 1869, but found the drug better for
poison victims because it also caused serious nausea and vomiting.

    But Tap created a "sublingual" version - it dissolves under the tongue -
that gets into the body so slowly that it doesn't cause nausea.

    The drug is 70 percent effective in the psychologically impotent, and
studies in disease-caused impotence are concluding now, Padma-Nathan said. Tap
had planned to seek FDA approval in 1999, but Padma-Nathan said Monday that the
drug works well enough that the company may act sooner.

    Vasomax is an oral version of a current injection drug that dilates penile
blood vessels. Trials show it can help about 40 percent of men with moderate
impotence. Manufacturer Zonagen Inc. is expected to seek FDA approval by year's
end.

    This first generation of easier impotence treatment could persuade more men
to seek help, from the 5 percent to 10 percent who do today to half of patients,
Padma-Nathan said.

    That's just the first generation of easier impotence treatment. Animal
experiments promise that gene therapy may one day allow men to battle impotence
over long periods by taking just two or three shots a year, said Dr. George
Christ of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine.

    And even newer research promises to let men with diseases that cause
impotence actually prevent sexual problems, said Dr. Jeremy Heaton of Canada's
Queens University in Ontario. "We are getting into very sophisticated
therapies," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2248 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 28, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 1497 words

HEADLINE: 'Gattaca' could foretell reality

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   In the new movie Gattaca, science has made it possible
to engineer a class of genetically superior human beings. Race
and ethnic backgrounds are no longer causes for discrimination.
People are judged only by their genes.

   Those who are conceived naturally in the heat of passion, called
"faith children," are the dregs of this new society, destined
to clean the toilets and polish the marble floors of the genetic
upper class. Only those children whose parents selected their
traits from a library of genes with the aid of a genetic counselor
are provided with opportunity and success.


   To borrow a line from the movie: "Your genes are your resume."

   Far-fetched?

   Today's leaders in genetics and reproductive medicine say the
ability to remove chance from our genetic hand of cards is closer
than we think. The basic difference between the fiction and the
fact is a matter of degree and time. "This is the kind of world
that might exist when our grandchildren are grown," says gene
therapy pioneer French Anderson, 60. "The basic science is already
here, but we will not not have the efficiency and safety to ethically
perform the gene transfers for another 10 to 15 years."

   The other technical deterrent is that the local gene bank does
not have on deposit the complex sets of genes that guide intelligence,
good behavior and perfect mental hygiene, adds Anderson, director
of the gene therapy laboratory and professor of biochemistry and
pediatrics at the University of Southern California School of
Medicine.

   Maria Bustillo, director of assisted reproductive technologies
at the South Florida Institute for Reproductive Medicine, Miami,
agrees. "We're mostly there in terms of the science," she says,
"but the gaps that remain are major."

   Horrified by ideas

   Anderson says he is personally horrified by the possibility that
people would use the gene therapy technology he has helped pioneer
to enhance genetic makeup.

   "The realization that we as human beings would make use of genetic
engineering to alter our children to be smarter or taller is why
I push so hard to say that it should not be used for any purpose
other than serious disease," Anderson says.

   But science races ahead like a bullet train, arriving at the station
often far ahead of the understanding of its implications. Gene
discoveries now are being made almost daily. Partial coding exists
in databases for more than half of all human genes. Millions of
letters of genetic code are pouring into the public gene bank
at the National Center for Biotechnology Information.

   The discoveries of whole genes involved in human disease are reported
almost weekly. And while essentially all complex traits such as
intelligence and behavior involve multiple genes, they eventually
will be discovered and perhaps one day be available from genetic
counselors like entrees on a menu.

   "I don't see this happening in my lifetime," Bustillo says.
"But the question for me is: Why would anyone want to do it?"

   Anderson, who began the first human gene therapy experiments in
1989 at the National Institutes of Health, says the more realistic
question is: Who can resist?

   "I believe most people would say yes to genetically enhancing
their children with the rationalization 'Since most people are
doing it, I have to do it, too,' and there is truth in that. People
respond to peer pressure," Anderson says.

   Tools for parents

   Parents already assist and override nature to have healthy children.
Prenatal tests exist for at least 200 diseases. And while society
has yet to create designer embryos, doctors and couples routinely
dispose of embryos that carry genes for diseases such as Tay-Sachs,
and they sometimes dispose of embryos that are not of the sex
preferred by the parents, Bustillo says.

   The tools used by the reproductive specialists to make babies
for infertile couples and to screen embryos for diseases, combined
with the techniques being developed to replace disease genes,
will become the tools for designing babies, Anderson says.

   He was an unpaid consultant for Gattaca's director and
screenwriter, Andrew Niccol. "I was asked to evaluate the science
and see if there was anything absurd about it," Anderson says.
"I was very impressed with it."

   Though the film does not show how it's done, the most probable
method scientists will use to rid embryos of diseases and enhance
their mental and physical potential is "germ line" gene therapy.

   With this method, genes are introduced at the earliest stages
of embryonic development and incorporated permanently into the
DNA. The germ line is the embryo's reproductive cells (the sperm
and the egg). Genes incorporated into the germ line will be passed
on to future generations.

   This technique is already done in animals, but 200 embryos must
be created to get one with the gene in the right place in the
DNA and to produce the desired result. This is how genetically
engineered mice are made for research.

   "We do this in animals, but the technique is very inefficient
and crude," Anderson says. "One has to engineer large numbers
of eggs in order to get a few which have the trait you want. The
majority of the eggs or pre-embryos are deformed, and that isn't
acceptable in humans."

   But with improvements in efficiency, it is not out of the question.
In fact, it is the goal.

   "The technology to do germ-line gene therapy hopefully will become
available in the next four to five years," says Michael Blaese,
who pioneered gene therapy with Anderson. "We desperately need
the tools, and personally I think germ-line cures of the awful
things I take care of would be wonderful."

   Approved technnique

   Somatic gene therapy is the only type that is approved for study
in humans today.

   The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) at the National Institutes
of Health oversees human gene therapy studies. The official policy
on germ-line studies is this:

   "The RAC will not at present entertain proposals for germ line
alteration but will consider proposals involving somatic cell
gene transfer. The purpose of somatic cell gene therapy is to
treat an individual patient, e.g. by inserting a properly functioning
gene into the subject's somatic cells. Germ line alteration involves
a specific attempt to introduce genetic changes in the reproductive
cells of an individual with the aim of changing the set of genes
passed on to the individual offspring."

   Anderson, Blaese and colleagues drew international attention in
1989 when they introduced genes into the bloodstreams of two young
girls who were born missing the gene that makes adenosine deaminase,
an enzyme necessary for normal immune function. Normally, such
children must take regular injections of a drug to prevent a severe
type of immune deficiency.

   The two girls in the historic experiment received injections of
the human adenosine deaminase gene. This type of treatment is
somatic gene therapy. The genes become permanently incorporated
into the DNA of only certain cells and are removed by the body
each time these cells turn over. That means the gene therapy has
to be repeated. In this particular case, the girls have remained
normal and have not had to be re-treated with the gene therapy
for three years.

   Germ-line therapy would be permanent. Anderson says three criteria
should be met before it is performed routinely on people:

   -- A procedure must be developed in monkeys with an efficient
means of transferring genes, and the result must be reproducable
and reliable and produce healthy offspring.

   -- Experience is needed in hundreds of human patients in carefully
controlled somatic gene studies to make sure that introducing
genes into the body does not have unexpected long-term problems
such as cancer.

   -- Society must understand the significant implications of changing
the natural gene pool.

   Meeting these criteria, Anderson predicts, will take 10 to 15
years.

   Meanwhile, the first example of gene enhancement is just around
the corner. A salve containing genes to promote hair growth is
expected to be submitted soon to the Food and Drug Administration.
The manufacturer, Anticancer Inc. of San Diego, will apply for
approval to treat hair loss associated with chemotherapy. But
once approved, the salve can be prescribed for any reason.

   "Enhancement engineering is starting to take place, but it is
coming through the back door," Anderson says. The same "off-label"
applications can be expected when the techniques become more efficient
for performing germ-line gene therapy to correct disease genes
in human embryos. Once the technology is there, society has to
decide whether it wants to evolve into a genetic caste system
a la Gattaca.

   "Maybe in a hundred years people will take genes like vitamins,"
Anderson says. "But, my God, we aren't ready now."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Grant Jerding, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research by
Tim Friend (Diagram, 2); PHOTO, B/W, Darren Michaels, Columbia Pictures

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1997


                             2249 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 27, 1997, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1916 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN TUMOR;
It is still perhaps the most dreaded diagnosis but methods of treating it are
improving;
HEALTH SENSE / JUDY FOREMAN

BYLINE: By Judy Foreman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Jordan Fieldman was a 23-year-old first year student at Harvard Medical
School when he was told that a brain tumor would probably kill him before the
year was out.

   For five years, he'd had "horrendous headaches" that were written off as
stress, he says. He'd also had trouble seeing what was on the blackboard since
his undergraduate days as a neuroscience major at Harvard.

   But the student health plan, he says, kept referring him to an optometrist,
who told him to keep using his glasses.

   So it wasn't until medical school that he saw an ophthalmologist, an eye
doctor, who detected a brain tumor and rushed Fieldman to the hospital in an
ambulance. He underwent a 15-hour operation to remove the tumor from the pineal
gland in the middle of his brain. The surgery left him temporarily blind.

   Still, Fieldman kept going to class - "If I went home, I'd be a cancer
patient; if I stayed in school, I'd be a medical student who happens to
disappear for treatment" - while going through nine months of experimental
chemotherapy and radiation.

   He was given "nonexistent" odds of living five years, but he beat those odds.
He is 31 now, a doctor at the Berkshire Medical Center in Pittsfield.

   Despite such encouraging stories, there is perhaps no diagnosis more
frightening than a brain tumor, and according to The Brain Tumor Society, a
national group based in Boston, it is a diagnosis that roughly 100,000 Americans
will hear every year.

   Worse still, say some experts and activists, the incidence of such tumors may
be on the rise, though this is a hotly disputed point. There is consensus,
though, that in recent years, there have been significant advances in treatment.

   The fear that incidence may be rising has galvanized activists. Last week,
more than 150 of them met with members of Congress to lobby for more funding.
And this Saturday, hundreds of patients, family members and health professionals
are expected to gather at a Boston symposium to discuss the latest research on
treatment.

   Most tumors in the brain are cancers that spread there from other organs in
the body. But every year, about 34,000 people are diagnosed with "primary"
tumors that arise in the brain itself, according to the Central Brain Tumor
Registry of the United States, the only organization that keeps track of both
malignant and benign brain tumors.

   Even benign tumors can be life threatening, depending on their location.
Slightly more than half of all primary tumors are malignant.

   According to the National Cancer Institute, which keeps track only of
malignant tumors, the incidence of primary brain tumors rose 18.5 percent
between 1973 and 1994. The biggest increases seem to be at the extremes of life
- a 57.9 percent increase in people over 65, and a 35 percent jump in children
from birth to 14.

   Other researchers, however, question whether the rate is really going up, or
it's just that detection is better.

   To be sure, brain cancer is still rare. In children, it strikes 3.3 in every
100,000 by age 14. But researchers are worried because the incidence seems to be
growing at 1.8 percent a year, faster than childhood leukemias - and no one
knows why, says NCI epidemiologist Martha Linet.

   But the debate continues over whether that increase is real.

   "I think the incidence is probably up," says Dr. Lisa DeAngelis, chairman of
the neurology department at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
"It doesn't seem to be just because of better detection."

   At the Massachusetts General Hospital brain tumor center, however, Dr. John
Henson, a neuro-oncologist, disagrees: "I do not think it is going up in older
people, and I don't think it's going up in children."

   When researchers at the Mayo Clinic reviewed 40 years' worth of patient
records in 1995, they concluded that the apparent increase in brain tumors was
attributable to better diagnosis. In older people, for instance, better imaging
technologies, like CT and MRI scans, now pick up tumors whose symptoms were once
attributed to strokes.

   Henson does believe, though, that one type of tumor - brain lymphoma - may be
on the rise. This is a rare cancer, he says, but new cases have tripled in the
last 20 years, even in people with healthy immune systems. (Most lymphomas
affect lymph glands and immune cells thoughout the body, but lymphomas that
arise in the brain seem not to affect tissues elsewhere.)

   The positive news in all this is that treatments - and survival rates - for
primary brain tumors have been improving steadily, especially for kids.

   In 1973, says Linet of NCI, the chance that a child under 19 with a malignant
brain tumor would survive five years was 54 percent. Today, it's 73 percent, she
says, "a big change."

   And for a tumor called a medulloblastoma, five-year survival is now 80 to 85
percent, says Dr. Roger Packer, chairman of neurology at Children's National
Medical Center in Washington, D.C. A generation ago, he says, it was 30 to 40
percent.

   One of those whose chances now look rosier is nine-year old Ellen O'Brien of
Melrose. Diagnosed the day after her fifth birthday, Ellen has had three
surgeries, chemotherapy and radiation. At one point, in the belief there was no
hope for survival, she was sent home for hospice care.

   There were some "horrendous" times, like when Ellen was on high-dose
steroids, says her mother, Kate. "The child was psychotic. She tried to kill
herself." But Ellen has been fine for two years, and her mom says, "Things are
looking great."

   For adults, unfortunately, the news is not quite as encouraging,
notwithstanding the miracle of Jordan Fieldman, the young doctor in the
Berkshires. Currently, the overall five-year survival for adults with malignant
brain tumors is 30 percent, NCI figures show. For very aggressive tumors, the
one-year survival is only 50 percent.

   Still, there are reasons to hope.

   One is that doctors now pay more attention to the quality of life of brain
tumor patients, a key issue because treatments historically destroyed so many
healthy parts of the brain that even if the tumor was removed, people were left
with severe handicaps, such as blindness.

   Another is that there have been "tremendous advances in ways of delivering
radiation," says Dr. Jay Loeffler, director of the Northeast Proton Therapy
Center at MGH and head of the brain tumor center at Brigham and Women's
Hospital.

   One thing that has helped is stereotaxis, a process in which doctors screw a
metal frame onto the patient's skull and then do CT or MRI scans, using markers
on the frame as reference points. The result is a three-dimensional map showing
where the tumor is. This allows doctors to do "conformal" radiation, that is, to
match radiation precisely to the shape of the tumor.

   "If the tumor looks like an aligator," says Loeffler, "we can make the
radiation look like that, too."

   Doctors use stereotaxis to guide the radiation, which can either be given in
daily doses over six or seven weeks or in a single big dose, a technique called
"stereotactic radiosurgery."

   Today, there are even noninvasive stereotactic frames in some hospitals.
Instead of screwing a frame to the head, doctors insert a plate into the mouth
and use the upper jaw - which doesn't move - as the fixed point to guide
radiation.

   Better types of radiation are helping, too. With standard radiation beams,
energy is released as it travels through tissues. But at a few centers, doctors
now use proton beams, which travel to a specified spot, then release all their
energy there, blasting the tumor and minimizing damage to other areas.

   Surgery has improved, too. Instead of opening the whole skull to see if a
tumor is present, doctors can insert a fine needle, guided by stereotaxis and
the scans. Surgeons can also remove some whole tumors this way, too.

   And at Brigham and Women's - so far the only center to do so - doctors now
remove some tumors with an MRI scanner in the operating room, getting constant
visual clues as they go along.

   Other treatments are also promising, including drugs to block new blood
vessel growth around tumors, an idea pioneered by Dr. Judah Folkman, director of
surgical research at Children's Hospital in Boston.

   Among these anti-angiogenic drugs is the once-reviled sedative thalidomide,
which was banned for causing severe birth defects.

   Recently, an advisory board to the US Food and Drug Administration
recommended its approval for treating a side effect of leprosy. Even if it is
approved, however, its for other conditions may be limited.

   At the Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Dr. Howard Fine, director of the Center
for Neuro-oncology, has been studying both thalidomide and a blood vessel
blocker called TNP470, and he says he's encouraged by the early results.

   Fine and others are now trying, in animal studies, to combine blood vessel
blockers with gene therapy, a process in which altered viruses that secrete
anti-angiogenesis chemicals are injected into tumors.

   Other researchers are tinkering with ways to penetrate the "blood-brain
barrier" to get more chemotherapy into the brain. This barrier is a unique
feature of blood vessels in the brain that makes them less leaky. That protects
the brain against toxic chemicals but makes it harder to get useful drugs in.

   Still others are working on drugs to make tumor cells evolve from more to
less aggressive and drugs to boost immune response.

   And then there's faith in something beyond science.

   "When Western medicine gives you zero percent survival, you start exploring
other options," says Jordan Fieldman, who spent six months living with Tibetan
monks in India - before his diagnosis. He still meditates every day.

   "I was trained in the sciences," he says. "It would have been easy for me to
obey the odds and do what it says in the textbooks. But I had faith I could
overcome it."

   "The biggest gift," he says, "is a far deeper respect and appreciation for
life in all its subtle manifestations."

 1.  To learn more

    An all-day symposium on adult and pediatric brain tumors called "New
Frontiers '97" will take place at the Sheraton Boston Hotel and Towers Saturday
from 8 a.m.-6 p.m.

   Admission is $ 30 per person, plus $ 25 for each additional family member.
Scholarships are available by calling The Brain Tumor Society at 1-800-770-8287
or 617-783-0340.

   You can also sign up via the Internet, at www.tbts.org.

   For more information on brain tumors, call:

   - The American Brain Tumor Association, 1-800-886-2282.

   - The National Brain Tumor Foundation, 1-800-934-CURE, or 1-800-934-2873.

 2.  Searching for causes

    Fears that the incidence of primary brain tumors is rising have led to a
search for factors that might account for this, especially in children.
Researchers have been able to rule out some hypotheses and are still exploring
others.

   Exposure to high doses of ionizing radiation, the kind produced by atomic
bombs and X-ray treatments (but not diagnostic X-rays), have been linked to
brain tumors in both children and adults, says Dr. Martha Linet, an
epidemiologist at the National Cancer Institute. But nonionizing radiation, the
kind that comes from television sets, power lines, video display terminals and
microwave ovens, has not been shown in studies to be a cause, says Linet.

   Diet may play a role. Research shows that children born to women who ate lots
of fruits and vegetables while they were pregnant are protected against some
types of primary brain tumors in childhood.

   Resear

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1997


                             2250 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   October 25, 1997, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A17; FREE FOR ALL

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Not Just 'Cosmetic'

BODY:


   Rick Weiss's glimpse into the coming ethics debates over "cosmetic gene
therapy" ["Gene Enhancements' Thorny Ethical Traits," front page, Oct. 12]
contained a number of factual errors about Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). While we
wish it were true, scientists have not yet succeeded in pinpointing a gene
responsible for PWS. Once they do, gene therapy for this condition is still a
long way off, if possible at all. The reason is that the genetic errors that
cause PWS (there are three different forms, not a single gene mutation) do their
primary damage in the brain, and the body's natural defenses prevent a simple
injection of normal genes into the brain.

   Even if gene treatment were soon available to avoid the obesity common in
this condition, Prader-Willi syndrome would not belong in a discussion of
"cosmetic" applications. Unlike the portrait this article paints of them as a
group of people who are essentially fat but happy, those born with PWS have a
complex and debilitating disorder that creates enormous stresses for them, their
families and their states' service systems. Compounding their characteristic and
uncontrollable compulsion to eat, people with PWS have a lower-than-average need
for calories, deficiencies in growth and development, impaired cognitive
functioning and a unique pattern of difficult, often severe, behaviors.
Restricting food intake and managing the behavior of those with PWS is a
lifelong struggle faced first by families and school systems, then by vocational
and residential service providers for adults with developmental disabilities.

   -- Linda Keder

   The writer is president of the Prader-Willi Syndrome Association of Maryland
and Metropolitan Washington.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1997


                             2251 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         October 24, 1997 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: FATHER JOHN VAUGHN, 71, EPISCOPAL PRIEST

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   The Rev. John J. Vaughn, an Episcopal priest who was the first American to
undergo an experimental treatment for a rare form of cancer, died Thursday at
University Hospital of an inflammation around his heart. He was 71.

   The condition that caused Father Vaughn's death probably was related to
mesothelioma that had attacked the outer lining of his left lung, but not to the
treatment he received last month, said Dr. Jay Kolls, director of the
gene-therapy program at Louisiana State University Medical Center.

   Two patients who have received the experimental treatment since Father Vaughn
are doing fine, Kolls said. The test involves injecting patients with harmless
cancer cells and following up with an antiviral drug. The testing program, which
is still evaluating prospective participants, is the first stage of a process
that could lead to federal approval of this weapon against mesothelioma, a
cancer that strikes fewer than 3,000 Americans annually and resists conventional
therapy.

   At first, Kolls said, Father Vaughn had been doing well, but he was put on
heart-failure medication after developing an irregular heartbeat and swollen
feet. Moreover, he wasn't eating or gaining weight.

   He was hospitalized late last week. Surgery showed fluid on the right side of
his chest, but, Kolls said, there was no way to tell then whether it was a
result of heart failure or the cancer's spread.

   Dr. Paul Schwarzenberger of LSU Medical Center, the project's leader, said
the tumor probably had invaded and surrounded his heart by the time Father
Vaughn's disease was diagnosed in March.

   Because the rindlike cancer around his heart was so thick - about one fifth
of an inch - it is unlikely that any of the chemicals Father Vaughn received
last month could have invaded that organ, Kolls said.

   Born in Kansas City, Mo., Father Vaughn was ordained a Catholic priest in
1951 and an Episcopal priest in 1968.

   He studied at St. Joseph's Preparatory College in Kirkwood, Mo., and the
Episcopal Theological School in Cambridge, Mass., and earned a master's degree
at Northeastern University in Boston.

   In addition to serving several churches, Father Vaughn was an alcoholism
counselor, a specialist in family therapy and, most recently, a consultant who
tried to bring spirituality to business. He kept friends informed of
developments in his fight against cancer on his World Wide Web site.

   By the time he joined the gene-therapy program, Father Vaughn was already
fighting mesothelioma with a regimen of vitamins, shark cartilage and prayer.

   Most mesothelioma patients die within two years, Schwarzenberger said.

   Despite the long odds against him, Father Vaughn remained optimistic. In an
interview shortly before his treatment, he said, "I feel very fortunate to have
this opportunity. I'm approaching this with unbounded optimism and
expectations."

   Survivors include his wife, Yvonne Dufrechou Vaughn; and two sisters, Betty
J. Conway and Jo Anne Gassman, both of Kansas City.

   Funeral arrangments are incomplete.

GRAPHIC: THE REV. JOHN J. VAUGHN PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1997


                             2252 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    October 21, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C, Maryland Watch

LENGTH: 179 words

HEADLINE: BioReliance subsidiary gains 4 NIH contracts

BODY:


   BioReliance Corp. has been awarded four federal contracts to produce viral
materials for experimental gene therapy studies planned by the National
Institutes of Health.

   Brandon Price, chief operating officer for publicly held BioReliance of
Rockville, said the contracts are worth $ 3.5 million. They were awarded to
Magenta Corp., a BioReliance subsidiary that specializes in biotechnology
contract manufacturing.

   Combined, the contracts are the largest Magenta has ever received, he said.

   Federal contracts represent about 10 percent of BioReliance's revenue, Price
said.

   Under three of the agreements, Magenta will produce viral "vectors" --
viruses that have been rendered harmless so they can be used to hold and
transport genes to treat diseases.

   The largest contract, worth more than $ 2 million, is with the NIH's National
Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases.

   The other contracts are with the NIH's National Institute of Neurological
Disorders, National Eye Institute and National Institute for Dental Research.

   Pub Date: 10/21/97

TYPE: COLUMN

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1997


                             2253 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    October 19, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 6H

LENGTH: 1097 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL WORLD IS ABUZZ WITH THE IDEA OF TREATING DISEASES;
WITH GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: SUE GOETINCK; Dallas Morning News

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:


   The inventors of the computer knew they were onto something good, even though
their machines were bulky and slow. Likewise, scientists laboring to bring gene
therapy out of the lab and into the doctor's office say they are certain that
the technique's time will come.

   Gene therapy is a catchall phrase for a variety of treatments that use
genetic material as medication. Researchers say it will advance virtually every
area of medicine. Gene therapy's impact could be as great, they say, as the
advent of antibiotics.

   But you'll have to be patient.

   "In gene therapy today we are where the computer industry was back in the
1950s or so," said Estuardo Aguilar-Cordova of the Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston. "Like anything else in science, it takes some time."

   Researchers hope gene therapy will provide a breakthrough in the treatment of
cancer, a disease that develops when genes begin to malfunction. Scientists also
say that gene therapy may conquer incurable genetic diseases such as hemophilia
or cystic fibrosis, conditions that occur when someone has a missing or
defective gene.

   "For genetic diseases, the excitement is incredible, because there is no
other method," said Inder Verma, a gene therapy researcher at the Salk Institute
in La Jolla, Calif.

   So far, however, gene therapy has worked only in laboratory animals. No cures
have been reported in people. But in the past two years, scientists have
reported new techniques that may be important bridges to successful gene therapy
in people.

   The goal of any gene therapy is to change the genetic makeup of cells.
Virtually every cell in the body harbors the same complete set of genes inside
its nucleus. Those genes serve as instructions to each cell, directing stomach
cells to digest food or nerve cells to send signals to the brain. But if someone
inherits an abnormal, or mutated, gene, some of their body's cells may not work
right.

   People with cystic fibrosis, for example, have a faulty version of a gene
that's crucial for lung cells to work right. Patients with hemophilia are
missing the proper genetic instructions to make proteins that help the blood
clot. Gene therapy approaches for these diseases are designed to replace or
correct the defective gene inside the proper cells.

   Other diseases, such as some types of cancer, come about not through an
inherited mutation, but when genes become mutated later in life. Most cases of
lung cancer, for example, progress because genes inside the lung cells acquire
defects that disturb vital functions of the cells. Gene therapy techniques for
cancer typically introduce genes aimed at making tumor cells more vulnerable to
immune system attack.

   No matter what the disease, the first step in any gene therapy approach is to
put genes into cells without causing harm to the body. And once the genes are
inside the cells, scientists have to be able to regulate how active the genes
are -- researchers would like to be able to set the genes at off, low, medium or
high. Finally, researchers need to control which types of cells the genes go
into. For example, it might not be good for a gene designated for a cancer cell
to end up in a healthy cell.

   In a recent issue of the journal Science, researchers -- focusing on the
outer "coat" of a mouse leukemia virus -- reported what they said could be a
step toward getting genes into the right cell. In most gene therapy approaches,
scientists package genes inside viruses that are altered so they no longer cause
disease. When the viruses infect body cells, the genes get inside the cells'
nuclei and tell the cell to make specific proteins. Those proteins are the ones
that researchers hope will cure or treat the disease.

   "Ideally . . . what one wants to be able to do is have viruses that you can
inject with confidence that they're going to infect a specific cell type," said
Peter Kim, the lead researcher on the Science report and a scientist at the
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass.

   Kim said he and his colleagues may now have some results that will help
researchers get viruses to latch onto the cell of their choice. The
Massachusetts scientists have taken an extra close-up "snapshot" of one of the
proteins that are part of the outer coat of a widely studied type of gene
therapy virus. The snapshot shows which part of the virus's coat hooks onto
cells. Now, Kim said, it may be possible for scientists to alter that hook so
the virus can latch onto, say, only liver cells or only kidney cells.

   But getting gene therapy viruses to the right type of cell is only one
problem that needs solving for gene therapy to become a reality. There are many
instances where scientists want to control how much protein the therapeutic gene
would produce.

   Last year in the journal Nature Medicine, researchers from ARIAD Gene
Therapeutics in Cambridge, Mass., reported a technique that might make that
possible. Along with the therapeutic gene, scientists would also tuck into the
virus two other genes. Those genes direct the production of corresponding
proteins that would serve as a "control knob" for the therapeutic gene. And the
control knob would be turned lower or higher with a drug that a patient could
take orally. The more drug, the higher the knob would be turned, and the more of
the protein would be made.

   And as in any medication, doctors will have to make sure gene therapy's
side-effects don't overshadow its curative properties. One problem with some
gene therapy viruses is that the body's immune system starts attacking the virus
itself.

   "You're fighting off the genes you're trying to put in to make a correction,"
said Mark Kay, a gene therapy researcher at the University of Washington in
Seattle.

   Kay and other researchers are trying to get around that problem by using a
virus that doesn't continually alarm the immune system by replicating inside
cells. The virus, known as "rAAV," is stripped of its natural genes and contains
only the therapeutic gene. Kay and other researchers are using "rAAV" to try to
find a treatment for hemophilia B, an inherited disorder in which the body's
blood doesn't clot normally. So far, "rAAV" carrying a normal version of the
hemophilia B gene has produced adequate levels of a clotting protein in
laboratory animals.

   The "rAAV" virus, unlike other potential gene therapy viruses, also has the
advantage that it can get into cells that are not dividing, such as muscle or
nerve cells. Researchers say that property makes "rAAV" a winner in the world of
gene therapy viruses.

GRAPHIC: Strands of Hope (diagram of gene therapy)

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1997


                             2254 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                    October 19, 1997, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: Researchers shed light on potential gene therapy

SOURCE: Washington Post

BODY:

   For many experiments, biologists need to tell whether a certain reaction or
event has occurred inside the cells they're studying. One way to get the
information is to "tag" a key structure (such as an antibody or a hormone) with
a fluorescent compound or a radioactive atom that can be detected when the event
occurs.

   In the journal Photochemistry and Photobiology, a group of researchers from
Stanford University and three biotechnology companies report a novel use of this
strategy.

   Christopher H. Contag, David A. Benaron and their colleagues used luciferase,
an enzyme that reacts with a second compound, called luciferin, to produce the
characteristic glow of light in a firefly's tail.

   They attached the firefly gene for luciferase to some other gene they were
interested in studying, then delivered the whole package into specific tissues
in living mice. They then gave the animals luciferin by various means.

   When the experimental gene became active, it turned on the luciferase gene,
which then produced the luciferase enzyme. The enzyme then reacted with
luciferin, making the cells temporarily glow.

   The researchers believe the technique may prove useful in experiments where
biologists seek to monitor gene expression in real time, and may help physicians
follow the progress of gene-based therapies.


LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1997


                             2255 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 19, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 33; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

HEADLINE: Tomorrowrama!

BYLINE: By Ed Regis;  Ed Regis is the author of "Nano: The Emerging Science of
Nanotechnology."

BODY:


   Visions
 How Science Will Revolutionize
 the 21st Century.
 By Michio Kaku.
 403 pp. New York:
 Anchor Books/Doubleday. $24.95.

    People love to make predictions. People love to read predictions. Most of
all, people love to believe predictions: it gives them the illusion they know
something about the future.

   But predicting is a risky business. Other than for matters covered by the
well-established laws of the hard sciences -- the laws of planetary motions and
the rules of chemical combination, for example -- the truth or falsity of a
statement about the future can't be decided in the present: by definition, the
confirming or disconfirming evidence doesn't exist yet, and won't until the time
comes. You can know that a given forecast is true only when the event occurs (or
fails to).

   That barrier has never stopped people from issuing all sorts of prophecies
about everything under the sun. Michio Kaku's book "Visions" makes a bunch of
forecasts about the shape of human life in the 21st century and well beyond.
Kaku, a professor of theoretical physics at City College of the City University
of New York, attempts to divine the fate not only of human minds and bodies but
also of computers, robots and man-machine blends, along with the fates of the
sun and all of its planets and their moons from now until the heat death of the
universe. You can't say he isn't ambitious.

   Many of his claims are plausible enough, and most are quite familiar. Still,
his list of items that are soon going to be "smart" is slightly alarming: by the
year 2020, he says, we are going to be working in "smart" offices surrounded by
"smart" walls where we scribble on "smart" paper before walking to the parking
lot in computerized "shoes that think" to our "smart" cars that will drive
themselves on "smart" highways to our "smart" homes that contain "smart"
bathrooms and other "smart" rooms filled with "smart" tables, chairs and other
furniture, and kitchen appliances that "sense your presence." The function of
all this overflowing dispersed intelligence is to satisfy our wishes even before
we're aware of them. The smart home of the future, Kaku predicts, will be able
to anticipate our needs and carry them out silently.

   It will automatically tone down the stereo when we are talking on the phone,
for example, or raise the sound of the phone if the stereo is on. Our "shoes
that think," meanwhile, will allow busy executives to trade information by means
of handshake alone: "Because skin is salty and conducts electricity, a resume
can travel electrically from shoe to hands and then to one's acquaintance's hand
and shoe. This may ultimately prove to be a convenient way to exchange large
computer files with someone on the street."

   Anyone who can make it to the year 2050 will live on an "intelligent planet"
populated by "robots which far surpass human reasoning abilities," have
feelings, and even dream at night "in order to process their memories." Someday
cyborgs will roam the earth and people will attain "true immortality" by
replacing their lowly and obsolete body parts, made of meat, with spiffy new
components made of silicon and steel. Other humans, or their machine-based
successors, will clone extra copies of themselves prior to boarding an
antimatter-powered starship headed for the extrasolar planets. After all, Kaku
says, astronomers at the University of Pittsburgh have already discovered a
"remarkably close" new planet "only 8.1 light-years away"!

   Fun though it may be to read, much of this stuff is just silly. Conceivably,
most of the predictions that have ever been made have been wrong, and we can all
remember past claims about the "paperless office" of the future and predictions
that soon we would all have personal helicopters or at least flying cars. Kaku
replies that such errant predictions are the work of gee-whiz writers and
journalists, whereas he confines himself to the forecasts of qualified
scientists who, supposedly, know what they're talking about. They, however, have
fared no better. In 1933, Lord Rutherford, winner of the 1908 Nobel prize in
chemistry, stated, "We cannot control atomic energy to an extent which would be
of any value commercially, and I believe we are not likely ever to be able to do
so." (The first nuclear power plant started operating in 1956.) In 1971, Sir
Macfarlane Burnet, winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine,
said of gene therapy that "the chance of doing this will remain infinitely small
to the last syllable of recorded time." (The first gene therapy clinical trials
began in 1990.)

   Prediction fans might dismiss such great moments in technological forecasting
as illustrations of Arthur C. Clarke's law, posited in "Profiles of the Future":
"When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible,
he is almost certainly right. When he states that something is impossible, he is
very probably wrong." Kaku is a researcher in superstring theory and a
distinguished young scientist, and his point of view in "Visions" is that, in
principle, many of the most outlandish dreams of science fiction are
scientifically possible. I agree. Still, it does not follow that all, or indeed
any, of the wilder fantasies he discusses are likely to materialize, the reason
being that much of the possible is undesirable for one reason or another.

   Picture phones, the paperless office and flying cars are all possible, but
undesirable in differing ways, and so we don't have them on any large scale. The
same might be said of space colonization, about which Kaku is an unrestrained
enthusiast. He quotes a succession of critics who see the Space Shuttle as "a
black hole for tax dollars" and "the most effective device known to man for
destroying dollar bills." He acknowledges that the proposed space station is one
of the ugliest structures ever designed ("a bathtub with wings"), concedes that
it serves no reasonable scientific purpose and notes that it will cost almost
$100 billion. He loves it anyway, and sees it as a steppingstone to a vast human
interstellar migration, all with the ostensible purpose of avoiding the
embarrassment and stress of a major meteor impact on earth. But if avoiding
meteors is the goal of space travel, then he ought to realize that colonizing
another planet merely doubles the chances of somebody getting hit.

   Forecasting the future is an essentially harmless form of infotainment, like
visiting the Futurama pavilion at the World's Fair. Go ahead, indulge yourself.
Just don't confuse predicting with knowing what's going to happen.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1997


                             2256 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                   October 18, 1997, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1491 words

HEADLINE: Hoping for the Impossible in Baltimore; Brazilian Girls With Rett
Syndrome May Aid Research That Can't Help Them

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

DATELINE: BALTIMORE

BODY:


   During her week in America, Tereza Alves dos Santos hopes to go to the zoo.
Or maybe the aquarium. Either is okay, just as long as it's fun for her four
daughters, ages 2 to 19, who have come with her all the way from Brazil.

   Alves dos Santos also has another, far less modest hope. She hopes the visit
will cure two of her daughters of Rett syndrome, a degenerative brain disease
that keeps them from talking, learning and growing like normal children. But she
knows this won't happen.

   "She believes that what she wants is impossible," says an interpreter,
translating from Portuguese. "She is realistic. She just expects some help."

   Alves dos Santos and her children spent this week undergoing a complicated
battery of tests at Kennedy Krieger Institute, a research hospital for children
with disabilities. They are here because they are unique in the world. Danielle,
5, and Elizandra, 9, have Rett syndrome. An older sister, 12-year-old Elaine,
died of the disease earlier this year. Theirs is the only family known to
contain three cases.

   Like the sufferers of other rare genetic diseases, these severely disabled
girls -- and their healthy sisters -- are the irreplaceable providers of the
blood and DNA, the spinal fluid and brain images, that may one day explain this
disease and, along the way, help illuminate the profound mysteries of how the
human brain develops.

   In that sense, this family stands at a frontier of medical research. But it
is research that holds no hope for them. Alves dos Santos seems to realize this,
but even the "help" she wishes for will be hard to deliver, for there's very
little that can be done for girls with Rett syndrome.

   There are about 8,000 cases in the United States. The disease usually appears
in the second year of life. An affected child -- they are always girls -- begins
to regress. She loses the few words she may have acquired and often becomes
irritable and emotionally withdrawn. At this stage, the disorder is often
mistaken for infantile autism.

   Over time, children also lose the ability to reach and grasp. They display
highly characteristic hand-wringing and hand-to-face movements. Most never learn
to walk normally and must eventually use wheelchairs.

   Rett syndrome girls are often short and thin for their age, in part because
an uncoordinated style of breathing causes them to swallow air, filling their
stomachs and making adequate nutrition difficult. Most also develop a seizure
disorder. Sudden death under the age of 15 is not uncommon.

   Genes for severe disorders like Rett syndrome are being identified almost
every week. Each time a new one is found, medical researchers say the discovery
will point the way to a treatment, maybe even a cure.

   However, understanding a disease's cause is no assurance a cure can be
devised, or even a good treatment found. The precise molecular defect in sickle
cell anemia, for example, has been known for 41 years, but the knowledge has had
no practical effect for its sufferers. As for fixing the genes themselves, so
far it is an alluring idea that has not worked.

   Rather than expectation of benefit, what brings people like Tereza Alves dos
Santos to places like Kennedy Krieger Institute is a mixture of altruism, hope
and sympathy. They are feelings that Patricia M. Cofer knows intimately.

   She's a 40-year-old woman from the Jersey shore, a sales representative for
Pitney Bowes Inc. She's also the mother of a 10-year-old girl with Rett
syndrome. Eight years ago, she started a foundation that raises money to study
the disease.

   Cofer helped arrange for the Alves dos Santos family to come to Baltimore,
along with the Brazil Rett Syndrome Association and Kennedy Krieger. Three
airline tickets were donated, and other costs of the trip were covered by the
Research for Rett Syndrome Foundation that Cofer founded, the Brazilian
association, Kennedy Krieger and other sources. On Tuesday, Cofer was in
Baltimore.

   "I know that one day she may go," Cofer said, referring to her own daughter,
Courtney, at a news conference with the Brazilian family held for local TV. "But
I will know that I've done all I can to help research on this disease, so that
other mothers don't have to go through what we've gone through."

   "Somebody who has a child with this syndrome has to be very, very patient,"
said Alves dos Santos.

   Later, Cofer added: "You always want to see the light at the end of the
tunnel. You always dream of bringing her back to the day when she could say
'mama' and 'dada,' or could hold a doll. But now I have accepted it."

   It is an ironic truth that the most severe and incurable diseases are often
the most "informative" ones in a biological sense. This appears to be the case
with Rett syndrome.

   A "disease gene" is not a gene whose evolutionary purpose is to cause a
disease. Rather, it is a normal gene that, because of mutation, functions
abnormally or not at all. Rett seems to be caused by a defect in a gene that has
a cascade of effects in the developing brain.

   Studies of girls who've died of Rett syndrome have given neuroscientists a
hint of what's happened.

   Their brains have an excessive number of receptors for the neurotransmitters
dopamine and glutamate, which may help explain some of the symptoms. The number
of brain-cell-to-brain-cell connections (called synapses) is only about half
that seen in normal brains. The cells are densely packed, a fact that almost
certainly explains the relatively small heads of the children with the disease.

   "We do believe there is a window of opportunity for possible treatment of
this disease," said Sakkubai Naidu, the pediatric neurologist at Kennedy Krieger
and the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

   "I think if we identify the gene defect, and know the protein that is
deficient, we might be able to intervene early enough to make a difference.
Those interventions might be dietary, the addition of growth factors to the
brain, gene therapy," she said.

   The disease was first described by an Austrian neurologist named Andreas
Rett, who published a description of eight cases in 1966. It is found around the
world, without an obvious predilection for specific ethnic groups.

   Unlike some genetic diseases, the defect causing Rett syndrome does not
appear to travel in families, affecting multiple generations. Instead, virtually
all the cases seem to be the product of "sporadic" mutations. Affected girls
have normal parents and relatives.

   Researchers are fairly certain the defective gene lies on the X chromosome.
(Females possess two X chromosomes, males one X and one Y.) Researchers believe
-- but are not certain -- that if an embryo gets an X with the Rett mutation and
a normal Y, it dies, which is why no boys with the disease have ever been
identified. Embryos with two X's -- one carrying the mutation and the other
normal -- survive but have the disease.

   Whatever the genetic mechanism, Tereza Alves dos Santos clearly has not
passed the defective gene to all of her female offspring. With her in Baltimore
were Silmara, a 19-year-old daughter who came along to help, and Romaine, 2,
Alves dos Santos's youngest child.

   The Brazilian woman came to medical attention seven years ago. A neurologist
with an interest in Rett syndrome, Jose Luiz Pinto Pereira, put a brief
description of the disease in numerous newspapers in southern Brazil, seeking
cases. A psychologist in a small town in the state of Parana answered the
inquiry, saying he believed he knew two sisters who might have the disease.

   Pereira went to see them. There is no clear-cut biological "marker" for the
disease, and the diagnosis is made entirely by medical history and clinical
examination. Nevertheless, he was quite certain the girls had Rett syndrome, as
did a third child born after his initial visit. (Pereira accompanied the family
to Baltimore this week.)

   Alves dos Santos went to school through the sixth grade and was married at
age 13. Her husband drives a lumber truck. She has had nine children -- eight
girls and a boy. Three of the girls and the boy died in infancy.

   Based on descriptions she's given, doctors believe that one of those girls
also probably had Rett syndrome. With four cases out of eight female children,
the family cluster may be even more unusual than initially thought.

   In the coming months, DNA from the three affected girls -- samples were kept
from the girl who died recently -- will be compared with DNA from the mother and
the two sisters. The purpose is to look for consistent differences between them.
With luck, that will point the way to the defective gene itself, said Jonathan
Pevsner, the molecular biologist heading up the effort.

   Most of the family's time in Baltimore was spent getting tests, or waiting
for them. They took a tourist boat around the Inner Harbor early in the week.
They may go to the National Aquarium today. They return to Brazil on Monday.


GRAPHIC: Photo, dudley m. brooks, Tereza Alves dos Santos holds daughter
Danielle as she is tested for degenerative brain disease, Rett syndrome.
Danielle Alves dos Santos awaits tests at Kennedy Krieger Institute.  Alves dos
Santos family friend sits with Danielle, 4, and Elisandra, 9, at Baltimore
institute. Tereza Alves dos Santos plans trips to the zoo or aquarium.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1997


                             2257 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    October 17, 1997, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: VIRUSES IN PIG TISSUES RAISING CONCERNS ABOUT TRANSPLANTS

BYLINE: ROBERT COOKE, NEWSDAY

BODY:


   New experiments showing that viruses hidden in pig tissues also can infect
human cells raise concern about the safety of transplanting animal organs into
humans, scientists reported Wednesday.

   Virologist Jonathan Stoye said the discovery does not mean animal organs
can't be used in transplants. But they do show that extreme care must be taken
when such operations are performed and careful monitoring must be done to watch
for signs of unusual infections in the recipients of animal organs.

   ''My feeling is that this doesn't stop anything'' in terms of so-called
xeno-transplants, Stoye said. ''I am concerned - but not alarmed.'' The two
classes of virus were found in all of the pig breeds his team tested, Stoye
said. They don't appear to make the pigs sick.

   ''What we don't know is whether they will do anything in humans,'' Stoye
said. ''Like SV40, one could have a great scare and then it wouldn't actually do
anything.'' SV40 is a monkey virus inadvertently given to many thousands of
people 30 years ago along with polio vaccine.

   The new results were reported in the journal Nature by Stoye and his
colleagues at the National Institute for Medical Research in England. The first
evidence that viruses lurk in animal tissues that might be transplanted came
last spring from biologist Robin Weiss, also in England. And Carolyn Wilson, at
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, also recently found that viruses that
come out of pig cells can infect human cells.

   Experiments with pig tissue are being done because the pressure to find
alternative sources of living tissue, as well as organs such as hearts, lungs
and kidneys, has become intense. There is a severe shortage of human organs that
might save the lives of thousands of people on waiting lists nationwide.

   At present, cells from pigs are being considered to replace the
insulin-producing islet cells in diabetics, and small amounts of nerve tissue
may go into the brains of Parkinson's disease patients. Research programs are
also under way to see whether pigs can be genetically engineered so their organs
won't be vigorously rejected by the human body.

   Some doctors also are exploring whether organs and tissues from primates such
as baboons - might substitute for human organs, but the concern about viruses is
the same.

   Dr. Phil Noguchi, director of the FDA's division of cellular and gene
therapies, said Stoyes' new findings offered reason for concern, but were not a
huge surprise.

   The FDA is working on a set of guidelines covering such xeno-transplants,
which may be released early next year.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1997


                             2258 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   October 16, 1997, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs;
Houston & Texas

SOURCE: From staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Researcher wins gene therapy patent

   A Vanderbilt University researcher has won U.S. and European patents for a
key element in the gene therapy technology developed by Gene- Medicine, a
biotechnology firm based in The Woodlands.

   GeneMedicine has an exclusive worldwide license to the technology, developed
by Dr. Kenneth Brigham. The patent covers the use of cationic lipids, or simple
fats, to carry genetic materials into cells. The company has already shown that
cationic lipids can be used to deliver therapeutic genes to tumors and blood
vessel cells in the lungs.

   GeneMedicine's shares closed at 5 3/4, up 1/4, in trading Wednesday on
Nasdaq.

   Zapata unit now Marine Genetics

   Houston-based Zapata Corp. has changed the name of its protein division to
Marine Genetics Corp.

   The company, formerly known as Zapata Protein, uses menhaden fish caught off
the Atlantic Coast and the Gulf of Mexico to produce fish meal, oil and
solubles, otherwise known as marine proteins. The products have been primarily
used in animal foods as a source of protein to spur growth of poultry, swine,
cattle and pets.

   AMR Corp. says earnings up 14.5

   FORT WORTH - American Airlines' parent reported on Wednesday third-quarter
earnings rose 14.5 percent, boosted by higher prices and a strong economy.

   AMR Corp., parent company of American Airlines, said earnings for the quarter
ended Sept. 30 amounted to $ 323 million, or $ 3.55 per share, compared with $
282 million, or $ 3.06 per share, a year earlier.

   Revenues were $ 4.8 billion, up from $ 4.6 billion a year earlier.

   AMR stock rose to close at 119 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   Argentine oil firm buying back bonds

   Argentine oil giant YPF said Wednesday it launched the buyback of about $ 704
million in bonds issued by its Dallas-based Maxus Energy Corp. oil subsidiary.

   The buyback is part of a broad restructuring of Maxus' debt.

   The buyback will run through Nov. 12, although YPF said it will be extended
if necessary.


LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1997


                             2259 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     October 16, 1997 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: KEYBANK NAMES A NEW VICE CHAIRMAN

BYLINE: FROM STAFF REPORTS

BODY:

   Sandra Maltby, who has helped build KeyBank's small-business division,
yesterday was named a vice chairman of the $66 billion unit of parent KeyCorp.
Maltby, 38, will continue to oversee small business while adding responsibility
for the bank's other two main consumer businesses, retail private banking and
what it calls the mature market. The promotion makes Maltby the highest-ranking
woman at the bank-holding company, responsible for developing and delivering
innovative products to consumers in each of the three segments. Maltby joined
Ameritrust Co.'s credit-card center as a secretary in 1978 and worked her way up
through the organization there and at Society Corp. after it took over
Ameritrust in 1991. She had been an executive vice president at KeyBank, which
under her direction was named the nation's biggest lender for commercial loans
under $250,000. Maltby is among the top eight officers at KeyBank.

   COPERNICUS GETS RESEARCH GRANT

   Copernicus Gene Systems Inc., a Cleveland biotechnology company, has received
a $100,000 Small Business Innovation Research grant from the National Cancer
Institute to test a new approach for treating liver cancer. Investigators will
look into using gene therapy to treat the disease. Its method involves
condensing DNA into a tiny ball, allowing it to be safely transmitted to the
right cells. The grant will allow the privately held company to try out its
therapy through intravenous injection.

   PUCO CONSIDERS COMPLAINT

   The Public Utilities Commission of Ohio staff said it has found merit with a
complaint from the Cuyahoga County Board of Elections that it is being
overcharged by Ameritech Corp. The PUCO finding will probably lead to a formal
hearing, said Dick Kummins, commission spokesman. The elections board complained
that 501 telephone lines activated only during elections each was charged the
full non-residency installation of $62.85, a total of $31,487 every time, even
though necessary wiring and telephone jacks were in place. In addition,
Ameritech has charged a full month's service at $26.62 to provide less than 24
hours of actual service on election days for each of the 501 lines, a total of
$13,336.62, the elections board said. "We feel that Ameritech will prevail in
this case," said Kim Norris, spokeswoman for Ameritech. "These rates were
previously approved by the PUCO."

   BRIDGESTONE CUTS FORECAST

   Bridgestone Corp. has cut its full-year group net profit forecast 55 percent,
saying it is accelerating plans to write off goodwill associated with the 1988
acquisition of Firestone Tire & Rubber Co., now Bridgestone/Firestone Inc. The
tire maker said it now expects to post group net profit of $314 million in the
year ending Dec. 31, compared with a group net profit of $646 million in 1996.
"We are changing our accounting methods to match international standards," said
Hiroshi Kanai, a Bridgestone vice president in Tokyo. He said the company will
accelerate writing off goodwill associated with the Firestone purchase, but some
costs will be partially offset in reduced tax payments.

   SMYTHE PART OF RELOCATION FIRM

   Cleveland's Smythe, Cramer Co. is a founding member, shareholder and owner in
a new relocation service company composed of many of the top real estate
companies in North America , said L.B. McKelvey, Smythe, Cramer president. Named
Reliance Relocation Services Inc., the company is based in Mount Laurel, N.J.
Reliance is beginning with a substantial base of business in each of three
operating divisions. It consists of 449 firms operating 2,597 offices
represented by 79,412 sales associates. Last year, Reliance members closed more
than $119 billion in residential real estate sales, which represents
approximately 27 percent of the national residential resale market, said
McKelvey. "Our sellers will benefit from the tremendous influx of buyers to our
area resulting from the vastness of the network."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: NO CREDIT; Sandra Maltby

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

   LOCAL TICKER

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1997


                             2260 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        October 16, 1997 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE TARGETS GAP IN HIV DRUG THERAPY

BYLINE: By JIM PUZZANGHERA Knight-Ridder Newspapers

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, CALIF.

BODY:

   Researchers at a Foster City, Calif., biotech company have shown they can
deliver the knockout punch to HIV in the laboratory by genetically altering
immune system cells to seek and destroy the hidden reservoirs of the virus that
evade the new triple-drug therapy.

   The triple-drug cocktail reduces the amount of HIV to near-undetectable
levels in many patients but hasn't been able to wipe it out.

   Researchers at Cell Genesys Inc. hope their gene-therapy approach, currently
in tests on people, will make that final leap.

   "The hope is in conjunction with triple-drug therapy, we can actually provide
patients with the HIV immune cells they're missing, which can target, identify
and kill these infected reservoirs in the body over time," said Margo Roberts,
principal scientist and director of immunotherapy at Cell Genesys.

   Roberts is one of the lead scientists on the research, which appeared in
Wednesday's issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. The
work was done in conjunction with Dr. Bruce Walker, director of the Partners
AIDS Research Center at Massachusetts General Hospital.

   The strategy of genetically engineering a patient's own immune cells to
better attack the virus is promising, but there are some hurdles to overcome
before the approach would work in people, said Garry Nolan, an assistant
professor of molecular pharmacology, microbiology and immunology at Stanford
University.

   "I think it's a really marvelous approach," he said. The cells would have to
be genetically engineered so they would not inadvertently attack the wrong cells
in the patient's body, causing a potentially harmful autoimmune response, Nolan
said. The fact Cell Genesys has progressed to mid-stage human trials indicates
some of those concerns have been addressed, he added.

   Cell Genesys is testing the therapy on patients in low doses at six sites
around the country, including the University of California at San Francisco, to
determine if the cells actually work as they should in the body. Results from
those tests are expected in the first half of next year and, if successful,
would let the company test the therapy at full strength.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1997


                             2261 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   October 16, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 2D; Jeannie Williams

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: Reeve's $500,000 gift to spinal research

BYLINE: Jeannie Williams

BODY:

   Christopher Reeve marks a milestone tonight with his foundation's
first anniversary and its first gift of $ 500,000 for spinal cord
injury research.

   Much of the money to be presented to the American Paralysis Association
was generated by the paralyzed actor's travels to raise awareness.

   He says he has cut back to finish his book, but we spoke after
his trips on Saturday to St. Louis and on Tuesday to Denver and
before he traveled to Manhattan for a Wednesday GQ dinner
and tonight's event hosted by Good Housekeeping editor
in chief Ellen Levine.

   "It is tiring, but the fact that these appearances can make a
difference helps me overcome the fatigue," Reeve says. He's an
ambassador of hope from science's frontiers and believes help
for the paralyzed "is realistic within five to seven years. There
will be very dramatic results. This is not false optimism."


   The GH dinner will introduce Circle of Friends,
a 30-minute fund-raising TV program on the American Paralysis
Foundation, to begin airing Friday nationwide on cable and on
some local outlets. It will feature Reeve, his wife, Dana, Mel
Gibson, Susan Sarandon, Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, Meryl Streep,
Rene Russo and Judith Light.

   Reeve's hope is high after leaps including a Swiss scientist's
discovery of a protein preventing regeneration of the cord and
an antibody that knocks it out in rats. The technique is close
for human beings, and Reeve says he's in line to be a research
subject for that or other methods. "As soon as the top scientists
say they're ready, I'm willing.

   "The cure will be a combination of gene therapy, cell transplants
and regeneration. It's now proved all of this is possible. Where
we're at is the more money we raise, the quicker this will happen.

   "It's not going to be like turning on the lights of a Christmas
tree, it will be incremental . . . with increasing recovery of
functions. In my case, it will start with breathing, then use
of arms, then bladder, bowel and sexual functions, then legs."

   Reeve recently had an MRI scan that showed the most detail yet
on the damage at his second cervical vertebra in that 1995 riding
accident. "There was only 1 centimeter of damage on the left
side of the cord. The radiologist said if my head had moved a
fraction one way during the fall, I would have been killed instantly.
If I had moved the other way, I would just have bruised my spine
and would have been walking in a couple of months. The way I landed
caused the hemorrhage on the left side of the cord, resulting
in the paralysis.

   "A twist of fate," he calls it. "One positive thing is that
it showed no further damage to the spine; it's very stable (no
holes or cysts). So I'm a prime candidate for recovery when the
scientists are ready."

   I have talked to Reeve a number of times since his accident, and
as Emmy Awards watchers also noticed, he is now able to speak
in much longer sentences. This is because six months ago a speaking
valve was inserted into his ventilator circuit. "It helped tremendously.
When I'm well-rested, I can speak more fluently than when I'm
tired. On a good day, many people who see me in public think I'm
off the respirator."

   He feels lucky to be in a position to help himself and others,
but "there are other things I'd rather be doing." Next May,
he'll act in an update of the movie Rear Window. Now, he's
working on his autobiography with Roger Rosenblatt. He does it
by dictating to a stenographer.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1997


                             2262 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle



                   October 15, 1997, Wednesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1759 words

HEADLINE: Researchers shed new light on vision problems of elderly

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY

DATELINE: UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif.

BODY:

   UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif. - Aging Americans expect more from their eyes these
days than ever before. People in their 70s and 80s want to be able to drive,
play cards, recognize people on the street, travel with their grandchildren,
take advantage of senior discounts in the movies and read the books they missed
while working full time.

   But eyes have a way of aging that can render such expectations unrealistic.
Far worse than the loss of visual acuity that prompts most middle-aged people to
resort to magnifying lenses are sight-robbing diseases such as glaucoma,
cataracts, age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and other
retinal disorders that afflict tens of millions of Americans, usually after age
50.

   The incidence of such potentially blinding disorders is increasing rapidly as
the number of older people grows. Experts predict, for example, that by the year
2030, 6.3 million older Americans will develop macular degeneration, up from 1.7
million in 1995. It is a still-irreversible disorder that robs people of the
central vision needed to drive, read, watch television, recognize faces, play
cards or do any fine work. If Grandma Moses had had macular degeneration, her
artistic talents would never have been noticed.

   Fortunately, research is progressing on a number of promising new treatments,
including low doses of radiation, and a combination of lasers and
light-activated chemicals, both of which are used for some particularly
hard-to-treat forms of macular degeneration. Other research is concentrating on
how to stop toxins that damage the eye in glaucoma, and the genetics of several
different eye diseases.

   "Older Americans today expect to enjoy their retirement with the same visual
capacity that they had in their younger years," said Dr. Harold Spalter,
professor of ophthalmology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
But, alas, as was apparent at a four-day seminar that Spalter chaired here last
month, researchers are still a long way from knowing how to reverse most
blinding eye disorders.

   Still, major progress in understanding and treating these conditions - and
perhaps detecting them early enough to blunt their effects - was evident at the
seminar, organized by Research to Prevent Blindness, a New York-based voluntary
organization. Unfortunately, though, many elderly Americans cannot afford the
early detection procedures described at the seminar because Medicare and many
other insurance programs do not cover such preventive measures.

   For example, while insurance companies would routinely cover a visual field
examination for a patient who already has glaucoma, most would not pay for this
test for a person who has not yet experienced vision loss, when the disease
process might be stopped without lasting vision damage.

   Furthermore, an ongoing study of 2,520 men and women aged 65 to 84 in
Salisbury, Md., has revealed that the usual eye chart test for visual acuity is
inadequate to assess vision losses that interfere with the ability of elderly
people to get around on their own, perform tasks of daily living and avoid
accidents that can result in serious or fatal injuries. Rather, Dr. Sheila West,
professor of ophthalmology at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, reported that
tests for contrast sensitivity - the ability to distinguish, say, a step from
the one below it - are more revealing of functional disability in older people.

   "We have found that loss of contrast sensitivity is as important as arthritis
and heart failure in determining loss of mobility in the aged," West said. She
traced this loss to "nonspecific retinal changes" and the beginnings of
cataracts, a gradual clouding of the lens of the eye that eventually obscures
vision. However, early-stage cataracts are rarely recognized by those who have
them and are often dismissed as inconsequential by eye doctors.

   Sunlight, West said, is a major factor in the formation of cataracts, and the
damage is cumulative. By assessing the exposure of study participants to
sunlight, West and colleagues determined that for every 1 percent increase in
exposure to ultraviolet-B light, the risk of developing cataracts rose by 10
percent.

   "There is no threshold for sun-related damage, the dosage is cumulative and
no group is immune to it," West said the study showed. She recommended that when
out of doors, everyone - starting in childhood - should wear lenses that block
ultraviolet light and a cap with a brim that shades the eyes.

   Dr. Cristina Leske, head of preventive medicine at University Medical Center
in Stony Brook, N.Y., and associates, identified other risk factors for
cataracts. Through a five-year study of 764 patients, they found that Caucasians
are three times as likely as blacks to develop cataracts. Those who take the
gout medicine allopurinol face more than a two-fold increase in risk, and
smokers have a 60 percent increase.

   On the other hand, certain nutrients appear protective. The risk was 30
percent lower among those who took multivitamin-mineral supplements and nearly
60 percent lower among those who took a vitamin E supplement, a finding that is
now being tested in a clinical trial sponsored by the National Eye Institute.
Still another study of 247 women aged 56 to 71 conducted at Tufts University in
Boston found that taking vitamin C supplements for more than 10 years reduced
the risk of early cataracts by 77 percent and the risk of moderately advanced
cataracts by 83 percent.

   But while cataracts can usually be treated very successfully by surgically
removing the damaged lens and replacing it with a synthetic lens implant,
age-related macular degeneration, the leading cause of legal blindness in the
elderly, has yet to yield to an effective treatment. Macular degeneration
involves progressive damage to the cells in the center of the retina that are
responsible for straight-ahead vision.

   Early cases are often treated with lasers, which have the unfortunate side
effect of destroying normal retinal cells as well as the damaged areas beneath
them. Furthermore, after laser treatment, the vision-damaging tissue often grows
back.

   Dr. Dennis Marcus, an ophthalmologist at the Medical College of Georgia in
Augusta, said that laser therapy usually cannot be used for the most severe form
of the disease - so-called wet macular degeneration, which involves the growth
of leaky blood vessels beneath the central retina. Instead, he and his
colleagues are testing low-dose radiation to destroy the blood vessels but spare
the normal retinal cells. Thus far, 100 patients have been treated in a clinical
trial that will eventually involve 500 people with wet macular degeneration.
While it is too soon to evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment, Marcus said
that he has seen no radiation-induced complications.

   Another clinical study is testing a technique called photodynamic therapy. It
starts with the intravenous administration of a photosensitive dye that collects
in the damaging blood vessels that are growing beneath the retina. The eye is
then exposed to laser light that activates the dye, destroying those vessels
only. Dr. Joan Miller, an ophthalmologist at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, said that preliminary studies showed that the technique effectively
closes off the leaky vessels in the majority of patients. And while these
vessels reopen and leak in some patients, the treatment can be repeated, if
needed, without harm to the eye.

   Some seminar participants said the best hope for conquering blinding eye
diseases was unraveling the sometimes complex genetics underlying many if not
all of these conditions. Just last month, for example, a team of scientists
announced the discovery of the first genetic link to age-related macular
degeneration, which strikes 25 percent of Americans over the age of 65 and is
the major cause of vision loss in the elderly. The researchers hope that by
studying mutations in this gene they will gain an understanding of how the
disease damages the eye, a means of identifying those at risk and methods of
prevention and treatment.

   Discoveries about the genetics of certain eye disorders can sometimes raise
more questions than they answer. For example, Dr. Fulton Wong of Duke University
Medical Center reported that as many as 50 genes are believed to be involved in
the progressive disease retinitis pigmentosa, which begins as night blindness
and loss of peripheral vision and eventually destroys central vision, leaving
people blind. Thus far, four genes have been identified, each with multiple
mutations that may result in different aberrations of the condition. One of the
genes that codes for the production of the visual pigment rhodopsin can exist in
92 different mutated forms, Wong reported.

   This year alone, three genes for various forms of glaucoma have been
identified. But Dr. Janey Wiggs, an ophthalmologist and geneticist at Tufts
University School of Medicine in Boston, said: "This is a very complicated
disease, with maybe 20 or 30 genes involved. And finding genes is only the first
step. Where and when is the gene required and how does it produce disease? Does
it result in too much or not enough of a gene product or make a toxic product?"

   Still, she and others expressed guarded enthusiasm for the prospects of gene
therapy to treat various devastating eye diseases. "The eye is accessible," she
said. "It can be given selective treatment, using the other untreated eye as a
control to see how well the treatment is working."



   As time goes by


   The aging eye is prone to a number of vision-threatening conditions.
Researchers are exploring new ways of treating them.

   Glaucoma


   Description

   Fluid builds up in the anterior chamber, creating pressure inside the eye and
damaging the optical nerve.

    Experimental approaches:

   Identification of genes for prevention; compounds to combat toxins released
in later stages of disease.

   Diabetic Retinopathy

   Description

   Diabetes damages the tiny blood vessels in the retina.

   Experimental approaches:

   Possible genetic approach involving suicide gene to prevent excessive
division.

   Macular Degeneration

   Description:

   The cells in the macula break down, or blood vessels behind the retina grow
into the macula.

   Experimental approaches:

   Low-dose radiation or other therapy to destroy blood vessels but spare normal
cells.

   Cataract

   Description

   The protein in the lens clumps and starts to cloud vision.

   Experimental approaches:

   Multivitamins or vitamin E may reduce risk.




GRAPHIC: Graph: As time goes by (TEXT, p. 21); New York Times

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1997


                             2263 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           October 15, 1997 Wednesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F02

LENGTH: 2055 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH ADVANCES FOR THE AGING EYE

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY, New York Times News Service <

DATELINE: UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif.

BODY:

   Wednesday, October 15, 1997 RESEARCH ADVANCES FOR THE AGING EYE

   Summary:  Older people nowadays want to keep their sight against the
depredations of numerous eye diseases

   Aging Americans expect more from their eyes these days.

   People in their 70s and 80s want to be able to drive, play cards, recognize
people on the street, travel with their grandchildren, take advantage of  senior
citizen discounts in the movies and read the books they missed while  working
full time.

   But aging eyes can render such expectations unrealistic. Far worse than the
loss of visual acuity that prompts most middle-aged people to resort to
magnifying lenses are sight-robbing diseases such as glaucoma, cataracts,
age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and other retinal
disorders that afflict tens of millions of Americans, usually after age 50.

   The incidence of such potentially blinding disorders is increasing rapidly
as the number of older people grows. Experts predict, for example, that by the
year 2030, 6.3 million older Americans will develop macular degeneration,
compared with 1.7 million in 1995. It is a still-irreversible disorder that
robs people of the central vision needed to drive, read, watch television,
recognize faces, play cards or do any fine work. If Grandma Moses had had
macular degeneration, her artistic talents never would have been noticed.

   Fortunately, research is progressing on a number of promising new
treatments, including low doses of radiation, and a combination of lasers and
light-activated chemicals, both of which are used for some particularly
hard-to-treat forms of macular degeneration. Other research is concentrating  on
how to stop toxins that damage the eye in glaucoma and the genetics of  several
different eye diseases.

   ``Older Americans today expect to enjoy their retirement with the same
visual capacity that they had in their younger years,'' said Dr. Harold
Spalter, professor of ophthalmology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in
New York. But, alas, as was apparent at a four-day seminar that Spalter  chaired
last month, researchers still are a long way from knowing how to  reverse most
blinding eye disorders.

   Costly early tests

   Still, major progress in understanding and treating these conditions -- and
perhaps detecting them early enough to blunt their effects -- was evident at
the seminar, organized by Research to Prevent Blindness, a New York-based
voluntary organization. Unfortunately, though, many elderly Americans cannot
afford the early detection procedures described at the seminar because  Medicare
and many other insurance programs do not cover such preventive  measures.

   For example, while insurance companies would routinely cover a visual field
examination for a patient who already has glaucoma, most would not pay for  this
test for a person who has not experienced vision loss, when the disease  process
might be stopped without lasting vision damage.

   Furthermore, a study of 2,520 men and women aged 65 to 84 in Salisbury,  Md.,
has revealed that the usual eye chart test for visual acuity is  inadequate to
assess vision losses that interfere with the ability of elderly  people to get
around on their own, perform tasks of daily living and avoid  accidents that can
result in serious or fatal injuries. Rather, Dr. Sheila  West, professor of
ophthalmology at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions,  reported that tests for
contrast sensitivity -- the ability to distinguish,  say, a step from the one
below it -- are more revealing of functional  disability in older people.

   ``We have found that loss of contrast sensitivity is as important as
arthritis and heart failure in determining loss of mobility in the aged,''  West
said. She traced this loss to ``nonspecific retinal changes'' and the
beginnings of cataracts, a gradual clouding of the lens of the eye that
eventually obscures vision. However, early-stage cataracts are rarely
recognized by those who have them and often are dismissed as inconsequential  by
eye doctors.

   Sun lovers risk cataracts

   Sunlight, West said, is a major factor in the formation of cataracts, and
the damage is cumulative. By assessing the exposure of study participants to
sunlight, West and colleagues determined that for every 1 percent increase in
exposure to ultraviolet-B light, the risk of developing cataracts rose by 10
percent.

   ``There is no threshold for sun-related damage, the dosage is cumulative,
and no group is immune to it,'' West said the study showed. She recommended
that when out of doors, everyone -- starting in childhood -- should wear  lenses
that block ultraviolet light and a cap with a brim that shades the  eyes.

   Dr. M. Cristina Leske, head of preventive medicine at University Medical
Center in Stony Brook, N.Y., and associates identified other risk factors for
cataracts. Through a five-year study of 764 patients, they found that
Caucasians are three times as likely as blacks to develop cataracts. Those who
take the gout medicine allopurinol face more than a two-fold increase in risk,
and smokers have a 60 percent increase.

   On the other hand, certain nutrients appear protective. The risk was 30
percent lower among those who took multivitamin-mineral supplements and nearly
60 percent lower among those who took a vitamin E supplement, a finding that  is
being tested in a clinical trial sponsored by the National Eye Institute.  Still
another study of 247 women aged 56 to 71 conducted at Tufts University  in
Boston found that taking vitamin C supplements for more than 10 years  reduced
the risk of early cataracts by 77 percent and the risk of moderately  advanced
cataracts by 83 percent.

   But while cataracts can usually be treated very successfully by surgically
removing the damaged lens and replacing it with a synthetic lens implant,
age-related macular degeneration, the leading cause of legal blindness in the
elderly, has yet to yield to an effective treatment. Macular degeneration
involves progressive damage to the cells in the center of the retina that are
responsible for straight-ahead vision.

   Laser treatment risky

   Early cases are often treated with lasers, which have the unfortunate side
effect of destroying normal retinal cells as well as the damaged areas beneath
them. Furthermore, after laser treatment, the vision-damaging tissue often
grows back.

   Dr. Dennis M. Marcus, an ophthalmologist at the Medical College of Georgia
in Augusta, said laser therapy usually cannot be used for the most severe form
of the disease -- so-called wet macular degeneration, which involves the  growth
of leaky blood vessels beneath the central retina. Instead, he and his
colleagues are testing low-dose radiation to destroy the blood vessels but
spare the normal retinal cells. Thus far, 100 patients have been treated in a
clinical trial that will eventually involve 500 people with wet macular
degeneration. While it is too soon to evaluate the effectiveness of the
treatment, Marcus said that he has seen no radiation-induced complications.

   Another clinical study is testing a technique called photodynamic therapy.
It starts with the intravenous administration of a photosensitive dye that
collects in the damaging blood vessels that are growing beneath the retina.  The
eye is then exposed to laser light that activates the dye, destroying  those
vessels only. Dr. Joan W. Miller, an ophthalmologist at the  Massachusetts Eye
and Ear Infirmary, said preliminary studies showed that the  technique
effectively closes off the leaky vessels in the majority of  patients. And while
these vessels reopen and leak in some patients, the  treatment can be repeated,
if needed, without harm to the eye.

   Some seminar participants said the best hope for conquering blinding eye
diseases was unraveling the sometimes complex genetics underlying many if not
all of these conditions. Just last month, for example, a team of scientists
announced the discovery of the first genetic link to age-related macular
degeneration, which strikes 25 percent of Americans over the age of 65. The
researchers hope that by studying mutations in this gene they will gain an
understanding of how the disease damages the eye, a means of identifying those
at risk and methods of prevention and treatment.

   Glaucoma advances

   Glaucoma, for example, usually involves elevated pressure inside the eye,
leading eventually to the death of ganglion cells, the nerve cells that
transmit information from the eye to the brain. This disease afflicts perhaps  8
million Americans and causes blindness in 5,500 each year. Currently, the  only
treatment involves continual use of eye drops that reduce intraocular  pressure.
This only works if treatment is begun early.

   Dr. Robert W. Nickells, an eye researcher at the University of Wisconsin in
Madison, said, however, that ``new advances suggest that glaucoma could be
treated during the second or even the third stage of the disease.'' The second
stage involves the release of high concentrations of ``excitotoxins,'' amino
acids that are toxic to nerve cells. Nickells said that several compounds that
intervene in the formation of excitotoxins have been developed to treat other
neurodegenerative disorders and also may prove useful in treating glaucoma.

   As for the third stage, he and his colleagues have found in monkeys and
rodents that ganglion cells succumb to a form of programmed cell death that
appears to be controlled by three genes that act as a molecular switch. One of
the genes, called bcl-x, prevents the fatal blow and might be harnessed
therapeutically to override the cell death mechanism, Nickells said.

   But discoveries about the genetics of eye disorders sometimes might raise
more questions than they answer. For example, Dr. Fulton Wong of Duke
University Medical Center reported that as many as 50 genes are believed to be
involved in the progressive disease retinitis pigmentosa, which begins as  night
blindness and loss of peripheral vision and eventually destroys central  vision,
leaving people blind. Thus far, four genes have been identified, each  with
multiple mutations that may result in different aberrations of the  condition.
One of the genes that codes for the production of the visual  pigment rhodopsin
can exist in 92 different mutated forms, Wong reported.

   This year alone, three genes for various forms of glaucoma have been
identified. But Dr. Janey Wiggs, an ophthalmologist and geneticist at Tufts
University School of Medicine in Boston, said: ``This is a very complicated
disease, with maybe 20 or 30 genes involved. And finding genes is only the
first step. Where and when is the gene required, and how does it produce
disease? Does it result in too much or not enough of a gene product or make a
toxic product?''

   Potential in gene therapy

   Still, she and others expressed guarded enthusiasm for the prospects of  gene
therapy to treat various devastating eye diseases. ``The eye is  accessible,''
she said. ``It can be given selective treatment, using the other untreated eye
as a control to see how well the treatment is working.''

   Dr. J. Timothy Stout, head of the division of ophthalmology at Children's
Hospital in Los Angeles, said, ``The potential use of gene therapy is nearly
limitless for the ophthalmologist.''

   He and his colleagues are exploring in animals the potential of a so-called
suicide gene to treat eye diseases that involve excessive cell division, such
as intraocular proliferative disease, macular degeneration and diabetic
retinopathy. Normally, most cells in an adult eye are not dividing. Using as a
gene carrier a virus that infects only actively dividing cells, he introduces
into the eye a gene that by itself is not toxic but that results in cell death
when combined with the drug ganciclovir, which also does not harm normal  cells.
Thus, the treatment is specific for the proliferating cells involved in the eye
disease.

   ILLUSTRATION: Graphic -- Illustrations and text -- AS TIME GOES BY -
Peripheral vision; Seeing things clearly; The aging eye is prone to a number  of
vision-threatening conditions. Researchers are exploring new ways of  treating
them

   (LIBRARY NOTE: To view complete text see the bound volume, Oregonian
microfilm or graphics notebook located in the Library. Copy was not sent to  the
Library computer.)

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2264 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                October 14, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 1; Column 2; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1955 words

HEADLINE: The Aging Eye: Researchers Aim To Stop the Clock

BYLINE: By JANE E. BRODY

DATELINE: UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif.

BODY:

   AGING Americans expect more from their eyes these days than ever before.
People in their 70's and 80's want to be able to drive, play cards, recognize
people on the street, travel with their grandchildren, take advantage of senior
discounts in the movies and read the books they missed while working full time.

   But eyes have a way of aging that can render such expectations unrealistic.
Far worse than the loss of visual acuity that prompts most middle-aged people to
resort to magnifying lenses are sight-robbing diseases like glaucoma, cataracts,
age-related macular degeneration, diabetic retinopathy and other retinal
disorders that afflict tens of millions of Americans, usually after age 50.

    The incidence of such potentially blinding disorders is increasing rapidly
as the number of older people grows. Experts predict, for example, that by the
year 2030, 6.3 million older Americans will develop macular degeneration, up
from 1.7 million in 1995. It is a still-irreversible disorder that robs people
of the central vision needed to drive, read, watch television, recognize faces,
play cards or do any fine work. If Grandma Moses had had macular degeneration,
her artistic talents would never have been noticed.

   Fortunately, research is progressing on a number of promising new treatments,
including low doses of radiation, and a combination of lasers and
light-activated chemicals, both of which are used for some particularly
hard-to-treat forms of macular degeneration. Other research is concentrating on
how to stop toxins that damage the eye in glaucoma, and the genetics of several
different eye diseases.

   "Older Americans today expect to enjoy their retirement with the same visual
capacity that they had in their younger years," said Dr. Harold Spalter,
professor of ophthalmology at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York.
But, alas, as was apparent at a four-day seminar that Dr. Spalter chaired here
last month, researchers are still a long way from knowing how to reverse most
blinding eye disorders.

   Still, major progress in understanding and treating these conditions -- and
perhaps detecting them early enough to blunt their effects -- was evident at the
seminar, organized by Research to Prevent Blindness, a New York-based voluntary
organization. Unfortunately, though, many elderly Americans cannot afford the
early detection procedures described at the seminar because Medicare and many
other insurance programs do not cover such preventive measures.

   For example, while insurance companies would routinely cover a visual field
examination for a patient who already has glaucoma, most would not pay for this
test for a person who has not yet experienced vision loss, when the disease
process might be stopped without lasting vision damage.

   Furthermore, an ongoing study of 2,520 men and women aged 65 to 84 in
Salisbury, Md., has revealed that the usual eye chart test for visual acuity is
inadequate to assess vision losses that interfere with the ability of elderly
people to get around on their own, perform tasks of daily living and avoid
accidents that can result in serious or fatal injuries. Rather, Dr. Sheila West,
professor of ophthalmology at Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, reported that
tests for contrast sensitivity -- the ability to distinguish, say, a step from
the one below it -- are more revealing of functional disability in older people.

   "We have found that loss of contrast sensitivity is as important as arthritis
and heart failure in determining loss of mobility in the aged," Dr. West said.
She traced this loss to "nonspecific retinal changes" and the beginnings of
cataracts, a gradual clouding of the lens of the eye that eventually obscures
vision. However, early-stage cataracts are rarely recognized by those who have
them and are often dismissed as inconsequential by eye doctors.

   Sunlight, Dr. West said, is a major factor in the formation of cataracts, and
the damage is cumulative. By assessing the exposure of study participants to
sunlight, Dr. West and colleagues determined that for every 1 percent increase
in exposure to ultraviolet-B light, the risk of developing cataracts rose by 10
percent.

   "There is no threshold for sun-related damage, the dosage is cumulative and
no group is immune to it," Dr. West said the study showed. She recommended that
when out of doors, everyone -- starting in childhood -- should wear lenses that
block ultraviolet light and a cap with a brim that shades the eyes.

   Dr. M. Cristina Leske, head of preventive medicine at University Medical
Center in Stony Brook, N.Y., and associates, identified other risk factors for
cataracts. Through a five-year study of 764 patients, they found that Caucasians
are three times as likely as blacks to develop cataracts. Those who take the
gout medicine allopurinol face more than a two-fold increase in risk, and
smokers have a 60 percent increase.

   On the other hand, certain nutrients appear protective. The risk was 30
percent lower among those who took multivitamin-mineral supplements and nearly
60 percent lower among those who took a vitamin E supplement, a finding that is
now being tested in a clinical trial sponsored by the National Eye Institute.
Still another study of 247 women aged 56 to 71 conducted at Tufts University in
Boston found that taking vitamin C supplements for more than 10 years reduced
the risk of early cataracts by 77 percent and the risk of moderately advanced
cataracts by 83 percent.

   But while cataracts can usually be treated very successfully by surgically
removing the damaged lens and replacing it with a synthetic lens implant,
age-related macular degeneration, the leading cause of legal blindness in the
elderly, has yet to yield to an effective treatment. Macular degeneration
involves progressive damage to the cells in the center of the retina that are
responsible for straight-ahead vision.

   Early cases are often treated with lasers, which have the unfortunate side
effect of destroying normal retinal cells as well as the damaged areas beneath
them. Furthermore, after laser treatment, the vision-damaging tissue often grows
back.

   Dr. Dennis M. Marcus, an ophthalmologist at the Medical College of Georgia in
Augusta, said that laser therapy usually cannot be used for the most severe form
of the disease -- so-called wet macular degeneration, which involves the growth
of leaky blood vessels beneath the central retina. Instead, he and his
colleagues are testing low-dose radiation to destroy the blood vessels but spare
the normal retinal cells. Thus far, 100 patients have been treated in a clinical
trial that will eventually involve 500 people with wet macular degeneration.
While it is too soon to evaluate the effectiveness of the treatment, Dr. Marcus
said that he has seen no radiation-induced complications.

   Another clinical study is testing a technique called photodynamic therapy. It
starts with the intravenous administration of a photosensitive dye that collects
in the damaging blood vessels that are growing beneath the retina. The eye is
then exposed to laser light that activates the dye, destroying those vessels
only. Dr. Joan W. Miller, an ophthalmologist at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, said that preliminary studies showed that the technique effectively
closes off the leaky vessels in the majority of patients. And while these
vessels reopen and leak in some patients, the treatment can be repeated, if
needed, without harm to the eye.

   Some seminar participants said the best hope for conquering blinding eye
diseases was unraveling the sometimes complex genetics underlying many if not
all of these conditions. Just last month, for example, a team of scientists
announced the discovery of the first genetic link to age-related macular
degeneration, which strikes 25 percent of Americans over the age of 65 and is
the major cause of vision loss in the elderly. The researchers hope that by
studying mutations in this gene they will gain an understanding of how the
disease damages the eye, a means of identifying those at risk and methods of
prevention and treatment.

   Glaucoma, for example, usually involves elevated pressure inside the eye,
leading eventually to the death of ganglion cells, the nerve cells that transmit
information from the eye to the brain. This disease afflicts perhaps eight
million Americans and causes blindness in 5,500 each year. Currently the only
available treatment involves continual use of eye drops that reduce intraocular
pressure. This only works if treatment is begun early.

   Dr. Robert W. Nickells, an eye researcher at the University of Wisconsin in
Madison, said, however, that "new advances suggest that glaucoma could be
treated during the second or even the third stage of the disease." The second
stage involves the release of high concentrations of "excitotoxins," amino acids
that are toxic to nerve cells. Dr. Nickells said that several compounds that
intervene in the formation of excitotoxins have been developed to treat other
neurodegenerative disorders and may also prove useful in treating glaucoma.

   As for the third stage, he and his colleagues have found in monkeys and
rodents that ganglion cells succumb to a form of programmed cell death that
appears to be controlled by three genes that act as a molecular switch. One of
the genes, called bcl-x, prevents the fatal blow and might be harnessed
therapeutically to override the cell death mechanism, Dr. Nickells said.

   But discoveries about the genetics of eye disorders can sometimes raise more
questions than they answer. For example, Dr. Fulton Wong of Duke University
Medical Center reported that as many as 50 genes are believed to be involved in
the progressive disease retinitis pigmentosa, which begins as night blindness
and loss of peripheral vision and eventually destroys central vision, leaving
people blind. Thus far, four genes have been identified, each with multiple
mutations that may result in different aberrations of the condition. One of the
genes that codes for the production of the visual pigment rhodopsin can exist in
92 different mutated forms, Dr. Wong reported.

   This year alone, three genes for various forms of glaucoma have been
identified. But Dr. Janey Wiggs, an ophthalmologist and geneticist at Tufts
University School of Medicine in Boston, said: "This is a very complicated
disease, with maybe 20 or 30 genes involved. And finding genes is only the first
step. Where and when is the gene required and how does it produce disease? Does
it result in too much or not enough of a gene product or make a toxic product?"

   Still, she and others expressed guarded enthusiasm for the prospects of gene
therapy to treat various devastating eye diseases. "The eye is accessible," she
said. "It can be given selective treatment, using the other untreated eye as a
control to see how well the treatment is working."

   Dr. J. Timothy Stout, head of the division of ophthalmology at Children's
Hospital in Los Angeles, said, "The potential use of gene therapy is nearly
limitless for the ophthalmologist." He and his colleagues are exploring in
animals the potential of a so-called suicide gene to treat eye diseases that
involve excessive cell division, such as intraocular proliferative disease,
macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy. Normally, most cells in an adult
eye are not dividing. Using as a gene carrier a virus that infects only actively
dividing cells, he introduces into the eye a gene that by itself is not toxic
but that results in cell death when combined with the drug ganciclovir, which
also does not harm normal cells. Thus, the treatment is specific for the
proliferating cells involved in the eye disease.


GRAPHIC: Chart: "As Time Goes By"
The aging eye is prone to a number of vision threatening conditions. Researchers
are exploring new ways of treating them. Diagram lists some treatments. (Charles
M. Blow/The New York Times/Photographs courtesy of National Eye Institute)

Diagram: "Seeing Things Clearly"
Normally, light is focused through the
1 -- Cornea
2 -- pupil and
3 -- lens and onto the
4 -- retina, where it is converted to
5 -- electrical impulses and
6 -- sent to the brain.
(Sources: National Eye Institute; The American Medical Association Encyclopedia
of Medicine (Random House); "Human Anatomy and Physiology' (Benjamin Cummings))

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1997


                             2265 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   October 14, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: IMAGING SYSTEM GUIDES TREATMENT;
TECHNOLOGY FOR HEART PATIENTS TESTED AT PITT

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Doctors at the University of Pittsburgh zapped parts of a man's heart from
the inside yesterday in an effort to cure him of a common heart arrhythmia.

   The nonsurgical technique, which had never been done in this country before,
became possible with the development of an imaging system that makes
three-dimensional views of the heart.

   The patient, a 42-year-old father of two from Irwin, had recurrent bouts of
an abnormal heart rhythm called atrial fibrillation, which is a rapid twitching
of the heart's upper pumping chambers. He is expected to be discharged from
UPMC/Presbyterian today.

   Just one out of every 200 Americans have the chronic condition, though as
many as 7 percent of the population will experience at least one episode of
palpitations.

   ''The disease is very insidious,'' said Pitt's Dr. David Schwartzman. ''We
see an incredibly depressed quality of life (because of it).''

   Schwartzman and other Pitt researchers are leading a multi-center trial to
evaluate the procedure's safety and effectiveness; hospitals in Oklahoma City
and Philadelphia also are participating.  The equipment and techniques have been
tried on a few patients in Europe, but results are not yet available.

   The procedure relies on real-time images of the heart that are constructed
using magnetic imaging techniques and echocardiography.

   ''This is the most sophisticated technology to come to Pittsburgh since Tom
Starzl did liver transplants,'' said Dr. Arthur Feldman, chief of cardiology.
''It's a combination of three-dimensional images and virtual reality.''

   Feldman said that the system may one day be useful for delivering drugs to
specific sites in the heart, or for gene therapy.

   In the current trial, Pitt researchers are trying a technique called catheter
ablation to stop irregular heart muscle contractions.

   In a normal heart, its pacemaker, called the sinus node, sends out an
electrical impulse that triggers the atria to squeeze blood into the ventricles
below them. A split second later, the ventricles contract, pushing blood into
the lungs or out to the rest of the body.

   In atrial fibrillation, multiple wavelets of electrical stimulation travel in
random patterns through the heart's top chambers. These impulses can override
the heart's sinus node, so the atria twitch rapidly instead of contracting
completely in a regular rhythm.

   Poor atrial contraction decreases the amount of blood that gets pushed into
the heart's lower chambers, the ventricles, and the chaotic electrical
conduction makes the ventricles contract faster.

   Patients usually feel palpitations. The poor blood flow through the heart can
make them breathless and dizzy and cause chest pain. Because the entire chamber
doesn't contract in unison, blood can pool, which leads to clot formation and an
increased risk of stroke.

   In the ablation procedure, a catheter-mounted instrument emitting radio waves
is maneuvered inside the heart chamber. Magnetic sensors on the catheter show
its position. When placed against an appropriate place on the muscle, energy is
released to kill heart cells in a 1-millimeter-wide strip all the way through
the heart wall.

   The result is a very thin line of scarred tissue.

   Scars are created to mark the heart in a pattern that allows normal waves of
contraction; abnormal twitches cannot spread past the lines nor override the
heart's pacemaker.

   Patients get back what they had lost: a normal atrial contraction, a normal
response from the ventricles and a regular heart rate. With these problems
corrected, the risk of stroke from a clot decreases.

   According to Schwartzman, the new procedure is based on surgeries that create
a maze of scars by actually cutting into the atria. The operations are
effective, but the risk of complications is high because the chest wall has to
be opened.

   Drug therapies are often not tolerated well and patients still get
recurrences of the abnormal heart rhythm, he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1997


                             2266 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      October 12, 1997 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 1178 words

HEADLINE: BEYOND TEARS: Molesters hide evil behind image of normal guy

BYLINE: By J.M. Lawrence

BODY:

   Ever since Americans first saw the face of 6-year-old Adam Walsh smiling
through lost front teeth and wearing a red baseball cap, parents have had
nightmares about a bogey man who would take their child.

   On paper, car accidents, lack of swimming lessons and house fires pose far
more danger to children than men like the pedophile who kidnapped Adam from a
mall and killed him in 1981.

   But the murder of 10-year-old Jeffrey Curley has renewed parent's worst fears
and spotlighted a most twisted and dangerous criminal. Pedophiles, experts say,
present two separate faces to the world and develop intricate strategies to reel
in their prey. They can learn how to control their behaviors but they can never
be cured.

   "They are master liars and masters at secrecy," says James Moody, a Rhode
Island mental-health counselor who has treated sex offenders for more than a
decade. "Some of the nicest people you'll meet are child molesters."

   "They don't stand out," says Dr. Craig Latham, a Boston counselor who works
to keep juvenile sex offenders from becoming adult offenders. "They don't walk
around with knuckles dragging on the ground, waving a trench coat. They're not
from a different gene pool. They are us."

   Six years ago, a church deacon named Henry Meinholz Jr. kidnapped a neighbor
girl and held her prisoner in his basement where he raped and killed her. His
wife said she knew nothing of his deviant ways until the day of his arrest.

   "The vast majority," says Joseph Rak, who has treated sex offenders for 14
years, "are employed and may very well be churchgoers, have a wife and kids and
a string of people who are going to come in and tell you he's Gandhi. They're
scary guys."

   Experts do not know where the terrible urges to sexually assault children
come from. There is no evidence so far that the behavior is genetic.

   Therapists do know that the vast majority of pedophiles they see were at one
time the victims of child molesters themselves.

   "I ask them, 'How can this be?' " says Moody. " 'You know you were offended
against as a kid and how that made you feel. How does it happen that you find
yourself doing the same thing?' And they don't know."

   Notorious pedophile Jesse Timmendequas, 36, who raped and killed 7-year-old
Megan Kanka in New Jersey, was allegedly sodomized by his father for years.

   News that the younger brother of one of the men charged with killing Curley
is accused of raping a different child may reveal a pattern of family abuse,
experts said. "You would look to see if the younger brother was molested by the
older brother or indoctrinated into the behavior by the older brother," Rak
says.

   One FBI agent refers to pedophilia as "the bite of the werewolf," as if once
bitten by one, you will become one.

   Pedophiles may even recreate their own victimization, developing an
attraction to only 12-year-olds, for example.

   "Some of these kind of people are stuck at a certain age emotionally," says
Dr. Theo Seghorn, who began treating Massachusetts sex offenders 35 years ago.
"As soon as their victim turns 13, 14 and starts developing muscles and body
hair, the pedophile loses interest."

   Or the sex offender may play out what they saw their own childhood role
models do. "It can be a learned behavior," Rak says. " 'If Dad can do it and
it's OK, why can't I do it?' "

   But Dr. Barbara Schwartz, president of the Massachusetts Association for the
Treatment of Sex Abusers, cautions that only a small percentage of victims wind
up as sex criminals - a fact she emphasizes in talking with parents of children
who have been assaulted.

   She adds that few pedophiles commit murder, although the ones who do cause a
fireball of grief that engulfs families and entire communities.

   Researchers estimate between 52 and 158 children will be abducted and
murdered by nonfamily members each year in America, according to studies called
for under the Missing Children's Assistance Act of 1984.

   "Fortunately, actual stranger abduction murder is a rare event," says Dr.
Gerald T. Hotaling, who worked on the study out of the University of New
Hampshire Family Research Lab.

   Murder, experts say, is not generally part of a pedophile's twisted sexual
desires. On the contrary, pedophiles feed on the notion that they have a genuine
relationship with their victim and use tools of manipulation and seduction.

   Details from Curley's murder show how pedophiles zero in on a victim and
"groom" him for a sexual relationship, experts said.

   Suspects Salvatore Sicari and Charles Jaynes befriended the boy, took him for
rides in their Cadillac and may have stolen his bicycle to entice him into a
sexual relationship in return for a new bike, police say.

   Reports that neighbors saw the men putting the laughing boy into the old
Cadillac's trunk weeks before the murder show "classic grooming behavior,"
experts in pedophilia say.

   "They actually convince themselves - as organizatons like NAMBLA (North
American Man-Boy Love Association) do - that they don't hurt the child," Seghorn
says. "They convince themselves they would never do anything the child isn't
willing to do."

   They seek out a child who may be emotionally vulnerable and responds to an
adult posing as a friend who will take them seriously, Seghorn said.

   Most pedophiles convince their young victims to live under a cloak of secrecy
about the relationship. They kill when they fear the victim will expose their
crimes.

   "One never can predict if or when the kid will squeal to the teacher or
fuzz," says a letter from a convicted child pornographer reprinted in John
Walsh's new book "Tears of Rage" about his son Adam's murder. "That's one reason
you see so many kids who had to be blown away after being molested."

   Seghorn said he believes there are no more pedophiles today than when he
first began treating sex offenders in 1962, though there are record numbers in
prison now because society takes the crimes more seriously, he adds.

   But Rak argues that sexually oriented Internet chat rooms, the proliferation
of sexual situations on TV and easy access to hard-core pornography are creating
more damaged children and possibly the next generation of pedophiles.

   Society's sliding sexual mores are occuring at the same time that parents are
strapped with work obligations and fewer adults are policing a child's free
hours, Rak says.

   "I worry with welfare reform," Dr. Schwartz says, "that now we're going to
have these children who aren't even going to have single mothers looking after
them now. And there are always child molesters looking for these kids."

   Although many learn techniques to control themselves, a pedophile's
destructive impulses will dog him into his last days, the experts say.

   When an 87-year-old child molester recently died of old age in his jail cell,
authorities found pictures of smiling Third World children among his belongings,
Schwartz said.

   He got them by sending money to a children's fund. In anyone else's
possession they would be signs of a caring spirit. But in his locker, they were
symbols of an evil one.


LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1997


                             2267 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                    October 12, 1997, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2304 words

HEADLINE: Gene Enhancements' Thorny Ethical Traits; Rapid-Fire Discoveries Force
Examination of Consequences

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   As a medical researcher, Scott McIvor never suspected that his efforts to
develop new cures would lead him to the edge of a brewing bioethical storm.
Then, a few months ago, he got an e-mail message from a doctor who wanted McIvor
to help him change a patient's skin color.

   McIvor oversees the University of Minnesota's program in gene therapy, in
which researchers inject healthy new genes into patients in an attempt to treat
genetic diseases. The doctor knew that genes affecting skin pigmentation had
already been identified, and he had a patient who wanted to change his racial
appearance. Would McIvor please treat his patient with those genes?

   A similarly disconcerting request recently came to Christopher Evans at his
office at the University of Pittsburgh. Evans is helping to devise a genetic
therapy for muscle diseases such as muscular dystrophy, in which genes will be
added to dying muscle cells to help those cells grow. A sports medicine doctor
"put two and two together," Evans said, and asked whether he could get access to
the treatment to help healthy athletes grow bigger muscles.

   Evans answered with a definitive "no," and McIvor didn't even respond to the
skin change request. Changes in skin color and muscle mass probably could be
accomplished with current technology, they and others said. But the possibility
of harm would be difficult to justify for a cosmetic procedure and, more
important, genetic enhancement of healthy people raises a host of difficult
ethical questions.

   Would cosmetic gene therapy exacerbate racial or other prejudices, for
example, by creating a market in preferred physical traits? Might it lead to a
society of DNA haves and have-nots, and the creation of a new underclass of
people unable to keep up with the genetically fortified Joneses?

   The troublesome questions being raised by genetic enhancement are among many
now arising as scientists break through long-standing barriers in various
fields, such as human reproduction, genetic engineering and animal-to-human
organ transplants.

   Advances in farm animal cloning, for example, have stirred fears that human
adults may also someday be cloned. And the mass production of gene-altered
animals with "humanized" organs may bring not only an end to the shortage of
transplantable organs but also new epidemics, as deadly animal viruses gain
their first entry into people.

   Some of these issues remain mostly hypothetical for now, but many are
surprisingly close at hand. Given the accelerating rate of scientific
advancement, experts said, it's not too soon to consider what limits, if any,
ought to be placed on even some seemingly remote possibilities.

   Until a few years ago, human genetic enhancement was one of those. But with
the rapid-fire identification of genes affecting physical characteristics, such
as height and skin color, and behavioral traits such as aggression and
sociability -- and recent improvements in the art of injecting genes into people
-- many scientists now believe that modest genetic makeovers could become a
reality within the next few years.

   "Certain types of enhancement will probably be upon us sooner than we'd like
to realize," Evans said.

   The federal government is taking that prospect seriously. The National
Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug Administration convened a meeting
last month to consider for the first time what regulations may be appropriate
for cosmetic gene therapy. NIH officials organized the meeting so they might be
prepared for the first such experiments, instead of reacting to them afterward,
as happened when news broke in February that scientists had for the first time
cloned an adult mammal.

   "We all know it's coming," said Theodore Friedmann, a professor of medicine
at the University of California, San Diego.

   Public opinion polls suggest that the demand for genetic enhancements may be
substantial. Surveys in 1986 and 1992 showed that 40 percent to 45 percent of
the American public approved of the concept of using genes to bolster physical
and intellectual traits.

   Those polls also suggested, however, that the science had gotten ahead of the
public understanding about the possible consequences of a free market in genes.
Few people realize, for example, that although gene therapy holds promise
against inherited diseases and cancer, none of the approximately 2,000 patients
treated so far has been cured by the still experimental technique. Meanwhile,
the procedure -- which generally uses special viruses to inject new genes into
peoples' cells -- has the potential to cause cancer or other problems.

   Because of those risks, federally funded scientists who want to put new genes
into patients must first convince the NIH and the FDA that the potential for
harm is outweighed by potential benefits. Privately funded researchers generally
submit their proposals for review as well, although they don't have to.

   No regulations specifically preclude the use of genes for cosmetic purposes,
and until recently none seemed necessary. But in March, after months of internal
debate, NIH officials changed the equation by approving for the first time a
gene therapy experiment in people who were not sick.

   The gene being added will not benefit the participants; it's part of a larger
effort to find a cure for cystic fibrosis. But scientists and ethicists
immediately expressed concern that it might serve as a precedent for other gene
modifications in healthy individuals. A slippery slope might ensue, some said,
with doctors eventually offering elective enhancements in people's genetic
makeup.

   But as researchers and regulators discussed at last month's meeting, the line
between treatment and enhancement won't be easy to draw.

   "The central question is, 'What is a disease?' " Friedmann said. "Disease is
a spectrum, spanning from what we all clearly believe to be disease . . . to
someone like me who would clearly benefit from a hair transplant."

   Friedmann, at least, may be in luck. A San Diego company that specializes in
getting genes into hair follicles already is developing a gene-laden lotion that
would be rubbed into the scalp to reverse baldness. It's also experimenting with
genes that will make gray hair grow dark again and to make straight hair grow
curly -- a truly permanent permanent.

   "Genetic enhancement is going to happen," said University of Southern
California gene therapist W. French Anderson. "Congress is not going to pass a
law keeping you from curing baldness."

   Anderson is one of many scientists urging the government to postpone for as
long as possible that inevitability. But the ethical arguments against cosmetic
gene therapy are not open and shut. After all, no one is against improvements in
diet to help children grow taller, or better schools to help them learn. What's
wrong with using genes to accomplish those goals?

   Moreover, cosmetic gene therapy would not affect eggs or sperm (that kind of
gene therapy, in which acquired traits could be passed to children, is
technically more difficult and is widely considered to be a decade or more in
the future), so arguments against engineering future generations do not apply.
And old-fashioned cosmetic surgery has been around for decades with little
apparent damage to the social fabric.

   Some experts suggest that genetic enhancement bothers people because it
represents a kind of "cheating" more fundamental than that of cosmetic surgery.
For example, scientists already know that a gene called IGF-1, which makes
muscles grow, could be valuable to an athlete heading for an Olympic meet -- and
would be virtually impossible to test for, since IGF-1 occurs naturally in the
body. But as with steroid use and "blood doping," gene enhancement would
undercut the Olympic spirit of earning rewards through hard work and training,
said Case Western Reserve University ethicist Eric Juengst.

   Others note that one person's cosmetic concern is another person's medical
problem. Obesity, for instance, is a serious medical condition as well as an
unpopular aesthetic. How should regulators view gene therapy for weight loss?

   That question may soon be more than hypothetical, said Case Western
researcher Hunt Willard. Scientists already have identified a gene that, when
mutated, causes Prader-Willi syndrome, a disease characterized by a huge
appetite and extreme overeating.

   "If one copy of that [normal] gene keeps people from overeating, maybe two or
three copies of this gene will be the new Jenny Craig," Willard said, referring
to the popular weight-loss plan.

   In fact, only rarely will cosmetic gene therapy be that simple. Very few
traits are encoded by a single gene, and many genes do more than one thing.
Researchers announced two weeks ago, for example, that IGF-1 enhances the growth
of prostate tumors -- a big price to pay for bigger biceps. Similarly, children
with the Prader-Willi mutation are not only obese but also are uniformly
extremely cheerful. That suggests the gene plays a role in mood as well as
appetite, and that injections of the normal gene may change more than a person's
weight.

   "The question is," Evans asked, "will you then have people who are very thin
but miserable?"

   That would run counter to the American Medical Association's position on
genetic tinkering, which states that genetic enhancement of traits should be
considered only when there is "no trade-off with other characteristics or
traits." Those guidelines are subjective and nonbinding, however, leading some
to suggest that professional self-policing is an inadequate regulatory option.

   Another option is to restrict reimbursement, as Medicare already does, to the
"treatment of illness or injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed
body part." That would probably limit enhancement procedures, but would not
preclude the wealthy from simply paying for the traits they want.

   Yet another option is to rely on the FDA, which regulates gene therapy as a
biological therapy, said Maxwell Mehlman, director of the law-medicine center at
Case Western Reserve. But that agency generally requires less proof of safety
and efficacy -- not more -- for cosmetic products, Mehlman noted. For example,
the agency ultimately gave up its demands for proof of efficacy of liposuction,
concluding that the benefits of the fat removal system are probably best
characterized in terms of "patient satisfaction."

   Would people be satisfied with cosmetic gene therapy? Or would enhancement
just lead to a never-ending escalation of bigger and better?

   The example of short stature may provide a clue. Researchers suspect that
daily injections of human growth hormone throughout childhood may help many
short children attain average heights. The treatment is controversial, however,
in part because the enormous number of injections can leave a child feeling even
more convinced that short stature is a serious disease. A single dose of growth
hormone genes might overcome that problem by providing a lifelong supply of the
hormone without the need for shots. But in the end it would simply raise the
average height, leave a new group of kids at the bottom of the curve, and
perhaps strengthen -- rather than weaken -- bias against shorter people.

   To avoid such scenarios, some believe there may be a need for a ban on
federal funding of genetic enhancement experiments -- or even a broader
legislative ban to include the private sector, as has been proposed for human
cloning. Even if gene therapy research were somehow restricted to bona fide
medical applications, however, companies might still wend their way into the
cosmetic market.

   That's the hope among scientists at Anticancer Inc., the San Diego company
developing a genetic cure for baldness. Andrew Perry, president of the company's
consumer products division, said the company will apply first for FDA marketing
approval for hair regrowth in cancer patients who have become permanently bald
as a result of chemotherapy treatments. Once it's approved for that medical
condition, he said, they will see if they can broaden the market.

   Similarly, McIvor said, imagine a company that wants to offer a permanent tan
-- a feat that might be accomplished by adding the gene for tyrosinase, an
enzyme involved in the production of the skin pigment melanin. "Sunburns can
lead to skin cancer, so it could be seen as sort of a melanoma vaccine," McIvor
said. "But it may also be seen as a cosmetic thing. Is that enhancement or
treatment? Well, it's a little of both."

   The reverse example, in which people of color may someday consider the
possible social benefits of genetically lightening their skin, carries even
greater ethical freight, said ethicist Juengst, who is a member of the NIH
committee that examines gene therapy proposals.

   "Self-improvement and wanting the best for your children is acceptable and
encouraged in this culture," Juengst said. "But would I be complicitous with
some unfair cultural values if I chose to change my skin color" to one that
offers the best chances of societal acceptance?

   That question concerns not only racial minorities but also people who suffer
from rare genetic conditions -- many of whom also face discrimination and worry
that the field of gene therapy is abandoning them for more profitable cosmetic
endeavors.

   "There will be many wealthy people willing and eager to pay the price of
making their child taller and more beautiful," said Michael S. Langan, a vice
president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders. "Eventually there
will be discrimination against those who look 'different' because their genes
were not altered. The absence of ethical restraints means crooked noses and
teeth, or acne, or baldness, will become the mark of Cain in a century from
now."


GRAPHIC: Illustration, laura stanton, POTENTIAL GENE THERAPY FOR BALDNESS A
cream could carry hair growth genes in laboratory-made bubbles called
"liposomes." 1. Cream would be rubbed into the scalp.  2. Liposomes would be
absorbed into the skin, where they bind to dormant hair follicle cells and
release their genetic payload.  3. Genes would enter follicle cells and turn on
hair growth machinery. Hair would continue to grow for as long as the new genes
continue to function inside cells.  SOURCE: Anticancer Inc.  ABOUT THIS SERIES
Biomedical research is proceeding at breathtaking speed.  Geneticists are
gaining new insights into how genes work. Biologists are unmasking the mysteries
of how a tiny clump of cells develops into a fully formed human. Immunologists
are deciphering the complexities of the body's defense systems.  The research is
yielding many potential benefits. Doctors can identify people at risk for
genetic diseases and fashion strategies to save their lives. Reproductive
biologists can help infertile couples have children. Researchers can engineer
animals with organs that may be transplanted into humans.  But as science speeds
ahead, it often pushes the edges of society's readiness to cope with its
consequences. Increasingly, research creates possibilities before the
accompanying ethical ramifications have been resolved. In an occasional series
of articles, The Washington Post will explore these issues. Today, the first
article in that series examines the possible benefits and problems raised by the
prospect of "cosmetic gene therapy."

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1997


                             2268 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   October 11, 1997, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: PITT, UPMC LOSE DOCTOR TO HARVARD

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Several key leadership positions at the University of Pittsburgh Schools of
the Health Sciences and its medical center will change with the departure of Dr.
James Herndon, who will soon join Harvard Medical School as its chief of
orthopedic surgery.

   In addition to chairing Pitt's orthopedic surgery department, Herndon served
as Pitt's associate senior vice chancellor for health services and as senior
vice president of medical services for the UPMC Health System.

   Last week, Dr. Loren Roth was named to fill those positions, which are near
the top of both the academic and clinical arms of the medical complex. A search
is beginning for Herndon's successor in the orthopedic surgery department.

   ''Jim has done a great job of building our orthopedics department here,''
Roth said yesterday. Studies pinpointing the mechanisms underlying artificial
joint failure and the first study of gene therapy for arthritis treatment began
during his tenure.

   Herndon, who spent a decade at Pitt, was out of town yesterday.

   Roth, a psychiatrist, has been at Pitt for 25 years and most recently set
education policy as one of three associate vice chancellors. Within the medical
center, he also served as vice president for managed care.

   ''These are inextricably intertwined systems,'' Roth said, noting the medical
school and the five other health science schools depend on the UPMC Health
Systems' hospitals and other patient care programs. ''In order to meet our
research and our educational missions, we need to continue to see patients.''

   On the academic side, Roth answers to Dr. Thomas Detre as a protracted search
continues for Detre's successor as senior vice chancellor for health services.
The UPMC Health System is headed by Jeffrey Romoff.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1997


                             2269 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 10, 1997 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: Tests find pain source and remedy

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists said yesterday they had found a very small group of spinal nerves
that might be responsible for chronic pain - and a "time bomb" drug that shuts
them off.

    Tests in rats showed it was possible to turn off the "bad" pain -
hypersensitivity that plagues arthritis sufferers, for instance - without
costing them the "good" pain reflexes that keep the body away from a hot flame.

    Patrick Mantyh of the University of Minnesota and colleagues worked on a
small number of nerve cells that snag substance P - a peptide known to be
involved in pain. They have special receptors, or chemical grappling hooks, that
are specially designed to grab substance P so it can be absorbed by the cell.

    "We're beginning to uncover the chemistry of pain at a level we never
understood before," Mantyh said in a statement.

    "It shows that there's an extremely small population of cells - no more than
1 percent of spinal nerves - that plays a pivotal role in the generation of
chronic pain."

    Members of Mantyh's team thought perhaps they could attach a poison to
substance P and kill off these cells, known as nociceptors, killing the pain
sensation too.

    They used a drug developed by Douglas Lappi at Advanced Targeting Systems in
San Diego that combines substance P with saporin. Saporin stops cells from
making proteins, effectively shutting them down.

    When they injected this drug into the spinal cords of rats, the nociceptors
soaked it up and died, they wrote in a report in the journal Science.

    Mantyh and colleagues then tested the pain reflexes of the rats. The rats
reacted normally to pain such as heat but did not react as strongly as normal
rats to injections of capsaicin - the substance that makes peppers hot and that
is used to simulate extreme or chronic pain in experiments.

    "This treatment signals a revolution in pain research," Mantyh said, adding
that it was difficult to dull chronic or intense pain without also dulling the
senses needed to tell the body it was in danger.

    "For example, chronic pain patients who received this treatment would still
have the reflex to remove their hands from a hot stove, and their nervous
systems would still communicate the news of an injury to the body," he said.

    Tests in humans are a long way off. But he said the idea of sending a time
bomb poison into cells could be used for gene therapy - by tying the appropriate
gene to substance P and letting the cells absorb it.

    A second study in Science indicated this could be a possible approach to
pain therapy. Annika Malmberg and colleagues at the University of California San
Francisco found "bad" pain required the production of protein kinase-C or PKC.

    Mice genetically engineered to lack the gene for this protein had normal
pain reflexes but did not develop chronic pain after surgery to their sciatic
nerve, which should have generated pain hypersensitivity.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2270 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                October 9, 1997, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 243 words

HEADLINE: Allow Alternative Medicine to Prove Itself

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   Leon Jaroff's complaints about the Office of Alternative Medicine at the
National Institutes of Health (Op-Ed, Oct. 6) suffer from numerous flaws. First,
no strong evidence supports his charge that the office "has given respectability
and increased profit to the purveyors of alternative practices and drugs."
Alternative medicine was widely used well before that office came into
existence.

    Second, the office has, as Mr. Jaroff notes, been in existence only five
years. That is hardly time for serious scientific results in any field. Millions
of dollars have also been spent for five years in the search for effective gene
therapy. So far that search has not paid off, but no one is calling for an end
to it.

   Third, while Mr. Jaroff can have fun mocking studies of "guided-imagery yoga,
massage, homeopathy and therapeutic touch," he seems to miss the point: they are
being studied because thousands of people use such supposed therapies. If there
is nothing to them, how is the public -- unless through good medical research --
to be disabused of its false beliefs?

   Many of us have never used alternative medicine, and it may turn out there is
little to it. But it is an unbecoming form of no-nothingism and scientific
dogmatism to want the only systematic study of it in the country scuttled.

DANIEL CALLAHAN
Garrison, N.Y., Oct. 6, 1997

The writer is director of international programs at the Hastings Center.

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Giora Carmi)

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1997


                             2271 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

             October 6, 1997 Monday, 5W GREATER TORRINGTON WINSTED

SECTION: TOWN NEWS; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: HOSPITAL TO OFFER SEMINAR ON CANCER

DATELINE: TORRINGTON --

BODY:

   Charlotte Hungerford Hospital is offering a free seminar on cancer care and
prevention from 7 to 9 p.m. Tuesday at the Yankee Pedlar Inn, 93 Main St.,
Torrington. Dr. Jedd Levine, a cancer expert affiliated with the hospital, will
review recent progress in the treatment of cancer and discuss the prospects for
immuno- and gene therapies. Although the seminar is free, pre-registration is
required and can be done by calling (860) 496-6478.



LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1997


                             2272 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 6, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
A gene therapy technique that is seen as easier and less expensive than the main
alternative.

BYLINE: By Sabra Chartrand

BODY:

   IN dozens of laboratories around the country, researchers are working to
perfect a great leap in medical technology, one they hope will enable doctors
and scientists not only to cure lethal diseases, but to prevent them.

   The key to success lies in learning how to manipulate cells. If researchers
can alter living cells by adding new genes, then the cells could be sent into
the body to carry out specific biological tasks. People born without a certain
gene could have them added later -- thus avoiding diseases like cystic fibrosis,
one of many that results either from the absence of a gene or the presence of a
defective gene. Cells that become cancerous could be weakened so they are more
easily killed.

    The research is called gene therapy, and it is little more than a decade
old. Most gene therapy experiments use DNA viruses to re-program cells because,
as anyone who has ever caught a cold knows, the viruses are very efficient at
carrying foreign genes into the cells of mammals.

   Now a team of scientists has won a patent for a gene therapy technique based
on groundbreaking work done at the University of Michigan in the 1980's. The
technique is a widely used version of a process called gene transfer technology,
or viral vector. The method has since become the most popular and most promising
method of gene therapy research in a field that has exploded into a worldwide
biotechnology industry.

   Dr. William N. Kelley, now dean of the University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, said the patent awarded to him, Thomas D. Palella and Myron Levine was
"about as broad as you can get in terms of DNA viruses and gene therapy."

   Today Dr. Levine is professor emeritus of human genetics at the University of
Michigan School of Medicine. Dr. Palella practices medicine in Niles, Ill. Their
patent application, first filed 10 years ago, resulted from work done at
Michigan's School of Medicine, so the university owns the patent.

   "This is a broad gene therapy patent which involves any DNA or piece
thereof," Dr. Kelley explained. "It involves any mammalian gene including any
human gene. It involves the administration of that gene to any mammalian host,
including a human. It involves any tissue or cell in that human."

   That's probably why it took the Patent and Trademark Office a decade to
approve the application, when most patents are awarded within two years. The
claims made by Dr. Kelley, Dr. Palella and Dr. Levine are broad enough to
encompass virtually all gene therapy research conducted today using the in-vivo
technique.

   "They examined it and re-examined it, and then re-examined it again," Dr.
Kelley said. He and his colleagues pioneered the in-vivo method, one of two
predominant techniques.

   "Gene therapy from the late 1980's to the 1990's evolved two different ways,"
Dr. Kelley said. The first, called ex-vivo gene therapy, involves the complex
and expensive method of removing a cell from a patient and infecting it with a
virus that has been altered by the addition of a gene designated to do a certain
job in the body. The modified cell is then re-introduced into the patient,
bearing the added gene that will then carry out its new job.

   "The other form of gene therapy was in-vivo," Dr. Kelley added. With that
technique, the cells are left in the body and the modified gene is sent to them
carried by a virus. The virus is first stripped of the elements that cause
infection, a move that also makes room for the therapeutic gene and the DNA
codes necessary to activate it.

   "One takes a virus, in our case a DNA virus, and inserts the gene you are
interested in into that virus, crippling the virus so it doesn't infect and
cause disease, and you give that virus to the patient," Dr. Kelley said.

   As an example, he cited the possibility of adding a missing gene to a patient
who might otherwise develop cystic fibrosis. In theory, researchers would take
the needed gene and insert it into the DNA virus that causes the common cold.
They could modify the cold gene so it could not actually infect the patient with
a cold. Then they could introduce the virus bearing the needed gene directly to
a patient's lungs. The patient's body would absorb the modified DNA virus --
just as it would whenever the lungs are exposed to a cold virus -- with the gene
needed to thwart cystic fibrosis along for the ride.

   Dr. Kelley said that researchers have come to favor the in-vivo process
because it is easier to accomplish and much less expensive.

   "You give the virus directly to the patient, almost like administering a
polio vaccination," he said. "There's nothing to it, and it's the kind of thing
one could do with a million people very easily. In ex-vivo, you're removing a
cell, inserting a virus, and giving the cell back. Those studies cost a million
dollars a study."

   More than 100 companies are using the in-vivo gene therapy technique in
research to combat cancer and genetic diseases. The University of Michigan has
said it will offer the patent free to nonprofit researchers and as a
nonexclusive license to commercial labs.

   "Any commercial company can use it," Dr. Kelley said. "It won't be exclusive
to any one company or group of companies. At the same time, research
institutions and nonprofit organizations will have free access to it."

   Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office,
Washington, D.C. 20231.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1997


                             2273 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                October 6, 1997, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EVERYDAY MAGAZINE, Pg. 01D

LENGTH: 1441 words

HEADLINE: THE AFTER LIFE;
ACTOR CHRISTOPHER REEVE BRINGS HIS MESSAGE OF HOPE TO ST. LOUIS

BYLINE: Judith Newmark; Post-Dispatch Theater Critic

BODY:


   ON May 27, 1995, Christopher Reeve fell off his horse and his life split in
two, like an apple - cleft into the before, and the after.

Before was the life people dream of.

After came the life people can't imagine.

Now he works at bringing it all together into one coherent whole.

   On Saturday, he is coming to St. Louis to speak at Gateway to a Cure, a
benefit to fund spinal cord injury research at St. Louis University School of
Medicine. This is familiar ground for him. Reeve the movie star - t alented,
articulate, heartbreakingly handsome - was always a welcome advocate for good
causes, and he made time for them, from environmental protection to free speech
rights.

   But now - talented, articulate, heartbreakingly handsome and quadriplegic -
Reeve brings to benefits like this one an arresting clarity of purpose.
Obviously, he's not coming out of a pure intellectual sympathy. This research is
his hope.

   "All across the country, researchers are collaborating as they never have
before, and that is producing some very exciting results," Reeve said in a
telephone interview from his home in New York's affluent Westchester County. His
voice is light, even, measured - a trained voice, an actor's voice. "They are
working on cell transplants and gene therapy, and hopefully will be able to move
fairly quickly from the rat model to humans.

   "The most important point is that research in spinal cord injuries is out of
the dark ages and into the age of enlightenment. Things that were thought
impossible just five years ago have now been proven. So there is real hope for
people like me, and for others who suffer from related neurological disorders
such as MS, Parkinson's disease or stroke."

   As chairman of the board of the American Paralysis Association, Reeve has
plunged into a world of fund-raising and lobbying. He is frustrated by the
relatively low amount of money that the National Institutes of Health allocates
for research into spinal cord injury, about $ 13 billion a year. "That simply
isn't enough," he said. "I think the budget should be doubled.

   "Look, the AIDS lobby has been very successful over the last decade. They
marched on Washington.

   "But," he adds dryly, "not everybody can do that. The paralyzed lobby can't
march. There are mobility issues that mean we aren't heard."

   But because of his fame, Reeve can be heard, so he uses his voice to lobby
politicians and to raise money. Research could lead to treatment that could
lessen the enormous cost of caring for people with spinal injuries, he points
out - around $ 2 billion a year in the United States - "not to mention the
relief of human suffering."

Of which, it goes unstated, he has had his share.

   "In the morning, I need 20 minutes to cry," Reeve says on Role Models on the
Web, one of several Web sites where he shows up. (His own is
www.circleoffriends.org.) "To wake up and make that shift, you know . . . to
really allow yourself the feeling of loss, even two years later . . . (that)
still needs to be acknowledged."

   The loss demands acknowledgment. Reeve can't move below the neck; he can't
walk, or use his hands, or turn over without help. Nothing is easy anymore, not
even breathing. He continues to use a respirator at times.

   "It is very hard to be spontaneous," he said. "That was something I used to
enjoy tremendously in the past - to do things on the spur of the moment. But we
try to go to places, to do as many things as I could do before. Fortunately, I
have good people working with me."

   But loss isn't everything either. To define Reeve strictly in terms of what
happened to him two years ago - as the victim of a catastrophic accident, or as
the leading campaigner for spinal cord research - is to miss a central fact:
that the 45-year-old actor/director is an actor and director, part of the world
of theater arts, just as he has been for decades.

   It would, perhaps, be easier to bear that in mind if audiences everywhere
didn't picture him in a red cape with a big S on his chest.

It's not exactly a doublet and tights, after all.

   But Reeve - though he embraced the acclaim that four "Superman" movies
brought him, as any young actor would - was always a serious actor as well. He
grew up in Princeton, N.J., the son of a professor. Early on, he knew he wanted
to be an actor, and was blessed with the good looks and talent to make that seem
like a reasonable goal.

   At 15, he made his debut at the Williamstown Theatre Festival; after
graduating from Cornell, he studied at Juilliard under John Houseman, the
distinguished actor and drama teacher who helped to shape a whole generation of
American performers, including Kevin Kline, Robin Williams and William Hurt.

   But while Reeve made his name in the Superman blockbusters, backed up with
comedies and thrillers like "Switching Channels" and "Deathtrap," he always kept
a piece of himself apart from celebrity glamour.

   Ten years ago, he met a young actress, Dana Morosini, whom he married in
1992; they have a 5-year-old son, Will, and a perfectly private life. (Reeve's
two older children, Matthew and Alexandra, live with their mother, Gae Exton, in
England, and spend summers with their dad.) Vigorous and naturally graceful, he
pursued everything that interested him, and he was interested in everything:
sailing, scuba diving, skiing, riding horses.

   And he acted, seeking out the kinds of roles that are rarely associated with
Hollywood superstars. He starred on Broadway in "The Fifth of July" and in
London in "The Aspern Papers." He made "Somewhere in Time" (a romance that has
become a cult favorite since its 1980 release), the Oscar-nominated "The Remains
of the Day" and "The Bostonians," a Mechant-Ivory period film intended for art
houses that, surprisingly, did well at the box office, too.

   It is in movies like those - interior, elegant, emotionally dense - that
Reeve expects to build his professional future.

   But not as an actor - today, Reeve thinks of himself increasingly as a
director.

   He made his directing debut last spring with "In the Gloaming," a critically
acclaimed HBO movie about a man with AIDS who comes home to die.

   "I had actually had plans to direct before (the accident)," he said. "I had a
project set up and there was a disagreement about casting. So, rather than do a
film with the wrong people, I stepped out.

   "That is why I was so grateful for 'In the Gloaming.' It had all the right
ingredients, particularly a very distinguished cast."

   The film, which starred Glenn Close and Whoopi Goldberg, was shot in a house
near Reeve's own house. Technically, adaptations had to be made; for example,
because of space, Reeve couldn't be in the same room as the actors he was
directing. He worked in another room, watching a monitor and communicating with
a microphone and headset.

   But for a man who makes daily negotiations with the facts of ordinary life,
those are technical difficulties, not insuperable barriers. He plans to direct
again after a couple of current, major projects are complete.

   Lately, he's been writing a lot. His autobiography is due out in April;
currently, he's updating the script to "Rear Window," the Alfred Hitchcock
classic about a man in a wheelchair who witnesses a murder. He will star in the
remake, to air next year on ABC.

   Reeve suspects that most of his work from now on will be for television.

   "The kind of movie I am interested in is more toward 'In the Gloaming' than
'Men in Black,' " he said. "In Hollywood, it's hard to get those movies
financed.

   "But you can get them done on cable. So probably most of my work will be for
cable, or possibly network television. Although you never know - anybody might
finance a good little script. Look at 'Shine.' And you know, those movies do
well at the Oscars.

   "There are a couple of projects I have in mind to begin (directing) in the
fall of '98. But I haven't decided which one yet. My interest is in doing
quality work, wherever it happens to be. I don't think it's worth doing anything
if you can't do it right. You want to start out with the highest possible
intentions."

   What: Christopher Reeve will speak at Gateway to a Cure, a benefit for spinal
cord injury research at St. Louis University School of Medicine. Sponsored by
HEALTHSOUTH, Pucks of Power at and St. Louis University, the awards dinner is
open to the public.

When: Saturday, Oct. 11, at 6:30 p.m.

   Where: The grand ballroom at the Hyatt Regency hotel, St. Louis Union
Station.

   How much: $ 195. For tickets or for sponsorship information, call SLUCare at
268-5880 or 1-800-268-5880.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, (1) Photo by AP - ABOVE RIGHT: Christopher Reeve at the 1996
Academy Awards.
 (2) Photo by AP - RIGHT: Reeve in his most famous role, Superman.
 (3) Photo by ABC - FAR RIGHT: Reeve with his wife, Dana (left), and NBC's Katie
Couric.
 (4) Photo - Christopher Reeve during filming of the 1980 movie "Somewhere in
Time."

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1997


                             2274 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          October 5, 1997 Sunday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1005 words

HEADLINE: Gathering examines an aging world
 Long-term care, ways to keep elderly productive among the issues discussed

BYLINE: MICHAEL VITEZ

SOURCE: Knight-Ridder News Service

DATELINE: New York

BODY:

   Japan this fall is likely to pass a new national social insurance plan to
provide long-term care for its aging population, though most Japanese are
skeptical the plan will work.

   European countries hammered by the world's lowest birth rates must figure out
how to keep their oldest citizens productive.

   In France, for instance, if current retirement laws and trends are not soon
changed, 30% of the population will be expected to support the remaining 70%.
"This is impossible," said one French official.

   And in 25 years, in nearly every country in the Northern Hemisphere Russia,
China, all of Europe, the United States and Canada one in every five people will
be older than 60.

   Science must find ways to reduce disability in old age and keep people
healthier as they live longer.

   These were some of the facts, findings and points of view expressed recently
at an unusual meeting sponsored by the International Longevity Center, an
organization aimed at preparing the world for an aging society.

   The conference brought together American and Japanese journalists who write
about aging issues, as well as policy experts from both countries and from
France, Britain and the Dominican Republic.

   American policy-makers were impressed that Japan had the social will to
impose a new tax and finance a social insurance program to provide nursing home
or home care for frail elderly. Under the Japanese plan, workers now will pay
into a social insurance plan that will give families money to hire home-care
workers for frail elderly relatives so the family caretaker can return to work.

   But the Japanese journalists have low expectations for the plan: It will be
run by local governments, with poor records of achievement, and demographics
indicate there won't be any workers to hire to care for the elderly.

   Jon Gordon, a professor of geriatrics at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New
York, said that around the world, molecular biologists are diving into research
of aging-related diseases that lead to disability, dementia and chronic illness.

   He urged that research money be spent more on improving the quality of life
in later years than on extending the life span.

   Robert N. Butler, the first director of the National Institute on Aging,
recently co-founded the non-profit International Longevity Center to focus world
attention on aging issues.

   He said old people must remain productive: "We can't really afford to have
people spend 20 years of life in a claimant or dependent position."

   Gordon contended that dramatic changes and improvements will come in the next
century when people will live longer and healthier, and then die swiftly.

   At least for the people who get the best health care, he said, "you are
likely to see longer periods of functionality, with more rapid decline."

   Those who don't have access to the best health care, however, will endure
years, even decades, of chronic illness a long, slow decline.

   He predicted that science will "clone and sequence" all genes in the next
several decades and that ways to apply gene therapy will be found in the next
century.

   "Suppose we find a pattern of vulnerability to heart disease," he said. "We
will introduce genes that forestall the disease."

   And he predicted that cell therapy will boom, too, another form of
transplantation.

   Instead of replacing entire organs, doctors "will introduce new vibrant cells
to replace dying or dead cells."

   Robyn Stone, a Georgetown professor and former U.S. assistant secretary for
aging, contended that "aging is to a great extent a female issue," since it is
women who live longer and who are all too often impoverished in old age.

   Women are also primarily the ones who care for the frailest and sickest, both
at home and in institutions. This is true internationally, she said.

   She also suggested that the whole notion of work and retirement must be
redefined in the next century.

   Butler noted that some Scandinavian countries are trying to give workers a
yearlong sabbatical every 10 years as a time to re-evaluate their careers or
simply take a break, instead of working straight through to retirement.

   Francoise Forette, chief of the department of geriatrics at the Hospital
Broca at the University of Paris, stressed that now only one-third of the
population of France over age 50 is still working. In the early '80s, France,
she said, lowered its retirement age to 60.

   "Projecting this" into the coming century, she said, "30% of the population
will have to support 70% of the population. That's impossible. So we must change
something in this country. But politically it is very hard to raise the
retirement age."

   Julia Alvarez, a diplomat to the United Nations from the Dominican Republic,
stressed that the percentages of older citizens are climbing fastest in the
developing world.

   She pointed out that in poor countries such as hers there is no safety net
for aging citizens, no such thing as Social Security, and that poor countries
can't afford to let older people be unproductive.

   Older citizens, she said, "must be viewed as resources because we don't have
the resources to view them as a burden."

   End-of-life issues were also discussed at the conference. Japanese
journalists indicated that a doctor in Japan recently gave a lethal injection to
a sick and frail patient, a radical act that has received significant media and
public attention.

   Kathleen Foley, director of the Project on Death in America, financed by
philanthropist George Soros, and head of pain and palliative care services at
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York, contended that assisted
suicide nationally and internationally ultimately may be "an economic issue, not
a rights issue."

   She highlighted statistics showing support for assisted suicide was lowest
among the poor, disabled and elderly.

   Many of the nation's nurses, she said, plan to hold a "nursing summit" in the
spring to consider the role of nurses in end-of-life care.


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1997


                             2275 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       OCTOBER 3, 1997 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1887 words

HEADLINE: WITH DRUG TRIALS, A WARY HOPE / GENE THERAPY HAS PROVEN TO BE SAFE. /
STILL UNKNOWN, THOUGH, IS ITS EFFECTIVENESS.

BYLINE: Donald C. Drake, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Joan and Donald Hardy didn't talk about the cancer in Donald's chest as they
drove to the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center on Sept. 19 for his
monthly checkup.

   They always avoided the subject when he went to the doctors. The fear that
the cancer had started growing again was too frightening.

   Donald Hardy had been making this trip for almost two years, ever since he
volunteered for a gene therapy experiment and let Penn doctors infect him with
genetically altered viruses designed to fight his cancer.

   Hardy had mesothelioma, a rapidly fatal form of cancer that attacked the
chest wall and lining of the lungs. Hardy was the first mesothelioma patient in
the world to be treated with this type of therapy.

   Mesothelioma has defied all forms of conventional therapy. Practically all
patients are dead or in advanced stages of the disease two years after
diagnosis. But in Hardy, the cancer had become mysteriously quiescent.

   Still, whenever the couple made this trip to Penn, in the back of their minds
was the fear that this time the doctors would find something with their physical
exams and X-rays and CAT scans, that this time they would announce that the
cancer had started growing again.

   * It's now four years since James M. Wilson came to Penn from the University
of Michigan with the mandate to set up a world-class gene therapy program and,
it was hoped, to start curing diseases with a radically new type of treatment.

   A lot has happened since he arrived in West Philadelphia during a
record-breaking March blizzard in 1993.

   He's set up the Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which has grown to 170
scientists and support staff, is financed with $20 million a year in government
and foundation grants and is housed in laboratories occupying five buildings on
the Penn campus, not counting two full floors that will be in a biomedical
research building now under construction.

   In that time, Penn scientists have started human trials with gene drugs for
cystic fibrosis, the inherited liver disease OTC (ornithine transcarbamylase),
mesothelioma and brain cancer. Trials of drugs against melanoma and colon,
ovarian and breast cancer are being planned.

   The four drugs already in use, which have been given to 54 patients, have
turned out to be extremely safe. Other than minor reactions such as mild fevers
and skin rashes that quickly went away, the drugs have had no side-effects.

   But so far there's no evidence that any of the drugs have been effective
against any of the diseases.

   Even so, Donald and Joan Hardy are convinced that the gene therapy has
stopped Donald's cancer, at least for the moment.

   * Daniel Sterman, one of the doctors taking care of Hardy, was always a
little nervous when he came in for checkups.

   Unlike the basic gene therapy researchers, sequestered in labs far from dying
patients, the 33-year-old Sterman was a hands-on physician whose focus was on
keeping his desperately ill patients alive, not just solving scientific puzzles.

   Hardy was the first patient to be treated in the study, which now involved 23
patients. Since Hardy underwent therapy in November 1995, nine of the other test
subjects had died and the disease was steadily progressing in seven of the
others, despite treatment. The remaining seven showed no progression of disease.

   With so many patients dying or doing poorly, Sterman was relieved to see
someone doing well, but how long would this last?

   Hardy, who had gotten mesothelioma during his 34-year career working with
asbestos, had become something of a hero or "poster boy" in asbestos-worker
circles.

   In August, he and Sterman flew to Las Vegas to address the annual meeting of
the International Association of Heat and Frost Insulators and Asbestos Workers.

   Both received standing ovations from the more than 800 attending the meeting
when the very hardy-looking Hardy was presented as a mesothelioma victim who had
volunteered to test an exciting new treatment for the lethal disease and was
doing well.

   In his speech, Hardy urged his former colleagues not to shy away from cancer
tests, a common practice because the disease was so relentless, but to get
frequent checkups because gene treatments were now available. The implication
was that gene therapy had helped Hardy and it might help them, too.

   Sterman followed Hardy to the podium and described the Penn program. He was
very careful, however, not to suggest that gene therapy had saved or even
benefited Hardy.

   * Sterman had reason to be cautious.

   Not only was there no evidence that any of the experimental drugs at Penn was
working, there is no proof that any form of gene therapy is effective.

   It's not for want of trying. The mesothelioma trial was one of more than 200
human gene therapy trials started in this country since the first human was
given a gene drug in 1990. And gene drugs have been tried against dozens of
diseases involving hundreds of patients.

   After an initial wave of enthusiasm and heartening news reports in the early
1990s, the field has largely fallen from public view.

   At first it had looked so promising and, in a way, easy to do. All doctors
had to do was insert disease-fighting genes into the cells of patients. The
genes would turn the cells into tiny biochemical factories.

   And there was no problem getting the genes to the cells. They could be
inserted into viruses, which would deliver them to every cell they infected.
Depending on the type of gene used, the cells would churn out proteins to combat
heart disease, cancer, AIDS, arthritis, genetic diseases or cancer like
mesothelioma.

   Animal studies looked very encouraging. But once human trials started,
scientists quickly discovered that nature wasn't going to be so obliging to
follow the script they had written to usher in a new era in medicine.

   Though the viruses did deliver the genes to some cells, not enough cells were
being infected to produce sufficient biochemicals to combat disease.

   The scientists' hopes were being dashed by an ironic turn of events. Unable
to distinguish the therapeutic viruses from viruses that cause disease, the
patients' immune systems were destroying the gene-carrying vectors and the cells
they infected.

   * Hardy was waiting in one of the examining rooms in Penn's clinical research
center when Sterman arrived to examine him.

   Sterman could see the moment he walked into the room that Hardy was doing
well, which was no surprise because the two had been together only a few weeks
earlier in Las Vegas.

   Sunburned from playing golf and cheerful as usual, Hardy took off his shirt
and Sterman began his examination. If the cancer had grown, the mass would block
the sound of Hardy's lungs filling and expelling air and cause a dull sound when
Sterman percussed Hardy's back.

   Thumping on Hardy's back, Sterman heard the drumlike sound of a healthy lung
being percussed. A small area over the lower right lung reverberated with a dull
sound, but it was no larger than it had been when Sterman examined him two years
earlier. He pressed the end of his stethoscope against Hardy's back and heard
clear breath sounds.

   Relieved, he told Hardy that it looked good. But both men knew that this was
a crude assessment. Only the radiologist could determine with any certainty if
the cancer was growing.

   After the exam, Hardy went down the hall for an X-ray and CAT scan. Then he
and Joan returned home to wait for the call telling them what had been found.
Usually they got word the next day, but it was Friday. They would have to wait
until Monday.

   * That night Sterman did not go home but drove to Absecon, N.J., where the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy was holding its annual retreat to review what
the Penn scientists were doing and hear papers from leaders in the field.

   Sterman was scheduled to report on the mesothelioma trial. Hardy was
represented by a dot on a slide that Sterman carried in his briefcase.

   Sterman presented the data without emotion to the 160 researchers and
students gathered in a meeting room at the Seaview Resort - 23 patients treated,
nine dead from their disease, seven doing poorly and seven doing well.

   Five of the patients showed no progression of disease even though they had
been treated many months earlier and should have been getting sicker by now.

   Hardy was one of those five. The disease is so deadly that 50 percent of
patients are dead within two years of diagnosis and 97 percent or more are close
to death.

   Sterman was at a loss to explain why the five patients were doing well. Some
received high doses of the drug and some low doses. Some patients showed no
evidence that the vectors had successfully delivered the genes to the cells, and
in other patients genes had clearly been successfully transferred.

   The only common factor among the patients was that they had all been
diagnosed in early stages of disease, but even so they should have shown disease
progression by now. One possible explanation, Sterman said, was that the
treatment caused an inflammatory reaction that stopped the cancer cells from
growing, at least for the moment.

   The gene therapy treatment had proved so safe, Sterman said, that plans were
underway to do a phase II trial, in which the drug's effectiveness would be
tested. Phase I trials, such as Hardy was in, test only safety.

   The phase II trial would involve many more patients - 100 - and four or five
medical centers. The other Penn trials discussed at the meeting were all phase
I, and those results, too, showed no serious side-effects, even though the doses
of the drugs were being steadily increased.

   Penn ophthalmologist Jean Bennett reported progress in testing different
vectors in animals who had retinitis pigmentosa, a leading cause of blindness in
humans.

   She said gene treatment temporarily delayed the onset of blindness in dogs
born with the disease. She said she was about to start trials with a new vector
called AAV (adeno-associated virus), which might confer more lasting protection.

   Katherine High of Children's Hospital reported success using AAV with a gene
that may repair the genetic defect that causes the bleeding disease hemophilia.
In mice, it had produced Factor IX, an element that promotes blood clotting,
which hemophiliacs lack.

   High is preparing to try the treatment on dogs with hemophilia. If it works,
she will move to human trials, possibly within a year or so.

   Inder M. Verma of the Salk Institute, a leading gene therapist, sounded a
cautionary note at the meeting. Pointing out that more than 200 human trials had
been conducted and still no proven therapy was in sight, he said scientists must
learn much more about the basic science of cell biology and immunity before
major problems blocking success could be solved.

   * While Sterman was attending the retreat in Absecon, Hardy was a few miles
away on a golf course shooting in the high 80s and his wife was in their Toms
River home.

   It wasn't until Monday afternoon that Sterman got the written report from the
radiology department. He immediately called Hardy.

   The radiologists found no signs that the cancer was growing, Sterman said.
The CAT scan was indistinguishable from early scans.

   "Well. I guess that's good news," Hardy said.

   "It certainly is," Sterman said.

NOTES: The Quest: Seeking an Ultimate Cure
One in a series of occasional articles on gene therapy research.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PHOTO
Donald Hardy, with his wife, Joan, underwent gene therapy in 1995 for
mesothelioma. The couple believes the treatment has stopped Donald's cancer.
(The Philadelphia Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)
Donald and Joan Hardy stand in their daughter's yard in Flemington, N.J. He was
treated for mesothelioma, a rapidly fatal form of cancer. (The Philadelphia
Inquirer, VICKI VALERIO)

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2276 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 1, 1997 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: $ 1M donation will aid Children's research

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Children's Hospital has received a $ 1 million donation from a philanthropic
foundation aimed at supporting research into primary immune deficiency, a
condition that afflicts more than 500,000 children in the United States.

   The gift from the Modell Foundation, started by New York businessman Fred
Modell and his wife, Vicki, will support a lab aimed at finding improved
treatments for children with the inherited condition that killed their son,
Jeffrey, in 1986.

   Modell said Children's, under the direction of Dr. Raif Geha, has been doing
some of the most exciting work in the country in the field of primary immune
deficiency.

   "It's a dream come true to be able to give this gift to Dr. Geha and
Children's Hospital," Modell said.

   Geha said the donation will ensure the continuation of his work to identify
the factors children with immune deficiency are missing and, eventually, to find
gene therapies.

   Patients with the condition battle recurrent infections of the ears and
lungs, high fevers, pneumonia and other infections. Treatment includes regular
transfusions of immunoglobin.

LOAD-DATE: October 01, 1997


                             2277 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           October 1, 1997, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT , Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING CANCER;
THE JAMES TAKES PART IN LEADING RESEARCH

BODY:


   One of every four deaths in the United States results from cancer, which is
why that disease is the most feared by all Americans. This year about 560,000
people are expected to die from it. On the bright side, though, about 7 million
people in this country are cancer survivors.

   A generation ago, there often were stories in the popular press that a cure
for cancer was on the horizon. Of course, it has since become widely known that
the disease takes many forms, necessitating many therapies.

   Since President Nixon declared ''a war on cancer'' in 1971, more than $ 25
billion has been spent on research. Just recently the death rate has turned
downward, but equally as important, scientists' understanding of the disease has
greatly expanded, largely because of government-study grants.

   If there is no silver bullet for cancer, there have been significant medical
advances. Some cancers are curable, and many treatments are less debilitating.
There are disappointing areas, too. The incidence of lung cancer in women and
lymphatic cancers in both men and women continues to rise. Some of the most
promising research is capitalizing on gene therapy, trying to see if a virus
that grows only in cancer cells will infect and kill tumor cells but not harm
normal cells.

   It's satisfying to know that the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital is one of 15
sites worldwide taking part in experimental treatment that replaces a flawed
gene. The hope is that this will benefit patients for whom surgery and radiation
treatment have not worked.

   Seven years ago the gene p53, a tumor-suppressor that controls cell growth,
was discovered. This gene appears in most, but not all, tumors. In the current
experiments, the gene will be injected into recurrent tumors in 78 patients.

   If all goes well, the virus successfully will duplicate in the cancer cells
and destroy them.

   Scientists agree that cancer is a genetic disease. But what they don't
understand completely is what causes people who have inherited normal cells to
develop gene defects that eventually lead to cancer. So the search goes on.

   If some are dissatisfied with the slow progress against this disease, it
would be measurably slower if the federal government had not committed billions
of dollars to research since President Nixon first opened the the faucet.

   With the hundreds of billions spent for weaponry, $ 25 billion plus seems
like little enough to try to defeat the killer of so many Americans.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1997


                             2278 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           September 29, 1997, Monday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL , Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: JAMES STUDY WILL USE GENES TO FIGHT CANCER

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

BODY:


   Doctors are hopeful that an experimental cancer treatment that replaces a
flawed gene will help some patients for whom surgery and radiation have failed.

   By zeroing in on a genetic mistake that occurs in nearly 70 percent of all
cancers, researchers at sites worldwide, including the Arthur G. James Cancer
Hospital, are attempting to treat head and neck cancer from the inside.

   This is the Columbus hospital's first crack at gene therapy.

   ''This study is an extension of all the flurry of activity in genetic
research going on here,'' said Dr. David Schuller, director at the James Cancer
Hospital and principal investigator for the study there.

   In 1990, genetic researchers discovered p53, a tumor-suppressor gene that is
responsible for controlling cell growth.

   When mutation occurs in this gene - known as the ''guardian of the genetic
code'' - cells grow uncontrollably. That can lead to tumors and cancers.

   According to a new publication, The Oncogene and Tumour Suppressor Gene Facts
Book, the incidence of p53 mutation varies from 0 percent in lung tumors to 30
percent to 86 percent in breast cancers, to 97 percent in primary melanomas, or
skin cancers. Mutations have been detected in about 69 percent of head and neck
cancers.

   Sponsored by a French company, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Pharmaceuticals,
researchers at 15 sites in the United States, Europe and Japan will inject the
p53 gene into recurrent tumor sites in 78 patients.

   ''The primary purpose of this study is to see whether the tumor will respond
to direct injection,'' Schuller said.

   The problem with gene therapy has been how to deliver genes to cells. In this
study, researchers are using an opportunistic virus.

   ''The adenovirus is more than just your standard virus,'' said Dr. Judith
Westman, director of the clinical cancer genetics program at the James Cancer
Hospital. ''It attacks cells pretty well and does a good job of getting into
cells. You have to put it in there and get contact with cells to get any
effect.''

   The theory is that the virus will successfully replicate in the cancer cells
and, with the help of p53, destroy those cells before moving on to others.

   Another drug company, Onyx Pharmaceuticals of Richmond, Calif., also is
investigating the effectiveness of injecting the p53 gene into cancer tumors.
Studies sponsored by Onyx include head and neck, pancreatic and ovarian cancers.

   Westman said p53 is a good starting point for gene therapy but said that
countless other gene mutations probably help cancer cells flourish.

   ''It's not the only gene,'' she said. ''But it seems to be one that almost
always has to go wrong for cancer to get going.''

   Another problem could be that gene therapy might not work on all cancers. For
some localized cancers that are easily accessible, such as head and neck
cancers, injections might be the ticket. For others that tend to spread quickly,
repeated injections could prove impractical.

   ''I'm hopeful that gene therapy will work,'' Westman said. ''But I am
somewhat skeptical that it will be the end-all. It has problems, and it won't be
the answer to all cancers.''

   For more information about the study at the James Cancer Hospital, call
800-293-5066.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1997


                             2279 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 29, 1997 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1053 words

HEADLINE: AS THE NUMBER OF ELDERLY SURGES, SO MUST SOLUTIONS FOR WELL-BEING /
THE INTERNATIONAL LONGEVITY CENTER SHARES FACTS, FINDINGS, AND POINTS OF VIEW IN
PREPARING THE WORLD FOR AN AGING SOCIETY.

BYLINE: Michael Vitez, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Japan this fall is likely to pass a new national social insurance plan to
provide long-term care for its aging population, though most Japanese are
skeptical the plan will work.

   European countries - hammered by the world's lowest birth rates - must figure
out how to keep their oldest citizens productive. In France, for instance, if
current retirement laws and trends are not soon changed, 30 percent of the
population will be expected to support the remaining 70 percent. "This is
impossible," said one French official.

   And in 25 years, in nearly every country in the Northern Hemisphere - Russia,
China, all of Europe, the United States and Canada - one in every five people
will be older than 60. Science must find ways to reduce disability in old age
and keep people healthier as they live longer.

   These were some of the facts, findings and points of view expressed recently
at an unusual meeting sponsored by the International Longevity Center, an
organization aimed at preparing the world for an aging society.

   The conference brought together American and Japanese journalists who write
about aging issues, as well as policy experts from both countries and from
France, Britain and the Dominican Republic.

   American policy-makers were impressed that Japan had the social will to
impose a new tax and to finance a social insurance program to provide nursing
home or home care for frail elderly.

   Under the Japanese plan, workers will pay into a social insurance plan that
will give families money to hire home-care workers for frail elderly relatives
so the family caretaker can return to work. But Japanese journalists have low
expectations for the plan: It will be run by local governments, with poor
records of achievement, and demographics indicate there won't be any workers to
hire to care for the elderly.

   Jon Gordon, a professor of geriatrics at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New
York, said that around the world, molecular biologists are diving into research
of aging-related diseases that lead to disability, dementia and chronic illness.
He urged that research dollars be spent more on improving the quality of life in
later years than on extending the lifespan.

   Robert N. Butler, the first director of the National Institute on Aging,
recently cofounded the nonprofit International Longevity Center to focus world
attention on aging issues. Old people must remain productive, he said. "We can't
really afford to have people spend 20 years of life in a claimant or dependent
position."

   Gordon contended that dramatic changes and improvements will come in the next
century, when people will live longer and healthier, then die swiftly. At least
for the people who get the best health care, he said, "you are likely to see
longer periods of functionality, with more rapid decline."

   Those who don't have access to the best health care, however, will endure
years, even decades, of chronic illness - a long, slow decline.

   He predicted that science will "clone and sequence" all genes in the next
several decades and that ways to apply gene therapy will be found in the next
century. "Suppose we find a pattern of vulnerability to heart disease," he
suggested. "We will introduce genes that forestall the disease."

   He predicted that cell therapy will boom, too, another form of
transplantation. Instead of replacing entire organs, doctors "will introduce new
vibrant cells to replace dying or dead cells."

   Robyn Stone, a Georgetown University professor and former U.S. assistant
secretary for aging, contended that "aging is to a great extent a female issue,"
since it is women who live longer and who are all too often impoverished in old
age. Women are also primarily the ones who care for the frailest and sickest,
both at home and in institutions. This is true internationally, she said.

   She also suggested that the whole notion of work and retirement must be
redefined in the next century.

   Butler noted that some Scandinavian countries are trying to give workers a
year-long sabbatical every 10 years as a time to re-evaluate their careers or
simply take a break, instead of working straight through to retirement.

   Francoise Forette, chief of the department of geriatrics at the Hospital
Broca at the University of Paris, stressed that now only one-third of the
population of France over age 50 is still working. In the early 1980s, she said,
France lowered its retirement age to 60. Projecting this into the coming
century, she said, "30 percent of the population will have to support 70 percent
of the population. That's impossible. So we must change something in this
country. But politically it is very hard to raise the retirement age."

   Julia Alvarez, a diplomat to the United Nations from the Dominican Republic,
stressed that the percentages of older citizens are climbing fastest in the
developing world. She pointed out that in poor countries such as hers there is
no safety net for aging citizens, no such thing as social security, and that
poor countries can't afford to let older people be unproductive. Older citizens,
she said, "must be viewed as resources because we don't have the resources to
view them as a burden."

   End-of-life issues were also heavily discussed at the conference. Japanese
journalists indicated that a doctor in Japan recently gave a lethal injection to
a sick and frail patient, a radical act that has received significant media and
public attention.

   Kathleen Foley, director of the Project on Death in America, financed by
philanthropist George Soros, and head of pain and palliative care services at
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York, contended that assisted
suicide nationally and internationally ultimately may be "an economic issue, not
a rights issue." She highlighted statistics showing support for assisted suicide
was lowest among the poor, disabled and elderly.

   Advocates for improving end-of-life care in the United States, Foley said,
interpret the recent Supreme Court ruling on assisted suicide as saying citizens
do have a constitutional right to good palliative or end-of-life care. And she
expected lawsuits on that right to eventually reach the court.

   Many of the nation's nurses, she said, plan to hold a "nursing summit" in the
spring to consider the role of nurses in end-of-life care.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2280 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                   September 28, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1847 words

HEADLINE: Betting on others, triumphing himself; Newhall being honored as
venture capitalist

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Emerging from the University of Pennsylvania in the heady late 1960s, Charles
W. "Chuck" Newhall III briefly fancied himself the next Ernest Hemingway.

   To jump-start the fire and romance of a literary career, Newhall enlisted in
the U.S. Army where he received the Silver Star, Purple Heart and other awards
for his service in the Vietnam War. But in short order he found his writing
skills to be, well, unremarkable.

   Suddenly, his father's career as a professional investor -- a successful one
at that -- in start-up businesses didn't look so bad. After all, he had made his
own mark on history, financially backing ventures in what is now the commercial
rocket industry.

   Today, the 52-year-old Newhall is regarded as arguably one of the most
skillful and successful venture capitalists in the mid-Atlantic region, if not
the nation.

   The Harvard MBA (1971) has honed an acumen for placing money not so much on
sure business winners, but on managers who, as he terms it, "can do the broken,
open-field running" so critical to successfully launching and operating new
business ventures in ferociously competitive environments.

   New Enterprise Associates, the Baltimore-based venture capital outfit that
Newhall co-founded in 1978, has backed more than 300 start-up companies with
more than $ 700 million in investments. More than 100 have gone public. In more
than a few cases, New-hall and his partners at NEA have recruited top talent to
take the helm of a venture they've created and believe has legs.

   Tomorrow evening, the Greater Baltimore Committee, the regional business
round-table group, will honor Newhall for his enduring role in shaping
Maryland's exploding high-technology sector.

   The GBC will bestow on Newhall its Baltimore's Extraordinary Technology
Advocate, or BETA, award at its annual high-technology night. The well-attended
event showcases a diverse array of regional high-technology companies and their
accomplishments.

   Ever the gentleman, Newhall sees the award as shared by his NEA co-founders,
C. Richard Kramlich and Frank Bonsal.

   The award also is recognition, says Newhall, of the venture capital
industry's vital role in helping the region's economy lumber out of its
post-industrial doldrums during the 1970s.

   It was venture capital, he says, that backed a number of information
technology and other high-tech start-ups in the region to help it emerge as a
leading player in the high-technology, life science and health care revolutions.

   "This is really a recognition that venture capital has been a driver of
change in the economy," says Newhall. "Entrepreneurs create the companies that
cause change. Venture capitalists finance that change."

   The former vice president of T. Rowe Price's New Horizons Fund (1974-1977)
has been particularly skillful in finding and backing health care and medical
technology ventures.

   Newhall and NEA have found rich mining in the Maryland-D.C.-Virginia region.

   Among the recent local ventures Newhall and NEA have backed are Elder Health
Inc., among the nation's first efforts to provide managed care for elderly
Medicaid recipients, and Pioneer EyeCare, which is bringing the managed-care
concept to eye specialists.

   The list of now publicly held ventures that Newhall and NEA have championed
in this region includes Integrated Health Services in Owings Mills and Genetic
Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg.

   Some, such as Integrated Health (market cap $ 853 million), a manager of
sub-acute care and rehabilitation centers nationwide, are having a lasting
impact on how medical care is structured, priced and delivered.

   Others, such as Gaithersburg-based Genetic Therapy, which was bought by
Sandoz Pharmaceuticals in 1995 for $ 295 million and is developing gene-therapy
treatments for cystic fibrosis and brain cancer, are pioneering new ground that
could one day dramatically alter medicine.

   While he is bullish about Baltimore's and Maryland's prospects for yet more
start-ups to lead high-technology growth, Newhall believes that business leaders
and elected officials need to start looking at high-technology business
development as a broader, regional (Northern Virginia to New Jersey) phenomenon.

   Were Newhall asked to draft a business plan for attracting new
high-tech-oriented firms to the region and stimulating creation of start-ups, it
would include dumping the state's high-tech incubator program and creating a
round table or "GBC clone" of executives from the 40 or 50 most promising and
fastest growing information-technology, medical technology, biotechnology and
other high-tech outfits. Business and economic development leaders would then
focus on interacting personally with the group often to ensure they are getting
what they need and above all that their companies stay in the region, says
Newhall.

   The reason: It is from these companies and their work forces that other
start-ups will be spawned, a phenomenon from which Silicon Valley and Boston
have benefited. Newhall calls this "spinning off new engines." This would serve
to create what New-hall believes the area lacks -- the "critical mass" of
forward-thinking high-technology companies needed to attract top entrepreneurial
and scientific talent from the nation's educational and high-tech hotbeds.

   "The thing people need to realize is this is a 40-year process and we're in
year 15," notes Newhall.

   Newhall's and NEA's acumen for picking winners has been driven in part by
taking the long view, say executives whose companies have been backed by them.

   The effort has been financially rewarding for Newhall and his partners.
Forbes magazine estimated last year that each of the partners has a net worth of
about $ 20 million.

   NEA's limited partners, which include T. Rowe Price and a number of big
pension and university funds from which the big cash stakes for new deals flow,
have benefited handsomely, too.

   Between 1978 and 1996, NEA's investors have seen an average annual compound
return, after expenses, of about 24 percent, according to NEA.

   That compares with the 14 percent average for the venture capital industry as
a whole, according to Venture Economics Information Services of Newark, N.J.

   NEA estimates that since 1978 about 10 percent of its investments have
failed.

   Newhall estimates that companies that he's helped back at NEA have combined
revenue today of about $ 15 billion annually and combined employment of 200,000.

   Dr. Robert Elkins, founder, chairman and chief executive officer of
Integrated Health, sums up Newhall succinctly:

   "He's one of the country's leading venture capitalists."

   Reasons for Newhall's success, says Elkins: "Chuck always bets on the jockey,
not the horse," and "he always takes the long view."

   Says Michael Steele, Elder Health's chief executive officer, "I've worked
with a lot of VCs in my career, and I've been astonished at the level of
commitment Chuck has made to us."

   Steele says Newhall "has gone far beyond the role" of the traditional VC,
opening doors to business and government contacts in Baltimore, helping the
management team solve problems and hone its mission of bringing down the cost
associated with medical service for the inner- city elderly while dramatically
improving the quality of care.

   "A lot of VCs spend most of their time analyzing your numbers and wanting to
know when you'll go public. There is always pressure for an exit strategy," says
Steele. "Never once have I been asked by Chuck or anyone at NEA when we'll go
public or been pushed to do something outside our mission. They believe in the
concept and us and are in for the long haul."

   Newhall's belief that venture capitalists must bet their money on people not
companies was best exemplified, perhaps, in his and NEA's unflagging support of
Integrated Health in 1990. It was then that the company's money stream was cut
off when the federal Resolution Trust Corp. took over IHS' top lender. Newhall
and NEA, which had backed Elkins in the venture from the beginning, orchestrated
a $ 3.5 million infusion of cash to help IHS meet operating needs and stay
afloat.

   Today, IHS is a powerhouse in the managed care industry, operating 1,000
"mini-hospitals" in 40 states and posting revenue in excess of $ 1.4 billion in
1996.

   "We're a huge success story today, and a good deal of the credit for that
goes to Chuck," says Elkins. "We haven't always seen eye to eye, but that has
never interfered with Chuck's faith in me. In many dark moments for the company,
that has made all the difference."

   What's Newhall's secret to knowing when to hang with a winner and when to cut
losses and bail?

   "People, people, people," says Newhall, whose office in an elegantly
renovated Baltimore brownstone is peppered with an eclectic array of
collectibles and knick knacks, from Bill and Hillary Clinton poster boards to
antique pistols and daggers.

   "The first thing I look for is management. People with a tremendously
successful track record. They have to have more than an idea -- and they have to
understand cash flow,; what it takes to operate under restrained resources
without running out," says Newhall.

   "I like entrepreneurs, people who have the ability to change the way we think
and see the world," says Newhall, who has a deft command of American and
European history and collects Federal period furniture and Impressionists
paintings by Maryland artisans.

   In Newhall's view, people with this entrepreneurial skill are "vastly
different" from professional managers of large companies in traditional
industries.

   For one, they are not averse to risk, says Newhall. Indeed, their very future
is tethered to risk. And, they are able to inspire interest in the venture in
400 people as easily as they inspire four.

   But perhaps the quality they share most of all, says Newhall, is an elusive,
hard to define ability he calls "broken, open field running" in which they can
negotiate the unpredictable nature of a new venture with agility and assurance.

   Newhall says he and his partners also look for companies or ideas that have
large market potential and appear to have the ability to effect auspicious
changes in society.

   The folks at NEA like to call this "riding the next wave" of a paradigm
shift.

   Waves Newhall says he's set his sights on to ride are the eventual extinction
of hospitals as they've existed for the past 50 years and medical entitlements.

   Both, says Newhall, are filled with financial waste, and ripe for technology
and business ideas that can make medical care efficient, yet provide better care
for patients.

   "These are $ 750 billion industries in the midst of change. We're going to
play a role in that," says an animated Newhall.

   Among the recent outfits Newhall and NEA have backed to ride these changes
are Elder Health, the Baltimore-based managed care Medicaid effort, and
MedPartners, which offers physician practice management. The Birmingham,
Ala.-based company went public in 1995.

   Says Newhall: "I love this business. We change the way the world is."

   Pub Date: 9/28/97

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, NANINE HARTZENBUSCH : SUN STAFF, Part of the job: Charles
W. Newhall III takes a call at his Baltimore office. Newhall is considered among
the most skillful and successful of venture capitalists.; PHOTO, NANINE
HARTZENBUSCH : SUN STAFF, Portrait of success: Charles W. Newhall III sits for a
portrait in his office at New Enterprise Associates, which he co-founded in
1978.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1997


                             2281 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          September 25, 1997 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 166 words

HEADLINE: Healing with genes still far off

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Efforts at using gene therapy to treat sick people have been disappointing so
far but are worth pursuing, experts said yesterday.

    Despite newspaper headlines, millions of dollars poured into research and a
lot of raised hopes, not a single person has been cured by giving them new,
healthy genes, they told a conference.

    "The long and short of it is that we have not achieved gene therapy," said
Theodore Friedmann, director of the human gene therapy program at the University
of California in San Diego.

    Nonetheless, Friedmann and other experts said they firmly believed gene
therapy would happen. "We should have an enlightened public debate while the
issue is still remote," he said. "It's fiction now, but it won't be for long."

    But while transgenic animals containing human and other genes had been
created and even bred, work on humans was much slower.

    "Humans are not mice. One cannot breed humans like mice. With mice one can
just put mistakes away - with humans, one cannot," Friedmann said.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2282 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 24, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 985 words

HEADLINE: BioReliance Corp. builds new offices; Firm's growth reflects vibrancy
of state's high-tech industries

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   BioReliance Corp. will begin construction on a new headquarters in Rockville
today -- tangible evidence of the company's fast growth, a trend that has not
gone unnoticed by Wall Street.

   The project also underscores the emergence of Maryland's biotechnology
industry as an important source of growth in the state's high-tech job sector,
say state economic development officials.

   BioReliance, which provides drug testing and manufacturing services to the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries, is just one of several Maryland
biotechnology companies that are expanding.

   Next week, Human Genome Sciences Inc. plans to break ground on a $ 40 million
facility, just a few blocks from BioReliance, to produce new protein-based
drugs.

   A third, MedImmune Inc., already is well into construction on its new $ 50
million drug manufacturing plant in Frederick. The plant will employ 150.

   Chesapeake Biological Laboratories Inc., a Baltimore-based contractor to
biotechnology companies, also is well along on a new $ 12.5 million
state-of-the-art production plant that will boost its capacity fivefold. It is
to open in early 1998.

   "I spent 15 years working in Silicon Valley and I'd have to say this area now
has the same excitement and feel. There is a lot of good things going on in the
biotechnology and high-technology sectors in Maryland," said -Capers McDonald,
BioReliance's president and chief executive officer.

   Montgomery County economic development officials see the Human Genome and
BioReliance projects as the fruit of a deliberate strategy.

   In the mid-1980s, economic development officials identified biotechnology as
a source of future job growth and stability. The county moved ahead with
cultivating the industry by launching the Life Sciences Center, a 300-acre
biotechnology-oriented business and education park. The county had bought the
site in the 1960s, initially expecting to lease land to doctors for professional
offices.

   "We are enormously pleased with the success of the Life Sciences Center,"
said Duk Duong, assistant director of Montgomery County's office of economic
development and the county's coordinator for the life sciences park.

   BioReliance's U.S. research and manufacturing plant is in the park, where it
employs about 300 people, as is Human Genome's headquarters and research
facility.

   The last two undeveloped parcels of land in the 300-acre business park have
recently been leased, and the county expects announcements soon by companies
that have signed on for them, said Duong.

   To ensure BioReliance would choose the Life Sciences Center for its new
headquarters' location, the county agreed to put its building and other permit
requests on a "fast-track" and adjust the zoning to accommodate future
expansion, said Duong.

   Because virtually all land in the park is leased, Human Genome purchased for
its new protein manufacturing facility a 13-acre site in the Johns Hopkins
Belward Research Campus down the street. Hopkins is developing the 138-acre
campus into a health and science research and business park.

   Once fully operational, Human Genome's plant could employ as many as 150,
company executives said. Initially, the plant will employ about 75.

   The state agreed to provide $ 2 million for the project from its Sunny Day
Fund, which is used to attract new companies or to assist existing Maryland
companies in expanding.

   BioReliance, which celebrates its 50th anniversary today, will lease its new
51,000 square-foot headquarters from a developer.

   Flush with more than $ 29 million from a $ 36 million initial public offering
in late July, it's hoping to build a new plant to handle large-scale production
of biologically-based drugs -- a move that would add more jobs.

   The company is close to making a decision on those plans, said McDonald.

   "This is a story of success that goes way beyond the stockholders and
directors," said McDonald.

   One of BioReliance's key strategies is to beef up its capability to
manufacture drugs and other treatments based on viral technology. Gene therapy,
emerging new cancer treatments and treatments for viral diseases are key revenue
growth areas for the company, say analysts.

   Formerly known as MicroBiological Associates Inc., the company counts among
its clients most of the major drug and biotechnology companies in the United
States. The company also has operations overseas.

   The company has experienced steady revenue and income growth recently, thanks
in part to its growing reputation as a reliable service provider and to the
booming need among drug developers for contractors that can test and manufacture
drugs made from living cells and other biological elements.

   BioReliance posted $ 37 million in revenue in 1996, up 25 percent from the
previous year when it posted $ 30 million, according to its prospectus for its
initial public offering

   Income rose also, to $ 1.5 million in 1996, more than double the $ 700,000 it
posted in 1995 -- an off year for earnings, according to analysts covering the
company.

   "BioReliance has a long track record of innovation," Morgan Stanley Dean
Whitter says in a recent report on the company. The analyst sees the company as
"the technological leader" in its field.

   Morgan Stanley projects revenue and earnings to be buoyed even higher by the
explosion in companies needing testing and production of biotechnology-based
drugs, and by company plans to expand viral production capacity.

   Outsourcing of drug testing and manufacturing is expected to swell into a $
650 million market by the year 2000, a 20 percent annual growth rate that in
Morgan Stanley's view favors BioReliance's growth prospects.

   Investors have taken notice of those prospects.

   Since going public at $ 15 share July 29, BioReliance shares have risen more
than 40 percent. They closed at $ 21.375, up 12.5 cents, yesterday.

   Pub Date: 9/24/97

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 1, Capers McDonald, BioReliance's chief executive officer, touts
the state's biotechnology and high-technology sectors.; PHOTO 2, New
headquarters: BioReliance Corp. today will begin the construction of a new
headquarters building in Rockville.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1997


                             2283 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                        September 24, 1997, Wednesday,
                       Correction Appended, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1616 words

HEADLINE: Lives of the Lasker laureates; McKusick: Dr. Victor A. McKusick, the
Hopkins gene pioneer, is a Maine dairyman's son who rose early and worked late.

BYLINE: Frank D. Roylance, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Maybe it was discipline imposed by cold early mornings and the cows waiting
impatiently in his father's dairy barn in Maine.

   Or maybe it is just genetic.

   In either case, Dr. Victor A. McKusick, 75, can't seem to retire or even slow
down after a long career at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. That career has
included the founding of Hopkins' Division of Medical Genetics, and quietly
convincing the world that by cataloging human genes and the maladies they cause,
doctors could discover the nature of the defect in the DNA molecule, and the
means to correct it.

   "I am cutting back," McKusick said wryly in a 10th-floor office at Hopkins
crammed with books and medical journals. "I only work half-days now. Twelve
hours."

   McKusick's work in medical genetics will be honored Friday in New York with
the presentation of the Albert Lasker Award for Special Achievement in Medical
Science.

   The prize, which includes a $ 25,000 honorarium, is considered one of the
most prestigious in medicine. Yet McKusick sought to downplay it, suggesting
that its prestige is in part a product of well-crafted "ballyhoo."

   "Isn't that like Victor to come up with some other explanation other than his
own excellence?" said Dr. Francis Collins, who heads the Human Genome Project at
the National Institutes of Health. He described McKusick as a "humble,
delightful, articulate historian of the whole enterprise. He would be the last
person to promote himself."

   The Lasker Award, Collins said, "is viewed as the most highly prestigious
medical award given in the U.S. It is a launching pad for the Nobel [Prize]. And
with a very impressive nominating committee you don't get on the short list
without a lot of good reasons."

   As the mysteries of many infectious and nutritional diseases have been
solved, what remain are the chronic disorders with genetic origins. So, medical
genetics has emerged in the last decade or two as the central science cutting
across all medical disciplines.

   "In the research lab, no matter what you are studying, the approach is
through molecular genetics," Collins said. "And the advance that's coming in the
next 10 to 15 years is an invasion of clinical medicine of all sorts by medical
genetics as well."

   Whether they are looking at cancer, diabetes, hypertension, asthma, or even
mental illness, doctors will have to incorporate genetic screening and familial
histories into their daily work.

   There is probably no one on the planet who understands better what makes
McKusick run -- and keep on running -- than his twin brother, Vincent.

   Older by 20 minutes, Vincent McKusick retired in 1992 after 15 years as the
chief justice of the Maine Supreme Judicial Court.

   He, too, never stops. He still goes to work every day as counsel to his old
law firm, Pierce Atwood of Portland. And he serves as a master and arbitrator,
including assignments from the U.S. Supreme Court to sit as a master in suits
between states.

   "I think our approach to law and medicine is basically very much the same,"
Judge McKusick said. "We enjoy studying and I think we are both hard workers,
which we learned on a dairy farm where we grew up." Or inherited. Their father,
too, was driven -- a teacher and principal until illness turned him to dairy
farming. He later became a state senator and chairman of the state Board of
Education.

   Dr. McKusick's wife of 48 years, Dr. Carol Anne McKusick, confirmed that her
husband takes his computer, fax machine and his work with him on their annual
summer retreat to their 18th-century farm in Nova Scotia.

   "I don't think you could possibly get him to leave it behind," said Carol
McKusick, a retired specialist in rheumatoid arthritis. "He's keeping up his
'Mendelian Inheritance in Man' [the computerized reference that catalogs
discoveries linking specific human genes with the maladies they cause]. It
requires constant input."

   Even so, she said, he manages to play tennis and pick berries. "It's quite a
change of pace."

   The McKusicks' three children have found their own paces, none of them in
their father's footsteps. Victor Wayne McKusick, 33, is a Presbyterian minister
with a parish in northeast Pennsylvania. Kenneth Andrew McKusick, 34, is an
actuary and rising executive at Monumental Life Insurance in Baltimore.

   Daughter Carol Anne McKusick, 43, is renovating a house on Light Street in
South Baltimore.

   McKusick's thin, grandfatherly form is topped by a thin fuzz of white hair.
Age has bent him a bit, but he brims with energy behind his gold eyeglass frames
and seems to be in constant motion. He is an "almost pathologically compulsive
reader," he said, and rises daily by 5 a.m.

   Speaking with the soft R's of Maine, he said his decision to become a doctor
came at 15, as he lay in a Boston hospital for 10 weeks battling streptococcus
infections in his left armpit and right elbow. The advent of sulfa drugs saved
him. "I saw a lot of doctors, and felt that was for me," he said, absently
rubbing the pale scars on his elbow.

   McKusick arrived at Hopkins in 1943 to attend medical school, and he has been
there ever since. His niche was cardiology, but when his practice and research
brought him to an intriguing intersection with genetics, he took the road less
traveled.

   "He started in medical genetics before anyone else knew there was such a
thing," said Collins. "Then carefully, thoughtfully, persuasively, he began to
catalog a long set of conditions that nobody had ever collected before."

   The key intersection was Marfan's syndrome, a genetic defect that affects the
body's connective tissues. Its victims are typically tall and lanky, and they
harbor a variety of tissue defects in the bones, eyes and lungs. The most
critical is a life-threatening weakness in the aorta -- the major blood vessel
from the heart.

   By documenting in a now-classic text how all the confusing clinical
manifestations of Marfan's could be traced to a single genetic defect, McKusick
illuminated a course for other scientists. They would eventually learn to
recognize such syndromes in families, track down the faulty genes and devise
interventions. For Marfan's patients, that meant heart surgery to head off the
aortic ruptures that usually killed them.

   In 1962, McKusick was drawn to a population of Amish people in Pennsylvania
who suffered from high rates of blood and liver disorders, and dwarfism due to
intermarriage. Working with them, he was able to unravel the genetic origins of
their disorders and define two separate types of dwarfism.

   His studies would lead to the identification of several dozen other forms of
dwarfism, or skeletal dysplasia. McKusick even won honorary membership in the
Little People of America, a fraternal and support group for dwarfs, midgets and
their families.

   In 1956, McKusick created the pioneering Division of Medical Genetics at
Hopkins. At Hopkins, and at his annual graduate program at Bar Harbor, Maine, he
has trained two generations of physicians in the field.

   From 1973 to 1985, he served as the medical school's William Osler professor
and director of the department of medicine, and physician in chief at the Johns
Hopkins Hospital. But he never lost touch with his greatest intellectual love.

   The growing body of data on defective genes and the disorders they caused led
McKusick to compile them in a single volume, first published in 1966, as
"Mendelian Inheritance in Man" (MIM). Its 1,500 original listings have since
grown to 9,000, and the work has been moved to the Internet. McKusick now spends
75 percent of his time updating the reference as new discoveries are reported.

   MIM has become a genetics bible to physicians, Collins said.

   "When I was a fellow in 1981, at Yale, I was learning about medical genetics.
And every time I would go to see a patient, and I would not know what they had,
I would go back to Victor's book and there it was, all laid out for me."

   Today, all over the world, when physicians are stumped by a set of symptoms,
they go to MIM and often they will find the genetic syndrome they're facing, in
detail.

   The value of the compilation led McKusick to propose in 1973 that scientists
set about to map and define all 80,000 human genes. Some critics called it a
waste of time and money. But the idea won the day. The Human Genome Project was
launched in 1990 and is due for completion in 2005.

   Today, discoveries linking specific genes responsible for human illnesses are
reported every few days in the press. The early stories, and the enthusiasm of
some of the researchers, misled both patients and scientists into an expectation
that cures were just around the corner.

   The enthusiasm "was never justified by the scientific data," said Collins, of
the Human Genome Project. "We have seen a mid-course correction in some of the
rhetoric."

   But McKusick said each discovery is "a giant step forward, like landing on
the moon, in understanding the disorder."

   Identification of a defective gene can lead quickly to diagnoses in fetuses,
or in people who do not yet show symptoms. And even before gene therapy becomes
available, McKusick said, scientists may untangle the molecular stages that lie
between a gene and its phenotype, or abnormal expression in the body.

   "If we can figure out the steps between 'gene and phene,' " he said, "we may
be able to determine some way to ameliorate the condition or treat it by
intervening."

   Collins called the current environment "the end of the beginning. When the
history books are written 50 years from now, they will look at this as a real
golden era, a real revolution. And it is people like Victor who set the stage."

   Pub Date: 9/24/97

CORRECTION-DATE: September 24, 1997

CORRECTION:


   The name of Dr. Anne B. McKusick, wife of Lasker Award winner Dr. Victor A.
McKusick, was misstated in yesterday's editions.

   The Sun regrets the errors.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, AMY DAVIS : SUN STAFF, Cutting back: Dr. Victor A.
McKusick says he's reduced his daily workload by half -- to 12 hours.; PHOTO,
AMY DAVIS : SUN STAFF, A long stay: Dr. Victor A. McKusick poses under the dome
of the original Hopkins Hospital. He started medical school there in 1943.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1997


                             2284 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                    September 24, 1997 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-02

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: AIDS gene therapy explored Boulder symposium told of latest efforts

BYLINE: By Ann Schrader, Denver Post Medical Writer

BODY:
 BOULDER - By studying children born with compromised immune systems,
researchers are learning how gene therapy may be used to treat people with AIDS,
a California scientist said Tuesday.

   People might question why it's necessary to find new ways to treat AIDS when
the recent "triple-drug cocktail" seems to be so effective, said Dr. John Rossi
of the City of Hope Beckman Research Institute.

   Rossi told the 300 people attending the 10th annual Colorado Biotechnology
Symposium that the cocktail costs more than $ 20,000 per patient annually and is
highly toxic, and there are some indications of patients developing resistance
to the drugs.

   Gene therapy, which involves implanting genes that are engineered to do what
dysfunctional genes can't, poses numerous challenges, such as finding a good
"vehicle" in which to deliver it.

   Rossi said gene therapy could be used alone or in conjunction with the AIDS
drug cocktail. Studies are continuing.

   "Perhaps we can prolong the lifespan of AIDS patients by 10 to 15 years" so
they can anticipate living as long as noninfected people, Rossi said.

   He made his remarks at the symposium, which was sponsored by the Colorado
Institute for Research in Biotechnology. The forum aims to facilitate the
exchange of ideas among academia, commerce and government.

   Since 1987, the institute has promoted biotechnology research and development
in Colorado and fosters transfer of technology from labs to clinical settings
and businesses.

   As part of its mission, the institute awards seed grants - ranging from $
15,000 to $ 17,500 - to faculty members for projects with commercial potential.

   Dr. Michael Glode, a cancer specialist at the University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, said gene therapy "hasn't really resulted in the kind of
benefit that we'd like to see in cancer patients."

   He and colleagues have been exploring gene-therapy use in malignant melanoma
and prostate cancer. They've run into challenges such as delivery systems, how
effectively the engineered genes express themselves once they're in a patient
and whether the therapy is safe.

   "I will spend the day tomorrow in clinic doing what I've been doing for 20
years," Glode said. "I would very much like to have other alternatives" to offer
patients.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1997


                             2285 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       September 21, 1997, Sunday , FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 4, Part K

LENGTH: 2117 words

HEADLINE: San Antonio Medical Foundation Golden AnniversaryS.A.'s medical center
boasts stars with international glow

BODY: The Alamo City is home to many outstanding researchers and clinicians,
several with national and international achievements. Among the medical center's
brightest stars are:

   PETER T. FOX, M.D., 45, Director, Research Imaging Center,University of Texas
Health Science Center.

   EDUCATION: Graduate, St. John's College, known for "great- books" curriculum;
Georgetown University School of Medicine; postgrad neurology/radiology training,
Washington University.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Fox is a world leader in the field of brain mapping. His
software is used widely to pinpoint areas of the brain involved in normal
functions, from vision and cognition to musical understanding and moods. Also
studying effects of disease on the brain. A major find was identifying
neuron-firing abnormalities in stuttering.

   Fox created a stir by showing the cerebellum, beyond just controlling
movement, is involved in cognition. Currently using magnetic resonance imaging
positron, emission tomography scans and transcranial magnetic stimulation in
ground-breaking diagramming of brain's connecting circuitry. His theory of what
makes neurons run spawned use of MRI to look at brain function.

   FUTURE: The hope is once myriad brain areas and wiring are mapped,
abnormalities can be corrected through surgery, TMS or more effective drugs. Fox
compares present maps of the brain to world maps in Christopher Columbus' day,
with vast continents still uncharted.

   WEN-HWA LEE, Ph.D., 47, Chairman, department of molecularmedicine and the
graduate program of molecular medicine, Universityof Texas Health Science
Center; Alice P. McDermott DistinguishedUniversity Chair; director, Institute of
Biotechnology, UTHSC.  EDUCATION: Master's degree, Institute of Biochemistry,
National Taiwan University; doctorate degree in molecular biology, University of
California at Berkeley.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Arguably, the city's top scientist. Lee drew worldwide
attention when he showed the BRCA1 gene, which in its mutated form is found in
the five percent of breast cancers that are inherited, is also implicated in the
other 95 percent of sporadic, non-inherited types. In these more common breast
cancers, BRCA1 protein normally produced in the center of the cell, is
mislocated.

   His work will help identify potentially aggressive, metastatic tumors early
on, so treatment can be tailored accordingly. Preeminent in the area of tumor
suppressor genes, such as retinoblastoma, Lee's lab was first in the world to
put a tumor suppressor gene back into a cancer cell and suppress tumor
formation, establishing the basis for their use in gene therapy.

   FUTURE: Ever-expanding knowledge of genes holds the most exciting prospects
for preventing cancer or delaying onset, along with better understanding of
environmental factors. Lee says our medical center has an edge because close
ties between basic scientists and clinical researchers are moving advances from
lab to patient faster.

   DANIEL D. VON HOFF, M.D., 50, Chief executive officer and director,Institute
for Drug Development, Cancer Therapy & Research Center.

   EDUCATION: Graduate of Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons; internal
medicine residency, University of California at San Francisco; subspecialty
training, National Cancer Institute. Came to the health science center in 1979;
joined the CTRC in 1988.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Because of Von Hoff and his team, medical oncologists around
the world cite the CTRC and the health science center as tops in development of
new cancer therapies. From petri dish testing to Phase I clinical trials in
patients, through Phase III trials and presentation to the Food and Drug
Administration for approval, the CTRC has developed many drugs, including: Taxol
for ovarian, breast and lung cancers and Kaposi's sarcoma; gemcitabine for
lymphoma and pancreatic, bladder, breast, ovarian and head and neck cancers; and
Taxotere for breast and lung cancers.

   FUTURE: The word is prevention. As genetic testing progresses, the
award-winning Von Hoff says medicine will be able to predict who is going to get
breast, lung or other cancers. Just as we control hypertension now, lowering the
incidence of strokes, we will be able to give cancer-risk patients daily
medication to prevent it.

   C. FREDERICK LEMAISTRE, M.D., 43, Director, South Texas Cancer Institute at
Methodist Hospital; clinical associate professor, Universityof Texas Health
Science Center.

   EDUCATION: Southwestern Medical School; postgraduate training at Parkland
Hospital, Dallas, and UTHSC.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Beginning in the 1980s at the UTHSC and the V.A. Hospital,
now at Methodist, he has built state-of-art bone marrow transplant services for
desperately ill patients in South and Central Texas. Fifteen years ago, doctors
drew 30 ounces of bone marrow from a patient for a transplant, a process
requiring monthlong hospitalization. Now, in an outpatient procedure involving
as little as eight teaspoons of bone marrow, colleague Dr. Carlos Bachier and
LeMaistre are doing the once impossible - growing it outside the body by seeding
"mother" stem cells in a high-tech bioreactor. In two weeks, they grow enough
bone marrow for a transplant.

   FUTURE: LeMaistre foresees the day when bone marrow cells can be manipulated
and engineered in a number of ways. Instead bombarding them with lethal
chemotherapy, cancers may be cured by through genes or stimulating the body's
own immune cells to fight the disease. MARENDA

   SUSAN A. MARENDA, M.D., 34, Otology/neorotology privatepractice specialist,
affiliated with Methodist Hospital; member of theboard of Sunshine Cottage for
Deaf Children.

   EDUCATION: Creighton University School of Medicine; residency in
otolaryngology, University of Texas Health Science Center; fellowship in
otology/neurotology, Texas Neurosciences Institute/Ear Medical Group.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: An expert in hearing disorders and vertigo, Marenda is the
only woman in Texas practicing in this small subspecialty, often working with
neurosurgeons in cranial nerve procedures for balance disorders and surgery on
tumors at the back of the brain. In addition to cochlear implants for profoundly
hearing-impaired children and adults, she performs microvascular decompression
surgery to relieve the pain of tic douloureux, removing part of trigeminal nerve
and blood vessels pounding on it, without harming nerve function.

   FUTURE: As technology progresses, she looks ahead to less invasive techniques
and better interoperative monitoring during surgery to preserve more function.
Already, with improved stereotactic surgery techniques, neurotology surgeons can
use an imaging wand to get a three-dimensional look at brain stem tumors and
location of important nerves.

   JAMES HEVEZI, Ph.D., 57, Director of medical physics, CancerTherapy &
Research Center.

   EDUCATION: Doctorate degree in nuclear physics, Notre Dame University;
postdoctoral studies, National Institutes of Health, University of Wisconsin.
Joined the CTRC in 1992.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Patients whose tumors were previously unapproachable now can
be treated, thanks to a combination of the AcQsim Spiral CT Simulator, using the
latest in virtual reality, and the Peacock IMRT System radiation planning and
treatment delivery systems. Hevezi helped bring these high-tech tools together,
establishing the CTRC as the only center in the world with the combination.

   FUTURE: The goal is to pick up disease before it's clinically evident, saving
lives through hottest technology. Hevezi is working on partnering with the
University of Texas Health Science Center's Research Imaging Center. Fiber optic
network will allow radiologists to overlay MRIs from the imaging center onto the
AcQsim system CT images, producing the precise@information about patients'
tumors needed to deliver more effective treatment doses.

   DR. ARNOLD B. VARDIMAN, M.D., 34, Private practice neurologicalsurgeon,
affiliated with Texas Neurosciences Institute and MethodistHospital.

   EDUCATION: University of Texas Southwestern Medical School; residency, UT
Southwestern Medical Center; specialty training, Barrow Neurologic Institute.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Using sophisticated computer technology and highly precise
imaging techniques, Vardiman gives Parkinson's disease patients, not helped by
medication, vastly improved quality of life through several updated,
stereotactic surgeries. Patients with tremors get relief from this devastating
degenerative disease through a thalamotomy, which destroys part of the thalamus.
Vardiman and teams of surgery specialists allow neurological patients be treated
locally.

   FUTURE: Less-invasive tools and best-possible outcomes. The gamma knife due
here next March is a non-surgical treatment tool that focuses radiation on
tumors and vascular malformations in the brain. Also coming, a neuronavigation
system with computer-generated images giving the surgeon extreme precision in
sparing healthy structures around intracranial tumors and malformations.

   SUSAN L. NAYLOR, Ph.D., 48, Professor, department of cellular andstructural
biology and director of the Human Genome Center, theUniversity of Texas Health
Science Center; associate director of SanAntonio Cancer Institute.

   EDUCATION: Master's degree, Johns Hopkins University; doctorate, UT Medical
Branch at Galveston; postdoctoral studies, Roswell Park Memorial Institute, N.Y.



   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: Naylor is an international leader in the Human Genome
Project, looking specifically at genes damaged by cancer. Played key role with
other scientists in mapping Chromosome 3. In a major find, Naylor's team
identified a tumor suppressor gene on Chromosome 3 that stops a cancerous tumor
from growing. The Suppressor gene information will aid in early diagnosis and
future treatment design. Naylor is also active in educating people about the
complex implications of genetic predisposition to breast cancer or other
cancers.

   FUTURE: Naylor predicts the Human Genome Project will be completed before
projected date, 2005. She looks beyond identifying and locating genes to viewing
the whole person and how, even with the presence of "bad" genes, some illnesses
can be prevented, partly through lifestyle changes.

    DR. BRADFORD E. WINDLE, Ph.D., 42, Researcher, departmentof cancer biology,
Cancer Therapy and Research Center; assistantprofessor, University of Texas
Health Science Center.

   EDUCATION: Doctorate degree in molecular biology, University of Maryland;
postdoctoral studies, Salk Institute for Biological Studies. Joined CTRC in
1990.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: A basic- science researcher in chromosome stability,
telomeres and telomerase, he was the first to study them in targeting cancer.
Telomeres are a DNA sequence at the end of the chromosome. As cancer cells
rapidly grow, they deplete telomeres, making the chromosome unstable and
thwarting the cancer cell. To get around that, the cancer cell starts producing
telomerase, an enzyme that grows telomeres. The cancer cell eventually becomes
immortal. Windle is part of a group developing several telomerase-inhibiting
drugs to block this process so the cell dies.

   FUTURE: If cancer cells learn how to get around telomerase inhibitors,
scientists may use gene therapy to devise a more subtle strategy of making the
telomerase produce an abnormal telomere. But prevention is the ultimate goal.
Telomerase science one day may block cancer before it develops - "a whole new
horizon to tackle," Windle says.

   C. KENT OSBORNE, M.D., 51, Division Chief, medical oncology,University of
Texas Health Science Center; director, Breast CancerProgram, San Antonio Cancer
Institute.

   EDUCATION: University of Missouri Medical School, residency at Johns Hopkins;
came to UTHSC in 1977 after stint as clinical associate, Medicine Branch of the
National Cancer Institute.

   ACCOMPLISHMENTS: A much- honored researcher with an international reputation,
Osborne has put San Antonio on map with work on prognostic and predictive
factors in breast cancer. Studied the mechanism of how anti-estrogen tamoxifen
works on tumors and how tumors become resistant to it, he is currently, involved
in research on new anti-estrogen, faslodex, that even works in
tamoxifen-resistant patients.

   FUTURE: Osborne and team are trying to identify sporadic, or non-hereditary,
genes that change normal breast cells, first into benign abnormalities, like
hyperplasia, then into cancer. State-of-science technologies help determine
which genes on which chromosomes are responsible. If they can predict patient at
high risk for cancer, very specific treatment can be designed.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1998


                             2286 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                          September 20, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: New York Weekend; Pg.  22

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: LAB NOTES

BYLINE: Compiled by News Staff

BODY:


   El Nino's one big baby

   Signs tracked by satellites in space show that the globally disruptive
weather phenomenon could well live up to its stormy billing: Its mass of warm
water in the Pacific Ocean has grown to 11/2 times the size of the continental
United States, and other data mean the Southwestern states could well be pounded
with winter storms.

   In May, when scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena
announced that satellite images showed a brewing El Nino, the warm mass was
two-thirds its current size.

   Worldwide weather experts said 1997-98 could bring the worst El Nino in 150
years.

   "As the satellite has mapped El Nino across the Pacific, what we've seen
continually throughout the summer and into September now is that early
indications actually have persisted and intensified," said Bill Patzert, a
research oceanographer at the lab.

   Vancouver's trip north

   Seventy-five million years ago, travel agents would have hawked it as the
ideal beach vacation: sun, sand, the soothing Canadian surf.

   According to a new study, the Vancouver Island region of British Columbia
once lay nearly 2,000 miles to the south at the latitude of present-day Baja
California. Instead of cold and rainy Canada, this chunk of land basked in
southern climes until it was ripped northward along a huge fault.

   So concludes a team of researchers led by paleontologist Peter Ward of the
University of Washington in Seattle.

   Chromosome closeup

   Scientists have revealed for the first time the elementary structure of the
chromosome in atomic detail.

   The discovery by Timothy Richmond and a team of researchers at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology provides a crucial clue to understanding how
chromosomes are put together and may lead to improved human gene therapy.

   Chromosomes, which are found in the nucleus of every cell, are present in all
organisms and contain the genes that determine the characteristics of an
individual.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1997


                             2287 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 19, 1997, Friday, ARUNDEL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: Research links defective gene to leading cause of blindness; It makes
possible a test for macular degeneration

SOURCE: LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


   Researchers have identified a gene that causes age-related macular
degeneration, the leading cause of blindness in the United States.

   Identification of the gene, reported in today's edition of the journal
Science, should eventually lead to the first treatments for the disorder,
possibly including gene therapy, but it may produce more immediate benefits,
experts said.

   The course of the disease is known to be accelerated by exposure to smoking,
sunlight and high-cholesterol foods, and screening for the gene would identify
individuals who should avoid such risky behavior.

   As many as 1.5 million Americans have severely impaired vision caused by
age-related macular degeneration, or AMD, and more than 10 million others are
thought to be in the early stages of the disease.

   The gene, called ABCR, was first identified earlier this year as the cause of
Stargardt disease, a familial form of the disorder in which blindness usually
develops by age 20.

   Now, a team from the National Cancer Institute and the University of Utah
have found that at least one in every six elderly people with macular
degeneration carries a defective form of the gene.

   "This exciting discovery is the first solid evidence that AMD is, at least in
part, a genetic disease, contrary to the common misconception that it is purely
a consequence of aging and undetectable in early life," said Gerald J. Chader,
chief scientific officer of the Foundation Fighting Blindness.

   "This finding has far-reaching implications for current AMD patients and
their families, as the door has been opened for the further discovery of
treatments and methods of prevention," he added.

   AMD damages the macula, the center portion of the retina that enables the eye
to look straight ahead and see fine detail. As people with AMD lose the ability
to read small print and distinguish other visual details, they have to rely on
their peripheral or side vision.

   Approximately 80 percent of AMD cases are the "dry" form, which begins with
white spots -- formed by bits of debris called drusen -- on the retina. As the
drusen accumulates, it causes a slow, progressive loss of vision. This form
cannot be treated with medication or surgery, but magnifying and telescopic
lenses can help salvage eyesight.

   The rest of the patients have the "wet" form, which is more severe. In wet
AMD, abnormal blood vessels grow under the retina and uproot it. The detached
retina and blood leaking from the vessel impair central vision. Laser treatment,
if performed early, may stop the blood-vessel growth and minimize or delay the
loss of eyesight.

   Dr. Richard A. Lewis of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston has been
looking for the AMD gene since 1985. Because the disease occurs so late in life
and has a complex genesis, he concentrated on Stargardt disease, which affects
about 25,000 Americans. Its symptoms are virtually identical to those of the dry
form of AMD, but it develops about 50 years earlier in life.

   Lewis, geneticist Mark Leppert of the University of Utah and molecular
geneticist Michael Dean of the National Cancer Institute's Cancer Research and
Development Center in Frederick, Md., reported in March that they had found the
gene, which is called ATP-binding cassette transporter-retina or ABCR.

   Although they do not yet know its precise function, they believe the protein
produced from the gene carries substances across membranes in the retina, the
light-sensitive portion of the eye.

   Having found the gene in Stargardt, they then tested 167 AMD patients -- 96
from Utah and 71 in Boston. To their surprise, they found that 26 of the
patients, or 16 percent, had a mutation in their ABCR gene.

   Pub Date: 9/19/97

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1997


                             2288 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 19, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: Leading cause of blindness linked to defective gene

SOURCE: LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


   Researchers have identified a gene that causes age-related macular
degeneration, the leading cause of blindness in the United States.

   Identification of the gene, reported in today's edition of the journal
Science, should eventually lead to the first treatments for the disorder,
possibly including gene therapy, but it may produce more immediate benefits,
experts said.

   The course of the disease is known to be accelerated by exposure to smoking,
sunlight and high-cholesterol foods, and screening for the gene would identify
individuals who should avoid such risky behavior.

   As many as 1.5 million Americans have severely impaired vision caused by
age-related macular degeneration, or AMD, and more than 10 million others are
thought to be in its early stages.

   The gene, called ABCR, was first identified earlier this year as the cause of
Stargardt disease, a familial form of the disorder in which blindness usually
develops. Now, a team from the National Cancer Institute and the University of
Utah have found that at least one in every six elderly people with macular
degeneration carries a defective form of the gene.

   Pub Date: 9/19/97

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1997


                             2289 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      September 19, 1997 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-05

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: Gene linked to eye disorder

BYLINE: By Thomas H. Maugh II, Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   Researchers have identified a gene that causes age-related macular
degeneration, the leading cause of blindness in the United States.

   Identification of the gene, reported in today's edition of the journal
Science, should eventually lead to the first treatments for the disorder,
possibly including gene therapy, but it may produce more immediate benefits,
experts said.

   The disease is known to be accelerated by exposure to smoking, sunlight and
high-cholesterol foods, and screening for the gene would identify individuals
who should avoid such risky behavior.

   As many as 1.5 million Americans have severely impaired vision caused by
age-related macular degeneration, or AMD, and more than 10 million others are
thought to be in the early stages of the disease.

   The gene, called ABCR, was first identified earlier this year as the cause of
Stargardt disease, a familial form of the disorder in which blindness develops
by age 20.

   Now, a team from the National Cancer Institute and the University of Utah
have found that at least one in every six elderly people with macular
degeneration carries a defective form of the gene.

   "This exciting discovery is the first solid evidence that AMD is, at least in
part, a genetic disease, contrary to the common misconception that it is purely
a consequence of aging and undetectable in early life," said Gerald J. Chader,
chief scientific officer of The Foundation Fighting Blindness.

   AMD damages the macula, the center portion of the retina that enables the eye
to look straight ahead and see fine detail. As people with AMD lose the ability
to read small print and distinguish other visual details, they have to rely on
their peripheral or side vision.

   Approximately 80 percent of AMD cases are the "dry" form, which begins with
white spots - formed by bits of debris called drusen - on the retina. As the
drusen accumulates, it causes a slow, progressive loss of vision. This form
cannot be treated with medication or surgery, but magnifying and telescopic
lenses can help salvage eyesight.

   The rest of the patients have the "wet" form, which is more severe. In wet
AMD, abnormal blood vessels grow under the retina and uproot it. The detached
retina and blood leaking from the vessel impair central vision. Laser treatment,
if performed early, may stop the blood-vessel growth and minimize or delay the
loss of eyesight.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1997


                             2290 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                    September 19, 1997, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1014 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS LINK DEFECTIVE GENE TO LEADING CAUSE OF BLINDNESS IN U.S.;


 HEALTH: DISCOVERY COULD OPEN WAY TO TREATMENT OF AGE-RELATED MACULAR
DEGENERATION, WHICH SEVERELY IMPAIRS VISION OF UP TO 1.5 MILLION.

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Researchers have identified a gene that causes age-related macular
degeneration (AMD), the leading cause of blindness in the United States.

   Identification of the gene, reported today in the journal Science by
researchers from Utah, Texas and Maryland, should eventually lead to the first
treatments for the disorder, possibly including gene therapy, but it may produce
more immediate benefits, experts said. The course of the disease is known to be
accelerated by exposure to smoking, sunlight and high-cholesterol foods, and
screening for the gene would identify individuals who should avoid such risky
behavior.

   As many as 1.5 million Americans have severely impaired vision caused by AMD
and more than 10 million others are thought to be in the early stages of the
disease.

   The gene, called ABCR, was first identified earlier this year as the cause of
Stargardt disease, a familial form of the disorder in which blindness usually
develops by age 20.

   Now, a team from the National Cancer Institute and the University of Utah
have found that at least one in every six elderly people with macular
degeneration carries a defective form of the gene.

   "This exciting discovery is the first solid evidence that AMD is, at least in
part, a genetic disease, contrary to the common misconception that it is purely
a consequence of aging and undetectable in early life," said Gerald J. Chader,
chief scientific officer of the Foundation Fighting Blindness.

   "This finding has far-reaching implications for current AMD patients and
their families, as the door has been opened for the further discovery of
treatments and methods of prevention," he added.

   AMD damages the macula, the center portion of the retina that enables the eye
to look straight ahead and see fine detail. As people with AMD lose the ability
to read small print and distinguish other visual details, they have to rely on
their peripheral, or side, vision.

   Approximately 80% of AMD cases are the "dry" form, which begins with white
spots--formed by bits of debris called drusen--on the retina. As the drusen
accumulates, it causes a slow, progressive loss of vision.  This form cannot be
treated with medication or surgery, but magnifying and telescopic lenses can
help salvage eyesight.

   The rest of the patients have the "wet" form, which is more severe. In wet
AMD, abnormal blood vessels grow under the retina and uproot it. The detached
retina and blood leaking from the vessels impair central vision.  Laser
treatment, if performed early, may stop the blood-vessel growth and minimize or
delay the loss of eyesight.

   Dr. Richard A. Lewis of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston has been
looking for the AMD gene since 1985. Because the disease occurs so late in life
and has a complex genesis, he concentrated on Stargardt disease, which affects
about 25,000 Americans. Its symptoms are virtually identical to those of the dry
form of AMD, but it develops about 50 years earlier in life.

   Lewis, geneticist Mark Leppert of the University of Utah and molecular
geneticist Michael Dean of the National Cancer Institute's Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center in Frederick, Md., reported in March that they
had found the gene, which is called ATP-binding cassette transporter-retina or
ABCR.

   Although they do not yet know its precise function, they believe the protein
produced from the gene carries substances across membranes in the retina, the
light-sensitive portion of the eye.

   Having found the gene in Stargardt patients, they then tested 167 people with
AMD--96 from Utah and 71 in Boston. To their surprise, they report today in
Science, they found that 26 of the patients, or 16%, had a mutation in their
ABCR gene. That was "mind-blowing," Leppert said.

   Twenty-five of 134 patients with dry AMD had a mutation in the gene, compared
to only one of 33 with the wet form.

   The researchers now believe that individuals with two copies of the mutated
ABCR gene--one from each parent--develop Stargardt disease, while those with
only one copy develop age-related macular degeneration.  Clearly, there are
other genes or environmental agents that can cause the disease as well, Dean
said.

   While researchers continue to look for other causes of AMD, the new finding
has sparked a variety of research. Because they found a variety of mutations of
ABCR in the 26 patients, Leppert's team is attempting to correlate the nature of
the mutation with age of onset and progression of the disease.

   Other researchers are attempting to produce mice with a defective version of
the ABCR gene or with no ABCR gene at all, to determine its normal function.

   According to Chader, preliminary gene therapy experiments in animals
sponsored by the foundation have delayed retinal degeneration, suggesting that
will be a useful approach in humans as well.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2291 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     September 19, 1997 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: STUDY FINDS GENE LINKED TO LEADING CAUSE OF BLINDNESS

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II; LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   Researchers have identified a gene that causes age-related macular
degeneration, the leading cause of blindness in the United States.

   Identification of the gene, reported in today's edition of the journal
Science, should eventually lead to the first treatments for the disorder,
possibly including gene therapy, but it may produce more immediate benefits,
experts said.

   The course of the disease is known to be accelerated by exposure to smoking,
sunlight and high-cholesterol foods, and screening for the gene would identify
individuals who should avoid such risky behavior.

   As many as 1.5 million Americans have severely impaired vision caused by
age-related macular degeneration, or AMD, and more than 10 million others are
thought to be in the early stages of the disease.

   The gene, called ABCR, was first identified earlier this year as the cause of
Stargardt disease, a familial form of the disorder in which blindness usually
develops by age 20.

   Now, a team from the National Cancer Institute and the University of Utah has
found that at least one in every six elderly people with macular degeneration
carries a defective form of the gene.

   "This exciting discovery is the first solid evidence that AMD is, at least in
part, a genetic disease, contrary to the common misconception that it is purely
a consequence of aging and undetectable in early life," said Gerald J. Chader,
chief scientific officer of the Foundation Fighting Blindness.

   AMD damages the macula, the center portion of the retina that enables the eye
to look straight ahead and see fine detail. As people with AMD lose the ability
to read small print and distinguish other visual details, they have to rely on
their peripheral or side vision.

   Approximately 80 percent of AMD cases are the "dry" form, which begins with
white spots - formed by bits of debris called drusen - on the retina. As the
drusen accumulates, it causes a slow, progressive loss of vision. This form
cannot be treated with medication or surgery, but magnifying and telescopic
lenses can help salvage eyesight.

   The rest of the patients have the "wet" form, which is more severe. In wet
AMD, abnormal blood vessels grow under the retina and uproot it. The detached
retina and blood leaking from the vessel impair central vision. Laser treatment,
if performed early, may stop the blood-vessel growth and minimize or delay the
loss of eyesight.

   Dr. Richard A. Lewis of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston has been
looking for the AMD gene since 1985. Because the disease occurs so late in life
and has a complex genesis, he concentrated on Stargardt disease, which affects
about 25,000 Americans. Its symptoms are virtually identical to those of the dry
form of AMD, but it develops about 50 years earlier in life.

   Lewis, geneticist Mark Leppert of the University of Utah and molecular
geneticist Michael Dean of the National Cancer Institute's Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center in Frederick, Md., reported in March they had
found the gene, which is called ATP-binding cassette transporter-retina or ABCR.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1997


                             2292 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        September 19, 1997 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: METAIRIE PRIEST IS TEST SUBJECT FOR GENE THERAPY;
1ST CANCER PATIENT TO GET TREATMENT

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   With the push of a hypodermic needle and the twist of a knob at the bottom of
a clear IV bag, a Metairie priest on Thursday became the first American to start
an experimental form of gene therapy for the rare cancer that threatens to kill
him.

   "This is it. This is what we've waited for," Dr. Scott Freeman said as the
first of 100 million genetically altered cells started dripping directly into
the Rev. John Vaughn's chest. Their target: the tumor that has attacked the
outer lining of the 71-year-old man's left lung.

   The cells which Freeman, a Tulane University researcher, prepared were
injected into a saline solution to make sure none stuck to the walls of the
whisker-thin intravenous catheter. Although Vaughn and the scientists had waited
weeks for the final federal approval to start the trial, the actual process took
less than an hour.

   Saying he felt nothing, Vaughn lay in his bed in Charity Hospital's General
Clinical Research Center while television crews recorded the event, their lights
turning the tiny room toasty warm.

   "It's almost a prosaic anticlimax," he said.

   Thursday's infusion was the first step of a regimen that will last about a
week, said Dr. Jay Kolls, director of the gene-therapy program at Louisiana
State University Medical Center.

   Vaughn received ovarian cancer cells that Freeman rendered harmless through
irradiation. They were used because they have a tendency to home in on the
cancer cells and bind to them, said Kolls, a pulmonary critical-care specialist.

   Once binding occurs, an enzyme is formed.

   Starting today, Vaughn will receive daily infusions of ganciclovir, an
anti-viral drug, for a week or so. The drug and the enzyme are supposed to
create a combination toxic to the cancer cells, and researchers hope it will
revitalize Vaughn's immune system.

   The test is the first stage of a process that could lead to federal approval
of the treatment for mesothelioma, a cancer that attacks fewer than 3,000
annually in the United States. Because conventional cancer therapy does not
work, life expectancy after diagnosis is generally less than two years, said Dr.
Paul Schwarzenberger of LSU Medical Center, the project leader.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1997


                             2293 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                     September 19, 1997 Friday, ST. TAMMANY

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: METRO BRIEFS - NEWS FROM AROUND THE REGION

BODY:

   Water information on tap with database

   Water quality experts will have a new way to measure pollutants in the
Mississippi River, a major source of drinking water in south Louisiana, thanks
to a database recently compiled by scientists at Tulane University. By combining
information from 34 agencies and sources, scientists now have information on the
river from the past four decades, said William George, director of toxicology at
the Tulane School of Medicine. George instigated the database project, along
with other scientists from Tulane University, the Tulane/Xavier Center for
Environmental Research and Louisiana State University. The database's range goes
from Memphis, Tenn., to the mouth of the Mississippi, he said. More than 400
water quality features and compounds can be accessed through the program, which
took three years to create, he said. "This is a real opportunity for people to
look at this data and ask the right questions," George said.

   EAST JEFFERSON

   It's a boy, a boy, a boy and a boy

   A Long Beach, Miss., couple more than doubled its family within one minute,
when Jennifer Schmermund gave birth to four boys by Caesarean section Wednesday
at Ochsner Foundation Hospital in Jefferson Parish. The boys, Logan, 3 pounds,
12 1/2 ounces; Taylor, 3 pounds, 10 ounces; Cameron, 3 pounds, 4 1/2 ounces, and
Kyle, 4 pounds, 9 1/2 ounces, were born in that order at 2:57 p.m. One of the
infants is having a few complications, but his three brothers have been given a
clean bill of health, doctors said.

   Cancer therapy begins for priest

   With the push of a hypodermic needle and the twist of a knob at the bottom of
a clear IV bag, a Metairie priest on Thursday became the first American to start
an experimental form of gene therapy for the rare cancer that threatens to kill
him. "This is it. This is what we've waited for," Dr. Scott Freeman said as the
first of 100 million genetically altered cells started dripping directly into
the Rev. John Vaughn's chest. Their target: the tumor that has attacked the
outer lining of the 71-year-old man's left lung. The cells which Freeman, a
Tulane University researcher, prepared were injected into a saline solution to
make sure none stuck to the walls of the whisker-thin intravenous catheter.
Although Vaughn and the scientists had waited weeks for federal approval to
start the trial, the process took less than an hour.

   WEST BANK

   Kenner teen charged in killing

   A 17-year-old Kenner youth was charged with second-degree murder Thursday by
a Jefferson Parish grand jury. Bron Webber was indicted in the shooting death of
Torrence Stokes, 23, also of Kenner, who was killed while attending a Sweet 16
party at the Veterans of Foreign Wars Hall at 2114 Kenner Ave. on July 25. A
witness told police that Webber ran up to a crowd, hollered "who hit my cousin"
and then shot Stokes. The grand jury also charged Elton "Al" Edwards, 45, of
Gretna, with theft of a turbine engine owned by Shell Offshore Inc.

   Garbage rates may go up

   The landfill company whose low prices prevented a long-feared Jefferson
Parish garbage rate increase is for sale before collecting its first ton of
waste, raising questions about whether residents will continue to enjoy monthly
rates among the lowest in the New Orleans area. John Sexton Sand & Gravel Corp.,
which won a hard-fought battle for the parish's 14-year landfill contract last
September, is up for sale to pay inheritance taxes after the death of family
matriarch Eileen Sexton, company executives said. If Sexton is sold, the buyer
would take over construction of a new 122-acre section of the parish landfill,
scheduled to open in January. The possible sale has sent ripples of concern
through government circles because it's unclear whether competitors can match
Sexton's deal.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1997


                             2294 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 18, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 24A

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Scientists reveal atomic structure of chromosome; Discovery might lead
to improved gene therapy

SOURCE: REUTERS

BODY:


   LONDON -- Scientists revealed for the first time yesterday the elementary
structure of the chromosome in atomic detail.

   The discovery by Timothy J. Richmond and a team of researchers at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology provides a crucial clue to understanding how
chromosomes are put together and might lead to improved human gene therapy.

   Chromosomes, which are found in the nucleus of every cell, are present in all
organisms and contain the genes that determine the characteristics of an
individual.

   Biologists James Watson and Francis Crick identified the molecular structure
of DNA, the basic building block of life, 44 years ago. Deoxyribonucleic acid
forms part of the chromosome and acts as a carrier of the genetic information.

   Richmond and his team have taken a giant step forward by showing the atomic
structure of the nucleosome core, the fundamental repeating unit of chromosomes.

   "What we have done is show where all the atoms are. We have determined its
atomic structure," Richmond explained in an interview.

   "The reason it's important is because in all higher cells, everything but
bacteria, whether it be yeast, or elephants or man or whatever, this is how the
DNA is organized in a cell nucleus," he said.

   Richmond said the atomic structure tells scientists how chromosomes are put
together and how the DNA is organized, and could lead to further advances in
biology and medicine.

   The nucleosome core is also the fundamental unit of chromatin, which has been
seen to be very important in repressing genes.

   "On the other hand, if you want to use the gene, one of the first steps, it
seems, is to change the structure of the chromatin so you can get at the DNA,"
Richmond said.

   In a report in the journal Nature, Richmond and his team described how they
used X-ray crystallography and synchrotron radiation to get the high-resolution
structure.

   They had to make a synthetic nucleosome to have a DNA sequence, which allowed
them to make crystals giving X-ray patterns that showed more detail of what was
going on.

   They solved the structure of the nucleosome core, the largest protein/DNA
complex for which an atomic image has ever been produced.

   Pub Date: 9/18/97

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1997


                             2295 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 18, 1997, Thursday, City Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 432 words

HEADLINE: Partners, Genzyme cut alliance deal;
Wide-ranging collaboration on research, clinical trials set

BYLINE: By Jerry Ackerman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge and Partners HealthCare System Inc. yesterday
said they have agreed to collaborate on a broad range of scientific research and
clinical trials.

   The agreement could include testing new Genzyme drugs on patients in
Partners' two major Boston teaching hospitals, Massachusetts General and Brigham
and Women's.

   Spokesmen for Genzyme, a major biotechnology company, and Partners, Boston's
largest medical care organization, said the agreement was unusual for its
breadth.

   Hospitals and drug companies routinely form alliances, many of them worth
millions of dollars, for research into specific diseases and therapies by
designated doctors or medical teams.

   In contrast, the collaboration between Genzyme and Partners names 10 broad
fields of medicine. "The major difference," David K. Stone, a biotechnology
analyst at Cowen & Co. in Boston, said, "is that this collaboration is being
organized at an institutional level, between Genzyme as a whole and Partners
HealthCare as a whole."

   Partners and Genzyme said their agreement runs for two years, carries no
payment aside from a $ 300,000 grant from Genzyme for administrative costs, and
is nonexclusive.

   The nonexclusivity clause means Partners could make similar agreements with
other pharmaceutical companies, and Genzyme is free to do the same with other
hospitals.

   The medical fields named in the pact include oncology, orthopedics, tissue
repair, genetic metabolic diseases, surgical research, genetics, gene therapy,
cardiovascular genetics, neurology and neuroscience.

   Dr. Eugene Grunwald, vice president for academic programs at Partners, said
10 staff physicians who also hold senior faculty appointments at the Harvard
Medical School will participate in the program at the outset.

   "We at Partners will be able to get access to some exciting new products at a
very, very early stage and do some important experiments," Grunwald said. And
"they will have access in return to some very strong scientists and scientific
research that our people are doing," he added.

   Cheryl Greenhouse, a Genzyme spokeswoman, said the company has no drug trials
currently scheduled under the agreement. But she said "access to Partners'
patient population, which is enormous," was high in the company's mind as terms
were being negotiated.

   Genzyme also will sponsor researchers' seminars and sabbaticals.

   In addition to the two major Boston teaching hospitals, Partners operates the
North Shore Medical Center in Salem and several specialty hospitals and has its
own network of primary care physicians.

CORRECTION-DATE: September 19, 1997

CORRECTION:
CORRECTION: Because of a reporting error, an article in yesterday's Business
section had the name of the vice president for academic programs at Partners
HealthCare System Inc. misspelled. His name is Dr. Eugene Braunwald.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1997


                             2296 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 18, 1997, Thursday, City Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Partners, Genzyme cut alliance deal;
Wide-ranging collaboration on research, clinical trials set

BYLINE: By Jerry Ackerman, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge and Partners HealthCare System Inc. yesterday
said they have agreed to collaborate on a broad range of scientific research and
clinical trials.

   The agreement could include testing new Genzyme drugs on patients in
Partners' two major Boston teaching hospitals, Massachusetts General and Brigham
and Women's.

   Spokesmen for Genzyme, a major biotechnology company, and Partners, Boston's
largest medical care organization, said the agreement was unusual for its
breadth.

   Hospitals and drug companies routinely form alliances, many of them worth
millions of dollars, for research into specific diseases and therapies by
designated doctors or medical teams.

   In contrast, the collaboration between Genzyme and Partners names 10 broad
fields of medicine. "The major difference," David K. Stone, a biotechnology
analyst at Cowen & Co. in Boston, said, "is that this collaboration is being
organized at an institutional level, between Genzyme as a whole and Partners
HealthCare as a whole."

   Partners and Genzyme said their agreement runs for two years, carries no
payment aside from a $ 300,000 grant from Genzyme for administrative costs, and
is nonexclusive.

   The nonexclusivity clause means Partners could make similar agreements with
other pharmaceutical companies, and Genzyme is free to do the same with other
hospitals.

   The medical fields named in the pact include oncology, orthopedics, tissue
repair, genetic metabolic diseases, surgical research, genetics, gene therapy,
cardiovascular genetics, neurology and neuroscience.

   Dr. Eugene Grunwald, vice president for academic programs at Partners, said
10 staff physicians who also hold senior faculty appointments at the Harvard
Medical School will participate in the program at the outset.

   "We at Partners will be able to get access to some exciting new products at a
very, very early stage and do some important experiments," Grunwald said. And
"they will have access in return to some very strong scientists and scientific
research that our people are doing," he added.

   Cheryl Greenhouse, a Genzyme spokeswoman, said the company has no drug trials
currently scheduled under the agreement. But she said "access to Partners'
patient population, which is enormous," was high in the company's mind as terms
were being negotiated.

   Genzyme also will sponsor researchers' seminars and sabbaticals.

   In addition to the two major Boston teaching hospitals, Partners operates the
North Shore Medical Center in Salem and several specialty hospitals and has its
own network of primary care physicians.

CORRECTION-DATE: September 19, 1997

CORRECTION:
CORRECTION: Because of a reporting error, an article in yesterday's Business
section had the name of the vice president for academic programs at Partners
HealthCare System Inc. misspelled. His name is Dr. Eugene Braunwald.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1997


                             2297 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          September 18, 1997 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Discovery gives hope for improved gene therapy

BYLINE: Patricia Reaney, REUTERS

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   Scientists revealed for the first time yesterday the elementary structure of
the chromosome in atomic detail.

    The discovery by Timothy J. Richmond and a team of researchers at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology was reported in the scientific journal Nature.
It provides a crucial clue to understanding how chromosomes are put together and
may lead to improved human gene therapy.

    Chromosomes, which are found in the nucleus of every cell, are present in
all organisms and contain the genes that determine the characteristics of an
individual.

    Biologists James Watson and Francis Crick identified the molecular structure
of DNA, the basic building block of life, 44 years ago. DNA forms part of the
chromosome and acts as a carrier of the genetic information.

    Richmond and his team have taken a giant step forward by showing the atomic
structure of the nucleosome core, the fundamental repeating unit of chromosomes.

    "What we have done is show where all the atoms are. We have determined its
atomic structure," Richmond explained in an interview.

    "The reason it's important is because in all higher cells, everything but
bacteria, whether it be yeast, or elephants or man or whatever, this is how the
DNA is organized in a cell nucleus."

    Richmond said the atomic structure tells scientists how chromosomes are put
together and how the DNA is organized, and could lead to further advances in
biology and medicine. The nucleosome core is also the fundamental unit of
chromatin, which has been seen to be very important in repressing genes.

    "On the other hand, if you want to use the gene one of the first steps it
seems is to change the structure of the chromatin so you can get at the DNA,"
said Richmond.

    In the report, Richmond and his team described how they used X-ray
crystallography and synchrotron radiation to get the high resolution structure.

    They had to make a synthetic nucleosome to have a DNA sequence that allowed
them to make crystals giving X-ray patterns that showed more detail of what was
going on.

   They solved the structure of the nucleosome core, the largest protein/DNA
complex for which an atomic image has ever been produced.

    "This is a real tour de force of biochemistry," Daniela Rhodes of the MRC
Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England, said in an accompanying
article in Nature.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2298 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 17, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: OncorMed lands screening deal; It will conduct p53 testing of cancer
patients; Medicine

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   OncorMed Inc. said yesterday that it has landed a deal to provide genetic
screening in one of the most advanced efforts yet to correct a genetic defect
that is considered a leading trigger for the spread of cancer.

   Gaithersburg-based OncorMed, which provides genetic testing services, will
gather a broad range of genetic information on patients with untreatable head
and neck cancer being enrolled in a trial to correct what's known as the p53
gene.

   RPR Gencell, a division of pharmaceutical giant Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, and
Introgen Therapeutics Inc., an Austin, Texas-based biotechnology company, are
jointly sponsoring the trial.

   They plan to analyze the information to see how genetic traits influence p53
gene treatment, said John Abrams, a spokesman for Rhone-Poulenc Rorer.

   Dr. Leslie Alexandre, vice president for corporate affairs at OncorMed, said,
"This is further validation for including genetic information as an important
part of gene therapy trials."

   Alexandre declined to disclose how much the deal with Rhone-Poulenc Rorer is
worth, but said it was seen by OncorMed as a big boost.

   The publicly held company lost $ 7.5 million on $ 600,000 in revenue in 1996.
Collegeville, Pa.-based Rhone-Poulenc Rorer earned $ 473.5 million on $ 5.4
billion in revenue last year.

   It has under way a major research effort into gene therapy. "This is our
first deal with a major pharmaceutical company on a cancer related trial. So for
us, it's a major step forward," said Alexandre.

   Among the information OncorMed will gather is which patients have a defective
p53 gene, and what happens to the gene after treatment, said Abrams.

   About 80 patients are being enrolled in the trials nationwide and will
receive a gene therapy treatment that has been shown in laboratory and small
human studies to result in tumor regression.

   RPR Gencell and Introgen plan to jointly launch the human trials using
Introgen's gene therapy product to correct p53 gene defects.

   The companies have a $ 50 million agreement to co-develop and market a p53
gene therapy treatment for cancer.

   Mutations of the p53 gene are the most common genetic defect found in human
cancers. Medical researchers have found that the p53 gene operates as a watchdog
against cancerous cell growth. However, if the gene is defective, it loses its
tumor suppressing ability, and cells divide out of control.

   Like other biotechnology companies attempting to develop treatments to repair
or replace the p53 defect, RPR and Introgen plan to load healthy p53 genes into
a common virus that causes colds but has been disabled.

   The viruses will then be injected into tumors.

   Abrams said RPR Gencell and Introgen were not disclosing which hospitals or
clinics had signed on to treat and monitor patients in the study.

   Introgen said it plans to launch smaller human trials of the p53 gene therapy
treatment in Europe and Japan next year. OncorMed said it will provide patient
testing for those trials as well.

   OncorMed also has a contract with Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Richmond,
Calif., to gather genetic information on cancer patients being treated with its
experimental p53 gene therapy, said Alexandre.

   Pub Date: 9/17/97

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1997


                             2299 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   September 15, 1997, Monday, S-TIER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 1183 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY STOCKS ARE NOT FOR THE FAINTHEARTED INVESTOR

BYLINE: JIM PUZZANGHERA; Knight-Ridder

BODY:


   The headlines from the world of biotechnology are astounding -- Adult Mammal
Is Cloned, Flu Pill Set for Human Testing, Firm Alters Virus to Kill Cancerous
Cells in Mice -- and you're thinking of placing a bet on the next medical
miracle.

   But before purchasing that hot new stock, remember one thing about the
biotech industry -- it's as volatile as pro basketball player Dennis Rodman on a
bad-hair day.

   All stocks rise and fall with news developments. But because biotech revolves
around small companies, complex biology, the hush-hush world of scientific
research and a lengthy product-approval process, a company's stock is
particularly vulnerable, industry analysts said.

   Biotech stocks often spike way up on big news, only to drop back down again
in a few days. So jumping on a company's bandwagon following one of those
astounding headlines can be a big mistake.

   "People don't understand how long the product development cycles are and how
risky it is, and they tend to respond overoptimistically to good news and
overpessimistically to bad news," said Cindy Robbins-Roth, editor of BioVenture
View, a biotech industry newsletter. "If you're going to play in this realm, you
have to do your homework."

   Check out a chart of the annual returns for Fidelity's biotechnology mutual
fund -- a broad-based fund that includes biotech big boys Genentech and Amgen as
well as pharmaceutical giant Schering Plough. It could be the blueprint for the
next thrilling ride at an amusement park: up 99 percent in 1991, down 10 percent
in '92, up 0.7 percent in '93, down 18 percent in '94, back up 49 percent in
1995, up 6 percent in '96. And up only about 3.3 percent so far this year, which
reflects the industry's volatility.

   What started out as a promising year -- the American Stock Exchange's biotech
index was up about 16 percent into late February, outpacing the Standard &
Poor's 500 -- turned sour amid fears of interest rate hikes and the overall
market correction.

   Before the year ends, there will probably be more tantalizing biotech
headlines. But odds are nothing will duplicate the splash a small Scottish
biotech company caused in February -- or the wild stock ride it set off.

   Researchers working with PPL Therapeutics PLC made history with the
announcement they had cloned an adult sheep. The company's stock shot up 65
percent over the next three days on the London exchange amid the hysteria about
a brave new world of customized human clones.

   But slowly, people began to realize that PPL Therapeutics, which owned
patents on the cloning process, was in the less sensational business of trying
to produce drugs in the milk of sheep and other animals.

   "That announcement really didn't add any value to the company," said James
McCamant, editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   The stock began to drop four days after the news, and three weeks later it
had given back nearly all of that initial gain.

   For reasons like that, experts say the biotech industry is not for the
fainthearted investor -- and the best strategy is a biotech mutual fund or a
diversified portfolio.

   "You never want to put all your eggs in one basket, even more so for a
volatile area like biotech," said Doug Lind, a biotech analyst at the investment
banking firm Morgan Stanley.

   Further amplifying the impact of major biotech news, he said, is that a lot
of people buy a company stock at a lower price in anticipation of a major
announcement. If the news is good, they'll watch the stock price rise and then
sell, sending that price back down, he said.

   Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc., of La Jolla, Calif., jumped 6.3 percent when
the Food and Drug Administration approved the company's AIDS drug Viracept.
Great news, right?

   "A lot of people sold (Agouron stock) on that news," trying to quickly cash
in on the FDA's approval, Lind said. They made money, but people who bought
Agouron that day had to watch as the stock then dropped 13 percent over the
following two weeks.

   Because biotechnology sits at the intersection of business and science, the
industry in many cases is hostage to the methodical processes of publishing
scientific research.

   In most cases, a company cannot simply announce when its researchers have
made a breakthrough. Those research results must be compiled and submitted to
groups of other scientists in a time-honored process known as peer review.

   Those scientists -- experts in a particular field but unconnected to the
company research -- review results for presentation at a scientific conference
or for publication in a science journal. Without peer review, a breakthrough is
not considered a breakthrough.

   The process is slow, and most journals will not publish the research if it
has been written about in detail in any other publication -- including
newspapers. So key biotechnology research often remains unknown to the world at
large for months after it has been completed.

   When major news is finally released and grabs public attention, it can shoot
the stock sky-high -- particularly for a small company with only a couple of
potential drugs.

   Hollins C. Renton, chief executive of Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Richmond,
Va., found out firsthand last fall. Research from his company was published in
the journal Science showing Onyx had genetically altered a type of human cold
virus to kill many hard-to-treat types of cancerous tumors in mice while sparing
healthy cells.

   The news was potentially a major advance in the field of gene therapy for
cancer and made front-page news around the country.

   "This idea of taking a common respiratory virus and modifying it so it will
only go in and kill cancer cells has a lot of popular appeal," Renton said. "It
did get a lot of coverage, probably more than a lot of other discoveries,
because of the novelty."

   The news led desperate cancer patients and their families to flood Onyx with
calls and led thousands of investors to buy Onyx stock. Shares shot up 59
percent the day the news broke -- from $ 10 to $ 15.88.

   The stock started dropping the next day, and several weeks later the price
was actually below where it started -- it closed at $ 9.88. It has hovered
around $ 10 since.

   Biotech's history is replete with tales of wild stock rides, soaring highs
and precipitous plunges. A good year for the industry, said Rachel Leheny of the
investment banking firm Hambrecht & Quist, means the market is up 100 percent. A
bad year can be almost as bad in the other direction.

   Onyx tried to control expectations in talking to the media about its
research, Renton said, stressing the tests were done only in animals and any
therapy would be years away. But he said understanding is limited outside the
biotech industry of how complicated it is to turn research into a product.

   "These are very volatile stocks. In general, people should not put their
savings into these kind of stocks. They have to have discretionary income if
they're going to invest," Renton said. "As excited as I am about Onyx, and as
heavily invested in it as I am, I don't recommend Onyx."

GRAPHIC: chart-The Biotech Bounce

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1997


                             2300 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    September 12, 1997, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A28

LENGTH: 491 words

HEADLINE: Scientists see leukemia virus finding as aid in gene therapy

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Scientists at the Whitehead Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital have
made a key discovery about how a leukemia-causing virus infects mouse cells, a
finding they believe can be used to turn the virus into a vehicle for human gene
therapy.

   The murine leukemia virus is a staple for scientists who are trying to attach
desired genes to hollowed-out viruses so the viruses can be used to carry genes
into defective cells. The technique of adding healthy genes to human cells,
although still in its early stages, holds promise for treating a wide variety of
diseases.

   The two Boston-area teams report today in the journal Science that they have
obtained a three-dimensional atomic picture of the virus's "binding domain," a
molecular structure analogous to a key that fits into a lock-like protein on the
cell the virus is infecting. They said it is the first detailed structural view
of a retrovirus's binding part.

   Retroviruses, of which the best known example is the AIDS virus, invade cells
and inject their genetic blueprints into the DNA of the host cell, which then
copies the foreign genetic material along with its own. This inherent trait
makes retroviruses useful for carrying desired genes into human cells; they have
been used, for example, in the experimental treatment of children with severe
genetic immune deficiencies.  But it had been impossible to "address" the virus
so that it targets a particular kind of cell.

   Now, the teams headed by Peter Kim at the Whitehead and Dr. James Cunningham
at Brigham and Women's have given scientists a better shot at doing this. They
have determined the structure of a part of the protein on the surface of the
leukemia virus that enables it to recognize and bind with structures on the host
mouse cell. The matching structures can be compared to the compatible docking
hatches that allow astronauts to move from a spacecraft to a space station.

   The binding domain on the mouse leukemia virus is relatively generic, Kim
said, so that the virus can bind to the receptors on most rodent cells. For gene
therapy, "you want to be able to target certain cells - cancerous ones or blood
cells or immune cells, for example - and the obstacle has been, how do you build
specificity into the virus?" he said.

   Kim said the research should make it easier for scientists to design protein
parts that could be attached to the virus's "key" so that it matches only
specific cell receptors. That would vastly improve the virus's use as a gene
therapy vehicle.

   Cunningham said the important step came when the scientist Robert Davey found
a way to make very pure crystals of the protein. Then the scientists in Kim's
lab, led by Deborah Fass, used X-ray equipment to determine the positions of all
the atoms in the protein. While the research is still a long way from
reprogramming the virus for particular cellular targets, Cunningham said, "It
has brought the problem into focus."

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1997


                             2301 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                  September 10, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 820 words

HEADLINE: GenVec in major drug accord; Warner-Lambert pact on diseases of heart
valued at $ 100 million; Pharmaceuticals

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Rockville-based GenVec Inc. and consumer health care giant Warner-Lambert Co.
said yesterday that they have struck a deal worth an estimated $ 100 million to
jointly develop a gene therapy product to treat common cardiovascular diseases.

   The deal with Warner-Lambert's Parke-Davis pharmaceutical division is the
first collaboration GenVec has struck with a major pharmaceutical house, and it
is a sign of growing recognition among some major drug companies that gene
therapy may have promising medical applications.

   Privately held GenVec, launched in 1993, is developing gene therapies for
cancer, cystic fibrosis and cardiovascular diseases, the nation's No. 1 killer.

   Under the agreement, Parke-Davis, based in Morris Plains, N.J., will take an
equity stake in GenVec and have the option to buy additional shares should
GenVec go public.

   It will also fund a five-year research effort aimed at bringing a product
called BioByPass to market by early in the next decade.

   The agreement includes an undisclosed signing payment to GenVec. The company
will receive additional payments upon achieving specific research and
development milestones, said Dr. Paul Fischer, GenVec's president and chief
executive officer.

   Parke-Davis gets the rights to market BioByPass worldwide, except in Asia.
GenVec retains manufacturing rights.

   The companies did not disclose how much of an equity position Parke-Davis is
taking or how much money has been pledged to further research and development of
BioByPass.

   "The terms of this deal reflect a very large product opportunity," Fischer
said.

   According to an annual survey of hospitals nationwide, 990,000 people in the
United States undergo surgical procedures to relieve blocked coronary arteries.

   An estimated 6 million others suffer symptoms considered early warning signs
of blocked arteries. GenVec officials believe BioByPass may also hold promise
for treating the millions of diabetics suffering from vascular problems, a
common complication of their disease.

   Wendell Wierenga, senior vice president for worldwide pre-clinical research
development and technologies at Parke-Davis, said the company has high hopes for
BioByPass.

   "We are very excited about the broad potential applicability of this novel
therapeutic approach for a variety of important medical needs," Wierenga said.

   The focus of the deal involves Parke-Davis and GenVec jointly developing
BioByPass, a promising new way to treat heart and vascular diseases stemming
from a condition known as ischemia.

   Ischemia primarily results when oxygen-carrying blood flow is blocked by fat
buildup in arteries, according to medical experts. The condition can be painful.

   BioByPass, which GenVec has tested on pigs, is a genetically altered virus
loaded with a gene that stimulates the body to produce a protein known as
vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF. It is responsible for triggering
new blood vessel growth.

   The treatment is designed to be injected into a diseased area and to trigger
blood vessel growth locally.

   Other biotechnology companies are attempting to develop cardiovascular
disease drugs to stimulate VEGF and blood vessel growth. One hurdle: how to
localize a drug's effect.

   In animal testing, Fischer said, BioByPass has been shown to stimulate blood
vessel growth locally.

   The approach, Fischer said, is based on the body's natural response to
ischemia -- forming new blood vessels to carry oxygen and nutrients to the heart
and other areas of the body where blood flow is blocked by arteries dammed by
fat deposits.

   Fischer said he envisions BioByPass being used in conjunction with surgery
and to treat patients who are too sick with blocked arteries to be candidates
for surgery.

   The companies expect to seek Food and Drug Administration approval late this
year to start human trials early in 1998 to assess the safety of the therapy,
Fischer said. Larger human trials may be launched in 1999, he said, if all goes
well in the early trials.

   Coronary heart disease and coronary artery disease today are typically
treated with surgical procedures, such as angioplasty and bypass surgery.

   Development of new drugs and therapies for cardiovascular diseases is one of
Parke-Davis' top research priorities, said Jeff Blaum, a spokesman for the
company.

   Parke-Davis has about 15 research alliance agreements with emerging
biotechnology companies, though the GenVec agreement is the company's first deal
involving genetic therapy.

   While there are a number of gene therapy products in clinical trials, mostly
for cancers, hurdles to development have been high.

   The BioByPass product differs from most of the other gene therapies in
development in that it does not seek to alter or replace a defective gene
triggering a disease.

   It seeks, instead, to use a gene to further stimulate the body's natural
responses to disease.

   Pub Date: 9/10/97

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1997


                             2302 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 10, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: Medical causes personal for some stars

BYLINE: Richard Peterson

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES -- Air Force One landed on movie screens in
grand style: big plane, big star (Harrison Ford), big price tag
($ 85 million) and eventually, big ticket sales ($ 159.3 million
so far).

   That's great news for any movie executive, but for Air Force
One producer Jon Shestack, the film's success brings something
more, something closer to his heart: a chance to use his moment
in the limelight to focus attention on autism, a neurological
disorder with no cure, which affects his 5-year-old son, Dov.
Autism causes severe impairment in language and communication
-- half of the 400,000 Americans who have it cannot speak.


   Complete with Hollywood types and floodlights, the Los Angeles
movie premiere of Air Force One raised $ 250,000 for Cure
Autism Now, or CAN, a foundation set up by Shestack and his wife,
Portia Iversen, to raise money and awareness.

   "I think of Air Force One as an $ 85 million trailer for
a CAN benefit," Shestack says. CAN, starting out with a handful
of families in 1995, now has 10,000 members across the USA.

   Not content with just attending charity events, as most celebs
do, a handful of them like Shestack and Iversen take their involvement
in medical causes a giant step further.

   Driven by the illnesses and deaths of family and friends, or suffering
from a disease themselves, these celebrities have formed or joined
medical charities with the same determination they used to build
careers. Taking on medical troubles has almost become a second
job for celebrities like Mary Tyler Moore, Bob Saget, Joan Rivers,
Sheryl Lee Ralph and Shelley Fabares.

   A famous figure can bring in millions of dollars for a charity,
says Daniel Borochoff, president of the Washington-based American
Institute of Philanthropy, and also can bring invaluable attention.
"So many media outlets are celebrity driven," he says.

   Americans donate more than $ 150 billion a year to charities, Borochoff
says. Continuing fund-raisers are crucial to causes such as muscular
dystrophy, beneficiary of the annual Jerry Lewis telethons, and
St. Jude's Children Research Hospital, started by the late actor
Danny Thomas and now headed by his daughter Marlo.

   "It would be a shame if we didn't take advantage of a super-generous
community," Shestack says of the entertainment industry.

   The producer also takes advantage of his savvy movie-making skills,
needed for lobbying efforts on Capitol Hill. Shestack has testified
before Congress to make sure more resources are routed to the
National Institutes of Health for autistic research.

   "Jonathan's strength is that he has a tremendous command of knowledge
regarding autism," says Carol Sprouse, a CAN adviser and physician
at Children's Medical Center in Washington, D.C. "And his driving
force is to find the answers."

   Shestack and Iversen first learned about autism in 1994, when
Dov was diagnosed. Before that, Dov began showing symptoms of
the illness, developing slower than peers and having staring spells.
Their only son was lost in his own world, and the parents stood
by helpless, unable to pull him out.

   "When we first found out, it was so shocking that we didn't tell
anyone for six months," Shestack says.

   Soon after the diagnosis, Dov began several therapy treatments
and slow progress was made; he eventually learned to nod his head
and perform simple tasks.

   With new developments in gene therapy, mental disorders are the
next frontier for researchers, Shestack says. "There will be
a whole new generation of treatment for them in the next 15 years.
I really believe that."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1997


                             2303 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   September 9, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 16A, LETTERS

LENGTH: 984 words

HEADLINE: Serendipity does work, but needs financial support

BODY:


   Your Aug. 28 editorial pointing out the importance of serendipity in
scientific research is right on target. Serendipity has played a higher role
than many people realize in scientific and medical advances that have changed
our lives.

   In 1928 Alexander Fleming discovered a mold "contaminating" his lab cultures
of staphylococci, a mold that changed the world -- now known as penicillin.

   In 1983, while driving a twisting, moonlit road, a California scientist named
Kary Mullis suddenly realized that nature's process of replicating DNA could be
accelerated the same way that time-lapse photography of a flower blooming can be
compressed from 24 hours to 20 seconds. This technique, called polymerase chain
reaction (PCR), has revolutionized the field of molecular biology, making the
identification of disease genes and gene therapy possible.

   More recently, while trying to develop a cholera vaccine, my own research
group inadvertently discovered a secondary toxin produced by the cholera
bacteria. Called Zot, the protein turned out to be the key that unlocks a
natural gate in the intestines. It showed us a new and effective way to deliver
insulin and other injectable drugs by mouth.

   Serendipity has been the touchstone of many a medical advance. But without
adequate funding for basic science research -- laboratory research on cells,
molecules and genes -- serendipity can lead us nowhere.

   As the great scientist Louis Pasteur, the father of pasteurization, said,
"Chance favors the prepared mind." If we as a society aren't doing the basic
research that reveals the underlying mechanisms of health and disease, we as
researchers aren't going to be prepared to take advantage of serendipity when it
occurs.

   Alessio Fasano, M.D.

   Baltimore

   The writer is professor of pediatric gastroenterology at the University of
Maryland School of Medicine.

Israel wrongly cast as the villain

   Jonathan Power's Aug. 29 article, "Losing war for peace in Middle East,"
reflects a blindness to reality that stems from ignorance or prejudice or both.

   To Mr. Power, the villains are the democratically elected government of
Israel and the "American Jewish lobbies" and the innocent victims are Yasser
Arafat and the Palestinians.

   Mr. Power is either unaware of or chooses to ignore the following: In the
Oslo Accords that Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed in
1993, the PLO pledged to fight terrorism. Since these accords, more than 250
Israelis have been murdered and more than 1,000 have been wounded and maimed by
Arab terrorists.

   In these accords, the PLO recognized Israel's right to exist. The PLO still
has not changed its covenant, which denies Israel's right to exist and advocates
"armed struggle to liberate Palestine," a geographic term that, to the PLO,
encompasses Israel.

   In these accords, the PLO pledged to refrain from anti-Israel propaganda.
Yasser Arafat, senior PLO officials and the PLO-controlled media (newspapers,
radio, and television) are producing a constant stream of extremely vitriolic
anti-Israel propaganda, including the praising of terrorists as "martyrs" and
the description of the terrorist bombings as "military operations."

   Harry L. Rashbaum

   Baltimore

World ban needed on land mines

   Since the death of Princess Diana, we have learned of the many good causes in
which she was involved. Not the least of these causes was the global ban on
anti-personnel mines.

   During the past several years, the media have not been remiss in portraying
the ghastly effects of this horrendous military practice, and so there are few
of us who would not agree with the princess and support this ban. I was shocked
therefore to see in the Sept. 3 edition of The Sun the headline "U.S. seeks
exception for defensive land mines in Korea."

   Land mines kill or wound 26,000 people a year, about 80 percent of them
civilians, often decades after a conflict has ended. Under any conditions these
weapons should be outlawed in their entirety with no exceptions.

   Can any military objective outweigh the horrors that these mines will someday
inflict? I doubt it. Or is our concern mitigated by Korea's lack of proximity.
How would we Americans feel if the mines were being installed across our own
"fruited plains"?

   William F. Eckert

   Ellicott City

Can't force those who refuse to learn

   In reference to Gregory Kane's Sept. 3 column ("Frustration, anger drive
teacher from city schools"), I would like to say that Baltimore City public
schools have no education problems. They have massive social and economic
problems, which should be somebody else's responsibility.

   The definition of education is the systematic dispensation of knowledge by
those who are qualified to teach to those who are willing to learn.

   Note the emphasis on "willing."

   We have a duty to give every willing child an education. We swear no oath to
force it upon the unwilling.

   They may join us whenever they wish.

   John G. Barry

   Baltimore

Bing was no refugee on these shores

   The headline of the Sept. 4 editorial, "Rudolf Bing, immigrant," struck me as
odd. Bing was "invited" to head the Metropolitan and I do not see how you can
call "obscure" somebody who had organized the Edinburgh Festival.

   Immigrants arrive here in many ways, and unquestionably their contributions
as well as those of their descendants have been enormous.

   To stick to New York and music, we can cite the example of Leonard Bernstein,
who was the child of immigrants and yet was hailed as the first American-born
music director of the New York Philharmonic. All previous ones were foreigners
and invited.

   Bing was certainly a great man, but to mold our immigration laws by his
example is at best dangerous. Immigrant is one thing, refugee another and
invited artist or scientist still another.

   Peter C. Sotiriou

   Baltimore

   Pub Date: 9/09/97

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, (RUDOLF BING)

TYPE: COLUMN, LETTER

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1997


                             2304 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                          September 8, 1997 Monday All

SECTION: Health and Science Pg. 2

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may help to combat AIDS
 An HIV-positive girl is the first child to try the experimental treatment

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: Los Angeles

BODY:

   Around 2 p.m. Aug. 28, at Childrens Hospital, a 13-year-old girl infected
with the virus that causes AIDS became the first child to undergo experimental
gene therapy to combat the disease.

   That is when registered nurse Beth Haden inserted an IV line into the girl's
arm, turned the stopcock and let flow into her bloodstream half a liter of warm
fluid containing genetically engineered cells from her own bone marrow.

   Medical scientists extracted those cells earlier that week from her pelvic
bone, and then endowed them with genetic material intended to hinder the growth
of the AIDS virus, HIV.

   The girl became infected as an infant from an HIV-contaminated blood
transfusion, said Donal Kohn, a pediatric immunologist, who conducted the study
with Josephe Church, an AIDS specialist.

   Her parents "understand that they are participating in research, and that
there is only a remote possibility that it will help their child," Kohn said.
"But I think emotionally they're hoping she'll be lucky."

   Kohn said the experiment posed little risk to the girl, who is healthy and
attends school, and that the worst was over the general anesthesia she received
during the bone marrow extraction. There was only a slight chance that she would
have an allergic reaction to the genetically engineered cells, he said.

   The girl is the first of five children with HIV disease that the Childrens
Hospital scientists are planning to study.

   The strategy of the gene therapy is to confuse the virus at a crucial stage
in its reproduction. The engineered marrow cells harbor a bogus shred of virus
genetic material that it uses to put itself together. If HIV gets into those
engineered cells and tries to replicate, it may end up using the genetic decoy
instead of the real thing. That will jam the virus assembly line and curb the
infection.

   The scientists tested the techniques on human cells in test tubes, showing
that marrow cells endowed with the decoy genetic material were protected from
HIV infection. Kohn said the experiment is supposed to determine if the
technique is feasible in people and whether, for instance, the engineered cells
will even take root in the girl's bone marrow.

   The scientists will sample her blood for tests each month for two years.

   The experiment comes at a time when HIV drugs have gained notoriety for
extending many patients' lives. The girl, Church said, has been taking such
medications and will continue doing so.

   But the success of drug therapies shouldn't make people complacent, he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1997


                             2305 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    September 7, 1997, Sunday, ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. 06B

LENGTH: 1055 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE WATCH;
HARD CHOICES;
Men must do their homework before deciding how to fight prostate cancer;
---which can be treated several ways, but still kills nearly 42,000 Americans a
year.

BYLINE: Bill Hendrick; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Hosea Williams has felt terror many times in his life: the March day in 1945
when he was shot by a German soldier; on the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma,
Ala., in 1965, when blood of civil rights marchers "flowed like water."

   But he's never felt as scared as he did a few weeks ago, when doctors told
him he has prostate cancer and needed to have his prostate gland surgically
removed ---possibly leaving him impotent or incontinent.

   For Williams, and thousands of other men each year, the question of what to
do after a prostate cancer diagnosis is daunting and confusing. While great
strides have been made over the past decade in diagnosing prostate cancer, a
cure remains elusive and appropriate treatment ---typically surgery,
chemotherapy or radiation ---varies from patient to patient.

   For some ---typically younger men with early-stage prostate cancer ---surgery
is the best option for survival. But because it renders as many as one in three
men incontinent and 30 percent to 50 percent impotent ---at least temporarily
---many are choosing other, less aggressive options.

   For the moment, Williams has elected to simply monitor the cancer ---an
approach known as "watchful waiting." Because prostate cancer is often
slow-growing, especially in older men, doctors are increasingly recommending
"watchful waiting" ---until the cancer becomes life-threatening.

   But even for patients like Williams, who says he'd rather die than become
impotent or incontinent, watchful waiting is no easy solution. "It definitely
won't be surgery," says Williams, 72, of the choice he'll make. "I enjoy life
and I still enjoy sex, and I'd rather be dead than impotent and wearing a
diaper."

Questions, confusion

   There is no simple, uniform answer to the question of how to treat prostate
cancer, says Dr. Patrick Walsh, urologist-in-chief at Johns Hopkins Hospital in
Baltimore and a top authority in the field. All men can do for now is seek
several doctors' opinions, read about the disease, and take the recommendation
of the physician they trust most, Walsh says. Dr. Harry Clarke of Emory
University says the uncertainty is a serious problem because it may keep men
from seeking a doctor's attention. And once the cancer advances beyond early
stages and spreads to other parts of the body, a man's treatment choices narrow.


Another big problem is public awareness of the disease.

   Prostate cancer has only recently become the focus of media campaigns and
significant public attention. It has also garnered far less research funding
than higher-profile diseases. The government's National Cancer Institute, for
instance, has spent $ 376 million on prostate cancer research since 1990,
compared with $ 1.8 billion on breast cancer. Prostate cancer will kill 41,800
men this year, compared with 43,900 women who will die of breast

cancer.

   Until about a decade ago, prostate cancer was virtually unknown among the
public.

   But that's beginning to change, says Dr. Rick Kaplan, an Atlanta internist.
This is due, he feels, to the deaths in recent years of celebrities such as
Telly Savalas, Bill Bixby, Don Ameche, Frank Zappa and Timothy Leary from the
disease.

   The new awareness is also due, in part, to the development of a blood test
---the so-called prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test ---that can detect the
presence of prostate cancer cells early. The American Cancer Society is
attempting to further awareness efforts this month, declaring September Prostate
Awareness Month.

   The goal, advocates say, is to get the word out on what's available in early
detection and diagnosis of prostate cancer, as well as up-to-date information on
treatment.

Symptoms, diagnosis

   Prostate cancer symptoms can masquerade as other ailments ---frequent or
painful urination, blood in urine or semen, lower back pain or upper thigh pain.
To diagnose it, doctors have two options: a digital rectal exam and the PSA
test.

   In a digital exam, a doctor inserts a gloved finger into the rectum to feel
the gland for any abnormalities. In a PSA test, a patient's blood is analyzed
for elevated levels of PSA, which can be a sign of cancer.

   The American Cancer Society recommends both PSA and digital rectal exams
annually for men at age 50 and older.

Varied treatments

   Once cancer is diagnosed, men must choose among the range of treatment
options ---generally surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, hormone therapy and
watchful waiting.

   Quality of life issues, the extent of the cancer's development and side
effects should guide men in their choices, Walsh says.

   Surgery is typically recommended for men whose cancer has not spread beyond
the prostate. Most often, surgery is recommended for men who can reasonably
expect to live another decade or more. Radiation is an alternative to surgery
for men with cancer confined to a small portion of the gland.

   Men whose cancer has spread beyond the prostate can opt for chemotherapy or
hormone therapy, which involves taking drugs or hormones to combat the cancer
growth. In some cases, chemical or surgical castration is performed to reduce
levels of testosterone, which promotes cancer growth.

   Another option, cryosurgery, is being investigated but isn't widely
recommended. The technique involves freezing the prostate to kill the cancer.

   Walsh, author of "The Prostate: A Guide for Men and the Women Who Love Them,"
has pioneered a surgical technique called nerve-sparing radical prostatectomy.
This procedure can be done only when the cancer has not invaded adjacent nerves,
and he says side effects are

negligible.

   Other treatments ---involving gene therapy and other refined techniques of
existing options ---are also under way. But for now, Kaplan says, patients need
to educate themselves and seek out opinions before making a choice.

   "A good family doctor will ask the same questions you do: 'Why this
recommendation? What's the advantages and disadvantages?' " Kaplan says.

   William Aylor, 41, a Covington machinist who decided to undergo radiation for
his prostate cancer, says it's important for men of all ages ---not just older
men ---to confront their fears and become educated so they can make informed
decisions.

   "Too many young men out there don't think it's anything they need to worry
about," says Aylor.

GRAPHIC:  Chart: TREATMENT OPTIONS
 OPTIONS
 SURGERY (radical prostatectomy): Removal of the prostate gland and
 surrounding tissue. Operation lasts up to four hours, requires hospital
 stay of three to seven days and three to six weeks of recovery.
 Nerve-sparing prostatectomy can be performed if the cancer has not invaded
 adjacent nerve tissue.
 WHO'S A CANDIDATE?
 Otherwise healthy men whose cancer hasn't spread outside who have a life
 expectancy of 10 years or more (i.e., most men under 65).
 SIDE EFFECTS
 Impotence, incontinence and pain are common. Stress incontinence a
 passing a small amount of urine when coughing, laughing or exercising a
 may affect up to 35 percent of patients. Chronic incontinence may affect 5
 percent. Impotence is reported in 30-50 percent of patients in the first
 year after surgery, but is less likely after nerve-sparing prostatectomy.
 OPTIONS
 RADIATION THERAPY: Use of X-rays to kill tumors and decrease their ability
 to grow. Two types: "external beam therapy," where patients receive X-ray
 treatments over six or seven weeks; and "internal radiation therapy"
 (called brachytherapy or seeding), in which radioactive pellets, the size
 of a grain of rice, are inserted into cancerous regions for weeks or
 months.
 WHO'S A CANDIDATE?
 Men whose cancer is confined to the prostate or a small area near the
 gland. It is the most common alternative to surgery in early prostate
 cancer. Also recommended for older men, those in poor health, or those
 with more advanced tumors.
 SIDE EFFECTS
 Causes at least temporary impotence and incontinence in 30-50 percent of
 patients. It also can cause diarrhea, urinary retention and inflammation
 of the bladder, penis and scrotum.
 OPTIONS
 HORMONE THERAPY: Use of hormonal treatments to decrease the amount of
 testosterone produced by a man's body; can be used in conjunction with
 removal of the testicles.
 WHO'S A CANDIDATE?
 Men whose cancer has spread to other parts of the body or in whom it has
 recurred after treatment. Hormone therapy works better if started as early
 as possible after the cancer has reached an advanced stage.
 SIDE EFFECTS
 Reduced sexual desire, impotence, breast tenderness and growth of breast
 tissue, hot flashes, loss of bone strength, fatigue, diarrhea, nausea.
 OPTIONS
 CHEMOTHERAPY:
 Use of anti-cancer drugs, injected into a vein or taken by mouth at a
 doctor's office, that damage cancer cells.
 WHO'S A CANDIDATE?
 Chemotherapy is not effective against early prostate cancer, but is used
 for patients whose cancer has spread outside the prostate gland and who
 have unsuccessfully undergone hormone therapy.
 SIDE EFFECTS
 Nausea, vomiting, hair loss, anemia, reduced blood-clotting ability,
 mouth sores, and risk of developing infections. Not everyone reacts to
 chemo in the same way. Most side effects disappear once treatment is
 stopped.
 Chart: September is Prostate Cancer Awareness Month.
 For information, call the American Cancer Society: 404-203-0266.
 Prostate screenings are being offered either free or at reduced rates
 this month by several metro Atlanta medical centers. Screenings are being
 held at Emory clinics at South DeKalb, in Smyrna, at Perimeter Center,
 Northlake, Fayetteville, Crawford Long Hospital and the Emory Clinic at
 1365 Clifton Road, Sept. 22-28. For more information, call 404-778-7777.
 For information on other prostate screenings, contact: Northwoods Medical
 Specialists in Cumming (free, 770-781-6350), North Fulton Regional
 Hospital (404-203-0266).
 Diagnosed with prostate cancer, Hosea Williams is weighing pros, cons of
 treatment options./ MARLENE KARAS / Staff

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1997


                             2306 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       September 4, 1997 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: CANCER PATIENT SETS STAGE FOR GOD TO ACT

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   A Metairie priest is scheduled to become the first person in the country to
test a treatment for a rare form of cancer that he is already fighting with a
regimen of vitamins, shark cartilage and prayer.

   Assuming the expected federal approval arrives, the Rev. John Vaughn will
check into Charity Hospital Sept. 11 for an infusion of genetically altered
cells, the first step in a procedure that has had a near-total kill rate of
cancer cells in laboratory tests, two Louisiana State University Medical Center
researchers said.

   "I feel very fortunate to have this opportunity," Vaughn, 71, said. "I'm
approaching this with unbounded optimism and expectations."

   Vaughan learned nearly six months ago that he suffers from mesothelioma, a
cancer that has attacked the outer lining of his left lung.

   Fewer than 3,000 cases are diagnosed annually in the United States, cancer
epidemiologists said. Because conventional cancer therapy does not work, life
expectancy after diagnosis is generally less than two years, said Dr. Paul
Schwarzenberger, the test's coordinator.

   The treatment, which Schwarzenberger and his colleagues hope to test on 16
people, starts with an infusion of millions of genetically altered
ovarian-cancer cells through a catheter about as big as a cat's whisker. The
cells, prepared by Dr. Scott Freeman of Tulane University Medical Center, will
have been rendered harmless through irradiation.

   Ovarian-cancer cells are used because they have a tendency to home in on the
cancer cells and bind to them, said Dr. Jay Kolls, a pulmonary critical-care
specialist at LSU.

   Once binding occurs, an enzyme is formed.

   Ganciclovir, an antiviral drug, is given intravenously the next day, a
treatment that continues daily for the next week or so. The drug and the enzyme
create a combination toxic to the cancer cells, and researchers hope it will
revitalize the body's immune system.

   The test is the first stage of a process that could lead to federal approval
of the treatment.

   In mesothelioma, a cancer found in the lining of the lungs and the abdominal
wall, the therapy is facing a formidable adversary because it doesn't respond
well to chemotherapy or radiation therapy. Even an early diagnosis -
traditionally a harbinger of a good outcome - isn't good news, Schwarzenberger
said, because once this type of cancer is removed surgically from one site it'll
grow somewhere else.

   Considering the gravity of his disease, "I figured this treatment was the
best option I had," Vaughn said. "I don't have a lot of trepidations."

   With this new approach, he said, "my goal is to equip my body to free up the
immune system so it can can come in and kill what remains of the cancer cells."

   Vaughn, who was ordained a Catholic priest in 1951 and an Episcopal priest in
1968, regards this addition to his anti-cancer armory as part of a sales pitch
directed to God in which he is doing everything he can to fight his illness.

   So far, this has included adopting a vegetarian diet, drinking five glasses
of carrot juice every day, swallowing large amounts of vitamins and taking shark
cartilage, which is supposed to starve tumors by blocking the blood supply.

   "What I'm doing is setting the stage for God to act," he said. "I'm doing
everything I possibly can to place all the natural means before God. If he
chooses to cure me, that's his choice."

   Vaughn, who most recently has been a consultant who tries to bring
spirituality to business, has kept friends informed of his fight on his World
Wide Web site; the address is www.businespirituality.org.

   Prayer is part of his daily regimen, too, and Vaughn has asked friends and
readers to join what he calls "the cheering squad."

   "I've put it in our Lord's hand," he said, "but I firmly believe that God has
work for me to do. . . . If it doesn't work out, I'm ready to accept God's
will."

   Information about the gene therapy test is available at 585-4019.

GRAPHIC: The Rev. John Vaughn is the first person in the United States to
undergo gene therapy to fight mesothelioma, a rare cancer.  'I'm approaching
this with unbounded optimism and expectations.  [COLOR] STAFF PHOTO BY SARAH L.
VOISIN

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1997


                             2307 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 4, 1997, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: Hear anything, doc?

BODY:

   Take a deep breath. Here's news that'll give you the health-care
heebie-jeebies: This week's Journal of the American Medical
Association reports that stethoscope skills of medical students
and interns are dismal. In a study, 541 trainees were asked to
identify 12 abnormal cardiac noises, including various snaps,
clicks and murmurs. Overall accuracy: about 20%.


   This ought to make your heart skip a beat. Even in this high-tech
world of magnetic imaging and gene therapies, the stethoscope
remains a crucial diagnostic tool -- inexpensive, reliable and,
when properly used, highly effective. Moreover, as cost-cutting
limits access to new technologies and places more responsibility
in the hands of primary physicians, the ability to make accurate
diagnoses with traditional tools is becoming more important, not
less.

   For all of that, fewer than one-third of internal medicine programs
teach the skill formally. And neither the American Board of Family
Practice nor the American Board of Internal Medicine tests stethoscope
skills before certifying a physician.

   It's bad enough that even experienced health-care workers don't
know enough to warm a stethoscope before putting it to flesh.
But once the instrument is in place and the vocal yipes and cardiac
yips have subsided, lead-eared interns at least should know what
to listen for.

   Now hold it. Listen to this: In an effort to control the
NFL's most penalized team, coach Joe Bugel has banned swearing
during practices, team meetings, even games.

   This could turn the Oakland Raiders into the dirtiest-playing,
cleanest-talking team in football. But imagine some Raider tackle
putting a late hit on a quarterback, then calling him a rump-fed,
onion-eyed clotpole. It's just not the same.

   Bugel's proposal is a principle, not a rule. And perhaps it's
worth a try. If asking players to internalize their verbal aggression
causes high blood pressure, then those lead-eared interns can
practice on them.

LOAD-DATE: September 04, 1997


                             2308 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              September 3, 1997, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 13A, HEALTH NEWS COLUMN

LENGTH: 896 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS

BYLINE: From Post-Dispatch Wire Services

BODY:


CANCERS OF STOMACH AND ESOPHAGUS

Smoking A Major Cause, Researchers Say

   More than 40 percent of the cases of stomach and esophageal cancer can be
blamed on smoking, and quitting does not cut the risk for 30 years, U.S.
researchers reported Tuesday.

   Marilie Gammon and colleagues at the Columbia University School of Public
Health said the rates of cancers of the stomach and esophagus, which leads into
the stomach, had risen steeply in the United States and Europe in recent years.
They said white males were especially prone.

   Reporting in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Gammon's group
said smoking was a clear risk factor for two different kinds of cancer -
adenocarcinoma and squamous cell cancer.

   They studied more than 1,000 people aged 30 to 79 who had been diagnos ed
with cancer of the esophagus or stomach and compared them to 600 people who did
not have cancer. They carefully questioned them about alcohol or tobacco use,
diet, medication and other factors.

   They found the risk of adenocarcinoma was doubled among current and
ex-smokers. The higher risk lasted for up to 30 years after someone stopped
smoking, they added. Drinking wine seemed to reduce the risk, while drinking
beer or spirits had no effect either way on adenocarcinoma. But drinking did
increase the risk of the other cancer, squamous cell cancer, they said.

CHOLESTEROL LEVELS

Passive Smoke Called Harmful To Children

   Children who have already inherited a harmful tendency to high cholesterol
levels are in "triple jeopardy" if exposed to cigarette smoke, researchers said
Tuesday.

   American Heart Association researchers said they found passive smoke lowered
so-called "good" cholesterol, or high-density lipoprotein (HDL), by about 10
percent in children aged 2 to 18.

   HDL protects against heart disease, as compared with low-density lipoprotein
(LDL), which is the kind of fat that gets deposited inside arteries, clogging
them up.

   Ellis Neufeld and colleagues at Boston Children's Hospital studied 103
children with elevated cholesterol levels, who had low HDL levels or a family
history of heart disease. They found 27 percent of them came from smoking
households. Those exposed to tobacco smoke had significantly lowered levels of
HDL.

   Unlike similar studies, this one, published in the association's journal
Circulation, took account of the children's weight, age, sex and how much they
ate and exercised.

(begin THREE STAR text)

STETHOSCOPES

Study: Many New Doctors Misusing Tool

   In a finding described as disturbing, U.S. researchers reported Tuesday that
many new doctors don't know how to use a stethoscope properly.

The study found an exception, however.

   Physicians with a trained ear for music are generally better equipped to get
the most out of the ubiquitous medical instrument, said the report from the
Allegheny University of Health Sciences in Philadelphia.

   The findings were based on a study involving more than 450 first-, sec ond-
and third-year internal medicine and family practice residents. They were asked
to detect 12 different heart problems by listening with a stethoscope to cardiac
rhythms played on a high-fidelity tape.

TREMORS

Researchers Close To Finding Damaged Gene

   Scientists say they've found the rough location of a defective gene that
causes tremors, especially in the elderly.

   The inherited condition it causes, familial essential tremor, usually causes
trembling in the hands and arms, but it may also show up in the head and voice.

   By one estimate, about one in 200 Americans gets this condition at some point
in their lives, and it's far more common in Scandinavia. It can be disabling,
interfering with everyday activities like writing and eating.

   It's treated with drugs or surgery, and studies of the gene might give hints
for new treatments.

   The gene itself has not been captured or identified, but the new work
suggests it lies somewhere within a particular region of chromosome 3.

   Researchers in Iceland who surveyed genes from 16 families concluded that a
gene in the region they identified causes the disease in most of those families.
They report the findings in the September issue of the journal Nature Genetics.

DUCHENNE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

Test Shows Gene Therapy Working Well

   A new method for tracking muscle cells shows that attempts to treat Duchenne
muscular dystrophy may work better than doctors had thought, researchers
reported Monday.

   They said their methods may help perfect other gene therapy techniques being
tested against cancer and heart disease. "This is the first time anyone's been
able to track the gene and the gene product," said Helen Blau, head of the
Department of Molecular Pharmacology at Stanford University in California.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a severe form of the disease that kills
sufferers in their teens or early 20s. It affects about one in every 3,500 male
babies.

   A gene mutation means their bodies do not produce dystrophin, which causes
their muscles to degenerate. It has been a leading candidate for gene therapy,
but trials have not seemed terribly effective.

   Blau and colleagues at Harvard University and the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute in Boston worked together to see if they could track the effects of
gene therapy.

(end 3* text)

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1997


                             2309 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        September 2, 1997 Tuesday Final

SECTION: News : Cancer Charity Checkup, Second of two parts Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2018 words

HEADLINE: Fund-raising scams worry reputable groups
 Most local charities have remained efficient

BYLINE: DAVE UMHOEFER

SOURCE: Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   The success of national health charities that mimic more respected groups but
do little but raise money worries local cancer organizations.

   Their fear: that any taint of squandered money smears the name of all cancer
causes and could drive down private donations.

   But by one measure, those very real concerns have not been realized: Local
cancer charities are doing well despite the intense and growing chase for
dollars throughout the non-profit world.

   And they've done it efficiently, for the most part, without excessive
fund-raising costs, according to a Journal Sentinel review of public financial
records. That's good news for Wisconsin charitable givers, cancer researchers
and patients.

   Givers who are confused by the national alphabet soup of cancer groups and
prefer to give locally can choose from several financially sound organizations
that rely heavily on volunteers and funnel money into credible cancer-fighting
programs, many local.

   Still, there are important distinctions in how and where their money is
spent, in fund-raising methods and in cancer charity governance. Programs can
range widely, from research grants to prevention and education programs, funds
for treatment, equipment, patient services or family aid.

   Increasingly, hospitals and research institutions are soliciting potential
donors themselves, creating another giving avenue.

   Research grants made by private charities such as the American Cancer Society
fill a niche, experts note, but the federal government is the primary funding
source to the tune of $2 billion a year. The private bucks are important,
though, often giving initial funding to researchers. The federal government
doesn't come close to funding all grant applications.

   The Cancer Society is a good example of an evolving charity. Times have
changed at this national community-based organization, whose Wisconsin division
is in the top third of state chapters in attracting public donations.

   The society is shifting more of its $400 million-plus budget into cancer
education (which now gets 32 cents of every dollar the charity spends), with
research getting somewhat less. That means greater emphasis on alerting the
public and health professionals about crucial links between cancer and diet,
smoking, skin care and other lifestyle factors.

   For cancer research, the volunteer-driven society spent $93 million
nationally in 1996 22 cents of every dollar, with more research looking at
lifestyle choices. Another 17 cents goes for aid to cancer patients.

   Even with the shift, "the ACS is the largest source of non-governmental funds
for cancer research in the world, and we intend to stay in that position," said
Richard Covey, a Fort Atkinson dentist and board president of the society's
Wisconsin division.

   The Cancer Society isn't strictly local. Under organization bylaws, 40% of
money collected in Wisconsin is sent to national headquarters in Atlanta; the
rest is put to use locally. The national organization disbursed a majority of
what it gets for research under a competitive system; University of
Wisconsin-Madison and Medical College of Wisconsin scientists have received
grants.

   The society has modernized its solicitations, moving from old-fashioned
neighborhood fund-raising appeals copied so successfully by competitors toward
more special events and telemarketing.

   The wake-up call was a period of flat fund-raising and tougher competition
from charities that spend much more heavily on bringing in income.

   Interestingly, the group's national headquarters is experimenting in many
states with telemarketing for new donors using a professional fund-raising firm.
But the Wisconsin division saying it can better control costs and content of
calls by doing it in-house has declined to participate.

   The local division, a pioneer in telemarketing, calls only existing donors,
using temporary workers supervised at its headquarters. After salaries and other
costs, the state division nets 68 cents on the dollar on telemarketing.

   In Wisconsin, the new fund-raising push paid off: Revenues jumped to nearly
$10 million last year, up from $7 million in 1993. Now, state Cancer Society
leaders are deciding how best to spend the bounty.

   "We're reviewing our priorities and our goals in prevention and early
detection," Covey said. "Breast cancer is an important area, prostate health,
colon and rectal cancer, skin cancer cancers that affect a lot of people."

   The Wisconsin division's spending habits get good marks based on standards
set by independent philanthropy review groups: About 70% of expenditures of
Wisconsin donations go for program services. Charity watchdogs set different
minimum standards for program spending 50% and 60% are two common benchmarks.

   Fund raising, including highly successful relay competitions, makes up 23% of
expenditures by the society's state division up noticeably from 15% five years
ago, but still comfortably within standards.

   Charities take different paths on fund raising. For some, telemarketing
campaigns, even if done well, are not the road they want to go down.

   John Cary, executive director of Midwest Athletes Against Childhood Cancer,
doesn't condemn non-profit groups who do it. But he worries that impersonal,
intrusive telemarketing will drag down the common denominator for all charities,
making people resistant to give.

   "Don't you get fed up at 20 to 6 when the phone rings?" Cary said, adding
that the expense of telemarketing is a consideration.

   The MACC fund relies heavily for revenue on a telethon and dozens of special
events run by the group or by others who send proceeds its way. It, too, has
managed to keep expenses well within standards set by charity watchdog groups.

   "Instead of adding telemarketing, we're going to foundations, doing more
planned giving, special events," Cary said. "One of the things people find
appealing about us is that we don't beat people up for donations."

   The fund has given nearly $13 million since 1976 for its sole purpose:
financing research into childhood cancer cures and treatments. It is the biggest
donor to the cancer center at the Medical College of Wisconsin in Wauwatosa,
specifically to the Midwest Children's Cancer Center there. The college's
research center is the state's second largest federally funded cancer facility;
the biggest by far and one of the premier in the nation is at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison.

   Some charities, especially larger ones, turn to paid fund-raisers for
telemarketing and direct mail to broaden their reach. They figure that, despite
the high initial costs, gifts can flow for years once a donor base is
established. That might be good news for the charity but a surprise for givers
who think more of their gift is reaching the charity.

   Experts say such costs should fall over time if a charity has a good
long-range plan in place. Ask charities to explain their goals, they say,
because costs of professional fund-raising campaigns can vary widely depending
on the plan and type of campaign. Campaigns that pay professional fund-raisers a
percentage of revenues rather than a flat fee are frowned upon by professional
associations in the industry.

   Less modern fund-raising methods no doubt yield less, but sometimes work more
efficiently.

   A slow-but-steady national cancer campaign run yearly out of Milwaukee by the
Fraternal Order of Eagles is one example.

   Through bake sales, card parties and other modest events, the Wisconsin-based
order has raised $17.7 million from the general public since 1959 through its
local units in every state. It gave away almost every dollar to respected cancer
research institutions and treatment facilities here and nationally.

   The continuing big winner: St. Joseph's Hospital in Milwaukee ($752,000),
where former Eagles cancer fund leader Art Ehrmann was treated before dying of
cancer in 1975. The hospital started a bone marrow transplant program with
Eagles money and this year is buying diagnostic equipment for prostate cancer.
In all, 17 Wisconsin institutions have applied for and won Eagles grants.

   Last year's gifts totaled more than $1 million, and "cancer has been named
our number one cause for this year," explained Lewis Reed, director of the
cancer fund that bears Ehrmann's name. "It will be a big, big year."

   Another local hospital that reaps major benefits from a relationship with a
successful cancer charity is St. Luke's Medical Center and its cancer clinic and
gene therapy research lab.

   The celebrity-rich Vince Lombardi Memorial Golf Classic and the separate
Lombardi Foundation Trust have raised about $4.5 million since 1971 through a
variety of special events and fund drives, with most of it going to Luke's.

   Some cancer charities that have programs here are benefiting from distinctly
modern marketing ideas that cost them nothing but the use of their good names.

   One is cause-related marketing. Example: a licensing deal under which the
American Cancer Society is paid $1 million for lending its name to ads for
nicotine-withdrawal products, or Florida orange growers in another deal that
ties in to the society's healthy living advice.

   Another charity, the Leukemia Society of America's Wisconsin chapter,
received $41,000 last year as its share of the society's lucrative national
contract with DialAmerica Marketing, a New Jersey telemarketing company. Under
the arrangement, solicitors sell magazine subscriptions and send 12.5% to the
charity, which allows use of its name but pays no fees to DialAmerica. Callers
are told how the money is divided.

   "It's been a phenomenal success," Bede Barth, the state chapter's executive
director, said of the deal, which brought $3 million for society chapters last
year.

   Charity watchdog groups give good marks to the Leukemia Society's finances;
it keeps fund-raising and management costs in check, spending 80% on program
services last year and 20% on administration and fund raising. Its focused
mission: a cure for leukemia and its related cancers lymphoma, multiple myeloma
and Hodgkin's disease.

   The Wisconsin chapter reported a whopping 30% jump in public support last
year, topping the $1 million mark. Fueling the rise were marathon competitions
in which participants collect pledges in memory of a cancer victim and in return
get expense-paid trips, Barth said.

   "Charitable giving is up now," said Barth. "And I think people tend to give
when they've been touched by cancer or leukemia. People also want to feel good
and if agencies can make them feel good through an event they will continue to
give."

   The charity uses a lot of special events, some in-house telemarketing for
renewing donors, direct mail and a little door-to-door fund-raising using
neighborhood volunteers, Barth said.

   Nationally, the Leukemia Society spends about 25 cents on the dollar for
research grants divvied up nationally $12 million last year. Currently, four
researchers at the University of Wisconsin are supported. Lesser amounts pay for
educating the public and professionals, patient aid, sponsoring local marrow
donor drives and other programs.

   Local chapters send at least 40% of money raised to the national Leukemia
Society office, primarily for research grants, while keeping the rest. The
biggest local program reimburses 525 people up to $750 a year for medical
expenses, Barth said.

   The positive fund-raising trends convince some locally that despite fears
about limits on people's capacity to give and sometimes-heated competition among
fund-raisers, the cancer fight will continue to win people's hearts.

   "Groups should be working together," said Les Weil, a volunteer Medical
College fund-raiser and founder of the innovative Zink the Zebra Foundation, a
school-based program that teaches compassion for young cancer patients and
others.

   "I believe we can expand the circle and convince more people to give," said
Weil, whose fast-growing foundation was inspired by the experience of his
daughter, Kelly, who died from bone cancer.

GRAPHIC: Photo

   Richard Covey, board president of the American Cancer Society's
Wisconsin division

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1997


                             2310 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       August 31, 1997 Sunday, MANDEVILLE

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 25H3

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: CHAMBER AUXILIARY DISHES UP A FEAST

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Moore

BODY:

   A gourmet luncheon to please the most discriminating palate was dished up by
members of the St. Tammany West Chamber of Commerce Auxiliary on Aug. 26 at the
new Courtyard Marriott.

   Lurline Alexius, along with Helena Brandes, headed up the "kitchen crew" of
Clare Drinkard, Katie Friedrichs, Anita Nuss, George Annis Breslau, and Meda
Koepp.

   George Annis took bows for whimsically decorating the appetizer table with
swan apples, pear mice and green-apple turtles. The table held such culinary
delights as a truffle and liver pate, creme fraiche and delectable dips.

   Nettie Galatas gave the invocation as the meal unfolded with artistically
presented dishes, beginning with a grilled eggplant terrine with roasted red
peppers and brie.

   Next on the dining agenda was chicken salad studded with white grapes, an
old-time favorite of the St. Peter's Altar Society, which was artfully
embellished with melon slices topped with a poppy-seed blueberry dressing.

   The dessert table tempted all with silky brownies, lemon curd tartlets and
cream puffs, plus pastries from the Mandeville Bake Shop.

   After auxiliary members toured the new suites at the Courtyard Marriott,
president Donis Jenkins introduced as guests Covington Mayor Keith Villere,
Reggie Badeaux, Eddie Deano, Malise Prieto and Dick Parks, executive director of
the Chamber of Commerce. Other auxiliary officers and board members attending
were Maxine Barker, Gerry Ebeling, Sis Rives, Nettie Galatas and Cora Lee
Ferina.

   Travel chatter focused on the recent wedding of Helena and Warren Brandes'
daughter, Lise Catherine Olga, to Scott McLean. Covington residents witnessing
the nuptials at the Yale Battell Chapel at Yale University in New Haven, Conn.,
were Lurline and G.C. Alexius, Tressie and Jimmy Carey, Felix and Janice Robito,
Rita Fitzpatrick, George Helen Burns, and Bert and Marian Levy. The Brandeses
are planning a post-wedding "R&R" to Lugano, Switzerland, followed by a sojourn
at a farm in Provence, France.

   Louis Ross was the lucky winner of the door prize, a beautiful crystal bowl,
and Clare Drinkard waltzed away with Audrey Oalmann's prize-winning blueberry
pie.

   Among those attending were new members Marian Schwartz, Rose Marie Stumpf,
Linda Troncoso, Mickey Arthur, Gerry Dirmann, Jennifer Stoltz, Carmel Galouye
and Lee Eaton.

   Others enjoying the sumptuous lunch were DeeDee Suthon, Katherine Dore,
Jeanne Gillio, Miriam Smith, Lois Murphy, Memise Danielson, Marjorie Kohnke,
Margie Abel, Frances Barker, Maxine Barker, Jan Butler, Beverly Pittman, Zelda
Rose, Jewel Hester, Edna Laumann, Ruth Reinert, Katherine Mayer, Eliza Macatee,
Bernice Terrell, Virginia McCloskey, Helen Camp, Denise Villere and Amy Pittman.

   Later in the afternoon, many members attended the reception and
groundbreaking of the Gene Therapy Research Building at the Tulane Regional
Primate Research Center.

   Elizabeth Moore is a Covington resident. News about west St. Tammany social
events can be sent to her at 1001 N. U.S. 190, Covington, 70433, or call
893-0612.

GRAPHIC: Members of the kitchen crew included, from left, crew chairwoman
Lurline Alexius, Clare Drinkard, Katie Friedrichs, George Annis Breslau,
co-chairwoman Helena Brandes, Anita Nuss and Meda Koepp.  PHOTO [color] Officers
and board members attending included Donis Jenkins, Maxine Barker, Gerry
Ebeling, Sis Rives, Nettie Galatas and Cora Lee Ferina.  Attending the St.
Tammany West Chamber of Commerce Auxiliary Membership Luncheonwere new members,
from left, Marian Schwartz, Rose Marie Stumpf and Linda Troncoso.  Other new
members included Mickey Arthur, Gerry Dirmann, Jennifer Stoltz, CarmelGalouye
and Lee Eaton.  THREE PHOTOS

COLUMN: North Shore Notables

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1997


                             2311 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 29, 1997, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 272 words

HEADLINE: Girl given HIV gene treatment;
Therapy to hinder AIDS virus growth

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - Around two o'clock Thursday afternoon at
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, a 13-year-old girl infected
with the virus that causes AIDS became the first child to
undergo experimental gene therapy to combat the disease.

   That is when registered nurse Beth Haden inserted an
intravenous line into the girl's arm, turned the stopcock and
let flow into her bloodstream half a liter of warm fluid
containing genetically engineered cells from her own bone
marrow.

   Medical scientists extracted those cells Monday from her
pelvic bone, and then endowed them with genetic material
intended to hinder the growth of the AIDS virus, HIV.  The girl
became infected as an infant from an HIV-contaminated blood
transfusion, said Dr. Donal Kohn, a pediatric immunologist,
who conducted the study with Dr. Josephe Church, an AIDS
specialist.

   The family asked for anonymity.

   Kohn said the experiment posed little risk to the girl, who is
currently healthy and attends school, and that the worst was
over - the general anesthesia she received during the bone
marrow extraction.  There was only a slight chance that she
would have an allergic reaction to the genetically engineered
cells, he said.

   The strategy of the gene therapy is to confuse the virus at a
crucial stage in its reproduction.  The engineered marrow cells
harbor a bogus shred of virus genetic material that it uses to
put itself together.

   If HIV gets into those engineered cells and tries to
replicate, it may end up using the genetic decoy instead of
the real thing.  That will jam up the virus assembly line and
curb the infection.


LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1997


                             2312 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                     August 29, 1997, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENTAL HIV TREATMENT LAUNCHED;
 HEALTH: DOCTORS USE GIRL'S OWN ALTERED BONE MARROW IN AN ATTEMPT TO CONFUSE THE
AIDS VIRUS INTO USING A GENETIC DECOY.

BYLINE: TERENCE MONMANEY, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   Around 2 on Thursday afternoon at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, a
13-year-old girl infected with the virus that causes AIDS became the first child
to undergo experimental gene therapy to combat the disease.

   That is when registered nurse Beth Haden inserted an IV line into the girl's
arm, turned the stopcock, and let flow into her bloodstream half a liter of warm
fluid containing genetically engineered cells from her own bone marrow.

   Medical scientists extracted those cells Monday from her pelvic bone and then
endowed them with genetic material intended to hinder the growth of the AIDS
virus, HIV. The girl became infected as an infant from an HIV-contaminated blood
transfusion, said Dr. Donal Kohn, a pediatric immunologist who conducted the
study with Dr. Joseph Church, an AIDS specialist.

   Her parents "understand that they are participating in research, and that
there is only a remote possibility that it will help their child," Kohn said.
"But I think emotionally they're hoping she'll be lucky."

   (The family asked for anonymity and declined interview requests.)

   Kohn said that the experiment posed little risk to the girl, who is healthy
and attends school, and that the worst was over--the general anesthesia she
received during the bone marrow extraction. There was only a slight chance that
she would have an allergic reaction to the genetically engineered cells, he
said. The girl is the first of five children with HIV that the Childrens
Hospital scientists are planning to study.

   Essentially, the strategy of the gene therapy is to confuse the virus at a
crucial stage in its reproduction. The engineered marrow cells harbor a bogus
shred of virus genetic material that the virus uses to put itself together.

   If HIV gets into those engineered cells and tries to replicate, it may end up
using the genetic decoy instead of the real thing. That will jam up the virus
assembly line, and, the researchers speculate, curb the infection.

   Before experimenting on the girl, the scientists tested the techniques on
human cells in test tubes, showing that marrow cells endowed with the decoy
genetic material were protected from HIV infection. Kohn said that the
experiment is supposed to determine if the technique is feasible in people and
whether, for instance, the engineered cells will even take root in the girl's
bone marrow. The scientists will sample her blood for a variety of tests each
month for two years.

   The experiment comes at a time when HIV drugs have gained attention for
extending many patients' lives. The girl, Church said, has been taking such
medications, including the so-called protease inhibitor drugs, and will continue
doing so.

   But the much-touted success of the drug therapies shouldn't make people
complacent, he said. "The drugs don't work for everyone," he said.  "We need to
look at every possible avenue of altering the natural history of this virus.
Gene therapy is just one strategy."

   A hospital spokesman said the girl was resting comfortably.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2313 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    August 23, 1997, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 293 words

HEADLINE: FEVER GENE MAY BE LINKED TO COMMON ANCESTOR

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A gene that causes an inherited tendency to run fevers may point to a common
ancestor for Arabs, Jews, Turks and Armenians, researchers said Friday.

   Doctors hope finding the gene for familial Mediterranean fever will help them
develop a cure for the illness, but they also are intrigued by the historical
implications.

   Two separate reports, in the journals Nature Genetics and Cell, described
five different mutations of the gene that causes the disease.

   The FMF gene controls production of a protein named pyrin by researchers at
the U.S. National Institutes of Health and marenostrin by researchers at
Genethon in Evry, France. The French name stems from the Latin for "our sea," or
the Mediterranean.

   The researchers think the protein plays a role in inflammation.

   People with the disease get recurrent fever, joint or abdominal pain and
inflammation of the membranes lining the abdomen. It is relatively common in
Armenians, Turks, Arabs and Sephardic Jews, affecting up to 1 in 200.

   Knowing which gene is involved will help researchers find useful drugs or
even develop gene therapy for the illness.

   Such genetic defects, when they are very common in a population, often confer
some benefit. For instance, the mutation that causes sickle cell anemia, common
in Africans and people of African descent, is believed to help protect against
malaria.

   The researchers said they believed FMF might protect against asthma in people
who carried only one version of the mutated gene.

   They also found an interesting historical perspective in studying the gene.

   Many Iraqi Jews who carry the FMF gene have the same mutation as North
African Jews, suggesting a common ancestor going back more than 2,500 years,
when the two groups split.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1997


                             2314 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 22, 1997, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business briefs; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: Business briefs

BYLINE: Staff, Wire Reports

BODY:

   GeneMedicine drug tested on humans

   GeneMedicine, a biotechnology company based in The Woodlands,
said Thursday that it has begun human clinical trials of its
first gene therapy product.

   Tests of Interleukin-2, a therapy for head and neck cancer,
are being conducted at Johns Hopkins University hospitals in
Baltimore and will begin in Germany in coming weeks, said Eric
Tomlinson, the company's chief executive.

   GeneMedicine's products originated from research conducted at
Baylor College of Medicine by Dr. Bert O'Malley.

   More than 40,000 patients in the United States are diagnosed
with head and neck cancers each year.  The medicine is designed
to promote local and systemic immune response against a
tumor.

   GeneMedicine developed the treatment as part of a broad
collaboration with the Boehringer Mannheim Group, based in
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

   Boehringer Mannheim has provided GeneMedicine with more than
$ 13 million in research funding and has made equity
investments of $ 12 million.  Total research, development and
equity funding to GeneMedicine could reach $ 47 million by
2000, and Boehringer Mannheim has an option to expand the
alliance to other areas of cancer research.


LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1997


                             2315 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       August 21, 1997 Thursday, ALGIERS

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 5F1

LENGTH: 900 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   *** Family Service honors 10 ***

   Judge Ernestine Gray, Margaret Wall, Patti Gay, Joyce Pulitzer, Ana
Gershanik, Wayne Lee, Pres Kabacoff, Ron Forman, Cleland Powell and Claire
Stahel were selected as the honorees for Family Service of Greater New Orleans'
1997 Ten Outstanding Persons Gala and Award Ceremony, to be held Oct. 9.

   They were selected for their contributions to the community through
volunteer, charitable and civic services.

   For information, call 822-0800.

   *** AMVETS officers elected ***

   Melvin Barras of Gretna was elected third vice commander of Louisiana's
AMVETS, or American Veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam, at the group's
recent state convention.

   Other officers from the New Orleans area are Nathaniel Wilson, New Orleans,
adjutant; Albert Hoover, Arabi, finance officer; and Evans St. Romain, New
Orleans, judge advocate.

   *** Judge elected to board ***

   Pascal Calogero Jr., chief justice of the Louisiana Supreme Court, was
elected to the board of directors of the Conference of Chief Justices at its
annual meeting in Cleveland.

   The group consists of the top justice in each of the 50 states, the District
of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Guam and the
Northern Mariana Islands.

   Also elected to the board of directors last week were Thomas Phillips, Texas,
president; David Brock, New Hampshire, president-elect; Randall Shepard,
Indiana, first vice president; Gene Franchini, New Mexico, second vice
president; Annice Wagner, District of Columbia; and Daniel Wathen, Maine.

   *** Teachers honored ***

   For the 11th consecutive year, the Delta Chapter of the American Petroleum
Institute has recognized outstanding area teachers through its Teaching
Excellence Award Program. The program recognizes public school teachers who
deliver quality services to students with minimal compensation and often
inadequate resources.

   Teachers in Orleans Parish who received the awards were Bonita Greco, Francis
W. Gregory Junior High School, first place; Linda Allgor, John F. Kennedy High
School, second place; and Julia Blair Battle, Sherwood Forest Elementary School,
third place.

   The awards were presented by Petroleum Institute members Dennis Renear and
Andrew Thomas.

   *** Doctor gets award ***

   Dr. Carlos Vazquez of Louisiana State University School of Medicine was one
of the winners of more than $400,000 in grants for respiratory disease research
awarded by the pharmaceutical company Glaxo Wellcome Inc.

   Vazquez received a $32,000 pulmonary fellowship award to investigate
pneumocystis carnii pneumonia and gene therapy.

   *** Elks member appointed ***

   George Kruger of Kenner was appointed a district deputy to the national
president of the BPO Elks of the USA.

   A member of New Orleans Elks Lodge No. 0030, Kruger was deputized during the
133rd Elks National Convention in Chicago. He will represent the East District
of Louisiana.

   *** Hospital designated ***

   The Veterans Affairs Medical Center in New Orleans has been designated a
Comprehensive Cancer Center by the American College of Surgeons and the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Only 60 of the department's 103 cancer programs
hold the designation.

   The center cares for more than 27,000 veterans annually, including 280,000
outpatient visits and 7,600 inpatients.

   *** UNO presents honors ***

   Joseph Logsdon, research professor of history and director of the Midlo
Center for New Orleans Studies at UNO, has received the 1997 Chancellor's Award
in Community Issues and Intercultural Diversity at UNO.

   The award recognizes "outstanding and devoted teaching, service and
research," as well as "commitment to the university's strategic emphasis on
strength thruugh diversity."

   Logsdon has been a member of the UNO faculty since 1964, specializing in New
Orleans history and ethnicity.

   *** Alumni honored ***

   Thomas Kitchen, vice president and chief financial officer of Avondale
Industries Inc., has been named the 1997 Homer L. Hitt Distinguished Alumnus of
the Year at UNO.

   The award, begun in 1986 and named for UNO's founding chancellor, honors
alumni for professional accomplishments and outstanding service to the community
and the university.

   Kitchen received a bachelor's degree in accounting in 1969 and a master of
business administration degree in 1971 from UNO, then known as Louisiana State
University in New Orleans.

   *** Professor honored ***

   Philip Harmelink, the Ernst and Young Professor and chairman of the UNO
department of accounting, has been named the 1997 UNO department chair of the
year.

   Harmelink, who assumed the chairmanship in 1990, is being honored for leading
the accounting department to "a lofty national ranking" (No. 4 in the first-time
pass rate of the certified public accountant exam) and for forming "significant
community partnerships," including an industry advisory board.

   Kathryn Smith, coordinator of job location and development in the UNO Office
of Career Placement and Cooperative Education, has been named the UNO 1997
Employee of the Year.

   A staff member since 1969, Smith was instrumental in developing the
university's off-campus job program for UNO students.

   If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to
Applause, The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, La. 70140. Photos
submitted to Applause may take several weeks before publication.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1997


                             2316 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                      August 21, 1997 Thursday, LAKEFRONT

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 6A1

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Teachers honored ***

   For the 11th consecutive year, the Delta Chapter of the American Petroleum
Institute has recognized outstanding area teachers through its Teaching
Excellence Award Program. The program recognizes public school teachers who
deliver quality services to students with minimal compensation and often
inadequate resources.

   Teachers in Orleans Parish who received the awards were Bonita Greco, Francis
W. Gregory Junior High School, first place; Linda Allgor, John F. Kennedy High
School, second place; and Julia Blair Battle, Sherwood Forest Elementary School,
third place.

   The awards were presented by Petroleum Institute members Dennis Renear and
Andrew Thomas.

   *** Doctor gets award ***

   Dr. Carlos Vazquez of Louisiana State University School of Medicine was one
of the winners of more than $400,000 in grants for respiratory disease research
awarded by the pharmaceutical company Glaxo Wellcome Inc.

   Vazquez received a $32,000 pulmonary fellowship award to investigate
pneumocystis carnii pneumonia and gene therapy.

   *** Elks member appointed ***

   George Kruger of Kenner was appointed a district deputy to the national
president of the BPO Elks of the USA.

   A member of New Orleans Elks Lodge No. 0030, Kruger was deputized during the
133rd Elks National Convention in Chicago. He will represent the East District
of Louisiana.

   *** Hospital designated ***

   The Veterans Affairs Medical Center in New Orleans has been designated a
Comprehensive Cancer Center by the American College of Surgeons and the
Department of Veterans Affairs. Only 60 of the department's 103 cancer programs
hold the designation.

   The center cares for more than 27,000 veterans annually, including 280,000
outpatient visits and 7,600 inpatients.

   *** UNO presents honors ***

   Joseph Logsdon, research professor of history and director of the Midlo
Center for New Orleans Studies at UNO, has received the 1997 Chancellor's Award
in Community Issues and Intercultural Diversity at UNO.

   The award recognizes "outstanding and devoted teaching, service and
research," as well as "commitment to the university's strategic emphasis on
strength thruugh diversity."

   Logsdon has been a member of the UNO faculty since 1964, specializing in New
Orleans history and ethnicity.

   Thomas Kitchen, vice president and chief financial officer of Avondale
Industries Inc., has been named the 1997 Homer L. Hitt Distinguished Alumnus of
the Year at UNO.

   The award, begun in 1986 and named for UNO's founding chancellor, honors
alumni for professional accomplishments and outstanding service to the community
and the university.

   Kitchen received a bachelor's degree in accounting in 1969 and a master of
business administration degree in 1971 from UNO, then known as Louisiana State
University in New Orleans.

   Philip Harmelink, the Ernst and Young Professor and chairman of the UNO
department of accounting, has been named the 1997 UNO department chair of the
year.

   Harmelink, who assumed the chairmanship in 1990, is being honored for leading
the accounting department to "a lofty national ranking" (No. 4 in the first-time
pass rate of the certified public accountant exam) and for forming "significant
community partnerships," including an industry advisory board.

   Kathryn Smith, coordinator of job location and development in the UNO Office
of Career Placement and Cooperative Education, has been named the UNO 1997
Employee of the Year.

   A staff member since 1969, Smith was instrumental in developing the
university's off-campus job program for UNO students.

   If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to
Applause, The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans., La. 70140. Photos
submitted to Applause may take several weeks before publication.

GRAPHIC: JOE LOGSDON THOMAS M. KITCHEN PHILIP HARMELINK

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1997


                             2317 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    August 19, 1997, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. C-4

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: SEARCH FOR A CURE

BYLINE: NICOLE M. RESNICK

BODY:


   Paralysis from spinal cord injury has no cure.

   But things have changed in head and spinal cord injury research in the past
15 years.

   Public awareness has been heightened recently by actor Christopher Reeve, who
was paralyzed after he was thrown from a horse in May 1995.

   The attention has translated into pressure on the government to fund more
research, and more clinical trials are under way.

   At the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's department of neurological
surgery, investigators are using an experimental model involving rats with
injured spinal cords. By studying the effects of the injury on proteins believed
to play a role in the progression of spinal cord injury, they hope to develop a
biologic strategy for halting the process. Preliminary results are promising -
injured rats treated with a new class of drugs have demonstrated an improved
ability to walk.

   UPMC researchers are also looking at the transplantation of immature cells
into rats with injured spinal cords. The transplanted cells may help the damaged
nerve cells to work better and eventually lead to the recovery of function in
the impaired spinal cord.

   Allegheny General participated in a trial to test the effects of several
different drugs given to spinal cord injury patients.

   The landmark study, called the National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study,
concluded that a steroid medication called methylprednisolone was the most
effective drug for treating spinal chord injuries and improved the outcome of
patients if administered within eight hours of the injury.

   Dr. Jack Wilberger, Allegheny General's director of neurotrauma, believes
molecular approaches, still in the infant stages in the laboratory, hold the key
to an eventual cure.

   At Allegheny University of the Health Sciences' campus in Philadelphia,
spinal cord regeneration studies and gene therapy strategies are under way.

   ''Although the ultimate solution will come from these lines of research,''
Wilberger said, ''it is still many, many years before they will have a useful
application.''

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1997


                             2318 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  August 19, 1997, Tuesday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 11A, HEALTH NEWS COLUMN

LENGTH: 757 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS

BODY:


DIABETES

Genes Of Tiny Worm Hold Implications For Research

   A gene that governs the lifespan of a humble, nearly microscopic
soil-dwelling worm has implications both for treating diabetes and for longevity
in humans.

   The worm's pace of life is controlled by a gene that is similar to a human
gene that determines how the body uses insulin, according to Gary Ruvkun, of the
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

   The worm can either live fast and die young while times are lush or go into a
slow mode of virtual hibernation to conserve energy to get through a lean
period.

   Previous research indicates that a near-starvation diet works with genetic
factors to lengthen life, notably in laboratory rats and mice, but also possibly
in humans, Ruvkun said.

   Researchers also found in the worms many so-called insulin receptor genes,
which govern metabolism. When worm food is scarce, low levels of insulin compel
the worm to store what it eats as fat rather than to fuel growth or
reproduction, and this shift in metabolism may cause the increased longevity.

   The worm's genetic makeup is similar enough to that in humans to offer
effective ways to study how insulin is regulated, Ruvkun said. Insufficient
secretion or utilization of insulin is a prime characteristic of diabetes.

HOSPITAL INFECTIONS

Treated Catheters Called Helpful In Fighting Disease

   Coating intravenous catheters with bacteria-fighting substances can help
prevent bloodstream infections that kill thousands of hospital patients
annually, researchers say.

   Catheters are long, thin, flexible tubes that often are inserted into a blood
vessel to deliver water, nourishment, food, blood or medicine. Dirty catheters
are blamed for 90 percent of bloodstream infections contracted in U.S.
hospitals, or more than 200,000 cases a year. Studies have found that 10 percent
to 25 percent of the infected patients die.

   "These infections are potentially serious. Some of them are fatal. We think
these are preventable," said Dr. Issam Raad, who led one of the studies.

Both studies were connected to the companies producing the catheters.

   One study, paid for by catheter manufacturer Arrow International Inc. of
Reading, Pa., looked at catheters impregnated with the antiseptics chlorhexidine
and silver sulfadiazine.

   University of Wisconsin researchers found that patients with coated catheters
were nearly five times less likely to come down with a bloodstream infection.

   The second study found similar results using catheters coated with the
antibiotics minocycline and rifampin.

AIDS

A Second Mutated Gene Is Found To Delay Onset

   Researchers at the University of Texas Medical School in Houston and
elsewhere say the reason some people can carry the AIDS virus for years without
developing symptoms is an AIDS-delaying mutated gene.

   Patients with the mutated gene progressed to AIDS at least 2 to 4 years later
than individuals with the normal gene.

   It's the second such mutated gene found to help delay the onset of full AIDS.
Unlike the previous one, however, the new one isn't unique to a few whites and
doesn't seem to protect against infection.

   The second mutation is in a gene called CCR2 that makes proteins called
chemokines, which previous research has shown delay the ability of the AIDS
virus to infect human cells.

   The CCR2 mutation was found after genetic analysis of patients with the human
immunodeficiency virus, or HIV.

   The discoveries are expected to eventually improve AIDS treatments, whatever
the fate of gene therapy experiments.

E. COLI WARNING

Avoid Raw Alfalfa Sprouts, Certain Groups Are Advised

   Young children, the elderly and people with suppressed immune systems should
stop eating raw alfalfa sprouts, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in Atlanta warned last week.

   The CDC reported Thursday that 108 people in Michigan and Virginia became ill
in June and July after eating alfalfa sprouts contaminated with a strain of
Escherichia coli known as O157:H7. The bacteria are found in human feces.

   E. coli O157:H7 bacteria cause 10,000 to 20,000 cases of illness in the
United States each year including abdominal cramping and bloody diarrhea. Most
of those infected recover on their own. In vulnerable groups, the infection can
lead to hemolytic uremic syndrome, in which red blood cells are destroyed and
the kidneys fail.

   Raw alfalfa sprouts are popular with health food enthusiasts, especially as
sandwich filler and salad topping.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1997


                             2319 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 18, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
A dark horse has scored a victory in the race to commercialize a gene linked to
breast cancer.

BYLINE: By Teresa Riordan

BODY:

   FOR years, a number of distinguished scientists furiously raced to become the
first to discover a breast cancer gene. In the end, Mark Skolnick, an
investigator with Myriad Genetics Inc. in Salt Lake City, was the victor.
Members of his team were the first to isolate BRCA1, a gene that has been
implicated in hereditary breast cancer, as well as ovarian cancer.

   But now a team led by another, relatively obscure scientist -- not Mr.
Skolnick -- has been awarded what her company contends is a significant patent
covering BRCA1.

    The scientist is Patricia Murphy, a geneticist with Oncormed Inc., of
Gaithersburg, Md. Oncormed was such a dark horse in the competition that it was
not even mentioned in "Breakthrough: The Race to Find the Breast Cancer Gene," a
recent book by Kevin Davies and Michael White.

   "We were not considered to be in that race," Tom Gallegos, general counsel at
Oncormed, acknowledged. "We have a company policy that we don't talk about our
intellectual property until a patent issues." Ms. Murphy has not published her
work on BRCA1 in any scientific journals, company officials said.

   Myriad Genetics has thus far not been granted any patents covering BRCA1 or
its mutations, but it has filed numerous applications and was widely expected to
have a monopoly on such rights. Peter Meldrum, president of Myriad, declined to
comment on the new patent, which was issued on Aug. 5. "We just don't comment on
other companies' activities," he said.

   Oncormed, a company specializing in medical diagnostics, said the patent
covered a full-length sequence of a variation of BRCA1 somewhat different from
the "wild type" gene that Myriad identified.

   The company contended that the gene sequence it had patented contained no
mutations that would give rise to cancer or other disease. The sequence is found
in 50 percent of the population, it said. It also contended that its patent
covered medical treatments and diagnostic tests arising from this version of the
gene.

   Therapeutic treatments based on BRCA1 (gene therapy, for example) are
expected to be based on healthy versions of the gene. Leslie Alexandre,
Oncormed's vice president for corporate affairs, said the BRCA1 sequence
patented by Oncormed was important because it was prevalent in the general
population.

   "If you're a pharmaceutical company and you're investing a huge amount of
money targeted at this gene, you want to know that the treatment you're creating
will elicit the same response in the majority of the population," she said.
However, Oncormed, which does genetic testing for breast cancer, does not plan
to develop any new therapies itself. "We plan to license the patent," Mr.
Gallegos said.

   Following a landmark Supreme Court decision on genetic engineering in 1980,
the Patent and Trademark Office has routinely granted patents on human genes.
Even so, the practice remains controversial, with religious groups and (in the
case of the breast cancer gene) women's groups protesting the practice.
Companies defend the patents, saying that without the promise of exclusive
rights, they could never afford to make the risky financial investments in new
therapies.

   Oncormed received patent 5,654,155.


   Diving for Treasure In the Kitchen Sink

    It has been a standard sitcom plot, from "I Love Lucy" onward. The housewife
places her ring on the edge of the sink while she washes the dishes and, oops,
it seems to have gone right down the drain.

   Noki Iida and Richard Rodriguez have patented a way to retrieve such lost
rings and other valuables. It consists of a clear plastic jar that attaches to
the trap at the bottom of the U-shaped bend in the waste pipe that leads out of
a sink drain.

   "The water goes down through the jar in a whirling motion," Mr. Iida said.
"The water will go right on through while an object like a ring will drop down
and get trapped by a stainless steel coil inside the jar."

   The jar can be unscrewed from the drain trap, the lost item retrieved, and
then the jar put back, where it stands ready to rescue the next valuable.

   Mr. Iida, of Phoenix, and Mr. Rodriguez, of Tempe, Ariz., are planning to
manufacture the trap, which they expect to retail for $12 to $15. They received
patent 5,638,557.

   Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office,
Washington, D.C. 20231.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1997


                             2320 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 18, 1997 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TECH; Pg. 51

LENGTH: 1930 words

HEADLINE: Beyond Pong: Computer imaging grows up

BYLINE: Karen Kaplan, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   Sometimes, a picture is worth more than a thousand words.

    A picture of a cancerous lung tumor, for example, can be matched against a
multimedia database and enable doctors to design a potentially lifesaving course
of treatment. A video of a cyber-microorganism can help biologists explain how
the real thing takes shape from a single cell. And a 3-D virtual car might even
serve as a working model that a designer could shape with his hands.

    These and other feats are made possible by advances in the burgeoning field
of computer graphics. Founded in the mid-1960s by computer science gurus David
Evans and Ivan Sutherland at the University of Utah, the discipline has moved
far beyond mere digital pictures and begun to make major contributions to fields
as diverse as medicine, radio communications, entertainment and architecture.

   "Once upon a time, those of us in computer graphics used to paint pictures on
screens, and all you could do was just look at it," said Turner Whitted, who
helped organize Siggraph, the annual conference of the Association for Computing
Machinery's subgroup for graphics - just concluded in Los Angeles.

   Whitted said that recent technological advances are such that users can now
roll up their sleeves and interact with computer graphics creations almost as if
they were physical objects.

    "The user himself is getting sucked into the screen," Whitted said.

    In simple terms, computer graphics technology makes it possible to visualize
- and manipulate - massive amounts of data. For years, though, its development
has been limited by the huge amount of computer horsepower required for even
simple applications. Turning weather data into a visual rendering of a storm
system, for example, requires a level of processing power available only in
biggest mainframes - until recently.

    But with the continued exponential advances in the power of the
microprocessor, such obstacles are falling away. A recent tour of university
laboratories revealed the remarkable breadth and potential of a field that is
just now coming into its own.

    At UCLA, computer science professor Wesley Chu is working with faculty from
the medical school in Westwood to build a database of X-ray images. Each X-ray
picture will be linked to a patient's case history - including the course of
treatment and its effectiveness - along with audio files of the doctor's
observations and video documenting the patient's progress.

    At first, this sounds like just a fancy multimedia version of the patient
files that are usually kept on paper. But as digital files, these case histories
are far more valuable because computers can search through them to find similar
cases with clues about how best to treat an individual patient.

    The key to making this work is computer graphics, Chu said. In order to
search through the files of thousands of lung-cancer patients, the computer must
be able to recognize a tumor in an X- ray. That's significantly more difficult
than using a search engine to find a keyword in a text document, since words
match precisely and pictures of similar tumors can actually look quite
different.

    Chu and his colleagues are teaching computers how to recognize features such
as shape, size, volume, location and texture in a 3-D MRI X-ray image. Then the
system, dubbed KMeD, can use those parameters to find tumors similar to one in a
new patient. Physicians can review files of earlier cases before deciding how to
treat the new patient.

    "We're not trying to replace physicians; we're helping them make decisions,"
Chu said.

    Across town at Caltech in Pasadena, researchers in the Computer Graphics
Laboratory are developing techniques to squeeze more information out of X-rays
made by magnetic resonance imaging machines. The MRI determines areas of
densities within a body part, and researchers use that data to make pictures
that show where the skin ends and the tendons underneath begin.

    Body parts such as hands are especially difficult to draw because of their
irregular shapes. And it's hard to determine the exact boundary of two kinds of
tissue, such as fat and bone. But Caltech researchers use vigorous mathematics
to draw extremely precise pictures of hands and wrists. The next step is to
apply this technology to hands in motion, professor Alan Barr said.

    "Then we could figure out what hand and wrist postures are the least likely
to produce carpal tunnel syndrome," he said. Carpal tunnel syndrome is a
debilitating repetitive stress injury.

    Barr and his colleagues also use computer graphics to make models of
microscopic organisms that can test biologists' theories about how they grow.
The graphics experts write programs so that the cells know the rules that govern
how they can multiply, what they will collide with and how they can bond with
each other. Then they run the program and watch to see whether the cells
organize themselves into the shapes the biologists had predicted.

    "We can do a simulation and see if the model works the way it does in real
life," Barr said. If it does, that affirms the theories of interaction on which
the models are based.

    At USC, computer science professor Gerard Medioni is teaching a computer how
to draw a 3-D object based on two still photographs. Using pattern-recognition
techniques and a form of mathematics called projective geometry, the computer
can establish points in two pictures (such as corners and straight edges) that
correspond to each other. Then it can tell how the object would look from any
viewpoint in between.

    Medioni, who is on the faculty of USC's prestigious Integrated Media Systems
Center, thinks this technology can be used to create virtual sets for movies and
television. For example, producers could snap a series of photographs of the
Kremlin's interior and use this "viewpoint synthesis" technique to create an
entire backdrop that could be synthesized onto a blue screen, he said.

    Helen Na is using computer graphics to study the ionosphere, the outer part
of the Earth's atmosphere that is populated with electrons. Like a weather
system, the ionosphere is constantly changing, especially in response to solar
conditions.

    That's a problem for the military, which communicates with soldiers by
bouncing radio messages off the ionosphere. If the shape of the ionosphere is
not known precisely, the signal may not go where it is intended.

    "You want to be able to design a signal so that it will go where you want,"
said Na, an electrical engineering professor at UCLA. "You also want to be able
to tell where a signal came from."

    Na uses data from 16 radio beacon receivers in the Caribbean to calculate
the density of the ionosphere, hundreds of miles above sea level. With computer
graphics, she constructs tomographic images of the ionosphere's ever-changing
shape. Denser areas are a different color than thin areas, which makes the maps
more useful.

    At the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (another member of the
NSF Graphics and Visualization Center), researchers are using computer graphics
to see microscopic structures-and even move them around. With a device called a
nanoManipulator, a graphics workstation converts data from an atomic-force
microscope into a realistic 3-D image that is magnified 1 million times.

    Using the tip of the microscope, which is connected to a force-feedback
device, UNC scientists have poked around at a virus that attacks tobacco plants
to see what makes them stick to their victims. They have also used the
nanoManipulator to push a 20-nanometer ball of gold (about 300 times smaller
than the width of a human hair) into a tiny gap in a gold wire.

    "This is a sandbox for physicists, biologists and gene therapists," said
Russell M. Taylor II, a computer science professor who has been developing the
nanoManipulator for five years. The range of potential applications for computer
graphics is also expanding with the help of new types of equipment. At Stanford
University, researchers are developing a "responsive workbench," a display
system that projects computer-generated images onto a table-like device with a
6-by-3-foot screen. The computer creates separate images for the left and right
eye, and the user wears special shutter glasses to create the 3-D effect.

    Although computer screens are suitable for many people, a workbench would be
preferable for architects, surgeons, automobile designers and others who require
a tabletop environment, said Pat Hanrahan, a professor in Stanford's computer
science department. Objects on the workbench - an idea that originated at the
German National Research Center for Information Technology - can be grabbed,
moved and rotated. Some items, such as individual bones from a virtual skeleton,
can be linked to text or other information. Hanrahan and his colleagues are
perfecting a workbench that two people can use simultaneously.

    The workbench paradigm "is more natural," he said. "We can just reach into
the world and grab something and manipulate it. With a mouse and a monitor, it's
all indirect."

    USC's Medioni is developing a pen that will draw a 3-D computer image when
it traces a 3- D object. When the pen traces two sides of an object, the
computer will automatically compute the shape of the edge that joins them.

    Medioni has trained a computer to discern the curve of a surface at every
point where the pen touches it. Then the computer uses those points to calculate
the overall shape of the object, whether it's smooth like a ball or lumpy like
an oversized model of a molar.

    Medioni can also use the pen to draw a shape freehand. To make a cylindrical
rod, for example, he draws a circle in the air and then a line extending from
the edge. The computer infers the rest. By keeping track of the angles between
the joints of the pen, the computer can determine exactly where the tip is in
3-D space.

    A pair of electrical engineering professors at UCLA are designing a system
based on a computer chip that can reprogram itself to process images more
efficiently than standard chips. Some chips, called application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs), are designed to perform only one kind of function
but to do it with exceptional speed. Other chips, such as Intel's Pentium
microprocessor, are designed to handle a wide range of applications but perform
them more slowly.

    The chip that John Villasenor and William Mangione-Smith are working on
combines the best aspects of the two chips. The hardware is designed for only
one task - in this case, to recognize a particular shape, such as a tank in a
satellite image of a battlefield. But within a matter of milliseconds, the logic
gates on the chip can be reconfigured to look for a different shape.

    "If you've got 500 different shapes on 500 separate ASIC chips, then it
takes up more space and costs you more power," Villasenor said. But the
reprogrammable chip can churn through calculations faster than a microprocessor,
he said.

    Villasenor and Mangione-Smith have demonstrated their chip on a small scale,
and they are currently building a full-scale system for Sandia National
Laboratory.

    Whitted, the Siggraph organizer, said that despite the plethora of computer
graphics technologies to be showcased at this week's conference, even more
dramatic applications are yet to come. Some will make it possible to communicate
with a computer by voice and hand motions instead of a mouse and keyboard.
Others will make virtual reality videoconferencing possible without clunky
hardware such as goggles and gloves.

    "With computer graphics," he said, "you can create a world that doesn't obey
the old rules."

GRAPHIC: 1. USC professor Gerard Medioni, who specializes in computer graphics,
watches while graduate student Song Han works with a 3D image of his hand on a
computer monitor.

 2. UCLA professor Wesley W. Chu poses with an image from his multimedia medical
database, which has become a valuable diagnostic tool.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2321 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     August 17, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 6H

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH SCIENTISTS DISCOVER GENE CRUCIAL TO ORGAN;
DEVELOPMENT

BYLINE: WARREN KING; Seattle Times

DATELINE: SEATTLE

BODY:


   Scientists have found a gene that is key to the development of several major
organs and could be important in the treatment of many genetic diseases.

   The gene produces a protein that stops fetal cells from overdeveloping. It
was discovered in patients with Alagille syndrome, a rare disease that affects a
broad range of tissues, including those in the heart, kidney, liver, eye,
skeleton and face.

   By isolating the gene, scientists "are beginning tounderstand the process by
which organs develop," said Leroy Hood, chairman of the University of
Washington's department of molecular biotechnology.

   "It begins to answer the question: What are the molecular and cellular events
that make the cardiovascular system or the face or other organs what they are?"

   Hood said the research has possible implications for gene therapy. Scientists
now may be able to arrest the development of stem cells -bone-marrow cells that
produce blood cells for fighting disease, carrying oxygen through the body and
healing injuries.

   Thus, before the stem cells have become specialized blood cells, healthy
genes could be inserted in these "grandfather" cells to replace defective,
disease-producing genes. The healthy genes would be passed on to subsequent
generations of blood cells.

   Linheng Li, a geneticist in Hood's laboratory, was the principal researcher
on the project, which was reported in this week's edition of the journal Nature
Genetics. The University of Washington team collaborated with scientists from
the University of Pennsylvania and the National Institutes of Health.

   The researchers found the gene, called "jagged1," in four families affected
by Alagille syndrome. Members of the families had symptoms including heart
disease and malformation of the eyes, skeleton and face. Scientists located the
defective gene on chromosome 20.

   Scientists found that the gene makes a protein that fits into a receptor
-itself a protein on the fetal cell surface. The gene and the receptor, called
Notch, act together, like a lock and key: Notch, the lock, is inactive until the
jagged1 protein is produced. The jagged1 protein, the key, activates Notch,
which tells the cell to stop developing before it "differentiates" into a form
that is too specialized for the developing organ.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1997


                             2322 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                   August 16, 1997, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-14

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: TEAM IDENTIFIES 'IMMORTALITY' GENE KEY TO UNCONTROLLED CANCER GROWTH

BYLINE: JOSEPH B. VERRENGIA, ROCKY MOUNTAIN NEWS

BODY:


   A research team led by Nobel laureate Tom Cech has identified an
''immortality'' gene believed to trigger the uncontrolled growth of cancer
cells.

   Finding the gene is the crucial first step in attacking cancer in a
dramatically different way - zeroing in on tumor cells and disrupting their
reproductive machinery while leaving surrounding healthy tissues unharmed.

   The new-found gene has been dubbed the immortality gene because it unleashes
production of telomerase, an enzyme that allows cells to replicate repeatedly.

   Most healthy cells contain a biochemical stopwatch that blocks telomerase and
begins the inevitable aging process. But in cancer cells, telomerase activity
won't quit.

   It essentially resets the biological stopwatch in cancer cells, enabling
tumors to grow continuously without the risk of cell death. Telomerase has been
found in the cells of 95 percent of all cancers.

   ''Telomerase takes one of the brakes off of cell division,'' Cech said.
''That's why this enzyme may be important in cancer.''

   Cech, who shared the 1989 Nobel Prize for chemistry, says we now have the
ability to make lots of pure telomerase, to understand its properties and learn
how to inhibit it.

   ''Then it could be tested for its anti-cancer activity.''

   Cech's group at the University of Colorado is working with researchers at the
Geron Corporation of Menlo Park, Calif. A rival research team at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology also has isolated the telomerase gene. The
role of telomerase was first raised in the early 1990s as both a theory about
the basic biology of cell growth and as a potential cancer target.

   In the nucleus of the cell, the body's 100,000 genes are twisted inside 23
pairs of chromosomes. The tips of the chromosomes are called telomeres. They act
like the plastic protective tip on the ends of a shoelace.

   The telomerase gene orders the production of an enzyme that replenishes that
tip through endless cell divisions. It functions in a period following
fertilization when cell division is occurring fast and furiously.

   This is true for organisms ranging from simple yeasts up to humans. Cech said
the gene discovery is fundamentally important because it shows that telomerase
was first developed by a simple life form eons ago and has been retained through
evolution by all eukaryotes - organisms whose cells have a separate nucleus and
cytoplasm.

   For unexplained reasons, the gene turns itself off and telomerase activity
ceases in nearly all healthy cells. Subsequently, the telomere tip of the
chromosome gets a little shorter every time the cell divides.

   Eventually, the telomere becomes so stubby that the cell can no longer divide
and will die. That's an unavoidable step in the aging process.

   Cancer cells avoid this life-shortening process by activating the so-called
immortality gene for its own protection. The enzyme serves as a cellular
fountain of youth, replenishing the telomeres in the cancer cell's chromosomes
and enabling the disease to spread unchecked.

   Finding drugs to block telomerase would insert the biochemical stopwatch into
cancer cells and, in effect, induce them to die of old age.

   Medical researchers say the discovery is a fundamental step in turning
telomerase theory into real medicine.

   In the near term, said Dr. Ken Shroyer, surgical pathologist at Colorado
University Cancer Center, it will lead to early warning tests that could spot a
telomerase marker in the bloodstream. That would signal the presence of cancer
long before tissue biopsies would show mature cancer cells.

   Shroyer said the discovery could lead to actual gene therapies that
specifically turn off the telomerase gene and kill the cancer.

   Cancer is a complex force that rarely is defeated for very long by a
single-target therapy. But telomerase appears to be a fundamental part of a wide
variety of cancers and could be a fat target.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1997


                             2323 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         August 15, 1997 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC GROUND FLOOR

BODY:

   Gene therapy is a hot field in medical research, one that could someday yield
cures for a host of genetic diseases, cancer and even AIDS.

   Those are exciting prospects, and so is this: Our area is going to be a part
of it.

   Tulane University's primate center near Covington is developing a gene
therapy program, the first of the nation's seven federally financed primate
centers to do so.

   The program will be housed in a new $2.5 million building at the center, paid
for in part by a $1 million grant from the National Institute of Health. The
building, which will house the university's AIDS research program, will include
a state-of-the-art lab, accommodations for visiting researchers and space for
the nearly 25 researchers already at work on gene therapy.

   Because gene research is already going on at the center, Tulane is well
positioned to develop a gene therapy program and expects to be at the forefront
of the field in five to 10 years.

   One ongoing project is seeking a cure for globoid cell leukodystrophy, a
fatal genetic disease that kills children who inherit it by the time they are 2
or 3. The disease is ideal for primate research because it is one of only two
genetic diseases that has been found in nonhuman primates.

   Another project is investigating gene therapy as a way to treat ovarian
cancer, and another is developing a helium air gun that could be used to deliver
genetic vaccinations.

   "Genetics in the larger sense is going to revolutionize medicine and spawn
industries that are as productive as the computer industry," said Dr. John
LaRosa, chancellor of the university's medical center. "In my more visionary
moments, I can't help but wonder why we can't become the Silicon Valley of
genetics."

   That vision is an exciting one. Getting in on the ground floor of a new
high-tech industry is an opportunity that doesn't come along often.

   Tulane officials deserve credit, not only for seeing the opportunity but also
for being in a position to seize it.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1997


                             2324 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                   August 14, 1997, Thursday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: PERSONAL BEST;
A CLOSE-UP LOOK AT PEOPLE WHO MATTER;
 Giving Her All to Anti-Cancer Foundation

BYLINE: DIANE WEDNER, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:


   Touched by the loss of loved ones to a disease that strikes nearly 1.4
million people nationwide each year, Roberta Pawlak decided 29 years ago to
thrust herself into the search for a cure for cancer.

   Through her volunteer work at the Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at
UCLA, for which she has helped raised millions of dollars, she has done just
that.

   "Roberta is a role model in philanthropy," said Helene Brown, a board member
of the Jonsson Cancer Center Foundation, the organization's nonprofit
fund-raising arm. "We'd be nowhere without her pioneering efforts. It's people
like her, with her ideas, that make a difference. No one else does what she
does."

   And Pawlak, despite her habit of shunning the limelight, does plenty.  From
interviewing young scientists to helping choose research projects to buying the
flowers for fund-raising events, her efforts have touched many lives.

   "What keeps me involved is how much I believe in the incredible work of the
center," said Pawlak, 62. "I like that I can feel so close to the work they're
doing."

   Pawlak became involved in cancer research when she and her mother, Nancy
Jones, joined the center's San Fernando Valley chapter in 1968 and were
instrumental in raising money for what was to become the Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center. Her own substantial financial contributions helped build the
Westwood center.

   The longtime Calabasas resident, a homemaker who came from a wealthy family,
said she chose the Jonsson Center for her efforts because "I actually have an
input into what cancer research projects will be funded with the money we
raise."

   Last year about $ 4 million was raised for the center, said Bill Flumenbaum,
the foundation's executive director.

   A portion of the funds are earmarked for "seed grants," which attract bright
researchers to the center. Their innovative ideas often generate larger
government grants, which have led to significant medical discoveries. According
to Flumenbaum, top cancer researchers at UCLA started with seed grants from the
foundation.

   The center's doctors and scientists have contributed to such discoveries as
gene therapy, in which the patient's own genes are used to alter or repair
faulty ones, and the development of antigens, which heighten the immune system's
ability to counteract cancer cells.

   According to the American Cancer Society, more than 3,000 cases of cancer are
diagnosed every day in the United States. With only half of those patients
surviving, the need for research into battling the disease is great, authorities
say.

   As a member of the foundation's board of directors, Pawlak is known for
asking penetrating questions about funding and for helping select prospective
grant recipients.

   " Pawlak is one of our most generous supporters. . . . She is a voice of
reason on the board; she's very focused," Flumenbaum said. "Combining grace,
charm and modesty, she epitomizes the volunteer for an organization like ours ."

   Pawlak sees no end to her volunteerism. "I'll always be supportive," she
said. "Enthusiasm and involvement are contagious. I'll stay as long as I'm
able."

   Personal Best is a weekly profile of an ordinary person who does
extraordinary things. Please send suggestions on prospective candidates to
Personal Best, Los Angeles Times, 20000 Prairie St., Chatsworth 91311.  Or fax
them to (818) 772-3338. Or e-mail them to valley@latimes.com.nameline

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Roberta Pawlak

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2325 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        August 13, 1997 Wednesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1276 words

HEADLINE: TULANE'S PRIMATE CENTER A LEADER IN GENE STUDIES;
RESEARCH PROGRAM FIRST OF 7 IN U.S.

BYLINE: By EZRA HODGE Staff writer

BODY:

   Elementary biology teaches us that genes define nearly every physical aspect
of living organisms, from hair color to ailments such as heart disease and
alcoholism.

   Cutting-edge science, however, promises the ability to replace, correct or
alter genes to cure or prevent disease, using techniques that have been broadly
defined as gene therapies.

   And it's perhaps history in the making for the New Orleans area that the
first of the seven federally financed primate centers in the nation to develop a
gene therapy program will be Tulane University's primate center near Covington.

   "This is a hot area of research," said Dr. John LaRosa, chancellor of the
university's medical center. "Genetics in the larger sense is going to
revolutionize medicine and spawn industries that are as productive as the
computer industry. . . . In my more visionary moments, I can't help but wonder
why we can't become the Silicon Valley of genetics," he said, referring to the
New Orleans area.

   LaRosa and Tulane primate center director Peter Gerone are spearheading
Tulane's new gene therapy research program, which will be housed in a new $2.5
million building at the primate center and will have a state-of-the-art research
lab, federally approved to develop human medicines.

   The hope of using gene therapies to cure genetic diseases, cancer and perhaps
even heart disease and AIDS is behind Tulane's decision to invest millions in
the emerging field and the National Institute of Health's decision to step in
with financial support.

   The institute has awarded the school a $1 million federal grant to help
defray the cost of the 14,000-square-foot building, which will house the
university's AIDS research program, in addition to providing research
accommodations for visiting gene therapy researchers and work space for the
nearly 25 researchers at Tulane now involved in gene research.

   The lot for the building was cleared recently; construction is due to begin
within the next few months and be completed within a year. The official
groundbreaking will be Aug. 26.

   In the next five to 10 years, Tulane expects its program will be at the
forefront of developing gene therapy research.

   Already the university has undertaken several gene therapy research projects
that will be further studied under the new program.

   *** Child disease research ***

   One project under way at the primate center targets a rare genetic disease
that shuts down a child's nervous system and usually kills him by age 2 or 3.

   Researchers are trying to cure the disease, called globoid cell
leukodystrophy, in rhesus monkeys. The disease is desirable for gene therapy
research because it is one of only two genetic diseases found in nonhuman
primates.

   The school's globoid research is arguably one of the world's most promising
gene therapy research projects.

   Instead of using drugs or surgery, the globoid researchers are trying to cure
the monkeys by adding a missing gene to their DNA. DNA is deoxyribonucleic acid,
the genetic code of all organisms.

   Led by veterinarian Gary Baskins, chief of pathology at the center,
researchers are making progress toward a gene therapy cure for monkeys with
globoid disease.

   Baskins was part of a team that discovered globoid disease by accident in
1987 in a single rhesus monkey. Since then, he has developed a colony of monkeys
that carry the globoid disease gene.

   Those with the disease are missing the gene GALC, which produces an enzyme
involved in the breakdown of myelin, a substance that acts as an insulator
between nerve fibers. Without the gene and without the metabolism of myelin, the
nervous system short-circuits, causing death.

   Baskins and other Tulane researchers, trying to cure the disease by replacing
the missing gene, have succeeded in getting marker genes, which have no function
but are easily detected, into the monkeys' cells.

   To do this, they used viruses - stripped of their disease-causing elements
and filled instead with the marker gene - that will pry their way into the
monkeys' cells and then replicate themselves and the marker gene.

   Gerone said, "The virus is like the Trojan horse," disguising the entry of
foreign genes.

   The scientists' next step is to replace the marker gene with GALC.

   The fact that the marker gene test worked "gives us proof of concept,"
Baskins said.

   "We know it can work now, but there is still a lot of research to be done
before we have a cure."

   If Tulane finds a successful gene therapy for globoid disease, it not only
will cure the disease, it may lead to the development of a monkey model for gene
therapy research for other genetic diseases. The idea is that once a monkey
model exists for one genetic disease, it could give clues into how to develop
models for other genetic diseases using monkeys, Baskins said.

   Gene therapy research, however, is not limited to genetic disorders. Some
nongenetic diseases can be evaluated for gene therapy cures or treatments, and
nonhuman primates could easily be used for such research, he said.

   *** Vaccination research ***

   In another example of gene therapy research under way at the primate center,
researcher and veterinarian Skip Bohm is working with Geniva Co. to develop a
helium air gun that could deliver genetic vaccinations to people by blowing
DNA-laced gold beads into their skin or other tissue.

   The injected DNA, which would correct faulty genes or replace missing genes,
would separate from the gold beads and be infused into the person's genome. The
genome is a person's complete set of genes.

   "The possibilities are endless. The experts are saying (gene therapy) is the
future of medicine," Gerone said.

   *** Cancer research ***

   Certain gene therapies could target cancerous tumors, said Dr. Scott Freeman,
an associate professor and researcher in the Department of Pathology at Tulane's
medical center who has found a way to fight ovarian cancer using gene therapy.

   Though his results have been promising - the process killed nearly all of the
tumor cells in a rare human gene therapy experiment - there is still a long way
to a cure. No tests have been done on second-generation tumors, which tend to be
more resistant to factors that killed their predecessors in other cancer
treatments, such as chemotherapy, Freeman said.

   *** New debates ***

   Although gene therapy research is promising, it has been hindered by three
main factors: Human experimentation is heavily regulated and dangerous; nonhuman
primate research is virtually nonexistent because there are few models in
nonhuman primates to study diseases; and genes of mice and other common research
animals are problematic because their sets of DNA are significantly different
from those of humans.

   But because Tulane already has a significant amount of gene research going on
involving nonhuman primates, it is better positioned than other research
institutions to develop a gene therapy program.

   The advancement of such research, however, is predicted to bring the debate
of bio-ethics to new levels.

   For example, while gene therapy could correct gene deficiencies in an
individual, that person would still pass along the original gene makeup to his
offspring. Permanently changing that original genetic material is highly
controversial.

   Tulane has no plans to conduct those types of experiments or to undertake
cloning research, but Baskins said those are issues society will face as gene
therapy research progresses.

   "There are a lot of things people have never had to deal with before because
it's never been possible before," Baskins said. "Those things scientists don't
decide; society has to make those decisions."

GRAPHIC: GARY BASKINS Veterinarian leads team studying monkeys [COLOR] PHOTO
Gene research using rhesus monkeys will take place at the Tulane University
primate center near Covington. Veterinarian Gary Baskins, chief of pathology at
the center, will lead a research team in gene therapy that has the potential to
cure or prevent diseases in humans.  STAFF PHOTO BY LIONEL COTTIER

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1997


                             2326 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        August 13, 1997 Wednesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: REPAIRING THE BODY'S BLUEPRINT;
THE KIND OF GENE THERAPY RESEARCH UNDERWAY AT;
TULANE UNIVERISTY IS ON THE CUTTING EDGE OF MEDICINE.

BODY:

   =============================================================

   #ART:

   WHAT IS GENE THERAPY?

   Genes are strands of genetic material - blueprints, if

   you will - in every living cell that determine the physical

   and biological characteristics of an individual. Many

   diseases are caused by genes that go haywire and make bad

   copies of themselves. So scientists are looking to fix those

   genes and cure many difficult diseases.

   FIXING A DEFECT

   To repair defective genes, researchers at Tulane and

   several other universities are looking at ways to send good

   genes directly into defective cells. Once the cell is

   repaired, it then makes good copies of itself. There are many

   ways to do this, but the most common method of delivery is

   through a virus. Here's how it works:

   1) A good gene is put inside a virus.

   3) The virus invades a defective cell, and releases the

   gene.

   3) The gene splices into the cell's strand of DNA and

   "fixes" it.

   A human cell nucleus contains 46 tightly wound strands of

   DNA known as chromosomes. Together, the chromosomes contain

   about 100,000 genes.

   RESEARCH AT TULANE

   1) Globoid cell leukodystrophy - Researchers are trying

   to treat a form of this rare and devastating childhood nerve

   disorder that occurs in primates by infecting the monkeys

   with a virus that carries a repair gene.

   2) Genetic vaccination - Using a high-tech air gun,

   researchers are trying to perfect injection into the skin

   of naked DNA attached to tiny gold beads to vaccinate people

   against a wide range of disorders.

   3) Ovarian cancer - Already under trial in humans, this

   method involves splicing a type of Herpes virus to ovarian

   cancer cells, then giving anti-viral medication that will

   mistake the cancer for a Herpes virus and kill it. Source: Staff research

   STAFF GRAPHIC BY SHELBY SAPUSEK

GRAPHIC: A rhesus monkey at the Tulane primate center near Covington.  [COLOR]
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1997


                             2327 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             August 8, 1997, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS , Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 549 words

HEADLINE: MARKET UNKIND TO PROGENITOR IPO

BYLINE: Mike Pramik, Dispatch Business Reporter

BODY:


   Progenitor Inc., a Columbus-based biotechnology company, saw its shares
tumble 32 percent at one point in its first day of trading yesterday after it
raised $ 19.3 million in a long delayed initial public offering.

   Progenitor, 1507 Chambers Rd., sold 2.75 million trading units at $ 7. Each
unit consists of one share of common stock and one warrant trading separately on
the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   The offering, which represents 22 percent of the company, was fully
subscribed, but by the end of the day the stock had fallen to 5 1/16. Warrants
closed at 1 1/4, making each unit worth 6 3/16 - down 9.8 percent.

   ''It looks like it bombed,'' said Jack Fitzgibbon, editor of New York-based
''IPO Aftermarket Newsletter.'' ''But the damage isn't as bad as it would
appear. It traded along the line of a weak unit offering.''

   The warrants are exercisable at $ 10.50 a share for five years. Lehman
Brothers Inc. and Genesis Merchant Group Securities co-managed the offering.

   Progenitor began its long march to market last summer. In June 1996, the
company announced plans to raise as much as $ 37 million by offering stock at $
11 to $ 13 a share.

   The offering was proposed at a time when biotech stocks were booming. But by
August 1996, the market had soured, causing Progenitor to postpone its offering.

   Progenitor, which had revenues of $ 1.3 million last year, tried again in
March. It filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission to sell shares at $
10 to $ 12 a share. By the time the stock was offered yesterday, the initial
price was pushed down to $ 7.

   ''It was a combination of a multitude of things,'' Fitzgibbon said. ''One, it
had been postponed, then they tried to cut the price back, and that's never a
good sign.''

   Progenitor was formed in 1992 to make cellular and genetic therapies that
were developed by researchers at the Edison Biotechnology Institute at Ohio
University in Athens, Ohio. Commercial applications for the company's research
includes treatments for cancer, degenerative diseases associated with aging and
blood and immunity disorders.

   Progenitor intends to use the proceeds to advance the company's research and
efforts to bring new drug therapies to market, to expand or upgrade facilities
and for other general corporate activities.

   The offering accounted for 21.5 percent of the company's 12.8 million shares
outstanding. Parent company, Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Lexington,
Mass., retains 41 percent ownership.

   In connection with the offering, Interneuron contributed outstanding
intercompany loans to Progenitor's capital and made other adjustments that
adding $ 16 million to Progenitor's working capital.

   Interneuron also purchased $ 3.5 million in units at the offering.

   Another buyer was Amgen Inc., a Thousand Oaks, Calif., company that licensed
Progenitor's weight-reduction technology in January. As part of that agreement,
Amgen agreed to purchase $ 5.5 million of Progenitor stock at the offering.

   The agreement also included a $ 500,000 licensing fee to Progenitor and up to
$ 36 million in other payments, based on the development and sale of products
that use Progenitor technology.

   Meanwhile, Progenitor also completed a $ 22 million stock swap for its
acquisition of Mercator Genetics Inc.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1997


                             2328 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            August 6, 1997 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN GENE SHOWS PROMISE FOR TREATING LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASEResearch
Notebook

BYLINE: Compiled by RICHARD L. HILL, of The Oregonian staff<

BODY:

   Wednesday, August 6, 1997

   CORRECTION: Published correction ran: 08/08/97:

   Researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel have created a
pure form of gallium arsenide that allows electrons to travel through the
material at a record 14.4 million centimeters a second. An item in the Science
section of The Oregonian on Wednesday misstated the speed. .

   HUMAN GENE SHOWS PROMISE FOR TREATING LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE

   Research Notebook

   Scientists studying mice that are genetically engineered to develop
familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis -- also known as Lou Gehrig's disease
-- have found that the human gene Bcl-2 may delay the onset of the disease.

   ALS is the most common motor neuron disease in humans, with inherited ALS
accounting for 15 percent of all cases of the disease.

   Researchers at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center worked with two strains
of mice: one carrying mutations that produced ALS and another carrying Bcl-2,
which is known to protect against apoptosis, or cell death. Scientists bred
the two strains of mice and discovered that offspring inheriting both ALS and
Bcl-2 developed ALS significantly later in life -- and lived longer -- than
offspring that inherited ALS but not Bcl-2.

   The study found that mice carrying the Bcl-2 gene had both more and
healthier motor neurons than mice without Bcl-2.

   ``The study suggests that gene therapy -- either with Bcl-2 or with another
gene capable of preventing apoptosis -- could help delay the onset of ALS,''
said Dr. Serge Przedborski, principal investigator and assistant professor of
neurology at Columbia University. The finding also could lead to the
development of drugs that mimic proteins produced by Bcl-2 or other protective
genes.

   The study's findings were reported in the July 24 issue of the journal
Science.

   Theory contends moon's birth began as planet vaporized Earth

   A rogue planet three times as massive as Mars probably sideswiped Earth
about 4.5 billion years ago, vaporizing enough material from Earth's upper
layers to form the moon, a researcher at the University of Colorado at Boulder
theorizes.

   The Mars-sized ``impactor'' proposed by Harvard University researchers in
the late 1980s is not large enough to account for the formation of our
unusually large moon, said Robin Canup of the university's Laboratory for
Atmospheric and Space Physics. His calculations indicate the rogue planet must
have been at least 2.5 to 3 times the mass of Mars to create the volume of
debris required to eventually coalesce into the moon.

   The planet probably was orbiting the sun somewhere between Earth and Mars
when the collision occurred, said Canup, who presented his findings last week
at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Cambridge, Mass.

   Canup said the ancient planet vaporized the upper portions of Earth's crust
and mantle, spraying the material into Earth's orbit. The material appears to
have spread into a gaseous disk around Earth, then formed a handful of
extremely hot moonlets that eventually coalesced into the moon we see today.

   Israeli's refined crystal raises the speed limit for electrons

   Researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel have created the
purest crystals of the semiconductor gallium arsenide, a feat that allows
electrons to travel at a record speed.

   Electrons zoom through this material at 14.4 centimeters per second --
about 324,000 miles an hour -- beating the previous world record of 11.7
million centimeters per second set by Bell Laboratories in 1989.

   The achievement, reported in the Aug. 4 issue of Applied Physics Letters,
allows scientists to study the behavior of electrons in extremely pure
materials and provides them with an important research tool for creating
faster and more efficient electronic devices.

   New laser increases precision for operations on eye's cornea

   Scientists at the University of Michigan have developed and demonstrated a
high-precision laser for eye surgery that can be used to perform surgical
procedures within the transparent cornea of the eye -- something not possible
with current laser technology.

   The laser uses powerful light pulses lasting just a few hundred
femtoseconds, or quadrillionths of a second. These ultrashort pulses require
less energy to cut tissue and do not create large shock waves that can damage
surrounding structures, said Ron M. Kurtz, assistant professor of
ophthalmology.

   Kurtz is testing the laser for use in corneal refractive surgery for vision
correction and in corneal transplantation. Future research will test the
laser's effectiveness in the treatment of glaucoma and cataracts.

   --Compiled by Richard L. Hill

CORRECTION:

   Published correction ran: 08/08/97:

   Researchers at the Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel have created a
pure form of gallium arsenide that allows electrons to travel through the
material at a record 14.4 million centimeters a second. An item in the Science
section of The Oregonian on Wednesday misstated the speed. .

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2329 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             August 4, 1997, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES ENTERTAINMENT & ACCENT , Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: SICKLE CELL DRUG SHOWS PROMISE IN INITIAL TRIAL

BYLINE: Dennis Fiely

BODY:


   A promising new drug for sickle cell anemia is "like soap that can be put
inside someone's body," Dr. Patricia Adams-Graves said.

   Adams-Graves, a 1970 graduate of East High School, directs the Diggs-Kraus
Sickle Cell Center at the University of Tennessee Medical School in Memphis.

   She is hopeful that polaxamer-188 can relieve the suffering of sickle cell
patients and postpone organ damage.

   Taken intravenously, the medication acts as a lubricant that eases sickled
cells through the blood vessels. The sticking of the misshapen red blood cells
in capillaries creates blockages that starve tissue and organs of oxygen and
cause episodes of severe pain.

   Adults often develop irreversible organ damage from years of oxygen deficits.

   Physicians treat the ailment with pain medications, fluids, blood
transfusions and antibiotics.

   Some patients are hospitalized with pain as often as once a month for stays
of 10 days or longer.

   Polaxamer-188 "is a drug that could abort painful crises early and shorten
hospital stays," Adams-Graves said.

   In a pilot study of 50 patients, those who received the medication required
lower doses of narcotics and reduced their hospital stays by an average of two
days, compared with the placebo group.

   Adams-Graves, who headed the trial, will publish the results next month in
Blood, the journal of the American Society of Hematology.

   "There were not enough patients in the study to make a final recommendation
about this drug. But even with the small sample, the results were statistically
significant," Adams-Graves said.

   A study of more than 300 patients, to begin later this year, should provide
more definitive conclusions.

   Kidney damage is a potential side effect, "but we did not see that in the
pilot study," Adams-Graves said.

   About one in 400 American blacks inherits the mutated gene that causes sickle
cell anemia. The disease also is common among Asians, Greeks, South Americans
and other ethnic groups. The average life span of people with the disease ranges
from 45 to 50.

   Adams-Graves, 45, grew up on the Near East Side and graduated from the
University of Louisville Medical School after attending Tennessee State
University in Nashville. She lives near Memphis with her husband and two
children, ages 2 and 13.

   An assistant professor in the division of hematology and oncology at the
University of Tennessee in Memphis, she described sickle cell anemia as "an itch
area for me."

   She has been concentrating on the disease since 1990.

   Polaxamer-188 "is not a miracle drug," she emphasized. "It doesn't hit the
genetic problem" that causes the disease. Nevertheless, it could become an
important weapon in an ever-increasing arsenal to fight the disease and its
symptoms.

   Bone marrow transplantation was shown last year to cure the disease, but the
treatment has a 10 percent death rate, Adams-Graves noted.

   Like polaxamer-188, hydroxyurea stems painful crises. But it also alters the
disease process by stimulating the production of fetal hemoglobin, which
prevents cells from becoming stiff and sickle-shaped.

   Hydroxyurea still is under study for sickle cell. One potential danger of the
chemotherapeutic agent is that it may lower blood cell counts.

   A cure through gene therapy remains "a wonderful thought" more than an
imminent reality, Adams-Graves said.


   Accent Reporter Dennis Fiely writes Mondays on health-related issues.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1997


                             2330 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                      August 4, 1997, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2467 words

HEADLINE: THE CUTTING EDGE;
 SIGGRAPH SPECIAL;
 HAND IT TO THEM;
 UNIVERSITY LABS ARE TAKING THE LEAD IN APPLYING COMPUTER GRAPHICS IN DIVERSE
FIELDS.

BYLINE: KAREN KAPLAN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Sometimes, a picture is worth more than a thousand words.

   A picture of a cancerous lung tumor, for example, can be matched against a
multimedia database and enable doctors to design a potentially lifesaving course
of treatment. A video of a cybermicroorganism can help biologists explain how
the real thing takes shape from a single cell. And a 3-D virtual car might even
serve as a working model that a designer could shape with his hands.

   These and other feats are made possible by advances in the burgeoning field
of computer graphics. Founded in the mid-1960s by computer science gurus David
Evans and Ivan Sutherland at the University of Utah, the discipline has moved
far beyond mere digital pictures and begun to make major contributions to fields
as diverse as medicine, radio communications, entertainment and architecture.

   "Once upon a time, those of us in computer graphics used to paint pictures on
screens, and all you could do was just look at it," said Turner Whitted, who
helped organize Siggraph, the annual conference of the Assn. for Computing
Machinery's subgroup for graphics. The conference takes place this week at the
Los Angeles Convention Center.

   Whitted said that today technological advances are such that users can roll
up their sleeves and interact with computer graphics creations almost as if they
were physical objects.

   "The user himself is getting sucked into the screen," Whitted said.


   *

   In simple terms, computer graphics technology makes it possible to
visualize--and manipulate--massive amounts of data. For years, though, its
development has been limited by the huge amount of computer horsepower required
for even simple applications. Turning weather data into a visual rendering of a
storm system, for example, could easily require a Cray supercomputer.

   But with the continued exponential advances in the power of the
microprocessor, these obstacles are falling away. A tour of university
laboratories in Southern California and elsewhere reveals the remarkable breadth
and potential of a field that is just now coming into its own.

   At UCLA, computer science professor Wesley Chu is working with faculty from
the medical school in Westwood to build a database of X-ray images.  Each X-ray
picture will be linked to a patient's case history--including the course of
treatment and its effectiveness--along with audio files of the doctor's
observations and video documenting the patient's progress.

   At first, this sounds like just a fancy multimedia version of the patient
files that are usually kept on paper. But as digital files, these case histories
are far more valuable because computers can search through them to find similar
cases with clues about how best to treat an individual patient.

   The key to making this work is computer graphics, Chu said. In order to
search through the files of thousands of lung cancer patients, the computer must
be able to recognize a tumor in an X-ray. That's significantly more difficult
than using a search engine to find a keyword in a text document, since words
match precisely and pictures of similar tumors can actually look quite
different.

   Chu and his colleagues are teaching computers how to recognize features such
as shape, size, volume, location and texture in a 3-D MRI X-ray image. Then the
system, dubbed KMeD, can use those parameters to find tumors similar to one in a
new patient. Physicians can review files of earlier cases before deciding how to
treat the new patient.

   "We're not trying to replace physicians; we're helping them make decisions,"
Chu said. Across town at Caltech in Pasadena--one of five universities in the
National Science Foundation-sponsored Graphics and Visualization
Center--researchers in the Computer Graphics Laboratory are also developing
techniques to squeeze more information out of X-rays made by magnetic resonance
imaging machines. The MRI determines areas of densities within a body part, and
researchers use that data to make pictures that show where the skin ends and the
tendons underneath begin.

   Body parts such as hands are especially difficult to draw because of their
irregular shapes. And it's hard to determine the exact boundary of two kinds of
tissue, such as fat and bone. But Caltech researchers use vigorous mathematics
to draw extremely precise pictures of hands and wrists. The next step is to
apply this technology to hands in motion, professor Alan Barr said.

   "Then we could figure out what hand and wrist postures are the least likely
to produce carpal tunnel syndrome," he said. Carpal tunnel syndrome is a
debilitating repetitive stress injury.

   Barr and his colleagues also use computer graphics to make models of
microscopic organisms that can test biologists' theories about how they grow.
The graphics experts write programs so that the cells know the rules that govern
how they can multiply, what they will collide with and how they can bond with
each other. Then they run the program and watch to see whether the cells
organize themselves into the shapes the biologists had predicted.

   "We can do a simulation and see if the model works the way it does in real
life," Barr said. If it does, that affirms their theories.

   At USC, computer science professor Gerard Medioni is teaching a computer how
to draw a 3-D object based on two still photographs. Using pattern-recognition
techniques and a form of mathematics called projective geometry, the computer
can establish points in two pictures (such as corners and straight edges) that
correspond to each other. Then it can tell how the object would look from any
viewpoint in between.


   *

   Medioni, who is on the faculty of USC's prestigious Integrated Media Systems
Center, thinks this technology can be used to create virtual sets for movies and
television. For example, producers could snap a series of photographs of the
Kremlin's interior and use this "viewpoint synthesis" technique to create an
entire backdrop that could be synthesized onto a blue screen, he said.

   Helen Na is using computer graphics to study the ionosphere, the outer part
of the Earth's atmosphere that is populated with electrons. Like a weather
system, the ionosphere is constantly changing, especially in response to solar
conditions.

   That's a problem for the military, which communicates with soldiers by
bouncing radio messages off the ionosphere. If the shape of the ionosphere is
not known precisely, the signal may not go where it is intended.

   "You want to be able to design a signal so that it will go where you want,"
said Na, an electrical engineering professor at UCLA. "You also want to be able
to tell where a signal came from."

   Na uses data from 16 radio beacon receivers in the Caribbean to calculate the
density of the ionosphere, hundreds of miles above sea level. With computer
graphics, she constructs tomographic images of the ionosphere's ever-changing
shape. Denser areas are a different color than thin areas, which makes the maps
more useful.

   At the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (another member of the NSF
Graphics and Visualization Center), researchers are using computer graphics to
see microscopic structures--and even move them around. With a device called a
nanoManipulator, a graphics workstation converts data from an atomic-force
microscope into a realistic 3-D image that is magnified 1 million times.

   Using the tip of the microscope, which is connected to a force-feedback
device, UNC scientists have poked around at a virus that attacks tobacco plants
to see what makes them stick to their victims.  They have also used the
nanoManipulator to push a 20-nanometer ball of gold (about 300 times smaller
than the width of a human hair) into a tiny gap in a gold wire.

   "This is a sandbox for physicists, biologists and gene therapists," said
Russell M. Taylor II, a computer science professor who has been developing the
nanoManipulator for five years.

   The range of potential applications for computer graphics is also expanding
with the help of new types of equipment. At Stanford University, researchers are
developing a "responsive workbench," a display system that projects
computer-generated images onto a table-like device with a 6-by-3-foot screen.
The computer creates separate images for the left and right eye, and the user
wears special shutter glasses to create the 3-D effect.

   Although computer screens are suitable for many people, a workbench would be
preferable for architects, surgeons, automobile designers and others who require
a tabletop environment, said Pat Hanrahan, a professor in Stanford's computer
science department. Objects on the workbench--an idea that originated at the
German National Research Center for Information Technology--can be grabbed,
moved and rotated. Some items, such as individual bones from a virtual skeleton,
can be linked to text or other information. Hanrahan and his colleagues are
perfecting a workbench that two people can use simultaneously.

   The workbench paradigm "is more natural," he said. "We can just reach into
the world and grab something and manipulate it. With a mouse and a monitor, it's
all indirect."

   USC's Medioni is developing a pen that will draw a 3-D computer image when it
traces a 3-D object. When the pen traces two sides of an object, the computer
will automatically compute the shape of the edge that joins them.

   Medioni has trained a computer to discern the curve of a surface at every
point where the pen touches it. Then the computer uses those points to calculate
the overall shape of the object, whether it's smooth like a ball or lumpy like
an oversized model of a molar.

   Medioni can also use the pen to draw a shape freehand. To make a cylindrical
rod, for example, he draws a circle in the air and then a line extending from
the edge. The computer infers the rest. By keeping track of the angles between
the joints of the pen, the computer can determine exactly where the tip is in
3-D space.

   A pair of electrical engineering professors at UCLA are designing a system
based on a computer chip that can reprogram itself to process images more
efficiently than standard chips. Some chips, called application-specific
integrated circuits (ASICs), are designed to perform only one kind of function
but to do it with exceptional speed. Other chips, such as Intel's Pentium
microprocessor, are designed to handle a wide range of applications but perform
them more slowly.


   *

   The chip that John Villasenor and William Mangione-Smith are working on
combines the best aspects of the two chips. The hardware is designed for only
one task--in this case, to recognize a particular shape, such as a tank in a
satellite image of a battlefield. But within a matter of milliseconds, the logic
gates on the chip can be reconfigured to look for a different shape.

   "If you've got 500 different shapes on 500 separate ASIC chips, then it takes
up more space and costs you more power," Villasenor said. But the reprogrammable
chip can churn through calculations faster than a microprocessor, he said.

   Villasenor and Mangione-Smith have demonstrated their chip on a small scale,
and they are currently building a full-scale system for Sandia National
Laboratory.

   Whitted, the Siggraph organizer, said that despite the plethora of computer
graphics technologies to be showcased at this week's conference, even more
dramatic applications are yet to come. Some will make it possible to communicate
with a computer by voice and hand motions instead of a mouse and keyboard.
Others will make virtual reality videoconferencing possible without clunky
hardware such as goggles and gloves.

   "With computer graphics," he said, "you can create a world that doesn't obey
the old rules."

   Karen Kaplan covers technology, telecommunications and aerospace. She can be
reached at karen.kaplan@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Graphics experts write programs based on biologists' theories
about how microscopic organisms grow. If the computer-generated organism grows
into the shape predicted, that affirms the theories.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Caltech
PHOTO: Professor Wesley Chu is developing the KMeD multimedia medical database
system, which displays an X-ray of a hand. Chu hopes KMeD computers will be able
to read X-rays and detect tumors, then compare them with similar cases in the
database. Chu is assisted by graduate students Alex Bui, left, and David
Johnson.  PHOTOGRAPHER: ROBERT DURELL / Los Angeles Times PHOTO: Graduate
assistant Song Han, left, works with professor Gerard Medioni to develop a
quicker way to draw 3-D objects on a computer screen.  The process uses a pen
that works in conjunction with a software program to produce a 3-D computer
image when it traces an object. Han compares his hand to a 3-D rendering.
PHOTOGRAPHER: ROBERT DURELL / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2331 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1997 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         July 31, 1997 Thursday, KENNER

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 1D1

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: BEATING THE ODDS - SURVIVOR HELPS FELLOW PATIENTS

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE BORDELON Kenner bureau

BODY:

   Ray Goldstein of Kenner has beaten the odds. At 52, he's outlived most people
with cystic fibrosis.

   Admittedly, living with cystic fibrosis, the most common hereditary disease
in the United States, hasn't been easy. Goldstein said the disease, marked by
salty sweat, a persistent cough and heavy appetite with little weight gain can
cause irregularities in the small intestine and pancreas.

   But his pro-active stance toward treatment and a positive attitude have
prolonged his life. It's because of his longevity that Cystic Fibrosis Research
Inc. invited him to speak at its 10th annual Cystic Fibrosis Conference Aug. 8
through 12 in Palo Alto, Calif.

   "When I met Ray last year, I was impressed with his candor and his
willingness to share how he takes care of himself," said Ann Robinson,
conference coordinator and executive director of Cystic Fibrosis Research in
Palo Alto. "We look for people who can articulate how they take care of
themselves."

   Goldstein will be among five adult panelists with cystic fibrosis and will
present the topic, "Living Well with CF" on Aug. 9.

   Conventioneers will learn his rigorous, four-hour daily routine involving
Albuterol and Pulmozyme therapy through a nebulizer, inhaling Proventil, taking
antibiotics such as Cipro, following a vitamin regimen and taking a little
exercise when he has the energy. This routine begins every day at 6:30 a.m. and
costs $2,000 a month.

   While it's a tough battle, Goldstein knows his efforts keep him alive.

   "I choose to believe that it is worth the hours and frustration we all go
through on a daily basis," he said.

   Goldstein attended a cystic fibrosis conference for the first time just last
year. He said he found himself among the few older patients in attendance and,
as a result, was bombarded with inquiries. He shared what has helped him and
said others at the conference were just as open.

   "We learn from each other," he said, "and the doctors talk on our level."

   Calling Goldstein an advocate for fellow sufferers is an understatement. He
has undergone gene therapy with the National Institute of Health in Bethesda,
Md., and participated in antibiotic trials in 1995 at Tulane University Medical
Center.

   He has written about his experiences in the Cystic Fibrosis newsletters,
Roundtable, and CF Network and is a member of the International Association of
Cystic Fibrosis Adults, Cystic Fibrosis Research, Cystic Fibrosis Foundation -
CFF Public Policy Alliance and Tulane University Medical Center's Adult CF
Support Group.

   But much of his day, when not involved in treatment, is spent on the
Internet, talking with 400 cystic fibrosis sufferers who are active on the
Cystic-L International Website, a support group for cystic fibrosis sufferers
and their families. He counsels participants on about filing for disability and
getting Social Security benefits, among other topics.

   Goldstein, a former sales manager, trumpets the disease to spread the word
about it and its severity. He calls it an "infant disease" because few people
know that as many as 30,000 U.S. adult and children suffer from cystic fibrosis.
Many more could have the disease because it often goes undiagnosed, Robinson
said. The average age of survival is only 30.

   Robinson and Goldstein said DNA blood tests make it easier to diagnose the
disease today, although only 70 of the assumed 670 cystic fibrosis genetic
markers can be identified. Still, it's a big advance from the days when
Goldstein was told he was suffering from allergies and chronic bronchitis.

   Goldstein was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis in March 1995, but, luckily, he
said, doctors at Tulane University Medical Center suspected in 1977 that he had
cystic fibrosis and since then have aggressively treated him.

   Goldstein lauds the efforts of Cystic Fibrosis Research, founded in 1975 as a
nonprofit volunteer organization that finances research and educational
programs. He hopes, through contributions, to present a sizable donation at the
conference. To donate, call 466-0198.

   Like others with cystic fibrosis, Goldstein has decided that quality of life
is most important to him. He's had to give up some activities and quit his job
but, he said, "I have a grandchild, and that is important to me. I want to enjoy
my family."

   Goldstein is looking forward to speaking at the convention. If he can help
just one person, it's worth it, he said.

   "I think it's an honor . . . to give encouragement to all those parents out
there and the teen-agers and ones in the 20s and 30s that they can make it."

GRAPHIC: Ray Goldstein will speak at a Cystic Fibrosis conference in California
in August. [COLOR] STAFF PHOTO BY JOHN McCUSKER

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1997


                             2332 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 30, 1997 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1388 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   In the Region FTC OPPOSES MERGER OF MEDIQ, UNIVERSAL HOSPITAL SERVICES * The
Federal Trade Commission said yesterday it will ask a judge to block a proposed
$100 million merger of the nation's largest companies renting medical equipment:
Mediq Inc. and Universal Hospital Services Inc.

   In February, Mediq announced its plan to acquire Universal for $17.50 a
share. Mediq, based in Pennsauken, N.J., has 85 rental offices and more than
130,000 pieces of equipment. Universal, of Bloomington, Minn., has 46 rental
sites and 40,000 pieces of equipment. Mediq's close on Amex: $7.625, down 7.5
cents. Universal's close on Nasdaq: $12.25, down 62.5 cents.

    BELL ATLANTIC AGREES TO MCI RESELL OF D.C. PHONE SERVICE Bell Atlantic Corp.
said it agreed to allow MCI Communications Corp. to resell Bell Atlantic local
phone service in the Washington, D.C., area under the MCI brand. Financial terms
were not disclosed. Bell Atlantic said the local interconnection pact is the
fourth signed between the two telecommunications companies. Other pacts, signed
last month, are in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Virginia.

   IRS PROBES DEBT-REFUNDING OVERCHARGES IN PA. * The Internal Revenue Service
has contacted officials in Allentown and other Pennsylvania municipalities as
part of its inquiry into alleged overcharging for debt refundings. The IRS wants
the municipalities to contact the agency within 30 days as it investigates
whether their bonds were marked up to help underwriters boost profits and let
issuers avoid taxes, a process known as yield-burning. The notification comes
four months after the municipalities said the Securities and Exchange Commission
subpoenaed documents, and after an IRS official last week said the agency was
stepping up a three-year investigation into the illegal practice.

   SMITHKLINE PROPOSES A NEW USE FOR FAMVIR * SmithKline Beecham said it has
filed a supplemental new drug application with the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to use Famvir to treat herpes simplex and shingles infections in
patients with compromised immune systems, such as those with HIV.

   CONSUMERS FINANCIAL EXPLAINS FAILURE OF MERGER WITH LASALLE * Consumers
Financial Corp., Camp Hill, Pa., said it terminated its merger agreement with
privately held LaSalle Group Inc. after LaSalle failed to secure financing. The
two insurance companies had agreed to merge March 25, but Consumers warned in
May that it might seek an alternate buyer because LaSalle didn't appear to have
enough funding. Consumers Financial said it has now signed a letter of intent
with Life of the South Corp., a Georgia-based insurance holding company, to sell
its marketing organization and its credit insurance business for cash.

   CIGNA FORMS HEALTH, RETIREMENT COUNSELING SERVICE Cigna Corp. has formed a
new subsidiary, Benefits Access Inc., to counsel workers about their employers'
health and retirement benefits. Initial clients include Bally Total Fitness and
Cigna's own Intracorp insurance subsidiary, each of which employs around 4,000
people. Also, Cigna's ESIS property and casualty insurance unit has formed a
joint venture with MetaRisk, a Washington, D.C.-based consulting firm, to assess
corporations' potential liability from alcohol and drug abuse by workers.

   CLARIDGE REPORTS SECOND-QUARTER NET OF $1.3 MILLION * The Claridge Hotel and
Casino Corp., operator of the Claridge Casino Hotel in Atlantic City, reported
net income of $1.3 million for the second quarter of 1997, compared with a net
loss of $3.2 million for the second quarter of 1996. Casino revenues for the
quarter were $43.4 million compared with $43.6 million a year ago.

   TRUMP REPORTS $3.2 MILLION QUARTERLY LOSS * Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts
Inc. reported a net loss of $3.2 million, or 14 cents per share, for the second
quarter ended June 30, compared with a loss of $44.4 million, or $2.06 per
share, a year earlier. Revenues for the second quarter rose to $368 million from
$235.1 million a year ago. Trump Atlantic City Associates reported combined net
revenues of Trump Taj Mahal and Trump Plaza for the 1997 second quarter of
$256.5 million, compared with $226.6 million for the 1996 second quarter.

   NOVARTIS PLANS TO LET RHONE-POULENC MARKET PRODUCTS * Novartis AG asked the
Federal Trade Commission to approve a plan to license Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.,
Collegeville, to sell a group of gene-therapy products being developed to treat
hemophilia, Bloomberg News reported. Novartis must license some gene-therapy
technology to competing firms under a 1996 antitrust agreement that permitted
Sandoz AG's acquisition of Ciba-Geigy AG, a combination that created Novartis.

   CAPSTAR TO BUY EMBASSY SUITES IN CENTER CITY * CapStar Hotel Corp.,
Washington, D.C., said it signed an agreement to buy the Embassy Suites Center
City hotel at 18th Street and the Benjamin Franklin Parkway from Atlantic
American Properties Trust, Philadelphia. Terms of the deal for the 288-unit
hotel were not disclosed. CapStar said it plans $2.6 million in renovations to
the hotel after the transaction closes.

   Elsewhere FTC TELLS LAWMAKERS IT WON'T PROBE MICROSOFT Microsoft Corp. won't
face a Federal Trade Commission antitrust probe, as the agency rebuffed a
request from a group of senators who said the Justice Department had gone soft
in its long investigation of the computer giant. FTC Chairman Robert Pitofsky,
in a letter to four lawmakers, said an FTC probe "could involve a substantial
duplication of effort as well as raise serious concerns about fairness to the
targets and potential witnesses." In June, Montana Republican Sen. Conrad Burns
and other lawmakers cited concerns from computer manufacturers and other firms
over whether Justice's antitrust division is vigorously looking into complaints
that Microsoft is violating the terms of a 1994 antitrust settlement.

   MCDONALD'S PICKS DDB NEEDHAM OVER LEO BURNETT * DDB Needham Chicago pulled
off a coup by becoming the lead creative talent for McDonald Corp.'s huge
advertising account and dealing another blow to Leo Burnett Co.'s efforts to
shore up its client base. The decision represents more than two-thirds of the
estimated $400 million to $600 million McDonald's plans to spend for the 1998
advertising year on media and production billings. It is the first time the
fast-food company has changed its lead agency in 16 years.

   MCCAW FAMILY IS BUYING A BIG PIECE OF NEXTEL * Cellular-phone pioneer Craig
McCaw and his family have exercised an option to buy 15 million shares of Nextel
Communications Inc. for $232.5 million, Nextel said. The move boosts Craig
McCaw's holdings in the wireless phone service provider, based in McLean, Va.,
to about 17 percent from about 12 percent. Nextel's Nasdaq close: $23, up $1.31.

   MERCURY WILL MARKET A REDESIGNED COUGAR Ford Motor Co. said the Mercury
Cougar will return early next year in an all new skin as a smaller, front-drive
sport coupe. Ford announced in March that it would halt production of the
current rear-drive Cougar and its better known structural twin, the Ford
Thunderbird, at the end of this model year. The automaker has not yet announced
plans for the T-Bird's replacement.

   ESPY SUPER BOWL TICKET TO COST SMITH BARNEY $1 MILLION * Smith Barney Inc.
will pay a $1 million civil penalty because of the purchase of a 1994 Super Bowl
ticket for former Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, prosecutors said. Independent
Counsel Donald C. Smaltz, who has been investigating Espy for three years, said
a $2,200 ticket purchased by a Smith Barney official was delivered to Espy the
day before the championship NFL game in Atlanta. At the time, Espy was backing a
proposal by Oglethorpe Power Co. of Georgia, represented by Smith Barney, to get
the Treasury Department to waive $286 million in prepayment penalties for a $3.1
billion loan from the Agriculture Department to the utility, according to court
documents.

   The Bottom Line

   SPS Technologies Inc., the Jenkintown maker of aerospace and industrial
fasteners, said its board approved a two-for-one stock split, effective Aug. 20.
. . . The parent company of the Home Shopping Network has increased its share in
Ticketmaster Group Inc. to 50.1 percent.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2333 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    JULY 30, 1997, WEDNESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B2; PEOPLE IN BUSINESS

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: PEOPLE IN BUSINESS

BYLINE: COLLEEN BENSON

BODY:

    Headway Technologies Inc., a Milpitas supplier of recording heads for disk
drives, appointed Michael Chang, 54, president and CEO. He was SVP of
engineering for SAE Magnetics in Hong Kong.

   Independent Colleges of Northern California, of San Francisco, promoted Marty
Ummel to president. She was executive director.

   Charles Zellerbach joined Leon A. Farley Associates, a San Francisco
executive search firm, as a partner. He was VP and general manager of the
commercial printing and publication group of Simpson Paper Co. in Seattle.

   San Francisco-based Morrison & Foerster has announced new partners in the law
firm. They are Elizabeth Allor, C. Jean Ryan, John Kennedy, Antoinette Konski,
Harry Macey and Robert Saltzberg.

   Union BanCal Corp., of San Francisco, named Yoichi Kambara, 48, EVP and group
head of the trust and private financial services group. He succeeds Roy
Henderson, 54, vice chairman of UnionBanCal Corp. and Union Bank of California
who will resign August 31. Kambara was EVP and trust executive officer of the
trust and investment management group.

   Safeway Inc., a Pleasanton food retailer, appointed David Bond, 43, SVP of
finance and control. He was a partner with Deloitte & Touche.

   Cell Genesys Inc., of Foster City, named Dale Ando VP of clinical research.
He was director of clinical development for gene therapy with Chiron Corp.

   Inktomi, a Berkeley network applications company, named attorney Tim Stevens
VP of corporate and legal affairs. He was with Wilson Sonsini & Rosati.

   Verysas Design Automation Inc., of Fremont, promoted Jeffrey Langner, 42, to
VP of worldwide sales. He was VP of U.S. sales.

   Tegal Corp., a Petaluma semiconductor equipment company, promoted George
Landreth to VP of new product development. He was program director.

   BOARD MOVES

   David Nosal, managing director of the San Francisco office of Korn/Ferry
International, was named to the board of The Mt. Diablo Region YMCA in Pleasant
Hill.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Ummel

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1997


                             2334 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                July 30, 1997, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 11A, HEALTH NEWS COLUMN

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS

BYLINE: Compiled From Post-Dispatch Wire Services

BODY:


NEW STUDY

Geneticist Targets Gene In Righties And Lefties

A single gene may separate most right-handers from lefties.

   Geneticist Amar J.S. Klar, who studied three generations of southpaws, says
people with the gene are right-handed and those without it have a 50-50 chance
of being either right-handed or left-handed.

   While others debate his theory, Klar, a researcher at the National Cancer
Institute's genetics laboratory in Frederick, Md., is now trying to identify the
exact gene.

LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE

Protein Might Help Combat The Ailment

   Scientists have delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's disease by giving
genetically engineered mice a protein that prevents cell death, suggesting a new
approach to fight the disease.

   The gene therapy did not cure the disease known officially as amyotrop hic
lateral sclerosis, said the study in Friday's edition of the journal Science.

   But the protein delayed the inherited form of ALS from striking mice who
carried the disease, suggesting this type of therapy might one day prove
"beneficial to ALS patients in whom treatment can be started before the onset of
symptoms," wrote co-author Dr. Serge Przedborski of Columbia University.

HEART ATTACKS

Study: Men Treated Better Than Women

   Women receive less aggressive treatment after a heart attack than men do,
leaving them in poorer health and more pain, according to a long-term study from
Canada reported this week.

   "We found a small but real difference in the way doctors treat women and men
after heart attack," said Dr. Lisa Schwartz, a researcher at the U.S. Veterans
Affairs Medical Center in White River Junction, Vt., who worked with colleagues
at the University of Manitoba.

   The researchers measured physical function on a scale from 1 to 100. On
average, men in the study went up 1.4 points during the five-year study period
while women's conditions went down an average of 0.2. Although the numbers don't
sound large, they mean that significantly more of the women than men were
declining toward congestive heart failure, Schwartz noted.

   The 677 heart-attack patients were part of the Manitoba Health Reform Impact
study between 1991 and 1992, and they were followed up at 18-month and one-year
intervals. About one-third of the patients were female.

   Even though the women had more visits to doctors during the period, they
received fewer diagnostic tests and medical procedures than men, according to
the report in the American Medical Association's Archives of General Medicine.

CYCLOSPORA

Parasite Is Prevalent, Federal Officials Say

   Federal health officials say more than 1,400 Americans may have been sickened
with the parasite cyclospora so far this year, most from outbreaks linked to
fresh raspberries, lettuce and possibly basil.

   The latest patients are about 200 people in a Washington-area outbreak
associated with either a basil-pesto sauce or fresh basil served by a gourmet
food caterer.

   Researchers are testing whether irradiation or ozone treatment would kill the
parasite without hurting fresh produce. Cooking kills cyclos porae, and freezing
may as well.

ASTHMA

Patients Who Take Accolate Get Warning

   Doctors are being advised to closely watch asthma patients who take the drug
Accolate for signs of a rare but sometimes fatal condition called Churg-Strauss
syndrome.

   Churg-Strauss syndrome is a tissue disorder that sometimes strikes adult
asthma patients and, if untreated, can destroy organs. Early symptoms are
flulike.

   Six Accolate patients, out of the 270,000 Americans who have tried the drug,
have developed Churg-Strauss, although the Food and Drug Administration stressed
that it had no proof the drug was to blame.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1997


                             2335 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     July 29, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z07

LENGTH: 1288 words

HEADLINE: Gene Research Trying to Put the Pieces Together

BYLINE: Abigail Trafford, Washington Post Staff Writer

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Maine

BODY:


   At a press seminar last week at Jackson Laboratory, scientists discussed a
major shift in genetic research that takes them from identifying individual
genes to unraveling how they work together in complex ways. "We're going through
a transition period from what and where a gene is to what is it that the genes
do," said laboratory director Kenneth Paigen.

   Genes carry the hereditary history for each cell and direct what the cell
does. In recent years, a rash of genes have been identified, cloned and tested
in animals, and a number have been linked to disease. But just knowing the gene
does not translate into having a treatment, and so far gene therapy has proved
disappointing in patients. Yet the pace of animal research has accelerated and
scientists have now devised a much more efficient way of delivering new genes
into cells. "We shall see positive clinical results hopefully before the century
is over," predicted Savio Woo of Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, but
success is likely to be modest and limited to simple genetic disorders such as
hemophilia.

   Meanwhile, researchers are gaining a better understanding of genetic
mechanisms in problems as common as obesity and as rare as Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome (a prenatal growth disorder).

   Among the major findings presented at the conference:

   Gender Inequality

   The battle of the sexes begins early, shortly after fertilization.

   According to the rules laid down by Gregor Mendel, the grandfather of modern
genetics, a gene is a gene is a gene, and it shouldn't matter whether you get a
copy from your mother or your father. Both copies of the same gene were thought
to be identical and equal.

   Now researchers know this isn't always so. Certain genes have been found to
behave differently depending on whether they come from the mother or the father,
a phenomenon called genomic imprinting. "The two copies of the gene are not
expressed at an equal level," said Andrew P. Feinberg of Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, a co-sponsor of the genetics seminar. "Imprinting
means there is a different function or tension between female and male origins
of a gene."

   What's more, alterations in imprinted genes -- called loss of imprinting --
are found to play a role in the development of cancer, including cancers of the
uterus, cervix, esophagus, prostate, breast, ovary and lung, Feinberg said.

   In mouse experiments, scientists examined the parental origins of a gene that
promotes growth (IGF2) and a gene that inhibits growth (H19). In normal
development, the growth-promoting gene is expressed when it comes from the
father while the growth-inhibiting gene is expressed from the mother. But in
mouse experiments, when imprinted genes are manipulated to behave abnormally,
the growth-promoting genes are expressed from both the mother and father, giving
cells a double dose and causing them to grow out of control -- a key feature of
cancer.

   "That whole region of the mother's chromosome is acting like the father's,"
explained Feinberg. "It's like a sex change on the chromosome."

   Test-tube experiments are underway to see if a drug can turn the gene back to
its normal pattern of imprinting and thus control the growth of cells.

   The take-home message is that inheritance at the molecular level is unequal
between parents. Perhaps playwright George Bernard Shaw captured the spirit of
imprinting when he replied to a woman who suggested they procreate because she
was so beautiful and he was so bright: "What if the child inherits my body and
your brains?"

   Down Memory Lane

   The search for a new prenatal blood test based on fetal cells turned up a
surprising finding: Women can carry remnant male fetal cells in their
bloodstream from pregnancies that took place decades earlier. What's more, these
leftover fetal cells may be linked to scleroderma, an autoimmune disease that
strikes mainly women over the age of 40.

   Studying 32 pregnant women and eight who were not, researchers found that a
significant number carried male DNA in fetal cells from previous pregnancies.
One woman had her son 27 years earlier. The male fetal cells can persist even if
a woman has an abortion. Among four women pregnant with female fetuses who also
carried male fetal cells, two had given birth to boys and two had abortions.

   In labor and delivery -- or an abortion -- a woman's body gets "showered with
fetal cells" in the bloodstream, explained Diana W. Bianchi, associate professor
of pediatrics and obstetrics-gynecology at Tufts University School of Medicine.
The majority of women clear these "foreign" cells from their system. But some
women retain relatively high levels of leftover fetal cells and they also appear
to have a higher than normal risk of developing an autoimmune disease -- a
tantalizing clue to why these diseases are more prevalent in women.

   "No one has looked at the possibility that fetal maternal cell traffic may be
involved," Bianchi said. Theoretically, remnant fetal cells could trigger a
rejection response similar to what happens when the body rejects a transplant.
In addition to scleroderma, researchers are looking at rheumatoid arthritis for
a similar link to remnant fetal cells.

   Woody Allen Syndrome

   "What makes people feel good? What makes them feel bad? I argue that
happiness largely comes from your genes," said Dean H. Hamer, researcher in
behavior genetics at the National Cancer Institute.

   Clues to genetic roots of behavior are found in matching personality traits
with studies of two brain chemicals, serotonin and dopamine. In a report
published last year in the journal Science, researchers found that the presence
of the short form of a key gene that regulates serotonin was linked to higher
scores of neuroticism and the telltale signs of anxiety, anger, hostility and
impulsiveness. "The shorter form is the more neurotic, aggressive form," Hamer
said.

   Meanwhile, the long form of a gene for a dopamine receptor has been
correlated with positive feelings.

   That still leaves a great deal of emotion and behavior up in the air.
Scientists suspect that many genes are involved in "subjective well-being" --
not to mention the major role of environment and experience in shaping
personality. Besides, in the study sample, which was largely male and not
representative of the general population, people with the anxiety gene reported
more sexual activity than those with the feel-good gene. "If you have the happy
gene, you have less sex," said Hamer. "Sorry."

   Mommy Dearest

   Scientists have demonstrated in experimental mice exactly how a breakdown in
DNA located in the mitochondria, the cells' energy-producing power plants that
lie outside the nucleus, can cause severe illness. This DNA is inherited only
from the mother.

   In this experiment, mice were genetically manipulated to delete a key
mitochondrial gene in heart and skeletal muscle that is essential to the cells'
ability to neutralize damaging compounds called oxygen radicals. As a result,
the mutant mice developed severe muscle weakness and enlarged hearts. The mutant
mice became so weak they couldn't exercise and collapsed halfway through the
study.

   "This is the first time we can show a cause-and-effect relationship" between
a genetic alteration in this mitochondrial DNA and disease, said Douglas C.
Wallace of the Center for Molecular Medicine at Emory University School of
Medicine. Blocking this crucial genetic step "causes mitochondrial disease," he
said. "We've proved that for the first time."

   The mouse model provides an opportunity to test different drugs to see if any
can compensate for this mutation and prevent or correct diseases in animal
experiments.


GRAPHIC: Photo; ig, BASIC GENETICS A cell is the basic structural unit of the
body. There are trillions of cells, each performing a specific task, in each
human. Individual cells carry 23 pairs of chromosomes.  Chromosomes are
threadlike structures that carry the body's DNA, the genetic blueprint that
determines all the characteristics of a person, including such things as height,
eye and hair color, face shape and, to some degree, personality. Virtually all
cells carry the same chromosomes.  A gene is part of the chromosome and contains
a segment of the DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), a long chemical molecule that
looks like it is made of intertwined strands. By controlling a recipe for a
specific molecule, usually a protein, it tells the cell how to behave and what
function it will serve. Every cell contains an identical set of 50,000 to
100,000 genes. Some are active in each cell, and others are not.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1997


                             2336 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       July 27, 1997 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 815 words

HEADLINE: DOCTOR GETS CASH TO STUDY CANCER

BYLINE: By JASON HALL; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   For years, Dr. Sanford Markowitz of Case Western Reserve University has been
searching for a gene that causes colon cancer, a quest he likens to a
15th-century sea voyage to the New World.

   In September, he will be given the medical equivalent of an armada to
continue his research, and he plans to mount an all-out assault on the disease.

   Markowitz, a cancer specialist who also works at University Hospitals of
Cleveland, has been named an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, a philanthropic organization with a $9.5 billion endowment formed
from Hughes' estate.

   Markowitz is the first Cleveland doctor to earn the honor, the institute
said. It will infuse $6 million over six years into his research.

   That award is more than twice the amount of the largest federal grant
available to an individual researcher, Markowitz said.

   "It's a tremendous infusion of dollars and resources, and it begins to
develop the kind of lab group ... that is going to be as muscular as some of the
operations at other leading institutions," he said.

   The first dollars will begin flowing this fall, and Markowitz will begin by
hiring seven new people for lab positions. Of the total grant, $400,000 has been
earmarked to buy new equipment and expand the lab.

   When he becomes a Hughes investigator, Markowitz will technically become an
institute employee. The institute will pay his salary and his staff's. It also
will lease his lab space from CWRU. Markowitz will retain his faculty title at
CWRU.

   In 1995, Markowitz and his team discovered a gene called RII, which he proved
was the body's natural defense against the formation of colon cancer.

   "In large part, I think the reason we've gotten the Howard Hughes award is
recognition of that discovery," he said.

   His research showed that the RII gene was responsible for maintenance and
timely removal of colon cells, and when that gene was defective, the cells grew
out of control, eventually becoming cancerous.

   About 150,000 Americans are diagnosed with colon cancer each year, and about
70,000 die from it. The disease is curable if caught in the early stages,
Markowitz said, but it is nearly always fatal if it spreads to other organs.

   Markowitz and other doctors are convinced there is a gene responsible for
causing colon cancer, and he is on a mission to find it. "We are trying to turn
that discovery into a blood test for discovering colon cancer, and eventually
into a gene therapy for treating cancer," he said.

   The Hughes position will allow Markowitz and his team to work toward that
goal much faster, because of the money and the length of the contract.

   "When you have that kind of stability, you can tackle long-term projects,
more risky projects," he said. "If you know you've got the money, then you can
afford to ask the questions."

   Federal government grants are highly competitive. Most of them are guaranteed
only for a year or two. This prevents many scientists from doing experiments
that might take three or four years to complete, Markowitz said.

   Markowitz also plans to open another lab and raise genetically engineered
mice, which he hopes will help isolate the genes and types of diet that
contribute to the formation of colon cancer.

   A grant from the National Cancer Institute is allowing him to continue a
Cleveland-area screening program for colon cancer. The test is for anyone who
thinks he or she might be at risk, but especially for family members of people
who have the disease, because there is a proven genetic link. Money from the
institute will help analyze the results.

   Markowitz joins an elite group of scientists with the title of Hughes
investigator. He was among 70 selected in the latest group; the total number of
investigators is about 330 nationally. The group includes six Nobel laureates.

   The institute hires investigators who conduct research in five major areas:
cell biology, genetics, immunology, neuroscience and structural biology.
Institute spokesman Jim Feeley said the majority of investigators were retained
after their initial contract.

   "As long as he keeps producing, he will be with us," Feeley said. "What we're
trying to do is find the best scientists possible and put the money in their
hands."

   Dr. Nathan Berger, dean of CWRU's medical school, said he hopes that having a
Hughes investigator will bring more attention to the school. "It's something we
and other medical schools have been working toward for a number of years," he
said.

   Markowitz said he was excited about the prestige his appointment would bring
Cleveland and CWRU. But he is consumed with the research, and with how this
money will help he and his team continue to track the killer, and eventually
crack the case.

   "We know enough to know that we can solve the problem," he said. "Now we have
to finish the job, and find out how to beat the sucker on the head and kill it."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY MIKE LEVY / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; Dr. Sanford Markowitz,
a cancer specialist and researcher at Case Western Reserve University and
University Hospitals of Cleveland, has received a grant from the Howard Hughes
Medical Institute to continue searching for the gene that causes colon cancer.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1997


                             2337 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                July 25, 1997, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26; S

LENGTH: 107 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy slows Lou Gehrig's disease

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's disease by giving
genetically engineered mice a protein that prevents cell death, suggesting a new
approach to fight the killer disease.

   The gene therapy did not cure the disease known officially as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, said the study in today's edition of the journal Science.

   But the protein delayed the inherited form of ALS from striking mice who
carried the disease, suggesting this type of therapy might one day prove
"beneficial to ALS patients in whom treatment can be started before the onset of
symptoms," wrote co-author Dr. Serge Przedborski of Columbia University.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1997


                             2338 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 25, 1997, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Lambs carrying human genes cloned

BYLINE: MAGGIE FOX; Reuters News Service

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON - The British scientists who cloned Dolly the
sheep said Thursday they had made a major advance by cloning
Polly the lamb, who carries human genes.

   This means they can clone herds of identical sheep that
produce human proteins or blood products for medical use.

   Polly and four near-identical sisters are transgenic - they
are sheep but they carry a human gene.

   ""It was what we told everybody we were going to do, but it's
nice to be able to say we have done it,'' Ron James, managing
director of PPL Therapeutics, said.

   ""This is a demonstration that we can genetically modify the
cells and then make transgenic animals, which is a world
first. ''

   PPL's scientists have cloned sheep before - not only Dolly but
nine others using other techniques.  They have also created
many transgenic animals - one at a time.

   This is the first time they have been able to combine the
technologies.

   The five Polly Dorset lambs were not using the stunning
technology that produced Dolly.

   Dolly was the first mammal cloned from an adult cell.  Polly
and her virtually identical sisters were created by fusing a
fibroblast cell from a fetus to an egg cell.

   It is slightly easier to use embryonic cells to make clones,
as they still have the natural potential to grow into complete
animals, rather than into skin cells or brain cells or muscle
cells.

   What is different this time is that the PPL team genetically
modified the fetal cells before they cloned them.

   Two of the five lambs have so-called marker genes, which are
easy for scientists to find and verify in the animal.  ""Three
of them are carrying a human gene of therapeutic value.  I'm
not going to say what it is,'' James said.

   The company's sheep produce alpha-1-antitrypsin, a blood
protein used to treat the symptoms of cystic fibrosis.

   They also have been genetically engineered to produce
fibrinogen, factor VII and factor IX - all blood clotting
products and activated protein C, which prevents clotting.

   The five lambs, all born within the past month to different
mothers, did not come from the Scottish-based company's
scrapie-free herd, so they will not produce any commercial
products, James said.

   Instead, they will be monitored, and scientists will try to
duplicate the technique in sheep guaranteed free of the
brain-wasting disease.

   The idea behind cloning transgenic animals is to guarantee
that the genes are there and the animal will produce the
desired human protein.

   PPL's first cloned sheep, Megan and Morag, have each had lambs
- showing they are normal enough to reproduce.

   The five new lambs will also be bred eventually, James said.

   If their human genes carry on into the lambs, the company has
a winner.

   ""But the first step is to just let them grow up,'' James said.


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1997


                             2339 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 25, 1997, Friday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: New approach on Lou Gehrig's disease

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Scientists have delayed the onset of Lou
Gehrig's disease by giving genetically engineered mice a
protein that prevents cell death, suggesting a new approach to
fight the killer disease.

   The gene therapy did not cure the disease known officially as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, said the study in Science.

   But the protein delayed the inherited form of ALS from
striking mice that carried the disease, suggesting this type
of therapy might one day prove ""beneficial to ALS patients in
whom treatment can be started before the onset of symptoms,''
wrote co-author Dr. Serge Przedborski of Columbia
University.

   Most cases of Lou Gehrig's disease are not inherited but arise
sporadically.  About 30,000 Americans have it.

   Still, Przedborski wrote, cell death can be similar in both
inherited and noninherited ALS, suggesting cell-protective
therapies be investigated for both types.

   ALS experts cautioned that the work needs confirmation.

   ""But it's very, very interesting that the disease is
postponed.  This is encouraging,'' said Dr.Teepu Siddique of
Northwestern University, who created the ALS-carrying mouse
breed that Columbia used.

   He is studying people with familial ALS to see if doctors can
predict when they will get sick.

   The human proto-oncogene called Bcl-2 produces a protein that
regulates cell death.  Przedborski cross-bred ALS mice with
mice that produced high levels of human Bcl-2, to see if it
would postpone this new generation's illness.

   Bcl-2 delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's by 19 percent.

   Consequently, the Bcl-2 mice lived 15 percent longer than the
original ALS mice - though once their symptoms began, the
protein could not slow the disease's inevitable
progression.


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1997


                             2340 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      July 24, 1997 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIVING; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 742 words

HEADLINE: RADIATION TREATMENT SAVES RESCUE DOG FROM CANCER

BYLINE: By CINDY STARR; SCRIPPS HOWARD

BODY:

   Gary and Michelle Hay of South Bend, Ind., discovered the sore on their pet
Rottweiler's paw in December. It was about the size of a quarter. Their
veterinarian removed the sore, but it came back, bringing with it bad news. The
dog, Krueger, had cancer.

   The Hays' heartache was compounded by the fact Krueger was not an ordinary
dog. The 6-year-old, 107-pound Rottweiler was Indiana's only search and rescue
dog certified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Were his paw
amputated, his abilities would be compromised.

   Unsure of what to do, Gary Hay and a fellow search and rescue partner sought
out possibilities through the Internet. In Cincinnati, Dr. Todd Jackson, a
veterinarian at the University of Cincinnati Medical Center, saw the call for
help and responded. "Come see us," he wrote. "We're not that far away."

   Thus began Krueger's foray into the world of modern medicine. With high-tech
assistance from the University of Cincinnati's Veterinary Cancer Control
Program, one of the few of its kind in the United States, this valuable,
sweet-tempered dog has lived to search another day.

   Under the supervision of Jackson and Dr. David Denman, associate professor of
radiation oncology and director of the Veterinary Cancer Control Program,
Krueger underwent radiation therapy 15 times in a three-week period in spring.
The tumor in his left paw was irradiated with gamma rays by a cobalt machine
designed for human use, a treatment that has resulted in an 85.7 percent cure
rate at the center.

   At a recent checkup, the dog's paw was still cancer-free. If the cancer has
not recurred within a year of treatment, the dog can be considered cured.

   "We are providing medical treatments to our animal patients similar to
treatment provided to people," Denman said.

   The program has been a blessing for Donna Stevens, whose Siberian husky,
Zeek, was found to have a tumor on his leg last fall. After learning that it was
malignant, she said, "I was so depressed I couldn't talk."

   But after meeting Denman and Jackson, she felt a surge of hope.

   "It was quite an experience," Stevens said. "I felt really blessed. Since
then he's had his 11th birthday. Every day is a gift for us."

   While the university's program for veterinary cancer patients benefits about
30 animals a year, Denman said information gleaned can be used to improve cancer
therapy for people as well. "The main difference in treating cancer in dogs is
that more information can be recorded in less time," Denman said. "One year in a
dog's life is equivalent to five, six or seven years in a human's life."

   Last fall Denman began developing direct-transfer gene immunotherapy as a
cancer treatment for dogs. When an incompatible human gene is injected into the
dog's tumor, Denman said, the dog's cells take up the gene, recognize it as a
foreign entity and then mount an immune response. The cancerous tissue is
subsequently rejected. The technique, using an uncommon human gene, also is
being explored in clinical trials in humans.

   Denman hopes to begin using gene therapy treatment, along with radiation
therapy, in pets in 1998. "The whole idea behind gene therapy is to bring the
cure rate closer to 100 percent," he said.

   At present, not all tumors can be treated with radiation. "If the tumor were
in the abdomen, we couldn't give the treatment because the intestines would be
damaged," Jackson said.

   Pets lose fur in the area being irradiated, but some or most of it will grow
back. Because the radiation does not strike their internal organs, however, they
are spared nausea and significant weight loss, Denman said.

   The center treats far more dogs than cats. Tumors in cats frequently are
discovered too late for treatment to be effective, Denman said.

   Nevertheless, there have been success stories with cats.

   Among them is Thor, a 9-year-old Norwegian forest cat owned by Ed Dowling of
Cincinnati. Thor, who developed a tumor between the shoulder blades, underwent
surgery by his regular veterinarian and then was referred to Denman and Jackson.

   Radiation treatment is expensive - full treatment at the University of
Cincinnati costs $1,150. Gary Hay, a mail contractor, and Michelle Hay, a school
bus driver, decided they could not afford the treatment for their Rottweiler.
But Denman intervened.

   "Krueger is such a special dog," Jackson said. "The radiology/oncology
department picked up most of the tab."

   Not every pet will be so lucky.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY SCRIPPS HOWARD; Dr. David Denman checks Krueger, a Rottweiler
that survived cancer, while owner Gary Hay holds the dog.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1997


                             2341 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 22, 1997, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: How to spend it all in one place;
NATIONAL PERSPECTIVE / DAVID M. SHRIBMAN

BYLINE: By David M. Shribman, Globe Staff

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   So the deficit is ending not with a bang but with a whimper.

    The strong economy has produced a surge of revenue that is chipping away the
deficit, bringing within sight not only the end of an era in national economic
history but also the end of a Washington mindset. With the deficit nearly gone
and with people talking about the possibility of an actual budget surplus, the
biggest brake on government spending - the Republicans' "deficit veto" - is
being swept away, too.

    "It would be nice to spend again," says Jeff Faux, who heads the
liberal-oriented Economic Policy Institute. "But it's been so long that I wonder
if we know how to do it anymore."

    Yes, it may be safe to spend again in Washington. Sure, there's still a
Medicare crisis and there's still a comparatively small annual deficit (maybe as
low as $ 45 billion for the fiscal year ending Sept. 30, a far cry from the $
290 peak in 1992). There's also a national debt that exceeds $ 5 trillion. But
throughout Washington, policy mavens and politicos are polishing up new spending
programs for the new era. Even Republicans are getting into the spending game.

    Don't expect a new New Deal or a greater Great Society; there's no taste in
the capital for grand schemes. But that doesn't mean Washington is thinking
small. The Progressive Policy Instititue, a Democratic think tank, has a
five-year "public-investment" spending plan that would cost $ 54 billion, and
that's from a moderate group. Merely giving full funding to Head Start, a plan
that George Bush touted when he announced his presidential campaign a full
decade ago, would cost an additional $ 8 billion a year.

    So here's a sampler of new ways to spend your money that are kicking around
the capital:

    - Infrastructure spending binge. Municipal water systems are leaking all
over the place. These are investments made 75 years ago, and they are in bad
shape. But that's not all. Bridges turn out to be more than metaphors in
Washington at century's end. The American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials says 100,000 bridges need to be fixed - and is calling
for an investment of $ 149 billion in bridges and highways over the next five
years.

    - Health care, again. After endless haggling, Capitol Hill negotiators
agreed to provide health insurance to about a third of the estimated 14 million
children who will be uninsured by the year 2002. Senator Edward M. Kennedy wants
to cover the other two-thirds and even now is girding for a new offensive on the
issue. He is also planning to press to double the $ 13 billion National
Institutes of Health budget by 2002, hoping to speed advances that would delay
the onset of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases, possibly regenerate nerves in
the spinal cord, and perhaps treat cancer through gene therapy.

    - Really reinventing welfare. One way to spend money, of course, is not to
collect it, and some lawmakers are talking about increasing the tax deduction
for charity - or even making it a tax credit. Some Republicans, in fact, are
talking about giving a full dollar-for-dollar tax credit for contributions not
to Princeton or the Kennedy Center but to groups that help the poor, like
Habitat for Humanity and the Salvation Army. "This would take an amount out of
federal revenues about commensurate with what we spend on federal welfare," says
Jeffrey Eisenach, head of the conservative Progress and Freedom Foundation. "It
saves a lot of transferring of money."

    - Back to schools. The General Accounting Office estimates the nation needs
to spend $ 112 billion just to fix roofs, get the rats out of the basements, and
wire the schools for computers. Congressional Democrats will almost certainly
push to start the job. President Clinton, in fact, put a $ 5 billion down
payment on this project in his original budget this winter, but the proposal was
dropped in budget negotiations.

    - Education and training. Some liberals are polishing a proposal to provide
the equivalent of tuition to a state university to everyone who wants to attend
college, a plan that would cost about $ 10 billion a year. There's talk of a
10-city, five-year experiment in means-tested scholarships for elementary pupils
and secondary students targeted to youngsters in the lowest-income families,
which would cost about $ 750 million a year. And former White House adviser
William Galston is talking about creating a million "mentoring" relationships, a
$ 1 billion-a-year idea that would match volunteers with vulnerable youths.

    A billion here and a billion there, and pretty soon you're talking about
real money - and maybe a real deficit again.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1997


                             2342 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             July 22, 1997 Tuesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS FIND NEW BREAST CANCER LINK

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN of the Oregon

BODY:

   Tuesday, July 22, 1997 SCIENTISTS FIND NEW BREAST CANCER LINK

   Summary: A gene involved in kidney cancer in children appears to be
associated with many common breast cancers

   A gene linked to kidney cancer in children might play a role in breast
cancer, a new study has found.

   Scientists at Oregon Health Sciences University and the University of
California at Santa Cruz have discovered that a faulty tumor suppressor gene,
called WT1, appears to be linked to a high percentage of common breast  cancers.

   WT1 stands for Wilms' tumor, a cancerous tumor of the kidney that occurs in
children, usually before age 5. A common early sign of the disease is high
blood pressure, followed by a , pain and blood in the urine.

   The researchers found that the gene, which suppresses abnormal growth, is
active in normal breast tissue. But its activity was absent or significantly
decreased in 70 percent of the breast cancer tissue samples the researchers
studied.

   Charles T. Roberts, director of research at OHSU's Doernbecher Pediatric
Research Laboratories, said the WT1 gene could provide a diagnostic tool for
early breast cancer detection, or it someday might be a target for gene  therapy
to treat breast cancer. However, more studies are needed.

   Roberts and Charles W. Daniel at UCSC's Sinsheimer Laboratories are senior
authors of a report on the finding that appears in today's issue of the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Abnormal expression of the WT1 gene might be one of the earliest steps in
the development of breast tumors, Roberts said.

   The researchers explored the WT1 gene because in addition to causing tumors
in some children's kidneys, it is known to regulate growth factors, the
substances that can make the mammary glands grow.

   ``This is a middle-management gene,'' said Gary B. Silberstein of Santa
Cruz, lead author of the report. ``The important thing to know is that it
normally inhibits the production of growth-promoting molecules. It normally
turns things off. That is why it is called a tumor suppressor. But when it  goes
away the things that it normally inhibits are set free.''

   Pinpointing the role of abnormal WT1 action in the development of breast
tumors paves the way for eventually restoring the function of genes in various
forms of breast cancer cases, the researchers said.

   Previously discovered breast cancer genes, known as BRCA I and BRCA II,  play
a role in hereditary forms of cancer, which compose about 5 percent to 10
percent of breast cancer cases.

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN  of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2343 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      July 21, 1997, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F05

LENGTH: 1082 words

HEADLINE: Gene Logic Gets to the Heart of the Deal; The Columbia Biotech Firm Is
Richly Rewarded by Procter & Gamble for Its Cardiology Research

BYLINE: Jacquelyn Powell , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Consider this entrepreneurial dream: You're a small biotech company, the new
guy in town, and a multinational heavyweight like Procter & Gamble Co. wants to
pay you $ 25 million to use your research method. You and your staff revel in
fine champagne.

   It may sound like fiction, but that is exactly what happened earlier this
year to Gene Logic Inc., a two-year-old privately held Columbia firm that is
breaking new ground in the treatment of heart disease.

   "We had a few high-fives and Mark got drenched with champagne," said Gene
Logic's president and chief executive, Michael J. Brennan, of his chief
financial officer, Mark D. Gessler, when they celebrated the deal.

   The collaboration with P&G's pharmaceutical division could mean more than $
75 million for Gene Logic, as two future deals with P&G for genetic work on
undisclosed diseases are in the works.

   Analysts and experts said the deal with P&G is the kind of thing that can
make a young company.

   "Certainly any time you see a deal with the magnitude of Gene Logic's P&G
deal, that provides validation for their technology," said Richard vandenBroek,
a senior analyst for the investment bank Hambrecht & Quist LLC. "Aside from the
validation in the [biotechnology] community, it provides much needed capital . .
. and it advertises to other players in the field" who want to invest.

   It is fitting that Gene Logic is moving fast, as speed -- or more precisely,
the lack of it -- was what motivated Brennan to form the company in 1995.

   Gene Logic's niche is to speed up the process by which genes can be used to
develop drugs; its technologies have reduced the traditional gene target
discovery period from six years to two. Brennan is aware that speed in bringing
drugs to market can translate into millions of dollars for drug companies and
provide a competitive advantage.

   "Pharmaceutical companies are incredibly competitive," Brennan said. "When
you're the first to come out with a treatment, you can dominate the market for a
while."

   In the laboratories at their headquarters, about 35 scientists are busily
forging ahead on what Gessler called "an entire new wave of technology that
brought Procter & Gamble to the table."

   And Procter & Gamble is happy to be riding that wave. "We entered the
agreement with them because we believe their technology offers a more quick and
accurate way to analyze genes," said P&G spokesman Jim Schwartz.

   "To summarize what we're doing with Procter & Gamble," said chief scientist
Keith O. Elliston as he escorted a visitor through Gene Logic's orderly maze of
laboratories, "we're analyzing a large number of samples of congestive heart
failure. First we're going to fully describe the disease on a molecular level,
and then we're going to analyze those data to try to find the best set of genes
that can be used to find a therapeutic treatment. The technologies that we are
bringing to bear on this are the lead technologies."

   For the first stage of the P&G project, Gene Logic is conducting tests on 200
samples of heart tissue bearing various stages of failure. The samples will come
from Temple University, Brennan said, which has an extensive heart-failure and
heart-transplant program.

   Brennan said the findings can be used only by Procter & Gamble, which will
work with Gene Logic during the rest of the project to analyze the results and
"pull out the potential gene targets" to screen for the disease.

   The need for speed in finding targets for drug development became crystal
clear to Brennan when he oversaw worldwide business development for the Boston
operation of Boehringer Mannheim, an international therapeutics concern, and
became frustrated by the slow pace of genetics companies he dealt with.

   He recalled that companies always fell into two categories: those "that gave
you . . . reams and reams of sequence information without any connection to a
disease," and those "that did additional cloning, which is an academic technique
where you look at families that have diseases commonly in them . . .  and see if
there's some common thread" among those who get the disease.

   The problem with those approaches, Brennan said, was that they were "very
slow and very expensive." It would take from four to eight years for those
companies to come up with one genetic target, Brennan said, while his company
"had the capacity to screen a lot of targets very quickly. The problem was we
didn't have any to screen."

   That inspired him to try to fill what he called "a gap in the genomics
industry." In November 1995 he drafted a business plan for Gene Logic,
consulting with Sherman Weissman, a professor of genetics and medicine at the
Yale University School of Medicine who developed the technology Gene Logics
uses, and Alan Walton of Oxford Bioscience Partners, a Westport, Conn., venture
capital firm. He submitted his plan for financial backing and raised $ 9
million.

   Seven months later, he moved Gene Logic from New Haven, Conn., to a
25,000-square-foot facility at Columbia's Rivers Center office complex,
encouraged by a $ 1 million incentive grant from Maryland as well as the state's
burgeoning biotechnology infrastructure.

   Brennan quickly built up his management team, bringing in Mark Gessler,
former vice president for corporate development at GeneMedicine Inc., as senior
vice president for corporate development and CFO; Keith Elliston, formerly of
Bayer Corp. and Merck and Co., as senior vice president for research and
development; and Eric Eastman, also from GeneMedicine, as vice president for
scientific operations.

   Expanding Gene Logic is a priority for Brennan. He said his staff, which has
grown to 46 today from three last year, will have 20 more employees by year's
end.

   Brennan is secure in his prediction that his firm is "going to be the leading
provider of drug targets and drug leads for the pharmaceutical industry."

   That may sound overly confident, but consider his calendar: In addition to
continuing the Procter & Gamble negotiations, he said, by the end of 1997 he
will have formalized similar alliances with another U.S. pharmaceutical company,
as well as two in Europe and one in Japan (none of which he would name). And a
public offering of Gene Logic may be in the works for next year.

   For Brennan, a 39-year-old former neurologist with a PhD in chemistry, all of
it is the definition of having fun. "Imagine, being on the cutting edge of
science and making good money at it."


GRAPHIC: Photo, tom allen, IN PROFILE Gene Logic Inc.  Business: Develops
processes that speed up the use of gene therapy to develop drugs for treatment
of disease. Diseases the company is developing treatments for include: Heart
disease Osteoporosis Cancer (breast, prostate and colon) Infectious disease
Headquarters: Columbia Leadership: Michael J. Brennan, president and chief
executive Mark D. Gessler, chief financial officer Employees: 46, with plans to
add 20 more by year's end Recent developments: Struck deal with Procter &
Gamble's health care division to develop a gene-based therapy for congestive
heart failure. The 4 1/2 year alliance could mean up to $75 million for the
two-year-old company. Here is how that funding would break down: $12 million
(for the research) $13 million (for discovering the genes and developing the
drug) $50 million ($25 million each for two additional disease treatments).
Procter & Gamble Heathcare Corporate revenue: $33.4 billion Health care revenue:
$3 billion Spending on pharmacology research and development: $250 million
Primary research and development areas: cardiovascular drugs musculoskeletal
drugs anti-infection agents respiratory drugs At a laboratory in Gene Logic
headquarters in Columbia, Michael Brennan, left, Mark Gessler and Keith Elliston
look at a computer display that shows different patterns of gene expressions,
which are used to define diseases.  Gene Logic's technology provides a unique
and fast way to look at genes. Here is an example of the trademarked molecular
topography imaging.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1997


                             2344 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             July 20, 1997, Sunday

SECTION: INSIGHT, Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: SKIN CELLS HELP REPAIR SEVERED SPINAL CORDS, RESEARCH FINDS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Rats with severed spinal cords partially recovered their ability to walk in
new research that mirrors the results of earlier tests but holds slightly better
hope for humans.

   Gene therapy was used to stimulate a regrowth of nerve cells in the severed
spinal cords of the rats, researchers at the University of California San Diego
School of Medicine reported.

   In the new experiment, described in last week's issue of The Journal of
Neuroscience, samples of normal skin cells taken through a biopsy were modified
to produce a growth protein, neurotrophin-3, which encourages the survival and
growth of nerve cells.

   The skin cells were then grafted to the spine at the injured site of the
animals. There, the modified cells delivered the growth protein for several
months, further enhancing the regeneration of damaged nerve cells.

   ''The goal in spinal injury research is to promote the regrowth of cut or
damaged axons,'' or specific parts of nerve cells, said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, an
associate neurosciences professor at UCSD School of Medicine and the study's
senior author.

   ''These results indicate that cellular delivery of (the growth protein)
through gene therapy can restore function.''

   In a previous study reported last summer, researchers at the Karolinska
Institute in Sweden successfully removed a block of healthy nerve cells from lab
rats and transplanted them to the injured sites, where they grew nerve
connections across the gaps of severed spinal cords.

   But that experiment, which also restored some motion and sensation to the
paralyzed hind legs of the animals, proved only that regrowth was possible and
did not necessarily indicate the best technique, scientists said at the time.

   One scientist, Dr. Wise Young, a nerve system researcher at the New York
University Medical Center in New York City, said the bridge technique used in
the Swedish study could probably never be applied to humans.

   Because of that, the new gene therapy technique could eventually prove more
useful if it could be replicated in humans.

   The California scientists said the new research is encouraging, but years of
research will be required before such a treatment could be available for humans.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1997


                             2345 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 18, 1997, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 05C

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: INVEST CAUTIOUSLY IN BIOTECH STOCKS;
THAT BANDWAGON COULD BE HEADED FOR A CLIFF

BYLINE: 1997,; Knight-Ridder Newspapers

BODY:


   The morning headlines from the world of biotechnology are astounding - Adult
Mammal Is Cloned, Flu Pill Set For Human Testing, Firm Alters Virus To Kill
Cancerous Cells In Mice - and you're thinking of placing a bet on the next
medical miracle.

   But before purchasing that hot new stock, remember one thing about the
biotech industry - it's as volatile as pro basketball player Dennis Rodman on a
bad-hair day.

   All stocks rise and fall with news developments. But because biotech revolves
around small companies, complex biology, the hush-hush world of scientific
research and a lengthy product-approval process, a company's stock is
particularly vulnerable, industry analysts said.

   Biotech stock often spikes way up on big news, only to drop back down again
in a few days. So jumping on a company's bandwagon following one of those
astounding headlines can be a big mistake.

   "People don't understand how long the product development cycles are and how
risky it is, and they tend to respond overoptimistically to good news and
overpessimistically to bad news," said Cindy Robbins-Roth, editor of BioVenture
View, a biotech industry newsletter. "If you're going to play in this realm, you
have to do your homework."

   Check out a chart of the annual returns for Fidelity's biotechnology mutual
fund - a broad-based fund that includes biotech big boys Genentech and Amgen as
well as pharmaceutical giant Schering Plough. It could be the blueprint for the
next thrilling ride at Great America: up 99 percent in 1991, down 10 percent in
'92, up 0.7 percent in '93, down 18 percent in '94, back up 49 percent in 1995,
up 6 percent in '96. And up about 3.3 percent so far this year.

This year's swings reflect the market's volatility.

   What started out as a promising year - the American Stock Exchange's biotech
index was up about 16 percent into late February, outpacing the Standard &
Poor's 500 - turned sour amid fears of interest rate hikes and the overall
market correction. Now analysts predict a biotech upturn in the last half of the
year.

   Along the way, there will be more tantalizing biotech headlines. But odds are
nothing will duplicate the splash a small Scottish biotech company caused in
February - or the wild stock ride it set off.

   Researchers working with PPL Therapeutics PLC made history with the
announcement they had cloned an adult sheep. The company's stock shot up 65
percent over the next three days on the London exchange amid the hysteria about
a brave new world of customized human clones.

   But slowly, people began to realize that PPL Therapeutics, which owned
patents on the cloning process, was in the less sensational business of trying
to produce drugs in the milk of sheep and other animals.

   "That announcement really didn't add any value to the company," said James
McCamant, editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   The stock began to drop four days after the news. Three weeks later it had
given back nearly all of the initial gain.

   For reasons like that, experts say the biotech industry is not for the
fainthearted investor - and the best strategy is a biotech mutual fund or a
diversified portfolio.

   "You never want to put all your eggs in one basket," said Doug Lind, of the
investment banking firm Morgan Stanley, "even more so for a volatile area like
biotech."

   Further amplifying the impact of major biotech news, he said, is that a lot
of people buy a company stock at a lower price in anticipation of a major
announcement.

   If the news is good, they'll watch the stock price rise and then sell,
sending that price back down, he said.

   Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc., of La Jolla, Calif., jumped 6.3 percent when
the Food and Drug Administration approved the company's AIDS drug Viracept, a
type of protease inhibitor.

Great news, right?

   "A lot of people sold (Agouron stock) on that news," trying to quickly cash
in on the FDA's approval, Lind said. They made money, but people who bought
Agouron that day had to watch as the stock then dropped 13 percent over the
following two weeks.

   When major news is finally released and grabs public attention, it can shoot
the stock sky-high - particularly for a small company with only a couple of
potential drugs.

   Hollins C. Renton, chief executive of Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Richmond,
Va., found out firsthand last fall. Research from his company was published in
the journal Science showing Onyx had genetically altered a type of human cold
virus to kill many hard-to-treat types of cancerous tumors in mice while sparing
healthy cells.

   The news was potentially a major advance in the field of gene therapy for
cancer and made front-page news around the country.

   "This idea of taking a common respiratory virus and modifying it so it will
only go in and kill cancer cells has a lot of popular appeal," Renton said. "It
did get a lot of coverage, probably more than a lot of other discoveries,
because of the novelty."

   The news led desperate cancer patients and their families to flood Onyx with
calls and led thousands of investors to buy Onyx stock. Shares shot up 59
percent the day the news broke - from $ 10 to $ 15.88.

   The stock started dropping the next day, and about two weeks later the price
was actually below where it started - it closed at $ 9.88. It has hovered around
$ 10 since.

   Biotech's history is replete with tales of wild stock rides, soaring highs
and precipitous plunges. A good year for the industry, according to the
investment banking firm Hambrecht & Quist, means the market is up 100 percent. A
bad year can be almost as bad in the other direction.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Graphic Chart by San Jose Mercury News, Knight-Ridder
Tribune/CLEVELAND LEE and JACKIE COOK - The Biotech Bounce
 Source: Bloomberg News
 The Biotech Bounce
 In the volatile world of biotech stocks, major news such as PPL Therapeutics'
role in sheep cloning or Onyx Pharmaceuticals' successful results on gene
therapy can send a stock shooting up dramatically. Small biotech company stocks
often drop right back down after initial euphoria. The sharp highs and lows
reflect the industry as a whole, as shown by the annual returns for Fidelity's
biotechnology mutual fund.

 PPL Therapeutics
 (Line graph showing closing stock prices from Feb. - March, 1997)
 Feb. 14 - $ 335
 Feb. 26 - $ 552.50
 March 14 - $ 387.50

 Onyx Pharmaceuticals
 (Line graph showing closing stock prices from Oct. - Nov., 1996)
 Oct. 14 - $ 10
 Oct. 18 - $ 15.88
 Nov. 14 - $ 11

 Fidelity Select Biotechnology
 (Bar chart showing annual returns from 1990 through 1996)
 (Positive returns for 1990, 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996)
 (Negative returns for 1992, 1994)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1997


                             2346 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 17, 1997 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: Hope for spinal injuries may lie in gene therapy

BYLINE: David Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the difficult search to treat the dysfunction caused by spinal cord
injuries, some UCSD researchers have taken a new tack: using gene therapy
techniques. Rats with damaged spinal cords were given transplants of cells that
were augmented with an additional, therapeutic gene, and the transplant improved
the rats' ability to walk, scientists are reporting. The gene, which was put
inside skin cells that were grafted at the site of the spinal injury, churned
out a nourishing growth factor that caused severed nerves in the spinal cord to
grow again and form functioning connections. To date, spinal injuries remain one
of the most perplexing injuries to treat in part because the nerve cells that
relay the brain's messages resist repair. "We observed partial recovery of
function, and that's one more useful sign we can intervene to generate spinal
function recovery," said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a UCSD neuroscientist. The
discovery encourages scientists to consider trying the technique in other
animals and, if successful, try it in people within a few years, Tuszynski said.
The study in rats is reported in this week's issue of The Journal of
Neuroscience. Use of therapeutic genes represents yet another approach to
correcting dysfunction and paralysis caused by damage to the nerve cells in the
spinal cord.

   And it may have advantages over other strategies other scientists are
pursuing, researchers believe. Elsewhere, scientists have experimented with
fetal tissue rich in nourishing growth factors and even nerve tissue transplants
that encourage growth of nerves, called axons, along the spinal cord. The gene
therapy approach does not require use of any fetal tissue, which has its own
ethical considerations.

   And Tuszynski's strategy may require less surgery than other approaches under
consideration. To test the effectiveness of gene therapy, Tuszynski's team of
scientists severed half the axons running down the rats' spines, so that injured
rats lost some of the fine control over their walking. The team took a biopsy of
rat skin cells and armed the cells with a gene that produces the human version
of growth factor neurotrophin-3, or NT-3, a substance abundant during fetal
development but lacking in adults. They grafted skin cells into the injuried
region, where the cells churned out the substance.

   When the rats were tested three months later, the axons had regrown and much
of the motor control function had returned. Injured rats make about eight faulty
steps as they walk across an 8-foot-long horizontal ladder, compared with one or
no miscues for healthy rats.

   The treated rats improved to the point of averaging only about two and three
faulty steps in the exercise. If another lab can repeat the experiment with
similar results, then testing would be in order in either dogs, cats or monkeys,
whose spinal cords more closely resemble humans, Tuszynski said.

   If the technique remains promising, tests in people might begin within a few
years, he said. "Our ultimate goal is to make people better," Tuszynski said.
"This is mounting evidence we can intervene after spinal chord injury and
ultimately get some restoration of function." Other scientists involved in
Tuszynski's study include Ray Grill, Keith Mural and Armin Blesch, all of UCSD;
and Fred Gage of the Salk Institute.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2347 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 15, 1997, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy experiment gives hope on spinal injuries

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    In a groundbreaking experiment, California scientists have used gene therapy
to induce nerves to regrow in rats with damaged spinal cords, partly restoring
their ability to walk.

   Only two or three previous experiments have enabled animals with spinal cord
injuries to regain some function, and the new experiment is the first to use
gene therapy successfully to restore function.  There are no immediate plans to
try the strategy in humans, said the researchers at the University of California
in San Diego. But the results are another in a series of recent hopeful steps
toward the goal of reversing paralysis from spinal cord injuries, which disable
10,000 or more people a year, most of them young and active.

   The report being published today in the Journal of Neuroscience shows that a
new biological tool, gene therapy, can be brought to bear on the problem, with
encouraging results in experimental animals.

   "I think it's very exciting," said Susan Howley, vice president for research
of the American Paralysis Association, a nonprofit organization that promotes
research on spinal injuries.

   "Our report is yet another promising sign that experimental strategies can
bring back some recovery of function in spinal cord injury," said Dr. Mark H.
Tuszynski, an associate professor of neuroscience at the university.

   Last weekend, Florida researchers reported they had tried a different
experiment in a disabled patient, implanting nerve cells from aborted fetuses
into a patient's damaged spinal cord. Howley said the gene therapy technique
raises none of the ethical or legal quandaries raised by using fetal cells.

   "In the long term, the use of fetal cells is not the happiest solution to the
problem," she said in an interview.  "The hot things now are genetically
engineered cells" taken from the individual's own body and reprogrammed to
deliver growth-enhancing substances to the damaged spinal cord, she said.

   The strategy of converting normal body cells into miniature factories for
growth factors was pioneered in the laboratory of Fred Gage of UCSD, a co-author
of the new report. The greatest obstacle to repairing damaged spinal cord nerves
is that they don't heal or regrow after an injury, unlike nerves in the body's
extremities.

   Until recently, scientists believed spinal cord nerves simply could not
regenerate, but they have now discovered that the spinal cord's environment
contains proteins that prevent unwanted growth of nerves as the body is "wired"
in fetal development. Very recent research has demonstrated that if these
inhibitory proteins are blocked, severed nerves can regrow, and that adding
certain growth factors fosters that regeneration.

   In their experiment, the California scientists shaved a small number of skin
cells called fibroblasts from the experimental rodents they would be treating.
In a laboratory dish, they grew large numbers of the cells and equipped them
with genes that direct them to produce the growth factor neurotrophin-3, or
NT-3. They hoped that the engineered cells, when implanted into the rats, would
secrete the growth factor into surrounding tissues.

   To test the idea, the scientists made identical injuries in the spinal cords
of 40 rats. Rather than completely severing the cord - which is unusual in human
spinal injuries - the scientists cut away a portion of the cord, which is like a
cable composed of many separate fibers. The fibers are long nerve cells called
axons that carry nerve messages up and down, relaying sensations from the limbs
and commanding the muscles to contract.

   They then implanted the NT-3 gene-carrying cells in half of the rats, while
implanting identical cells without the gene into the spinal cords of 20 control
rats. The researchers cautioned that they don't know whether performing the
implants right after the injury - which would not be possible in humans - was
crucial to their success.

   One month later, some of the severed axons had regrown and crossed the injury
zone and extended a fraction of an inch beyond. When tested on a special device
to measure walking ability, the treated rats were significantly improved
compared to the control rats, said Tuszynski.

   Because some types of spinal cord axons did not respond to the growth factor,
the researcher said, they will probably try a "cocktail" of various growth
factors in future experiments.

   Research funds came from the US Department of Veterans' Affairs and two
private foundations.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1997


                             2348 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             July 14, 1997, Monday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 605 words

HEADLINE: GENETICS CAN SAVE LIVES, BUT POSE RISK

BYLINE: Mark D. Somerson, Dispatch Medical Reporter

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore.

BODY:


   Genetic testing for some forms of heart disease could save lives, but with
the new technology come ethical questions.

   Three cardiologists discussed genetics yesterday at an American Heart
Association conference, and they said this brand of science has a significant
place in today's medicine.

   ''Ten or 15 years ago we were teaching medical students that heart disease
was multi-factoral without strong genetic representation,'' said Dr. Henry
Sondheimer, a pediatric cardiologist at Children's Hospital in Denver.

   ''But times have changed.''

   For example, Dr. G. Michael Vincent, a cardiologist at LDS Hospital in Salt
Lake City, said sudden death in young people is often associated with structural
heart disease.

   It is estimated that as many as 40,000 sudden deaths occur every year in
people under age 25. As many as 8,000 of those deaths are unexplained, and as
many as 50 percent of those may be caused by something called ''Long QT
Syndrome.''

   This inherited disorder, named after the long interval between Q and T waves
on electrocardiogram readings for heart rates, is an arrythmia - a disorder of
heart rhythm - and results in loss of consciousness and sudden death.

   It can strike from the first few weeks of life up into the 30s.

   ''It is the biggest problem that has not caught the eye of the scientific
community and the public,'' Vincent said.

   He said many people who faint suddenly are often misdiagnosed as having
seizures, when in fact they could have this disorder.

   Vincent said pedigrees, or family trees, should be created for patients who
have Long QT Syndrome to trace the defective gene and treat those who may have
it.

   He said genetic testing will become commercially available soon to diagnose
some patients.

   ''It's a very treatable disorder,'' Vincent said. ''Usually it is treated
with beta-blockers.''

   In people with severe cases, pacemakers or implantable defibrillators can be
used.

   Dr. Arnold Strauss, a pediatric cardiologist at the Washington University
School of Medicine in St. Louis, said specific genes linked to cardiomyopathy
have been discovered in the last few years, and that gene therapy is perhaps
soon to follow.

   Cardiomyopathy, a disease in which the heart muscle becomes thick and doesn't
work properly, is among the most common causes of hospital admissions and deaths
in the United States.

   The disease is often secondary to the effects of other disorders, such as
coronary artery disease and high blood pressure.

   But primary cardiomyopathy, with no other sources for the disorder, is being
seen as a cause of sudden death and health problems in children and young
adults.

   It occurs in an estimated 1 in 200 people.

   The definitive treatment, Strauss said, is heart transplantation.

   ''Many, if not the majority, who have heart muscle disease have a genetic
component,'' he said.

   Strauss said cardiomyopathy could explain some Sudden Infant Death Syndrome
cases. SIDS is most commonly linked to breathing problems, but in many cases,
the cause is unknown.

   Early diagnosis may prevent deaths in these children, he said.

   ''A family who had a SIDS baby and then has another child should look at
this,'' he said.

   Gene therapy could one day replace transplantation, he said.

   Still, Sondheimer warned that with questions concerning insurance coverage
for people who carry a defective gene, and the lack of genetic therapy to treat
disorders, genetic counseling is crucial.

   ''There is potential harm in genetic diagnosis,'' he said. ''What do you do
when you diagnose a child who is normal but has a phenotype for heart disease?''

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1997


                             2349 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 13, 1997, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 898 words

HEADLINE: Treatment of dogs and cats for cancer produces promising results

BYLINE: CINDY STARR; Scripps Howard News Service

BODY:

   Gary and Michelle Hay of South Bend, Ind., discovered the sore
on their pet Rottweiler's paw in December.  It was about the
size of a quarter.  Their veterinarian removed the sore, but it
came back, bringing with it bad news.  Krueger had cancer.

   The Hays' heartache was compounded by the fact that Krueger
was not an ordinary dog.  The 6-year-old, 107-pound Rottweiler
was Indiana's only search and rescue dog certified by FEMA,
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  Were his paw
amputated, his abilities would be compromised.

   Unsure of what to do, Gary Hay and a fellow search and rescue
partner sought out possibilities through the Internet.  In
Cincinnati, Dr. Todd Jackson, veterinarian at the University
of Cincinnati Medical Center, saw the call for help and
responded.  ""Come see us,'' he wrote.  ""We're not that far
away. ''

   Thus began Krueger's foray into the world of modern medicine.

   With high-tech assistance from University of Cincinnati's
Veterinary Cancer Control Program, one of the few of its kind
in the United States, this valuable, sweet-tempered FEMA dog
has lived to search another day.

   Under the supervision of Jackson and Dr. David Denman,
associate professor of radiation oncology and director of the
Veterinary Cancer Control Program, Krueger underwent radiation
therapy 15 times in a three-week period this spring.  The mast
cell tumor in his left paw was irradiated with gamma rays by a
cobalt machine designed for human use, a treatment that has
resulted in an 85.7 percent cure rate at UC.

   At a recent checkup, the dog's paw was still cancer-free.  If
the cancer has not recurred within a year of treatment, the
dog can be considered cured.

   ""We are providing medical treatments to our animal patients
similar to treatment provided to people,'' Denman said.  ""I'm
not aware of any other medical school in the United States
that has human machines just for veterinary patients. ''

   The program has been a blessing for Donna Stevens, whose
Siberian husky, Zeek, was found to have a tumor on his leg
last fall.  After learning that the cancer was malignant, she
said, ""I was so depressed I couldn't talk. ''

   But after meeting Denman and Jackson, she felt a surge of
hope.

   ""It was quite an experience,'' she said of her pet's therapy.

   ""I felt really blessed.  Since then he's had his 11th birthday.

   Every day is a gift for us. ''

   While UC's program for veterinary cancer patients benefits
about 30 animals a year, Denman said that information gleaned
can be used to improve cancer therapy for people as well.  ""The
main difference in treating cancer in dogs is that more
information can be recorded in less time,'' Denman said.  ""One
year in a dog's life is equivalent to five, six or seven years
in a human's life. ''

   Last fall Denman began developing direct transfer gene
immunotherapy as a cancer treatment for pet dogs.  When an
incompatible human gene is injected into the dog's tumor,
Denman said, the dog's cells take up the gene, recognize it as
a foreign entity and then mount an immune response.  The
cancerous tissue is subsequently rejected.  The technique,
using an uncommon human gene, also is being explored in
clinical trials in humans.

   Denman hopes to begin using gene therapy treatment, along with
radiation therapy, in pets in 1998.  ""The whole idea behind
gene therapy is to bring the cure rate closer to 100 percent,''
he said.

   At present, not all tumors can be treated with radiation.

   Localized tumors, particularly in the extremities, are the
easiest to combat.  ""If the tumor were in the abdomen, we
couldn't give the treatment because the intestines would be
damaged,'' Jackson said.

   Pets lose their fur in the area being irradiated, but some or
most of the fur will grow back after treatment.  Because the
radiation does not strike their internal organs, however, they
are spared nausea and significant weight loss, Denman said.

   Pets might experience mild weight loss when a tumor is in the
mouth or if their normal eating schedule is disrupted during
treatment.

   The center treats far more dogs than cats.  Tumors in cats
frequently are discovered too late for treatment to be
effective, Denman said.  Also, dogs have more leg to work
with.

   Nevertheless, there have been success stories with cats.

   Among them is Thor, a 9-year-old Norwegian forest cat owned by
Ed Dowling of Cincinnati.  Thor, who developed a tumor between
the shoulder blades, underwent surgery by his regular
veterinarian and then was referred to Denman and Jackson.

   Without the radiation, Dowling learned, there was a 50-50
chance that the tumor would recur.

   ""He may have survived; I'll never know,'' Dowling said.  ""But to
me 50-50 is lousy odds.  It's good if you're playing the
lottery, but terrible if it's whether you live or die. ''

   Radiation treatment is expensive - full treatment at UC costs
$ 1,150 - and is not a viable option for everyone.  Gary Hay, a
mail contractor, and Michelle Hay, a school bus driver,
decided they could not afford the treatment.  ""It was a very
tough decision,'' Gary Hay said.

   But Denman intervened on behalf of a dog trained to search for
missing persons in the wilderness or under rubble.

   ""Krueger is such a special dog,'' Jackson said.  ""The
radiology/oncology department picked up most of the tab. ''

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1997


                             2350 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      July 13, 1997, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D15; BASEBALL NOTEBOOK

LENGTH: 1125 words

HEADLINE: BASEBALL NOTEBOOK

BYLINE: Mark Maske

BODY:


   Donations Result In Research Progress

   Some good did result from last fall's spitting incident involving Baltimore
Orioles second baseman Roberto Alomar and umpire John Hirschbeck, after all.

   Alomar and the Orioles, responding to the national uproar that followed the
Sept. 27 episode in which the second baseman spit in Hirschbeck's face during an
on-field argument in Toronto, donated $ 50,000 apiece last fall to the Kennedy
Krieger Institute in Baltimore for research on adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD).
That's the rare brain disorder from which Hirschbeck's son John died in 1993 at
age 7. The umpire has another son with the disease.

   Last week researchers said that, thanks largely to the donations from Alomar
and the Orioles and others who made contributions after the publicity that
followed the incident, they'd made a breakthrough in the search for a treatment
for ALD. They've been able to genetically engineer mice to contract ALD and
that, they said, will enable them to begin working aggressively toward finding a
treatment through gene therapy.

   Belle's Toll

   Albert Belle reportedly has a $ 50,000 incentive clause in his five-year, $
55 million contract with the Chicago White Sox for making the AL all-star team.
So what did Belle do to "earn" his $ 50,000 this year after being named to the
AL team by Manager Joe Torre? He skipped the AL workout on Monday and refused to
participate in the team photograph on Tuesday. He asked Torre not to play him in
the game Tuesday night, leaving the AL short on outfielders and forcing the
Orioles' Brady Anderson to play all nine innings on a badly bruised and swollen
left calf muscle. Of course, Belle didn't inform Torre of his desire not to play
until late on Monday, when it was too late to discuss the possibility of naming
a replacement.

   Pirates Please Neagle

   When the Pittsburgh Pirates put their payroll-slashing drive into effect last
July by trading pitcher Denny Neagle to the Atlanta Braves, it's doubtful that
anyone in baseball believed that both teams would be in first place at the
All-Star break this year. That required only a .500 record, at 43-43, for the
Pirates in the pitiable NL Central, but it still was a nice accomplishment given
their $ 9 million player payroll.

   "I'm happy for those guys, I really am," Neagle said last week in Cleveland.
"Everybody's been impressed with how they go out there and play so hard and so
scrappy. First place and .500, that's great for them. I'm not complaining
either, though."

   Bonds Puts Stock in the Giants

   Can the San Francisco Giants keep it going and turn this into a
worst-to-first season? Barry Bonds says he thinks so.

   "Oh yeah, definitely, we have enough to win the division," the all-everything
left fielder said during last week's all-star festivities in Cleveland. "We may
not be the best team out there. We don't have a lot of sluggers or a lot of big
names. But we have good pitching. We have a very versatile bullpen. We play good
defense. We don't beat ourselves very often. We have some hitters who are doing
the things you need to do to win, and we have people who want to play."

   The Giants finished last in the National League West last season, 23 games
behind the first-place San Diego Padres, with a record of 68-94. But they've
turned their revamped roster into a first-place club so far this year. They have
an offense in which Jeff Kent, Glenallen Hill and J.T. Snow have complemented
Bonds nicely. The have a bullpen in which closer Rod Beck could threaten the
single-season saves record of 57 by Bobby Thigpen for the Chicago White Sox in
1990. And they have a starting rotation in which 24-year-old left-hander Shawn
Estes, who was acquired from Seattle in a 1995 trade that sent pitcher Salomon
Torres to the Mariners and entered this season with three major league wins, has
become an honest-to-goodness ace.

   Estes surrendered Sandy Alomar's decisive home run in Tuesday's All-Star
Game, but Bonds likens him to "a young Greg Maddux." Said Bonds: "He wasn't with
the right team. He's nasty. He throws 90-plus [mph] and has a great curveball,
changeup, sinker and slider. He's got a lot of confidence. Shawn Estes is going
to win some Cy Young Awards."

   As for Bonds, it would take a monstrous second half for him to make a run at
his fourth NL most valuable player award. But he said that's okay with him
because his often antagonistic relationship with the media has taken the joy out
of individual awards for him anyway.

   "I have to dominate," Bonds said. "If anyone's close to me, they're not going
to vote for me... The press has squashed every opportunity I could have had
endorsement-wise and community-wise. That's the only sad part. There are a lot
of things I wanted to do in the community but couldn't because I'm the so-called
bad boy of baseball."

   San Francisco in the 1990s

   1997: 51-38*

   1996: 68-94

   1995: 67-77

   1994: 55-60

   1993: 103-59

   1992: 72-90

   1991: 75-87

   1990: 85-77

   *through Friday

   QUOTE

   "Tony Gwynn, for my money, always has a chance to hit .400. He can still beat
a ball out. He never strikes out. It seems to me, he always gets a pitch he can
handle. I don't think I've ever seen him have a bad swing."

   -- Atlanta Braves Manager Bobby Cox.

   SPOTLIGHT

   KENNY LOFTON

   OF, BRAVES

   The center fielder was hurt and didn't play in Tuesday's All-Star Game in his
return to Cleveland but received a standing ovation during pregame
introductions. "I thought it was great," said Indians General Manager John Hart,
who traded Lofton and reliever Alan Embree to Atlanta during spring training for
outfielders Marquis Grissom and David Justice. Hart last week had his first
meeting with Lofton since the blockbuster trade, and said: "Are there hard
feelings? No, I don't think so. In fact, I'm sure there are not."

   SCHILLING WATCH

   Most baseball people seem to regard the Cleveland Indians as the
front-runners to land Curt Schilling if the Philadelphia Phillies change course
and decide to trade the all-star pitcher by the July 31 deadline for completing
deals without players having to clear waivers.

   CATCHY QUESTION

   Sandy Alomar could become the first AL catcher ever to win a batting title,
but New York Yankees Manager Joe Torre said last week he doubts that it will
happen. "Alomar could win it, but it will be very tough," Torre said. "He's got
July and August in front of him. Catchers take such a beating."

   PASSING ON CORDERO

   Sources close to the Wil Cordero situation said last week that the Orioles
and Indians demonstrated the most sincere interest in trading for the troubled
outfielder before backing off. Cordero rejoined the Boston Red Sox on Thursday
but still is facing domestic abuse charges.


GRAPHIC: Photo, reuter; Photo ; Chart, Barry Bonds has helped direct Giants into
first place after 94 losses in '96.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1997


                             2351 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Arkansas Democrat-Gazette
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                            July 12, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: NEW; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 542 words

HEADLINE: New research   offers family  hope of cure  for sick boy

BYLINE: OLIVIER UYTTEBROUCK, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:



   When Jonathan Shearer was 6, the Pangburn boy passed out when he laughed.
About the same time, school work became harder for him.

   Within months, his family learned that a rare genetic illness caused the
symptoms. Niemann-Pick type C typically strikes children ages 5-10 and kills
them by early adulthood.

   But this week, researchers announced the discovery of the gene that causes
the disease and said the find might lead to a therapy.

   "It's slow, but it's cruel," Richard Shearer said of the disease, which
affects about 300 U.S. children. "It keeps taking things away from him. It keeps
shutting things down and finally it will shut down something that's vital."

   Niemann-Pick type C slowly clogs cells with cholesterol. Nerve cells die
first, causing a slow degeneration of the child's brain functions.

   National Institutes of Health scientists said Thursday that they have
isolated a gene that seems to help regulate how cells store and burn
cholesterol.

   In Friday's edition of the journal Science, researchers announced that they
had found eight mutations of the gene that can cause the disease. When copies of
a healthy gene were inserted into skin cells taken from patients, the cells
began processing cholesterol properly. The finding means it may be possible for
gene therapy to cure the disease.

   Researchers said the discovery could also help people at risk of coronary
heart disease by shedding light on how cholesterol moves around within cells.

   Arkansans can claim some credit for the discovery.

   In 1976, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences veterinarian Arliss
Booth discovered a mouse with the disease. Booth donated the animal to the
National Institutes of Health, Shearer said. Researchers used that mouse's
descendants to isolate the Niemann-Pick gene, he said.

   Arkansans also contributed money in the early years of research, Shearer
said.

   The Governor's Developmental Disability Council contributed $ 90,000 to the
research from 1992-1995. Shearer said he appealed to Gov. Jim Guy Tucker and his
successor, Gov. Mike Huckabee, for help getting those grants.

   Also, private contributors in the state donated another $ 15,000, Shearer
said.

   "We started the snowball that turned into an avalanche," he said.

   Former Notre Dame football coach Ara Parseghian has raised $ 6 million for
research in the 21/2 years since two of his grandchildren were diagnosed with
Niemann-Pick. Parseghian joined scientists Thursday when they announced the
discoveries.

   Richard Shearer said his son lost his abilities to walk and speak within
three years. Now 12, Jonathan is confined to a bed and wheelchair, though he
enjoys watching other children.

   The Shearers count themselves lucky that Dr. May Griebel, a pediatric
neurologist at Arkansas Children's Hospital in Little Rock, diagnosed the boy's
illness in 1992 within six months of his first examination. Other families have
waited as long as 12 years to get a proper diagnosis, Shearer said.

   Griebel said the discovery of the gene is an important first step, though
therapy remains years away.

   "It offers hope," he said Friday. "It takes years of research, but the thing
is, it's progress."

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1997


                             2352 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      July 11, 1997, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Researchers identify gene for rare cholesterol disease; Affliction
kills children; finding might help fight other cholesterol ailments

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- At 6, Christa Parseghian has slurred speech and learning
disabilities. Her 8-year-old sister, Marcia, stumbles in ballet class.

   The symptoms are early signs of a rare, fatal children's cholesterol disease
that recently killed their brother -- but scientists now have hope for fighting
back.

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health revealed yesterday the
discovery of a gene that causes Niemann-Pick type C disease.

   The finding may not come in time to save the grandchildren of former Notre
Dame football coach Ara Parseghian, who helped pay for the research. But doctors
say it might ultimately benefit millions by helping to explain how cholesterol
gums up people's arteries.

   "I hope that this finding has an impact on our girls' lives, but I have to be
realistic," said their mother, Cindy Parseghian, whose 9-year-old, Michael, died
in March. "It was somewhat anticlimactic; we were so buried in our sorrow."

   The disease hits about 300 U.S. children a year, so rare that few scientists
even study it.

   Cholesterol builds up in storage compartments of cells called lysosomes.
Eventually, the buildup kills the cells, starting with nerve cells in the brain.

   The first symptoms, occurring between ages 5 and 10, are problems in seeing,
walking and talking. Patients try low-fat diets and anti-cholesterol drugs, but
most die before age 20.

   In today's edition of the journal Science, NIH scientists ended a 20-year
search for the gene NPC1 with the announcement of eight different mutations that
can cause the disease.

   When copies of a healthy NPC1 gene were inserted into skin cells taken from
patients, the cells began processing cholesterol properly, wrote lead authors
Peter Pentchev and Eugene Carstea of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke.

   That means it might be possible one day for gene therapy to cure the disease.

   Scientists have a "mouse model" of the gene ready to test immediately in a
search for other, easier treatments, another NIH group reported in Science.
Usually scientists spend months after discovering a human gene to breed test
animals with the same defect, but molecular biologist William Pavan found the
defective gene in a strain of diseased mice even as his colleagues found it in
humans.

   Although Niemann-Pick type C strikes rarely, "it's an important finding,"
said cell biologist Yvonne Lange of Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center
in Chicago.

   "It will have relevance to understanding atherosclerosis," a dangerous
buildup of cholesterol inside arteries that afflicts millions of Americans, he
said.

   The body needs cholesterol to function, but too much of it causes heart
disease by clogging arteries. Nobody understands how it moves within cells, but
the protein that the NPC1 gene makes could finally help explain that process,
explained the institutes' neurology director, Zach Hall.

   Cindy Parseghian said the far-reaching cholesterol implications of the
defective gene should generate a race to understand it and treat its effect.

   Meanwhile, she's helping her children try to live normally.

   "We have talked with them that it could be fatal, but we expressed to them
that none of us knows when we're going to die," she said.

   "We just keep our hopes up and don't look too far down the road."

   Pub Date: 7/11/97

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1997


                             2353 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           July 11, 1997 Friday Final

SECTION: News Pg. 12

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Cholesterol illness cause identified

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   At 6, Christa Parseghian has slurred speech and learning disabilities. Her
8-year-old sister, Marcia, stumbles in ballet class. The symptoms are early
signs of a rare, fatal children's cholesterol disease that just killed their
brother but scientists now have hope for fighting back.

   Researchers at the National Institutes of Health revealed Thursday the
discovery of a gene that causes Niemann-Pick type C disease.

   The finding may not come in time to save the grandchildren of former Notre
Dame football coach Ara Parseghian, who helped pay for the research. But doctors
say it might ultimately benefit millions by helping to explain how cholesterol
gums up people's arteries.

   "I hope that this finding has an impact on our girls' lives, but I have to be
realistic," said their mother, Cindy Parseghian, who learned of the gene's
discovery just after 9-year-old Michael died. "It was somewhat anticlimactic; we
were so buried in our sorrow."

   The disease affects about 300 U.S. children and is so rare that few
scientists even study it.

   Cholesterol builds up in storage compartments of cells called lysosomes.
Eventually, the buildup kills the cells, starting with nerve cells in the brain.
The first symptoms, occurring between ages 5 and 10, are problems in seeing,
walking and talking. Patients try low-fat diets and anti-cholesterol drugs, but
most die before age 20.

   In today's edition of the journal Science, National Institutes of Health
scientists ended a 20-year search for the disease-causing gene with the
announcement of eight different mutations that could cause the disease.

   When copies of a healthy gene were inserted into skin cells taken from
patients, the cells began processing cholesterol properly, wrote lead authors
Peter Pentchev and Eugene Carstea.

   That means it may be possible one day for gene therapy to cure the disease.

   Even though Niemann-Pick type C strikes so rarely, "it's an important
finding," said cell biologist Yvonne Lange of Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's
Medical Center in Chicago. "It will have relevance to understanding
atherosclerosis," a dangerous buildup of cholesterol inside arteries that
afflicts millions of Americans.

   The body needs cholesterol to function, but too much of the substance causes
heart disease by clogging arteries. Nobody understands how it moves within
cells, but the protein that the key gene makes could finally help explain that
vital process, said the institutes' neurology director, Zach Hall.

   Cindy Parseghian said the far-reaching cholesterol implications of the
defective gene should generate a race to understand it and treat its effect.
Meanwhile, she's helping her children to live as normally as possible.

   "We have talked with them that it could be fatal, but we expressed to them
that none of us knows when we're going to die," she said. "We just keep our
hopes up and don't look too far down the road."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1997


                             2354 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        JULY 11, 1997 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: GENE ISOLATED

BYLINE: Brigid Schulte, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In what could be a breakthrough in cholesterol research, scientists from the
National Institutes of Health announced yesterday that they had isolated a gene
responsible for a rare and fatal childhood disease.

   The discovery, after a search of more than 20 years, may help researchers
better understand and treat atherosclerosis, the cholesterol buildup that
hardens arteries and can lead to heart disease, strokes and kidney failure.

   "Heart attack and stroke are the biggest killers in Western society," said
Dr. Peter Pentchev, a scientist at the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke. "This discovery could lead to very, very novel ways of
treating and preventing them."

   The hope, scientists said, is to find a way not just to reduce levels of
cholesterol in the blood - which is the most that current medicine can do - but
to completely remove it.

   The discovery, published in today's issue of the journal Science, all began
with a little boy named Michael Parseghian.

   When he was in kindergarten, Michael began stumbling on the playground. His
writing got sloppy. Doctors told his parents not to worry, he was just clumsy.
Finally, as his problems became more pronounced, doctors found he suffered from
a rare genetic disorder called Niemann-Pick type C.

   Niemann-Pick type C affects about 300 children in the United States. It
occurs only when both parents carry the defective gene, which prevents children
from processing cholesterol. Their bodies begin to break down.

   The liver, where the body's natural cholesterol is produced, and the spleen
become enlarged. Afflicted children lose their ability to walk, swallow and
speak. They are gripped by seizures or dementia. Those who make it into their
teens often die of respiratory failure. Few make it past 25.

   Children are put on low-cholesterol diets and given cholesterol-cutting
drugs. There is no other treatment. And no cure.

   Once Michael was diagnosed, the Parseghians had their other children tested.
Michael's two younger sisters also suffer from the disease.

   "The news was devastating," said their mother, Cindy Parseghian. "I realized
if we're going to do anything, we've got to move the research forward. And move
it forward quickly."

   With the children's grandfather, former Notre Dame football coach Ara
Parseghian, the family in 1995 formed a foundation and began raising funds for
research. The $6 million they have raised to date was crucial, scientists said,
to the breakthrough announced yesterday.

   An estimated 52 million American adults have high levels of cholesterol in
their blood, increasing the risk of heart disease and stroke.

   Still, scientists do not know how cholesterol functions. How does it work in
the body? How is it absorbed? How can medicine more directly treat
cholesterol-related diseases such as atherosclerosis?

   Isolating this defective gene, scientists said, is central to begin finding
those answers. But it is only the beginning. Only when scientists understand
exactly how cholesterol works can they begin to develop treatments - drugs,
protein replacement or gene therapy - to combat illnesses from Niemann-Pick type
C to clogged arteries.

   "Quite simply, much hard work lies ahead," said Jeffrey Trent, director of
the Human Genome Institute, and one of more than 40 scientists from seven
countries who worked to isolate the gene.

   The breakthrough does not come without heartache. Michael Parseghian died in
March. He was 10. And no one knows whether research to develop a cure will move
fast enough to save his two sisters.

   "We're closer to a cure. I hope it comes fast," Cindy Parseghian said. "But I
don't think long-term anymore. We try to make every day count for them. This has
taught us all how precious life is."

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2355 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 9, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: UCSD inks research deal with Dutch firm

BYLINE: Thomas Kupper, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD and a Dutch pharmaceutical company yesterday finalized an unusual joint
venture that gives the university a 49 percent stake in a company that will
conduct advanced medical research. Officials at the University of California San
Diego said the collaboration with pharmaceutical giant Boehringer Mannheim
represents a new source of research funding and a new mechanism to market the
fruits of that research. However, the deal differs from most private-sector
ventures in that UCSD isn't expecting to make money.

   Vice Chancellor of Health Sciences John Alksne said UCSD's share of the
profits, if any materialize, would likely be reinvested in the company's
research. Alksne and other officials gathered yesterday in UCSD's Center for
Molecular Genetics for an hourlong ceremony that culminated in the signing of
documents authorizing the venture, which was first announced last fall. "The
service center that results from this partnership with Boehringer Mannheim will
speed the process for investigators who are exploring new treatments for genetic
disease," Alksne said. The new company's work will involve gene therapy, a field
UCSD pioneered in the 1970s in which doctors inject minute quantities of
genetically engineered material into a patient to fight disease. Among the goals
are finding ways to transform UCSD's research into products that work safely and
effectively in human patients and to find diagnostic techniques to determine
which patients are candidates for the treatments. Ted Friedmann, director of
UCSD's gene therapy program, said the deal represents an experiment in funding
research and in transferring technology to the private sector. "We've become
very used to the idea that government is the driving force in research,"
Friedmann said.

   "Unfortunately, we've seen a reduction in government's role in driving this
research." Called Molecular Medicine LLC, the joint venture will grow from an
existing lab on UCSD's La Jolla campus.

   Boehringer Mannheim's initial investment is $4.2 million, while UCSD is
contributing the lab and equipment. Boehringer's money will cover losses in the
near term, and Alksne said funding beyond that would be resolved if the money
runs out.

   He said, however, that the collaborators expect to create revenue-generating
products. For Boehringer Mannheim, an Amsterdam-based company with worldwide
sales of $4 billion, the deal brings access to potential technologies that the
company says its customers want. "For us the challenge will be to bring together
these two types of cultures and create real value out of it," said Dennert Ware,
chief executive officer of Boehringer Mannheim's U.S. subsidiary. Boehringer
Mannheim and UCSD will appoint a president and management committee to run the
new company.

   If it works, UCSD officials said, the venture could be a model for future
collaborations. Alksne said the test of whether that happens with other partners
will be whether the venture produces worthwhile products and reaches financial
self-sustainability.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2356 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      July 8, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Ovitz will head fund-raiser for UCLA health facilities

BYLINE: Marilyn Elias

BODY:

   Ex-Disney chief Michael Ovitz has a new job: He'll chair a $ 418
million fund-raising campaign launched today by UCLA Medical School.
Instead of drawing a salary, though, Ovitz has contributed $ 25
million -- about one-third of his severance prize after departing
Disney in January.

   UCLA's hospital, severely damaged in the 1994 earthquake, will
be gutted and rebuilt from an I.M. Pei design, largely with federal
and state funds, college officials say. Other campus health science
facilities will be renovated, providing 25% more space for medical
research. The targeted full tab, $ 1.1 billion, is expected to
take at least five years to raise.

   "We'll be going to everybody, whether they can contribute $ 10
or $ 10 million," says Ovitz, a 1968 UCLA alumnus. "Hey, my wife
and I consider it a minor miracle that they graduated us," he
jokes.

   Buildings will house a new program in human genetics, emphasizing
gene therapy, labs to develop innovative transplant techniques
and a major neuroscience research facility, among other specialties.
"It's going to be premier, state of the art," Ovitz says.

   Since leaving Disney, he says, "All I've been doing is driving
my kids to school, and now school's out, so we're on vacation.
. . . I hadn't seen them for about the last 29 years." His three
children are 10, 14 and 16.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W

LOAD-DATE: July 08, 1997


                             2357 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            July 7, 1997, Monday,
                       Correction Appended, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH (NEWS), Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1281 words

HEADLINE: A key advance in research; Orioles' $ 100,000 gift to Kennedy Krieger
aids ALD research

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Roberto Alomar's trip to the All-Star game may signal his rehabilitation from
the infamous spat that made him an overnight pariah, but he can also find
comfort in a development far from the world of baseball.

   In a happy twist to the bizarre incident, scientists at the Kennedy Krieger
Institute say $ 100,000 donated by Alomar and the Orioles has helped them reach
a milestone in their research on a rare childhood fatal disease.

   The milestone is the creation of a colony of mice endowed with the genetic
trait responsible for adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), a nerve-wasting disease, in
humans.

   Scientists will use the creatures to test therapies and to gain better
insights into the biological changes that occur at different stages of
degeneration.

   "I'm glad they are going in the right direction, and hopefully they can find
a cure," said Alomar, when asked Wednesday to comment about the achievement.

   "One of the reasons I gave that money was to help the kids. I hope it makes a
difference. That's what I'm looking for, to make a difference," said Alomar,
whose $ 50,000 donation was matched by the team.

   In experiments that will unfold in years to come, scientists will subject the
mice to bone marrow transplants and other treatments, including Lorenzo's oil, a
therapy that attracted public attention through the 1992 movie of the same name.

   Not all of the experiments will take place at Kennedy Krieger.

   Tomorrow, a breeder pair named "Fred" and "Ethel" will be placed in a sterile
container and taken to Dulles Airport, where they will be shipped to St. Vincent
de Paul Hospital in France.

   There, parallel experiments will be conducted by Dr. Patrick Auberge, who
trained at Kennedy Krieger and later identified the gene that causes ALD.

   It would be a stretch to say none of this would have happened without the
money donated in the aftermath of the ugly incident between Alomar and umpire
John Hirschbeck, who lost a son to ALD.

   But at Kennedy Krieger, scientists say the money came at a critical juncture,
when their research was too young to attract long-term funding from the National
Institutes of Health.

   Now, with the mice numbering about 100 and various experiments planned,
researchers say the serendipitous dollars from the baseball incident may have
provided the boost they needed.

   ALD is a rare disease that destroys the protective myelin that covers nerves
-- a sheath necessary for the smooth transmission of neural messages.

   In its most severe form, the disorder attacks boys between the ages of 4 and
10, robbing them of the ability to walk, see and speak in as little as two
years.

   It is fatal.

   Scientists have learned much but not enough to cure the disease. They have
observed, for instance, that afflicted children accumulate high levels of
substances known as long-chain fatty acids in their brains.

   Mystery over myelin

   These fats play some role in the breakdown of myelin, but the precise role
remains a mystery.

   With Auberge's 1993 discovery, they also know the gene responsible for ALD.
But they don't know why some who inherit the gene become afflicted before
adolescence while others remain symptom-free until adulthood. People with
late-onset ALD develop a milder condition resembling multiple sclerosis.

   Many of these secrets could lie in the brains of laboratory mice, which
reproduce rapidly and can be sacrificed and studied at various stages of their
lives.

   "This provides us with an opportunity to go in at the earlier stages of
destruction and look at what is happening in the brain," said Dr. Kirby Smith,
director of molecular genetics for the institute, whose laboratory performed the
genetic manipulation responsible for the mouse strain.

   "We've never been able to study the initial steps of the brain disease," said
Dr. Gary Goldstein, president of Kennedy Krieger. "What we get are autopsied
brains, after the patients die. That's the end stage."

   The laboratory critters are called "knockout mice" because scientists have
removed -- or knocked out -- the gene that directly or indirectly keeps fatty
acids from reaching dangerous levels. In its place, they have inserted a strand
of DNA that does nothing.

   Lest anyone become too excited about the power of knockout mice, the
Baltimore scientists admit to a major limitation. While the mice accumulate the
fats, they do not develop the disease.

   As a result, scientists could measure a drug's effects on fat levels but
would not be able to gauge its effect on symptoms.

   Lorenzo's oil

   The disease is so rare -- afflicting about 1,000 families in the United
States -- that it attracted little public attention until "Lorenzo's Oil" was
released.

   The movie depicts the struggle of Augusto and Michaela Adone to save the life
of their son, Lorenzo, a gifted boy who was stricken with ALD in 1984.

   Despite their lack of medical training, the Washington-area couple pored over
scientific journals and, within two years, pieced together the theory that a
refined oil may stop or slow the disease. The movie makes the case that the oil
halted Lorenzo's decline and even helped him regain some functions.

   It also opened a rift between the Adones and Dr. Hugo W. Moser, the Kennedy
Krieger neurologist who is presented in the movie as a coldly scientific
naysayer.

   Moser, who directs ALD studies at the Baltimore hospital, later charged that
the movie overstated the oil's effects and gave false hope to desperate
families.

   Augusto Adone insists that he always respected the Swiss-born scientist, who
at one time cared for their son.

   With news of the mouse colony, he appears eager to proclaim their friendship.

   "Listen, if it hadn't been for Lorenzo and we had just met on a plane or
lived in the same town, we would be friends," he said.

   "He stimulates me. In some ways, we have the same form of thinking, the same
logic. It's one of those very interesting relations. Knowing Dr. Moser has made
quite an impact on my life."

   So impressed is Adone that he has committed $ 120,000 toward mouse
experiments at Kennedy Krieger and St. Vincent de Paul. The money will come from
the Myelin Project, a foundation that the Adones established to support research
into ALD and related diseases.

   "It's a fantastic thing that they've done," Adone said.

   The mice might resolve many questions about Lorenzo's oil, such as when to
give it and how the oil lowers fat levels.

   Moser recommends the therapy for boys carrying the defective gene, but only
for those who have not yet developed symptoms.

   "There is general agreement that for patients who are already symptomatic,
Lorenzo's oil doesn't change the course of the disease," Moser said.

   But in symptom-free children, he said, the oil clearly reduces levels of
long-chain fatty acids. It will take years, however, to observe whether this
prevents crippling symptoms.

   The mice, whose lives are compressed into a few years, could resolve this
question swiftly.

   Lorenzo, who began treatment after he was crippled by ALD, is now 19. He
requires round-the-clock nursing and can no longer speak or move significantly.
His father says he can answer "yes" or "no" with sign language and appears to
enjoy music.

   Augusto Adone doesn't know if science will produce anything that will help
his son.

   For less advanced patients, Adone holds the greatest hope for gene therapy,
an experimental treatment in which a patient's own bone marrow will be removed,
genetically altered and then reinfused. If the treatment succeeds in mice, it
can be tried in humans.

   "This mouse will enhance the chances that gene therapy will eventually be
successful," Adone said.

   Pub Date: 7/07/97

CORRECTION-DATE: July 7, 1997

CORRECTION:


   In Monday's editions, the name of the family that established the Myelin
Project to support research into the childhood disease adrenoleukodystrophy, or
ALD, was misspelled.

   Augusto and Michaela Odone started the foundation. Their son, Lorenzo, has
the nerve-wasting disease.

   The Sun regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, NANINE HARTZENBURCH : SUN STAFF, Mice: Dr. Kirby Smith and
graduate student Jyh-Feng Lu of the Kennedy Krieger Institute hold mice that
carry the gene for adrenoleuko-dystrophy, a rare but fatal disease that affects
children.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1997


                             2358 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                   July 7, 1997, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
A doctor finds a way to induce rare bone marrow cells to reproduce themselves in
the laboratory.

BYLINE: By Teresa Riordan

BODY:

   STEM cells, which live deep in the bone's marrow, are the grandmother cells
of the body, giving rise to all manner of progeny cells that regenerate blood
and bone and tissue. As such, they hold great medical promise in treating cancer
patients and as a fundamental ingredient in new gene therapies.

   But stem cells are elusive. Only one in 2 million to 10 million bone marrow
cells is a stem cell. Researchers have developed different techniques to obtain
the stem cells from the marrow. But even so, they are faced with a finite
supply.

    Scientists have sought ways to induce stem cells, by exposing them to growth
factors or other agents, to divide and reproduce. But although the stem cells
divide into new cells, the new cells differentiate into more mature cells rather
than stem cells, and thereby lose their most important properties.

   Dr. Stephen G. Emerson, a professor of medicine who is the chief of
hematology and oncology at the University of Pennsylvania, took a different
approach: Instead of adding substances to stem cells, he made a laboratory
approximation of the environment in which stem cells live in the human body. In
doing so, he got the stem cells to replicate themselves at approximately the
same rate they would in the body.

   Dr. Emerson expects to receive tomorrow what appears to be a fundamental
patent for his technique. The patent has been assigned to Aastrom Biosciences, a
biotechnology company in Ann Arbor, Mich.

   In Dr. Emerson's technique, the stem cells are mixed with nutrients and other
substances in a round, flat cassette that he described as being the size of a
large pizza. Then the cassette is inserted into a "bio-reactor," where a gaseous
mixture of oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide sits above a membrane. The oxygen
diffuses across the membrane to the cells in the cassette below.

   "It recreates the rate of flow of plasma and nutrients to cells and recreates
the proper oxygenation of the cells," Dr. Emerson said.

   The ability to propagate stem cells could have immediate benefits for cancer
patients whose blood counts fall after getting high doses of chemotherapy or
radiation. In May, Dr. Patrick Stiff, director of the bone marrow transplant
program at Loyola University Medical Center, reported on successful clinical
trials with breast cancer patients who had received stem cells grown in an
Aastrom bioreactor.

   According to Aastrom, its new technique is cheaper but also far less
traumatic to the patient, from whom it requires the extraction of relatively
fewer stem cells. Patients also can receive a larger number of stem cells than
they would otherwise get.

   "Other techniques require the patient to be in the doctor's office up to 40
hours and can be very invasive, with the patient getting from 25 to 150 needle
sticks," Douglas Armstrong, president of Aastrom, said. "Our approach under
development takes less than an hour and requires only 4 to 10 needle sticks."

   Aastrom has other trials under way at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, the South Texas Cancer Institute and the Duke University Medical
Center.

   But another important application of growing stem cells is in gene therapy.
Unlike most other kinds of cells, which live only for a few days or weeks, stem
cells continue to produce new cells over a lifetime.

   That means that stem cells genetically altered to correct for hemophilia or
sickle cell anemia, for example, could be injected into a patient's blood, where
they would migrate to the bone marrow and then would manufacture new,
"corrected" blood cells in perpetuity.

   Genetic information is locked up in a cell's nucleus, which forms a dense
tight ball that is difficult to penetrate. Only when the cell is in the process
of dividing does the nucleus become vulnerable to the insertion of a new gene.

   "Many investigators have tried different ways to penetrate the nucleus," Dr.
Emerson said. "But only by getting stem cells to divide has anyone had any
success."

   Aastrom said it anticipated that the new patent, as well as others in the
pipeline and already issued to Dr. Emerson, will make it necessary for companies
in the gene therapy field to license the technology.

   "A lot of people are using this approach to different degrees," Dr. Armstrong
said.

   Will the patents raise the ire of the scientific community, as did one
granted several years ago to Systemix Inc., now a unit of Novartis A.G. of
Switzerland, which covered a way to purify stem cells?

   "I think the industry will be surprised at the patent," Jean-Paul Lavalleye,
Aastrom's patent lawyer, said. "A lot of people were gunning for this result.
The difference is that the Aastrom technology is the enabling technology. To use
an analogy: We invented the car; everyone else is coming up with turbochargers
or some other accessory to the original invention."

   Dr. Emerson, Michael Clarke, a professor of medicine at the University of
Michigan, and Bernhard Palsson, a professor of bioengeneering at the University
of California at San Diego, are scheduled to receive patent 5,646,043, which
will be held by the University of Michigan but which has been exclusively
licensed to Aastrom.

Dark Horse Takes Creativity Honors

    What is the most innovative state in the union? California residents filed
the most patent applications in 1996: 23,082. New York, in second place, had
8,733 applications.

   But adjusted for population, the runaway winner is . . . Idaho.

   According to a ranking created by the Intellectual Property Owners
Association, Idaho filed nearly 108 patent applications per 100,000 residents.
Minnesota comes in a distant second with nearly 78 applications per 100,000, and
Massachusetts is third with about 77.

   Which states filed the fewest applications, adjusted for population? Alabama
is 48th, with about 13 applications per 100,000; Mississippi is 49th, with 10.5,
and Arkansas is last, with about 10.

   Patents are available by number for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office,
Washington, D.C. 20231.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1997


                             2359 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 6, 1997 Sunday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. G-3

LENGTH: 934 words

HEADLINE: America's (and the world's) scientists

BYLINE: Lukas K. Buehler, BUEHLER is a lecturer in biology at UCSD and scientist
at the R.W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute in San Diego.

BODY:

   Breast cancer, obesity, Alzheimer's. What these conditions have in common are
the recent claims that they are caused by genetic disorders.

   The surprising scientific claim in each case was that the malfunctioning of a
single gene rather than a complex interplay between many genes and the
environment can be held responsible. With these and other such discoveries, hope
for cures rises, and gene therapy is on its way to changing forever the way
Americans will have to think about their futures.

   And once again, science makes headlines promising cures for the incurable.
Scientific research is conducted in the United States to improve the quality of
life of the populace.

   It is conducted by scientists, but Americans don't really know who these
scientists are.

   They know the anecdotes, but not the facts. The fact is that many of the
scientists who toil in American laboratories and at American research
institutions are not Americans.

   This is the story of one of them.

   This is also my story. I came to America from Switzerland six years ago to
work as a neuroscientist at UCSD. My intent was to earn credentials that would
lead me into an academic career.

   The reputation and strong presence of scientists in San Diego prompted me to
stay longer than I had planned. Gaining legal-resident status allowed me to
begin teaching young biology students the principles of biochemistry. There
exists in this country an "American" science, promoted by strong science
education, with a high output in Ph.D.s sustaining a level of excellence in
research and development in industry and universities alike. This high level of
quality is reflected in the number of Ph.D.s awarded in the chemical sciences to
noncitizens, nearly half of such degrees awarded. The success of American
science can be traced back to the Manhattan project and the "Sputnik shock" as
this country renewed efforts to become the most technologically advanced nation
on Earth. The participation in this effort by foreign nationals has been a plus
for American science and technology.

   But how long will this participation continue?

   Today, politicians are pushing for immigration reform as a response to the
perceived crisis of economic and spiritual decline by a majority of Americans.

   A crisis, perceived or real, instills fear.

   Fear is blinding.

   Americans say, therefore, that immigration has served its purpose but harms
them today. Proudly, Americans buy "Made in America."

   People know what they owe to themselves and their children.

   Americans want to base their decisions on the perception of national
independence, strength and pride.

   Yet being part of an international economy, these are political slogans
designed to calm a collective fear.

   The real forces work quietly, as quietly as the scientists coming from all
over the world to visit America, with the goal of exchanging ideas for prestige.
The influence of foreign scientists on American science is an open secret in the
scientific community, and this influence is in the best interest of science and
the American people.

   Science is no Olympic competition.

   It is a struggle between the human mind and nature.

   Such battles are won by individuals who, in times when the calls for national
identity become louder, happen to carry the burden of their place of birth.

   Such is the rush against immigration; it is the urge to find a national
identity in times of perceived economic decline.

   It is the search for scapegoats. Scientists like me come from all over the
world.

   This is true as it was true during the times of the Manhattan Project.

   Many of the physicists came from Germany, when nationalism culminating in the
systematic killing of unwanted people also destroyed one of the strongest
scientific communities of that time.

   These are the fruits of the belief that salvation from crisis lies in
nationalism. Today's public mood, of course, is of a different nature.

   It is the frustration about illegal immigration that is negatively affecting
the tolerance for legal immigration.

   This tolerance, however, is important for scientific research, where many
people work on (temporary) legal-resident status.

   Restrictions for immigration levels are under political debate, and certain
welfare benefits are now being denied to legal immigrants, although they are
required to continue contributing tax money to these very welfare programs. To
be sure, we scientists are but a small group of legal immigrants entering on
temporary work visas.

   We rarely intend to stay for good and often return to our home countries.

   We are guests in the best sense of the word, and we work for our own good,
yet contribute to the strength of our host country.

   We are visitors who come to earn reputations as scientists and then to go
back home. More often than not, we bring money from our governments.

   We learn and bring skills.

   We are the backbone of the scientific community in this country and some of
us travel to Stockholm for Nobel Prizes as a result. Yet prizes given for our
accomplishments are given to us as citizens of a nation, as if the nationality
changes the laws of nature. The prospect of immigration can be seen by looking
at those welcome visitors who are messengers of knowledge.

   Yet what is true for scientists is true for every immigrant.

   It is the contribution, the motivation and spirit oft he individual that
counts.

   Stopping legal immigration means stopping the human spirit.

   It is a self-defeating policy.

   The prospect of prohibiting foreign scientists from coming to American
research institutions serves as an example of the danger of punishing a
scapegoat -- the legal immigrant, for the problems of the nation.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: JOHN OVERMYER

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2360 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     July 01, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z08; LETTERS

LENGTH: 1456 words

HEADLINE: Letters: 'A Life Well Lived'

BODY:


   Rebecca Lilly, the Takoma Park teenager whose battle against brain cancer was
chronicled in the Health section, died Wednesday at home. In response to The
Post series, hundreds of readers wrote letters to the Health section, to the
Lilly family or to Becca herself. Here, with the writers' permission, are
excerpts from a sampling of those letters.

   Although the result in Becca's case hasn't turned out the way we wished and
hoped and prayed, the loving effort by everyone involved was clearly the real
story that was told. As for Becca, it has been a life well lived.

   William Kelley Eidem

   Mount Rainier

   I feel compelled to write regarding Rebecca Lilly. I have followed her
triumphs and tragedies through The Post's articles and feel I know Rebecca and
her family intimately. She and her family have been both valiant and courageous
through this rough journey. Rebecca has touched my life as she has touched many
others. Although I have never met her, I will miss her.

   Erica G. Irwin

   Gaithersburg

   I have followed with sincere interest your series on Rebecca Lilly -- one
very brave, almost 17-year-old, faced with looking at death at a time in her
life when life itself was just beginning to unfold. Her positive attitude, her
tenacity, her individualism is much to be admired.

   James Paul

   Germantown

   Hillary and I were very sorry to hear about Rebecca's death and send our
prayers and deepest sympathy. Rebecca was truly a remarkable young woman. Her
courage, strength and grace touched so many lives.

   Bill Clinton

   Washington

   I have read every article with hope and I have been deeply touched by
beautiful Rebecca. I feel so much for her and for her entire family, and
although I do not know them, I have been touched with the grace and courage of
such a loving family. I will love my two children more carefully and tenderly
because of Becca. Thank you for sharing this delicate, private journey with
others so that we may be better parents and friends in this life.

   Sue McDonald

   Alexandria

   I am a 28-year veteran of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and Becca
Lilly is my hero. She is the most courageous person I have ever known. I am the
parent of three children, and I hold her parents in the highest esteem for their
never-ending devotion, courage and resolution. I hope that should I ever face a
similar situation, that I could perform with as much grace.

   God made Rebecca a very special person and the world is a better place
because of her.

   Ed Burwitz

   Stafford, Va.

   I have been extremely touched by the coverage of Becca Lilly's struggle with
cancer. I admire her courage and the wonderful love that she and her family have
for each other. Her struggles put things into perspective for me. Family and
friends come first, and helping those that you love in any way that you can, and
helping those that need whatever you can offer.

   Sherill I. Kuc

   Ellicott City

   I have been following Becca's story. Even though you've emphasized from the
beginning that this type of cancer was fatal, I was hoping beyond hope never to
have to read that last story.

   Josiane Kanza Hansen

   [no address given]

   Bravo for such a personal and well thought out series of articles on Becca
Lilly. I was so moved by the way you portrayed her family's fight to save
Becca's life. I unfortunately felt their pain intensely. This series was a gift
to us, and many lessons learned. What a brilliant portrayal of a brave family.
Today and every day, I celebrate their strength in the face of such sadness.

   By telling Becca's story the way you have, you keep her spirit alive.

   Andy Smull

   Kensington

   All concerned -- Becca, her family, Dr. Packer and his associates -- are to
be thanked for the unique gift they have given us all in permitting the telling
of this story in such intimate detail. To borrow the title from President
Kennedy's book, this story is replete with profiles in courage from which each
of us can learn.

   Peter R. de Bruyn

   Rockville

   I've read many sad and disturbing stories over the years, but the update on
Rebecca Lilly was the first that ever made me sit and cry. My heart goes out to
the Lilly family, and especially to Becca, for having to bear such a burden. The
support Rebecca has received from her friends and family is truly inspiring --
the only positive thread that has run throughout the coverage of this
devastating experience.

   Suzanne Melancon

   Burke

   Dear Rebecca,

   I am so sorry you are so sick. I had an uncle that had a brain tumor and he
died last June. I miss him a lot. So when my Mom read the article I felt sad
that you have a brain tumor too. I am 7 years old.

   Love,

   Kathryn Rose Wiebe

   Silver Spring

   From the day Becca set foot on the grounds of Camp Friendship with her
trademark hat and smile and her characteristic spunk to the final days of her
life as a beautiful and determined young lady, she inspired us one and all.

   Beverly Gough

   President

   Carol Jean Cancer Foundation Inc.

   Silver Spring

   How very sorry I am to read about Rebecca's passing. What I will try to
remember most was her strength, courage and zest for life.

   Taury Silver Falk

   Potomac

   Like so many others, I was awed and moved by Becca's immeasurable courage and
perseverance and her overwhelming generosity in allowing us to come to know her
and be inspired by the grace in which she bore her burden.

   I think the picture of her I will keep in my mind when I think of her, which
has been and will be often, is the one where she is winding up to throw a
softball. She is concentrated and focused on the moment she is living in, which
is what we all need to do. She will be remembered by so many of us, in our
private moments, when we are scared and anxious and it will help us to think
about her.

   Ann McMullin

   Bethesda

   Becca has not merely left a mark on her family, "her kids" and the rest of
us, but she has planted with hard work and conscious effort something full of
life, enduring, perhaps beyond life.

   The Lillys have been so kind, so open, so generous to allow us into their
lives with the series of articles. They have let us see how exceptional an
ordinary family can be, facing extraordinary, insurmountable challenges.

   Our hearts go out to you, our prayers on wings.

   Stacey Gurian-Sherman

   Takoma Park

   Becca was a joy to be around. During the past year, her patience and love
touched the lives of 18 children in a way that I believe will live with them
always. Her courage and her unfailing happiness were an inspiration to me. She
will be greatly missed. She will never be forgotten.

   Jean Cihlar, preschool teacher

   St. Andrew Apostle School

   Wheaton

   Please know the love shown by this family is an inspiration to all.

   Patricia Martz

   Chambersburg, Pa.

   As I begin the task of teaching my 4-year-old daughter how to grow up to be a
good person, I am learning so much from the Lillys. They have taught me that
life and death are not opposites, but part of a process. They show me it is
possible to bear anything, if you do it together. They embody a family with the
very best qualities -- strength, compassion, wisdom and love.

   Becca will be with me as I teach Hannah the important lessons about being
human. And she will be with me as I strive to live my own life more dearly.

   Becca's song rings out.

   Tamar Abrams

   Arlington

   Dear Becca,

   I am continuing to pray for you. I am sorry that other treatments haven't
helped you, but I believe that prayer and faith in God's healing power will help
you. May God bless you.

   Eugene Kelly, age 10

   Alexandria

   I am one reader who has benefited from the coverage of Rebecca's illness.

   My sister was diagnosed with leukemia at the same age Rebecca was diagnosed
with her tumor, and my sister fought it for the same number of years. I was
three years younger and spared many of the details. Following Rebecca's story
has taken some of the mystery out of my sister's experience and allows me to
imagine what she went through as an adolescent and the type of decisions my
parents had to make.

   Laura Falvey

   Millersville, Md.

   Becca was an angel that touched the lives of so many. I feel fortunate to be
one of the many who benefited from her love, laughter and great strength.

   Molly O'Hara

   Falls Church

   Letters intended for publication must be signed and include the writer's home
address and home and business telephone numbers. Letters may be edited. Although
we are unable to acknowledge all letters, we appreciate the time and value the
viewpoints of those who write. Send letters to Health Section, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071 (FAX: 202-334-6471). Our Internet
address is healthwashpost.com.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, Rebecca Lilly's funeral last Saturday drew
hundreds of mourners. At her graveside, her father, Joe Lilly, helps her sister
Sarah take a carnation from the top of the casket.  In her battle with a brain
tumor, Becca underwent surgery, radiation, chemotherapy and gene therapy. Yet
she led an active life that included finishing her junior year at Good Counsel
High School in Wheaton in May, playing basketball and going bowling after
leaving the Winter Ball.

LOAD-DATE: July 01, 1997


                             2361 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                      June 29, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1531 words

HEADLINE: From cells arises Osiris; Company was started four years ago in new
area of medicine; Groundbreaking discovery; Firm has gained powerful ally with
Novartis investment

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   James S. Burns, a veteran of the pharmaceutical industry, took on an
intriguing, if not risky, assignment in 1993: Launch a new company, indeed a new
area of medicine, based on a startling and seemingly futuristic discovery.

   The premise for the venture -- a way to regenerate bone and other connective
tissue cells -- had emerged in 1990 in a professor's laboratory at Case Western
Reserve University in Cleveland.

   The professor, Arnold Caplan, had determined that the body produces certain
types of cells that serve as "seed" cells. They divide repeatedly and eventually
differentiate from one another, forming highly specialized cells for a specific
job, such as replenishing bone.

   The cells were dubbed mesenchymal stem cells. They are the reason, says one
molecular biologist, "why we don't fall apart."

   The discovery, say medical experts, was groundbreaking.

   Burns, a co-founder of HealthCare Investment Corp., a New Jersey-based
venture capital firm with a track record of backing successful biotech
start-ups, paid Caplan several visits.

   Caplan convinced Burns that his work on stem cells showed it might be
possible to harness these seed cells in such a way that they could be used to
grow back tissue damaged from chemotherapy or from degenerative diseases such as
osteoporosis.

   Burns, who holds a master's degree in biological science, reasoned that there
could be important medical applications for the technology.

   Says Burns, "We didn't set out to just create a new company, but a whole new
area of medicine."

   Burns and Caplan named the company they formed in 1993 to develop products
based on these forerunner cells for the Egyptian god of the "lower world,"
Osiris.

   Osiris Therapeutics Inc. was launched in Cleveland with money Burns had
banked away and cash from a New York-based friend and risk taker.

   The company was lured to Baltimore in 1995 largely on the strength of a $ 4.7
million state and city financial package, which allowed Osiris to create a
top-flight research and pilot manufacturing facility -- with waterfront views --
in Fells Point.

   Today, cash flow is no longer a worry. The company has raised more than $ 30
million from investors, including $ 22 million from Swiss investors, such as
high-tech financier Peter Friedli.

   Powerful ally

   Earlier this month, Caplan's discovery and Burns' gamble gained a powerful
and wealthy ally: Novartis Corp., the world's No. 1 drug company.

   The Switzerland-based pharmaceutical powerhouse (formed by the merger of
Sandoz AG and Ciba-Geigy) signed on as an 8 percent equity holder.

   It also pledged up to $ 50 million in research and development funding to
develop stem cell therapies to treat two of the most common bone diseases,
osteoporosis and arthritis. Novartis also agreed to underwrite the cost of any
clinical trials -- a multimillion dollar undertaking.

   Osteoporosis and arthritis, which affect 40 million in the United States, are
among Novartis' top R&D targets for new drugs. The equity investment by Novartis
valued shares of privately held Osiris at $ 8.50. At that price, Osiris Chief
Financial Officer Michael Demchuk Jr. says, the company has a "pseudo" valuation
of about $ 125 million.

   Novartis executives in Switzerland declined to be interviewed for this story.

   But the Swiss concern is no stranger to stem cell technology. Clearly, it is
banking on it to emerge as a hugely marketable medical therapy.

   In January, Novartis said it would pay $ 75 million for the remaining shares
it didn't own in Systemix Inc., a California company developing stem cell
therapies to treat cancer and AIDS. Its technology is based on a group of stem
cells discovered earlier that controls red and white blood cell production.

   Despite Novartis' clear interest in stem cells, it is astounding that a
start-up like Osiris could line up a well-heeled partner like Novartis ($ 2.6
billion in 1995 sales) just four years out of the gate, say industry experts.

   "It's important that Osiris was able to strike a big pharm deal so quickly,"
says Thomas Neff, a partner in Three Arch Bay Health Sciences Fund, a Mountain
View, Calif., venture group and an early backer of Osiris.

   "Novartis is very rich and very smart. They have all the tools to understand
the biology and the commercial opportunities of stem cells," says Neff, who also
heads Fibrogen, a California biotechnology outfit. "They would't go into a deal
like this if they didn't think there was something very significant happening at
Osiris."

   And to hear Burns, Osiris' president and chief executive officer, tell it,
the market potential is staggering.

   He estimates that the "tissue regeneration" market could prove to be a $ 15
billion industry. Each disease or injury indication for which a stem cell
product is approved has a potential $ 1 billion market waiting to be tapped in
the United States alone, Burns estimates.

   "Even if we get a tiny slice of that action, we're going to be in very good
shape," says Burns.

   Consider, for example, stem cell therapies' potential for just one of the
Novartis-Osiris targets, cartilage injuries and other orthopedic procedures.

   Such treatments could reduce or replace the reliance on plastic and metal
implants used in orthopedic surgery, say company executives. That implant market
generates estimated sales of $ 4.3 billion annually, says Frost & Sullivan, a
California-based market research outfit.

   On verge of expansion

   Says Neff, the venture capitalist, "The tissue regeneration field is about to
rapidly expand."

   For now, Osiris is a leader in the stem cell field and faces few direct
competitors, says Neff. He notes, though, that as new stem cell technologies
emerge, so will competitors.

   Oddly Osiris' biggest competition may be Novartis' Systemix unit. Both are
attempting to develop stem cell treatments for cancer, a disease not covered by
the Novartis-Osiris agreement.

   Also, Osiris owns a 62 percent stake in Gryphon Inc., a company spun out of
Johns Hopkins Medical School to capitalize on blood stem cell research by
Hopkins researcher Curt Civin.

   Other companies are developing tissue regeneration products with different
approaches. These include using proteins that regulate signals in cells to
stimulate tissue growth, and harvesting, growing and reimplanting tissue, which
Genzyme Corp., a Massachusetts company, is doing.

   From his office in a former Fells Point warehouse, Burns sees fair skies
ahead for the fledgling biotech concern.

   The location -- it's close to research hubs Hopkins and University of
Maryland Medical School -- and a $ 12 million investment in top-of-the-line lab
equipment have lured top talent to the company. And the company expects to
expand its current 65-employee work force to 110 by year-end.

   The CEO anticipates signing at least one other major corporate partner by the
end of the year and forecasts signing as many as four alliances over the next
several years.

   Delayed stock offering

   One cloud on the horizon: The company had hoped to have gone public by now.
But a sour IPO market for biotechnology issues has sidelined that plan
indefinitely.

   But, fortified with Novartis' capital, the company is moving ahead.

   Osiris recently put the finishing touches on a futuristic-looking cell
incubator facility.

   The company expects the facility to serve as a hub where cartilage stem cells
taken from patients will be placed in one of 24 mini-refrigerator-size
incubators. Osiris has figured out a way to get the cells to multiply by the
millions over a 37-day period and then implant them into the cartilage in the
expectation they'll spur growth.

   Osiris is in the final stages of adding a small manufacturing facility to mix
early batches of stem cell-boosting drugs or other products for human clinical
trials.

   The product furthest along in development is a treatment to help cancer
patients' blood and bone marrow stroma, where disease-fighting white blood cells
are born, recover quickly after chemotherapy. A top potential target for the
therapy: breast cancer patients.

   The company plans to get that product into clinical trials next year.

   Daniel Marshak, Osiris' senior vice president for R&D, also has high hopes
for figuring out how to use stem cells as a way to deliver beneficial genes to
diseased tissues.

   Gene therapy researchers have had limited success finding the right vehicle
or "vector" to get beneficial genes to the right site and then have it activate
or "express" the proteins that might block or reverse diseases.

   Even more futuristic sounding than that project is the one Osiris is working
on for the Department of Defense as the result of a $ 6 million grant.

   The company is looking into whether stem cells might be matched with
vaccines. These drug-loaded cells would, hypothetically, be injected into
soldiers heading into battle.

   The drugs wouldn't be released by the stem cell carriers until a biological
or chemical agent stimulated a response, releasing the vaccine.

   Says Burns, "None of us here has yet to get over the amazement factor. Just
about every day there is something to be surprised about."

   Pub Date: 6/29/97

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ANDRE CHUNG : SUN STAFF, Leaders: Osiris Therapeutics is led by
Chief Executive James Burns (left) and Daniel Marshak, senior vice president of
research and development. They are standing in Osiris' main research lab in
Fells Point.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1997


                             2362 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JUNE 27, 1997, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: DNA Delivers Therapy in Lab Mice
 Blood-clotting protein produced over period of time

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    Gene therapy, that promising but slow-developing new form of medicine you
keep hearing is just around the corner, took another mouse-size step forward
yesterday.

   After numerous failed attempts, scientists said, they had finally succeeded
in getting human DNA to function properly, and perhaps permanently, in the liver
cells of laboratory mice.

   It is not the first time that researchers have managed to deliver a
bioengineered payload of human DNA. What is new is the way the latest mouse
subjects seemed to take up the DNA almost as if it were their own.

   The mice produced the desired human protein, in this case a blood-clotting
substance known as Factor IX, for months afterward without showing any ill
effects. Nor did the Factor IX output taper off as time went by.

   It's all still years away from even the testing stage in people. But the new
findings, reported in the scientific journal Nature Genetics, could lead to a
simple-to-deliver, permanent fix for the life- threatening disorder called
hemophilia B.

   If the safety of the techniques is proved, prenatal testing could be used to
select hemophiliacs for treatment at birth through a simple infusion of
therapeutic DNA.

   Researchers sponsored by Cell Genesys Inc., a Foster City gene therapy
company, and the National Institutes of Health began with a modified and
apparently harmless relative of the common cold virus.

   All the viral DNA was removed. The particles that remained were then packed
with the gene that instructs human liver cells to make Factor IX, which plays a
key role in the formation of blood clots.

   People with hemophilia B lack a functioning form of the Factor IX gene and
thus are prone to life- threatening hemorrhages. About 3,000 people are affected
in the United States.

   In the results reported yesterday, researchers led by Richard Snyder of Cell
Genesys and Dr. Mark Kay of the University of Washington showed that the test
mice were still producing significant quantities of human Factor IX at least
nine months after they were treated with the gene-carrying virus.

   Independent researchers cautioned that yesterday's findings have yet to be
corroborated. The same gene-therapy strategy cannot be used for every disease,
partly because some genes are too big to fit into the particular virus selected
by the Cell Genesys-University of Washington team.


LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1997


                             2363 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 27, 1997 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: Salk scientist gets $750,000 research grant

BYLINE: David Graham, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A Salk Institute scientist has received a $750,000 grant from the March of
Dimes Birth Defects Foundation for research that could help develop gene therapy
into a practical medical technique. Inder Verma, co-director of the Salk's
Laboratory of Genetics, is receiving the grant over three years to build more
efficient means of delivering genes into the body, where the genes could serve
as medicines to prevent or treat disease. Although gene therapy is used in very
limited circumstances now, many scientists think the medical approach has
potential to be a powerfully efficient form of treatment. Verma is one of three
scientists receiving a total of $2 million in research grants toward the same
goal.

   The other two are Charles Coutelle of the Imperial College of Medicine in
London and David W. Russell of the University of Washington. The grants were
announced here yesterday during the foundation's annual planning meeting. The
foundation also intends to give future grants for gene therapy research, said
March of Dimes spokeswoman Leslie Webb. The March of Dimes is calling each
recipient a Franklin D. Roosevelt investigator in honor of the president who
started the foundation in 1938 that led to the fund-raising campaign. The
organization was instrumental in providing money for the founding of the Salk
Institute more than three decades ago.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2364 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 June 27, 1997, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 14A, HEALTH NEWS COLUMN

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS

BYLINE: From Post-Dispatch Wire Services

BODY:


ALZHEIMER'S

New-Found Lesions Could Aid In Fight

   Lesions made of a previously unidentified protein have been found in the
brains of Alzheimer's patients - a discovery that could shed light on the cause
of the disease and offer a means of early diagnosis and perhaps even treatment.

   "This is a spectacular lesion, never before seen, that tracks closely with
the disease state," said Dr. John Q. Trojanowski, director of the Alzheimer's
Disease Center at the University of Pennsylvania and senior author of the study,
published in the July issue of the American Journal of Pathology.

   Alzheimer's is a brain disease that generally strikes people over 65. There
is no known cure.

   German neurologist Alois Alzheimer described the two primary characteristics
of the disease - nerve fiber tangles and plaque coating the nerve cells - in
1907. The plaque that Alzheimer found is formed by amyloid, or waxy, proteins.
Trojanowski's team found new lesions made of different material.

   n Zaven Khachaturian, director of Alzheimer's Association Ronald & Nancy
Reagan Research Institute, said, "If confirmed, this finding may provide new
insights to our understanding of the disease."

POLIO

Cases Worldwide Drop By 43 Percent

   Reported cases of polio around the world plunged 43 percent last year from
the year before, bringing health experts closer to their goal of wiping out the
disease by 2000.

   A total of 3,997 cases were reported last year, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention said Thursday.

   That is down 89 percent from 35,251 cases in 1988, the year the World Health
Organization made global elimination of polio by the end of the century a goal.
"This reflects tremendous progress," said Dr. Roland Sutter, a CDC
epidemiologist. "The years to come are going to be the toughest."

   The decrease is credited to large-scale immunization campaigns. Polio has
been eliminated from North and South America, and 155 nations now report no
cases, the CDC said.

   The CDC estimated that only one in 10 cases of polio is actually reported, so
there may be as many as 40,000 actual cases. Even so, the decrease is
significant, Sutter said.

PARKINSON'S

Gene Abnormality Linked To Some Cases

   Researchers announced Thursday that they have identified for the first time a
gene abnormality that causes some cases of Parkinson's disease.

   Scientists from the National Institutes of Health, who reported last fall
that they had traced the defect to a particular chromosome, found the flaw in a
gene that issues instructions for assembling a protein called alpha synuclein.

   In the abnormal version of the gene, the mutation occurs in just one letter
in a string of more than 400 that make up instructions for the protein.

   Because the normal gene plays a role in the function of nerve cells, the
finding also gives researchers a powerful tool for understanding cell
abnormalities in Parkinson's disease and offers a link to other neurological
disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease.

   Dr. Mihael Polymeropoloulos, of the National Human Genome Research Institute
and head of the research effort, said knowledge of the gene defect "will have an
application in the not too distant future as a clinical research tool within
families especially prone to Parkinson's disease and may permit us to design
clinical studies for investigating drugs or other ways of postponing or offering
protection from the disease."

   The team's research report was published today in the journal Science.

ORGAN DEVELOPMENT

Isolated Gene Could Be A Key To Diseases

   Scientists have found a gene that is key to the development of several major
organs and could be important in the treatment of many genetic diseases.

   The gene produces a protein that stops fetal cells from overdeveloping. It
was discovered in patients with Alagille syndrome, a rare disease that affects a
broad range of tissues, including those in the heart, kidney, liver, eye,
skeleton and face.

   By isolating the gene, scientists "are beginning to understand the process by
which organs develop," said Leroy Hood, chairman of the University of
Washington's department of molecular biotechnology.

   Hood said the research has possible implications for gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1997


                             2365 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     June 26, 1997, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2433 words

HEADLINE: 6-Year Fight With Cancer Ends for Rebecca Lilly

BYLINE: Don Colburn, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Rebecca Erin Lilly, the Takoma Park teenager whose battle against brain
cancer has been chronicled in The Washington Post's Health section, died
peacefully at home early yesterday. She was less than four weeks from her 17th
birthday.

   Becca Lilly died with her family at the bedside: her parents, Joe and Maureen
Lilly, and siblings Anne Marie, 20, and Joe Jr., 14. Her 5-year-old sister,
Sarah, was asleep. The family woke her and later brought her into the room to
say goodbye.

   After Becca's fitful breathing stopped about 2:30 a.m., the Lillys stayed
with her awhile and held her hands and quietly cried. Then Joe Jr. went to find
candles, and the priest was called.

   Becca's six-year fight against a malignant brain tumor exemplifies the
promise and limits of state-of-the-art medicine.

   She underwent every major form of cancer treatment -- five brain surgeries,
two kinds of radiation and four combinations of chemotherapy. In November 1995,
during a nine-hour operation at Children's Hospital, she became the first child
to undergo gene therapy for a brain tumor.

   All the medical firepower doctors could bring against Becca's tumor was not
enough to save her life. Early this month, when her symptoms overwhelmed her and
a brain scan showed the tumor growing out of control, Becca's family decided to
forgo further medical treatment and concentrate all effort on keeping her at
home and free of pain.

   Tuesday evening, hospice nurse Sue Eynon Lark spoke to the Lillys in a little
room off the kitchen and told them Becca probably would not make it until
morning. Her blood pressure was falling, and her heart was racing in an effort
to compensate. Her pulse was between 190 and 200 beats a minute, almost too fast
to count. Her right lung had filled with fluid, and her breathing became more
rapid and more shallow.

   Becca was wearing her pink Cape May whale watch T-shirt, slit down the back
like a hospital gown. A toy moose and a box of tissues lay on the pillow. The
walls of the room were crowded with balloons.

   Becca appeared "very comfortable," the nurse said, but she raised the
morphine level another notch to try to keep the lungs and heart from fighting
quite so hard.

   It was difficult to tell anymore how conscious Becca was. Her eyes were
half-open and unfocused, and she no longer moved except to breathe.

   Earlier in the day, Joe and Maureen Lilly had bent close over her, one on
each side of the bed. Joe Lilly spoke slow and loud to her, almost directly into
her right ear.

   "Becca, if you can see Mom, blink your eyes."

   Nothing.

   "Becca, do you want people to come see you? If you do, blink."

   She blinked.

   "Good girl, Bec," said her mom.

   "I know it's scary when you can't see things," Joe Lilly continued, "but
we'll talk to you and tell you who's here. Okay, kiddo? You'll be okay. Just
relax.

   "When you get to Heaven, all that changes."

   Around midnight, with Becca still holding on, the rest of the family tried to
sleep: Joe and Maureen Lilly on a futon next to Becca's bed, Joe Jr. in a
sleeping bag on the living room floor, Anne Marie and Sarah upstairs. Meanwhile,
Becca's aunt Bonnie Logan and a friend kept watch over Becca, under orders to
wake everyone if the gaps in her breathing widened.

   Coming Home

   "What Rebecca showed us is that you can't measure our lives in terms of the
number of years we live," said Martin Lustick, a pediatrician with Kaiser
Permanente, the Lillys' health plan. "To see a 16-year-old confront the ultimate
with such amazing grace makes you realize that it's completely unrelated to how
long people live."

   "You gain from just being around someone like Rebecca," said neurologist
Roger J. Packer, who directs the brain tumor program at Children's Hospital and
treated her for more than five years. "She and her family help you understand
how important life is and what true quality of life means."

   Packer praised the Lilly family's courage in trying new treatments as long as
they offered hope -- and in ultimately pulling back from all-out medical
treatment "to avoid needlessly hurting her."

   Less than four weeks ago, Becca was at Walt Disney World in Florida, where
she toured the Magic Kingdom and rode the Splash Mountain spillway. But by the
time the Lillys returned from Florida, she was falling sick with severe
headaches, nausea, double vision and weakness on her right side. Her doctors
said the tumor had progressed beyond their ability to treat it.

   After a brief hospitalization, Becca went home. She spent her last days in a
hospital bed in her sister's old room on the ground floor of the Lillys' home,
surrounded by balloons, flowers and her vast collection of stuffed animals. Her
family handled most of her care, with help from the home hospice program of the
Jewish Social Service Agency of Metropolitan Washington.

   Father's Day afternoon, Joe Lilly lifted his daughter out of bed and carried
her into the living room, where she sat leaning back on the sofa for a couple of
hours, as family and friends looked at snapshots of the recent Disney World
trip. But in the last week, she did not leave her room.

   Two nights before Becca died, hospice social worker Barbara Psotka asked
5-year-old Sarah what she would tell other children going through a similar
experience.

   "If somebody's sick," Sarah replied, "you should let your mom and dad be by
theirselves so they can work with the kid who is sick, like my sister, Becca,
who has cancer. She is probably going to die. If your sister is sick, you should
leave them alone; they might be tired. Also, if someone is sick you should tell
them you love them because it makes them happy and feel better. And if they die,
you might never see them again. Kids can kiss their sister and try to make them
smile. When Becca's sick lots of people come to see her because they want to say
hello and they want to say goodbye."

   Although Becca drifted in and out of wakefulness during the last week, she
occasionally surprised visitors, letting them know she was listening by a nod, a
smile, a wave of her left hand or a characteristic wince at one of her father's
jokes. When she could no longer swallow pills, a battery-powered pump dripped
painkilling morphine continuously into her bloodstream through a catheter. The
dose could be momentarily boosted by the press of a button if she seemed
distressed.

   Gradually, she became less alert and her breathing more labored. She didn't
eat or drink. She began to go into heart failure. Still, she hung on for a few
more days. Over the weekend, she dozed but would not sleep.

   "We don't know," Maureen Lilly said. "Maybe the tumor. Maybe drugs. Maybe she
just doesn't want to close her eyes."

   'A Quiet Strength'

   Becca's tumor, a malignant glioblastoma, was diagnosed six years ago this
month, when she was finishing fifth grade. In both children and adults,
glioblastomas are the most aggressive of brain tumors. Of children diagnosed
with a glioblastoma, only one in five is alive three years later.

   Despite her disease and its dire prognosis, Becca kept up a teenager's pace.

   "Becca never let her illness -- or our treatments -- slow her down," said
Peter C. Adamson, a pediatric oncologist at the National Cancer Institute. "She
could be very sick one moment and a couple of days later be back getting on with
her life. I don't know many adults -- I'll include myself -- who could do that."

   One of the most difficult things for families facing a life-threatening
illness, Adamson said, is to understand that doctors don't have all the answers.
He lauded the Lillys for accepting as well as parents could "what we do and what
we don't know" about brain tumors, even as they pursued every possible means of
prolonging their daughter's life.

   Adamson visited Becca at home last week and spoke with her -- as he had about
six weeks ago -- about the seriousness of her condition and the lack of any
medical treatment to stop the tumor. He asked her once again if she had any
questions about what was happening, and she said she had none.

   "I really got the sense that she was at peace, as best one can be," he said
Friday.

   About 10 days ago, worried that they might somehow be misinterpreting Becca's
outward calm, Maureen Lilly asked her directly, "Are you afraid?" Becca said no.

   Becca received Holy Communion daily. Because she had trouble swallowing, she
could not take the wafer, but Joe Lilly squirted a sip of wine -- diluted with
holy water -- into her mouth through a plastic syringe. Each evening, the Lilly
family gathered around Becca's bed and held hands quietly or said the rosary and
other prayers. Sometimes Becca's lips moved with the words.

   Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee . . .

   After a fierce thunderstorm knocked out electrical power one evening last
week, the Lillys read scriptural passages to Becca by flashlight.

   "Becca had a quiet strength," said Karen Olson, a nurse on Children's
Hospital's neurosurgery unit, 4 Green, where Becca was hospitalized eight times
in the last year and a half. "What amazed me was how she always worried about
the people around her -- her mom and dad and her brother and sisters, and the
other kids on the unit."

   In response to a series of articles on Becca over the last 15 months,
hundreds of Post readers sent her cards, letters, poems and prayers.
Preschoolers colored for her. A Bethesda man gave her the Bronze Star he had
been awarded during World War II. Former first lady Nancy Reagan mailed a jar of
jelly beans.

   "I am a 28-year veteran of the FBI and I want you to know that you are my
hero," Ed Burwitz, of Stafford, Va., wrote Becca last week. "You are the most
courageous person that I have ever known."

   Becca seemed unfazed by such attention or by her harrowing treatments.
Through it all, what she wished for most was to be an ordinary teenager. She
rarely talked about her cancer, even to her closest friends and family.

   She was a kid who loved hats, bears, dancing, a dog named Lady, angels,
London broil, fried shrimp and basketball. She was turned off by loudmouths,
people who are full of themselves, a purple dinosaur named Barney, bad
basketball referees and bad hair.

   Becca completed her junior year at Good Counsel High School in Wheaton last
month and was awarded a class ring. She had cut back to half the normal course
load last fall, as increasing troubles with language and memory made schoolwork
difficult. Her favorite class was a special project three mornings a week at St.
Andrew Apostle School in Wheaton, where she helped out with a class of
4-year-olds, whom she referred to as "my kids."

   A competitive athlete in an athletic family, Becca played soccer, softball
and, especially, basketball. Even this past winter, when her tumor was robbing
her of stamina and peripheral vision, she played on a Catholic Youth
Organization basketball team.

   Five summers in a row, she attended Camp Fantastic, a camp for youngsters
with cancer near Front Royal, Va.

   Gene Therapy Pioneer

   Most of Becca's medical treatment was at Children's Hospital, Georgetown
University Hospital and the Clinical Center at the National Institutes of
Health. After her tumor was diagnosed in 1991, she was treated with surgery and
radiation -- standard therapy for glioblastomas -- in 1991 and again in 1994,
when the tumor recurred. In the fall of 1995, when the tumor grew back again,
standard medicine had nothing more to offer her, and she became the first child
treated with gene therapy for brain cancer.

   Gene therapy, still in its clinical infancy, is an effort to treat illness by
altering the genes inside a patient's cells. It offers doctors the tantalizing
hope of treating not merely the results of a disease, as current cancer
therapies do, but its root cause.

   In Becca's case, that meant trying to trick the tumor into committing
cellular suicide. After removing as much tumor as possible, surgeons injected
into her brain a harmless virus carrying a gene designed to make the tumor more
sensitive to a follow-up drug. If it worked, the virus would act as a kind of
"taxicab" for the gene, transporting it inside the tumor cells, which would then
become vulnerable to the drug.

   Becca's tumor grew back six months after her gene therapy. What effect, if
any, the gene therapy had on her tumor is unclear and will remain so until more
patients can be studied and compared. At the least, Becca's case helped show
that the initial dose was safe and nontoxic -- allowing doctors to boost the
level for other patients. For Becca, a six-month lull in tumor growth was
significant, neurologist Packer said, even though gene therapy couldn't cure her
disease.

   "It didn't work for Rebecca, but that doesn't mean it can't work for other
children, if we get smarter," Packer said. "The only thing we can do is to
continue to battle and find more things to battle [cancer] with."

   Becca was also among the first children treated with several promising
combinations of anti-cancer drugs in the earliest stages of testing in humans.

   In considering whether to participate in such tests, known as clinical
trials, families often have to make agonizing choices between alternatives with
long odds. On the basis of sparse data and sometimes conflicting results, they
must weigh hope against fear and likely effect against likely side effect.

   The quality of Becca's life was the Lillys' touchstone as they made such
decisions. Becca participated in their discussions, and she signed the medical
consent forms before her pioneering gene therapy operation and subsequent
surgeries.

   The afternoon before Becca died, her close friend and Good Counsel classmate
Megan McArdle sat by her bed for a while. Megan read aloud a letter she had
written to Becca.

   "I told her I loved her, and she squeezed my hand," Megan said. "It was like
she didn't have to say anything because I knew exactly what she meant."

   Besides her parents and siblings, survivors include her maternal grandmother,
Adele W. Traber, of Riverdale, and her paternal grandmother, Nancy M. Lilly, of
Washington.

   * FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS

   A public viewing will be held from 5 to 9 p.m. today and from 7 to 9 p.m.
tomorrow at the Rafferty Center, Good Counsel High School, 11601 Georgia Ave.,
Wheaton.

   The Mass of Christian Burial will be at 10 a.m. Saturday at St. Bernadette's
Church, 72 University Blvd., East Silver Spring.

   In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to the Becca Lilly
Cancer Fund, care of Sequoia Bank, 4912 Del Ray Ave., Bethesda, Md. 20814.


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, Parents Joe and Maureen Lilly, and older
sister Anne Marie, sat at Rebecca's bedside on Tuesday. Rebecca was weeks shy of
her 17th birthday when she died.  Rebecca was the first child to undergo gene
therapy for a brain tumor.  After her third brain surgery, Rebecca Lilly read
get-well messages on a card on her hospital wall as she prepared to go home.
Later, back playing centerfield for the Spandits softball team, she pitched in
relief, made three hits and scored two runs. At right, she is shown with
Christine Bowman, back to camera, and Mackenzie Rawls, children in a class at
St. Andrew Apostle School in Wheaton, where she helped out.  At top, Rebecca
Lilly, at home in Takoma Park, is surrounded by family members who gathered each
evening to pray. In front are brother Joe Jr., mom Maureen and younger sister
Sarah, and in back, sister Anne Marie and dad Joe. Above, Joe Lilly holds his
daughter's hand, and at right, her parents kneel as the Rev. Paul A. Morel,
assistant pastor of St. Bernadette's Church, celebrates Communion.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1997


                             2366 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 25, 1997, Wednesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1320 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme strives for good deal more;
Acting like a 'big brother' drug maker, biotech company bids for access to new
technology;
Emerging Business

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    It's become a little brother-big brother relationship. In recent years,
biotechnology companies have become practically an extension of the
pharmaceutical industry, selling their promising drugs and technology to drug
giants who have the money and clout to market them.

   But now Genzyme Corp., which had steered clear of the big drug makers, wants
to be a big brother itself. In recent months, the Cambridge biotech company has
struck a flurry of deals with smaller biotech firms to gain access to new
technology. It has even embarked on an unusual financial strategy of spinning
out its own divisions into publicly traded companies, while retaining control
over those emerging businesses.

   Call Genzyme the biotech deal maker.

   The company's deal-making spree is part of new opportunistic, outward-looking
strategy that began barely a year ago, when chairman Henri Termeer - the
architect of the company's diversification - met with his top managers to
discuss ways of linking Genzyme's internal product development with
complementary products from smaller biotech companies.

   "I remember telling my managers, 'Listen guys, we have to link the company in
a more fluid fashion,' " recalls Termeer, the financially savvy Dutch-born chief
of Genzyme. "We have infrastructure capabilities of manufacturing and marketing
here and abroad and we can make deals without losing our independence."

   Genzyme, with $ 511.4 million in 1996 revenue, had grown to a size where it
needed to diversify. What's more, it was big enough to cut drug development and
marketing deals without sacrificing its independence.

   Termeer says the number of Genzyme professionals involved in deal-making has
quadrupled in the past 12 months, and plans are to add more.

   In just the past six months, Genzyme has made eight deals with emerging
biotech firms, ranging from collaboration on drug discovery to product
marketing.

   But unlike big pharmaceutical firms that often pay steep prices for
biotech-developed drugs, Genzyme is a thrifty shopper. Instead of seeking
potential blockbuster drugs and medical therapies with market potential of $ 1
billion a year and up, it often pursues smaller deals.

   "Genzyme is more opportunistic, looking for things it can acquire relatively
cheaply compared to other similarly sized biopharmaceutical companies," says
David Stone, managing director of Cowen & Co. "The deals they have done make
sense." Just last week, Genzyme agreed to pay $ 27.5 million to GelTex
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Waltham in a joint venture to market RenaGel, GelTex's
oral medication, which is designed to prevent bone deterioration in kidney
dialysis patients. With an estimated dosage price of about $ 1,000 a year and
200,000 potential patients in the United States, the potential market is about $
200 million annually. Genzyme expects to have the drug approved and on the
market in 1999.

   "We felt a product like ours is more important to a biotech company like
Genzyme than a large pharmaceutical firm that has 30 to 40 products in its
pipeline," says Mark Skaletsky, the GelTex president.

   Indeed, Genzyme is acting like the big brother to GelTex.  The young Waltham
company will provide the technology and rely on Genzyme to market RenaGel.
Genzyme also will buy a $ 2.5 million stake in GelTex.

   "Genzyme's approach may appear to be nontraditional, but I think other
companies will follow their lead," says Scott M. Rocklage, the president and
chief executive of Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge.

   Cubist is among the three smaller companies that have paired up this year
with Genzyme on drug discovery. In March, Cubist, a five-year-old firm, began
using Genzyme's "library" of 800,000 compounds to help find potential
infection-fighting drugs to treat certain diseases resistant to bacteria and
fungi.

   But the new opportunism apparent at Genzyme goes beyond pairing up with
smaller companies.

   Termeer, whose leadership has made Genzyme the largest biotech company on the
East Coast, also has launched a novel financial strategy of spinning out
divisions into publicly traded businesses - much like Thermo Electron Corp., the
big Waltham instruments and equipment maker, has done over the years in creating
more than 20 publicly traded firms.

   At Genzyme, the spinouts raise money on Wall Street to finance high-risk drug
development. Genzyme still retains majority control. In turn, the spinouts have
access to Genzyme's research and development, clinical and regulatory expertise,
manufacturing operations, and sales and distribution channels.

   The result: Genzyme's main businesses fall under the Genzyme General Division
stock, which has been joined recently by stocks in Genzyme Transgenics, Genzyme
Tissue Repair, and soon, Genzyme Molecular Oncology.

   Genzyme Transgenics, the only spinout that's minority-owned by Genzyme,
develops genetically engineered animals that produce human pharmaceuticals in
their milk. Genzyme Tissue Repair develops biological products to treat
cartilage damage, severe burns, and chronic ulcers. And Molecular Oncology will
develop cancer drugs.

   The spinouts, or so-called "tracking stocks," help raise more money than
Genzyme could by itself, while shielding Genzyme General's balance sheet from
the financial risks of specific development projects.

   Genzyme, for instance, earlier this month completed the $ 28 million
acquisition of PharmaGenics Inc., a small research firm with a portfolio of
rights to certain cancer-related genes. In a related deal, Genzyme later this
year will float a new Genzyme Molecular Oncology stock that will incorporate
both PharmaGenics technology and Genzyme's internal cancer research projects.
PharmaGenics shareholders will have 40 percent ownership of Genzyme Molecular
Oncology, while Genzyme will own the other 60 percent.

   Genzyme General, the company's flagship division, is the largest both in
revenue and employees. It's responsible for drugs such as Cerezyme/Cerdase, the
company's biggest selling product, and RenaGel, surgical and diagnostic
products, genetic testing products, and fine chemical pharmaceuticals.

    "Few companies have been as opportunistic as Genzyme, and tracking stocks
are unusual in the biotech industry, but they have done a good job over the
years with very astute management," said Meg Malloy, biotech analyst at
Hambrecht & Quist.

 Genzyme the deal maker

    How Genzyme Corp. is building its future with emerging biotechnology
companies. Date Deal/product June 19, 1997 Announced a $ 27.5 million joint
venture with GelTex Pharmaceuticals Inc. to market RenaGel, which prevents bone
deterioration in kidney dialysis patients. June 16, 1997 Completed $ 28 million
purchase of PharmaGenics Inc., a developer of genomics-based therapeutic
products for cancer. Announced creation of Genzyme Molecular Oncology through
combination of internal research and PharmaGenics technology. Will do initial
public offering of Genzyme Molecular Oncology stock. June 3, 1997 Reached
agreement with LeukoSite Inc. to jointly find drug candidates for autoimmune,
infectious, and inflammatory diseases. April 30, 1997 Announced partnership with
ArQule Inc. to identify drug candidates for cancer, infectious, and
autoimmune/inflammatory diseases. March 25, 1997 Signed deal with Cubist
Pharmaceuticals Inc. to collaborate on discovery and development of drugs for
certain infectious diseases. March 25, 1997 Entered into a $ 20 million
(Canadian) venture with StressGen Biotechnologies Corp. to jointly commercialize
StressGen's and Genzyme's gene therapies for cancer. March 13, 1997 Genzyme
Transgenics signed $ 17 million pact with Fresenius AG to produce transgenic
human serum albumin in cows. Albumin balances fluids in blood. Jan. 8, 1997
Signed deals with Sulzer Carbomedics Inc. and Cook Group to develop surgical
instruments. SOURCE: Genzyme Corp. GLOBE STAFF CHART

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Genzyme chief Henri Termeer: "I remember telling my managers,
'Listen guys, we have to link the company in a more fluid fashion.' "

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1997


                             2367 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                  June 24, 1997, Tuesday, CONSTITUTION EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 06B

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: OBITUARIES;
Steve Micko, technician at Emory who battled brain tumor for 10 months

BYLINE: Brian J. Back; STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The memorial service for Steve Micko, 52, a technician in the bone- marrow
transplant center at Emory University Hospital who participated in an
experimental gene therapy program to ease the impact of a vicious brain tumor,
will be at 1 p.m. Friday at Green Forest Baptist Church.

   Mr. Micko of Stone Mountain died at Atlanta Hospice on Sunday, about 10
months after he was diagnosed with glioblastoma mutiforme, the most common and
deadliest form of brain cancer. The body was cremated, and Cremation Society of
the South is in charge of arrangements.

   Atlanta Journal-Constitution readers learned of Mr. Micko's plight in a Nov.
30, 1996, article. He was the first patient in Georgia and the ninth in the
United States to try the gene therapy treatment, which involves altering the
genetic makeup of the tumor cells. It has minimal side effects and can double
the survival time of patients.

   Mr. Micko, who was interested in alleviating the severe headaches he had for
years, experienced only a few minor sinus headaches since beginning the
treatment, said his wife, Cornelia Micko of Stone Mountain, a histology
technician at Emory's surgery research lab. The usual surgery-
chemotherapy-radiation route offers about three months of extra life. Mr. Micko
underwent gene therapy treatment and radiation for about nine months.

   A native of Springfield, Ill., he earned a bachelor's degree in biochemistry
from the University of Illinois and began doctoral studies at the University of
Arizona in Tucson. He met his wife at Washington University in St. Louis, where
the two worked at the Barnes Hospital complex. Four years ago, Emory University
Hospital recruited Mr. Micko for his bone marrow cell treatment expertise, said
his wife.

   In the late 1960s, Mr. Micko taught science in war-torn Uganda for the newly
founded Peace Corps. During a period when the Uganda government rounded up
foreigners and placed them in jail, his roommate was shot and killed, and the
6-foot-6-inch Mr. Micko was imprisoned for a few days in a cell so small he
could not stand up in it. Before he was transferred to Liberia, the U.S. State
Department mistakenly told his family he was dead. He felt his survival hinged
on having an American passport, said his wife.

   Mr. Micko was diagnosed with the brain tumor after a seizure in his lab early
last September rendered him temporarily unable to speak. He was involved in a
project to build a double-tiered deck onto his home, and friends and co-workers
at Emory and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention finished it for him.
"We had surgeons banging on the deck," said his wife. "Steve designed it, and
they finished it."

   Friends and co-workers brought "enough food to feed a Third World country"
for the couple, gave them money, mowed their lawn and even planted flowers in
their yard. "(Atlanta) is heaven as far as we're concerned," said Mrs. Micko,
who described her husband's neurology team led by Dr. Jeffrey Olson, a
neuro-oncologist at Emory University Hospital, as fantastic.

   "That tumor was a common denominator," she said. "We banded together and
fought hard."

   Survivors other than his wife include three sons, Daniel Micko of Stone
Mountain, Stefen Micko of Fort Bliss, Texas, and Ameed Micko of Fort Lee, Va.;
two brothers, Richard Micko of Beaumont, Texas, and Jerry Micko of Phoenix; and
three grandchildren.

GRAPHIC: Mug of Steve Micko

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1997


                             2368 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             June 24, 1997 Tuesday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. C04

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: HUNDREDS HONOR KIRSTEN FROHNMAYER

BYLINE: BRIAN T. MEEHAN of the Oregonia

DATELINE: EUGENE

BODY:

   Tuesday, June 24, 1997 HUNDREDS HONOR KIRSTEN FROHNMAYER

   Summary: Mourners gathering in Eugene remember the 24-year-old's  painful
struggle with Fanconi anemia as an inspiration

   On an afternoon of broken skies and broken hearts, more than 700 friends
gathered Monday at South Eugene High School to remember Kirsten Frohnmayer,
whose gallant battle against an unrelenting disease inspired those who knew  her
and, in the words of a friend, left footprints on a thousand hearts.

   Kirsten, 24, daughter of University of Oregon President Dave Frohnmayer,
died last week of respiratory failure stemming from her 14-year struggle with
Fanconi anemia, a deadly blood disorder. But those who gathered at her alma
mater came to honor her life.

   ``I learned from her that it is possible to stand in the shadow of death  and
only shine more brightly,'' said Allison Walsh, her roommate at Stanford
University, in a letter read during the 75-minute memorial service. ``This
memory will not leave me. It will be something to honor and emulate throughout
my life.''

   Kirsten's legacy to her family and friends was a theme of the memorial
service. It was marked by the sweet strains of Aaron Copeland's ``Appalachian
Spring,'' played by the University Brass Quintet; by Brahms folk songs, sung  by
members of the family; and by a benediction by former U.S. Sen. Mark O.
Hatfield, R-Ore.

   ``We are grateful to Kirsten,'' Hatfield said. ``She showed us how to
live.''

   Her friends and family remembered a life well-lived, a bright young woman
who never gave up in the face of relentless medical setbacks.

   ``The destruction of each person lies in the pity he or she saves for
themselves,'' said Bob Fraser, a partner in the Eugene law firm where Kirsten
worked during college summers. ``Kirsten saved no pity for herself.''

   She died Thursday at Sacred Heart Hospital in Eugene. She had experienced
lung problems the past two months as a result of treatment to suppress
leukemia, said Bill Gary, a family spokesman and longtime friend.

   Kirsten is the second Frohnmayer child to die as a result of Fanconi  anemia.
Her sister, Katie, 12, died in 1991 of a stroke related to the  disease.

   A surviving sister, Amy, 10, has Fanconi anemia but has yet to exhibit
symptoms. Kirsten's brothers, Mark, 23, and Jonathan, 12, do not have the
disease.

   Kirsten was diagnosed at age 10 with Fanconi anemia, which afflicts about
2,000 people in the United States. The disease, which is carried in a  recessive
gene that can lie dormant for generations, strikes patients  differently.

   It can cause birth defects, damage the heart and brain, lead to leukemia  and
retard growth. In most patients, it eventually attacks the bone marrow and
destroys the marrow's vital function of producing blood cells. Few patients
survive to adulthood.

   A successful bone marrow transplant, usually from a sibling, is the only
proven cure. But in the Frohnmayers' case, none of the siblings matched.

   Kirsten pinned her hopes on development of gene therapy until she received  a
grim diagnosis in January 1995: She had leukemia.

   Undaunted, Kirsten underwent a bone marrow transplant in February 1995 in
Minneapolis, even though the anonymous donor was not an exact match. Kirsten
recovered quickly but suffered a stroke after a disastrous medical mistake. A
catheter was placed in an artery rather than a vein, a mistake her mother,
Lynn, described as ``catastrophic.''

   But Kirsten recuperated in time to attend her June commencement at Stanford
University, where she graduated with honors as a human-biology major.

   In October 1995 she traveled to Milan, Italy, for experimental therapy  aimed
at preventing a recurrence of the leukemia For medical reasons, however, she
never was able to complete the therapy.

   Through it all, Kirsten remained an inspiration.

   ``She was such a tough cookie,'' college classmate Miranda Grisham said.
``She inspired people to take risks for love, for life.''

   In a letter read by family friend Stan Long, Dave and Lynn Frohnmayer
reflected on their intrepid daughter.

   ``From the very beginning you tackled every aspect of life with
enthusiasm,'' they wrote. ``You found so much joy in every day you were given.
We find comfort in knowing that. In your own words, you would have changed
places with no one, that your life was one of the happiest and best anyone
could ever have known.

   ``We have lumps in our throats and a searing emptiness in our souls. You
would not wish us to despair. You were always able to go on after a crushing
setback, and we must try, again, to learn from you. We will miss you  forever.''

   In closing remarks, Gary reflected on the rich legacy of her life.

   ``As we carry on, if we can remember to appreciate the simple joy of life,
if we can just be a little bit kinder to one another, if we believe just a
little bit more in our ability to change the world, then Kirsten Frohnmayer
will live on in all of us.''

   Kirsten Lori Frohnmayer was born Feb. 10, 1973, in Eugene.

   She graduated from South Eugene High in 1991, where she served as student
body president as a senior. She graduated from Stanford University in Palo
Alto, Calif., in 1995

   She is survived by her parents, Dave and Lynn Frohnmayer of Eugene;
brothers, Mark and Jonathan; sister, Amy; and grandparents, Otto and MarAbel
Frohnmayer of Medford and Sue Johnson of Grants Pass.

   The family suggests memorial contributions to the Fanconi Anemia Research
Fund, 1902 Jefferson St., Suite 2, Eugene, Ore. 97405.

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = BRIAN T. MEEHAN  of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2369 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            June 21, 1997, Saturday

SECTION: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; CLEARWATER TIMES; PASCO TIMES

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: Love for son helps charity keep growing

BYLINE: DEBORAH O'NEIL

DATELINE: SAFETY HARBOR

BODY:


      The tears are less frequent and the laughter is more plentiful in the
Gorman family one year after their son received a diagnosis of muscular
dystrophy.

   This family has a contagious kind of hope that makes people want to believe
in miracles - their miracle, the one that will cure 6-year-old Danny Gorman's
disease. He has Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a fatal form of the disease that
strikes boys.

   The Gormans' minister, the Rev. Leddy Hammock at Unity Clearwater Church,
opens services every Sunday with a prayer for Danny. She says, "M.D. no  longer
stands for Muscular Dystrophy. In my mind, it stands for Miracle  Developing."

   It was hope that drove Donald and Debbie Gorman to found the Danny
Foundation for Muscular Dystrophy Research shortly after "the diagnosis."  (The
Gormans never say Danny has muscular dystrophy; he has only been  diagnosed,
they say.)

   And perhaps it is hope that has inspired hundreds of people to donate not
only money, but prizes and time to help the Gormans organize fund-raisers. In
the past year, the Danny Foundation has raised $ 25,000.

   Today the Danny Foundation will hold its annual major fund-raiser, a golf
tournament at Lansbrook Golf Club. The tournament is booked but there will be  a
public sports auction at 6 p.m. in the Lansbrook Clubhouse. Some of the  items
that will be auctioned  are a Troy Aikman football, a Don Mattingly  baseball
and a hockey stick from the Tampa Bay Lightning.

   The money goes to the Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Research Center at the
University of Pittsburgh, the hub of some of the world's most promising
research on the disease. Doctors there are working on treatment of muscular
dystrophy through gene therapy.

   "Money equals the cure," said Mrs. Gorman.

   Lansbrook general manager Gregg Gagliardi said people admire the Gormans'
commitment to saving their son.

   "They are special people," Gagliardi said. "These folks have a lot of
support. A lot of the people involved hope it never happens to their family."

   Donald Gorman said new research projects are on hold because there isn't
money to pay for them. Every research project could potentially save their
son's life.

   "It's frustrating, especially when you think about how much money is  wasted
in this country," he said.

   While mother and father continue their quest for a cure, Danny really
doesn't know he has a disease. For now, he's an active 6-year-old, playing in
the neighborhood with friends, going to karate class and zapping video game  bad
guys.

   His parents told him his muscles have a cold. "He knows he wears his magic
shoes," Donald Gorman said. "He knows he goes to see doctors so his muscles  can
be strong. That's about the extent of it. He never really asks."

   In Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a missing protein causes muscles to break
down. The muscles weaken until, eventually, victims lose use of their limbs.
Danny has trouble jumping and climbing and he can't touch his toes.

   "The kids he plays with around here, he can't quite keep up with them,"
Gorman said. "It bugs him a little but he's a well-adjusted kid."

   The Gormans already have seen their 16-month-old daughter, Jessica, do
things Danny never could, like crouch  to pick up something, then stand  up
again.

   "Our dreams had to change," Gorman said. "For him, it's normal."

   Danny has had a busy year. Through the Make-A-Wish Foundation, he has met
figure skater Katarina Witt and seen the Harlem Globetrotters. He also made a
commercial for the Long Center in Clearwater, where he swims regularly.

   In recent months, the family decided  Mrs. Gorman would quit her job at
State Farm Insurance  to stay home with her children and work full time for  the
growing Danny Foundation. The family will sacrifice buying a bigger house  and
maybe a few other  things, but the Gormans said that doesn't bother them.

   "I'm trying to realize my children are a gift," Mrs. Gorman said.  "People
say, "Oh, I'm so sorry for you.' Actually, they should be glad for  us. A lot of
good has come from this."

   While Danny heads to first grade at Safety Harbor Elementary this fall, the
Gormans will work on reaching  other parents whose children have muscular
dystrophy. The heartache of learning about the diagnosis has eased, they said,
but it's never far away. They hope they can help other parents.

   "There's not enough people in the community who are aware of how close  they
are with a cure," Mrs. Gorman said. "They don't know how much hope  there is."

   The Gormans want to raise $ 25,000 for that cure this weekend. It's a race
with Mother Nature they think they will win.

   "I know there will be a treatment in the next few years and a cure is not
out of the question in my son's lifetime," Mrs. Gorman said. "When they're
ready to test the cure, we'll be there."  To help out

Debbie and Dan Gorman started The Danny Foundation a year ago to raise money
for Duchenne muscular dystrophy research. Their 6-year-old son, Danny, was
diagnosed with the disease last year. Donations can be made to the foundation
through any AmSouth Bank or by calling the foundation at 726-4657.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, (2); COLOR PHOTO, SCOTT KEELER; BLACK AND WHITE
PHOTO, SCOTT KEELER; Debbie Gorman (ran NT); Donald Gorman (ran NT); Lansbrook
Golf Club general manager Gregg Gagliardi helps Danny Gorman, 6, learn to putt
last week. (ran NT, CT); Lansbrook Golf Club general manager Gregg Gagliardi
helps Danny Gorman, 6, learn to putt last week. (ran PT)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1997


                             2370 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1997 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              June 20, 1997 Friday
                                SUNRISE Edition

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1224 words

HEADLINE: KIRSTEN FROHNMAYER LOSES LONG BATTLE WITH BLOOD DISEASE

BYLINE: BRIAN T. MEEHAN of the Oregonia

BODY:

   Friday, June 20, 1997 KIRSTEN FROHNMAYER LOSES LONG BATTLE WITH BLOOD DISEASE

   Summary: The 24-year-old daughter of Dave Frohnmayer had fought Fanconi
anemia for 14 years

   Kirsten Frohnmayer, the daughter of University of Oregon president Dave
Frohnmayer, died Thursday morning at Sacred Heart Hospital in Eugene of
complications related to her 14-year battle with Fanconi anemia, a rare genetic
blood disorder. She was 24.

   She was hospitalized Tuesday with respiratory problems prompted by treatment
to suppress her leukemia, which was diagnosed in January 1995, according to
family spokesman Bill Gary. Fanconi anemia patients are 15,000 times more likely
to suffer leukemia than the general population.

   Kirsten's parents, Dave and Lynn Frohnmayer, and her brother, Mark, 23, were
with her when she died at 4:15 a.m.

   ``Kirsten was a beloved daughter, an inspirational teacher of life and, above
all, a dear friend,'' her parents said in a prepared statement Thursday. ``We
are devastated beyond measure with the sadness of her passing from our lives. .
. . Her thirst for life produced medical miracles that made all who knew her
believe that she could continue to prevail through sheer determination.''

   Kirsten is the second Frohnmayer child to die as a result of Fanconi anemia.
Her sister, Katie, died in 1991 from a stroke related to the disease. She was
12. A surviving sister, Amy, 10, has Fanconi anemia but has shown no symptoms.
Kirsten's brothers, Mark and Jonathan, 12, do not have the disease.

   Gary said Kirsten had been struggling the past two months with lung problems
brought on by the treatment of her leukemia, which was in remission.

   ``In the last few weeks her breathing difficulties had become increasingly
troublesome,'' Gary said. ``Before that, she was working hard to regain her
strength -- walking and doing yoga. It was a full-time job for her to regain her
strength. That continued to the very end. Yesterday, she asked for lung therapy
to help combat the breathing difficulty. She never gave up.''

   Always reached for the top

   Determination was a trademark of the Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Stanford
University. The Frohnmayers' oldest child allowed herself little time for
self-pity. She refused to think of herself as a victim.

   ``Optimist is too mild a term to describe her given the difficulties she
contended with in her life,'' Gary said. ``She was incredibly wise beyond her
years and in love with life.

   ``She was a source of strength to those around her. What makes today so sad
is the fact that the person who would be the greatest comfort now in this time
of loss would be Kirsten herself. She would make everyone see that life goes on
and the sun comes up tomorrow.''

   She was diagnosed at age 10 with Fanconi anemia, which afflicts about 2,000
people in the United States. The disease, which is carried in a recessive gene
that can lie dormant for generations, strikes patients differently. It can cause
birth defects, damage the heart and brain, lead to leukemia and retard growth.
In most patients, it eventually attacks the bone marrow and destroys the
marrow's vital function of producing blood cells. Few patients survive to
adulthood.

   A successful bone marrow transplant, usually from a sibling, is the only
proven cure. But in the Frohnmayers' case, none of the siblings matched. The
family founded a clearinghouse to match potential bone marrow donors and a
research fund, which has raised $3 million for research into the disease.

   The Frohnmayers also established a support group for families, which numbers
500 members from every state and 38 nations. The family's medical struggles have
received wide attention, in part stemming from Dave Frohnmayer's 10 years of
service as Oregon's attorney general.

   Medical mistake `catastrophic'

   Kirsten pinned her hopes on successful development of gene therapy until she
received a grim diagnosis in January 1995: leukemia.

   Undaunted, Kirsten underwent a bone marrow transplant in February 1995 in
Minneapolis, even though the anonymous donor was not an exact match.

   Kirsten recovered quickly but suffered a stroke after a disastrous medical
mistake. A catheter was placed in an artery rather than a vein, a mistake her
mother, Lynn, described as ``catastrophic.'' But again Kirsten recuperated in
time to attend her June commencement at Stanford, where she graduated with
honors as a human-biology major.

   In October 1995 she traveled to Milan, Italy, for experimental therapy aimed
at preventing a recurrence of the leukemia, which was showing signs of
returning. For medical reasons, however, she was never able to complete the
therapy.

   Through it all, Kirsten remained an inspiration to friends and family.

   In a June 1995 interview, she said her brush with death after the stroke
reminded her about life's priorities.

   ``I think it has given me a much better idea of how much my friends care
about me and how much I care about them,'' she said. ``When you are in such a
serious condition you really realize what's important.''

   She loved to ski and watch old movies with her best friend, her mother, Lynn.
Kirsten Frohnmayer was a seeker of knowledge, whether the topic was her medical
condition or the world around. She considered careers in law and the public
sector. At times, she grew frustrated about her nagging medical problems. She
yearned to accomplish much, but always there was the dread disease to contend
with.

   ``Kirsten was a truly special person with leadership qualities you rarely
find,'' Gary said.

   A busy student

   She particularly loved her time at Stanford, which she often called the best
four years of her life. She delighted in auditing a dozen classes each term
before deciding which ones to take.

   She fought through onerous side effects of her treatment. Chemotherapy
slurred her speech, impaired her vision and tipped her sense of balance. But her
sense of herself and her outlook on life did not waver. She stayed true to the
words she spoke as class valedictorian when she graduated from South Eugene High
School on June 8, 1991.

   ``I have learned to keep my problems in perspective,'' she told fellow
graduates. ``There's always something worse that could have happened but didn't.
My family jokes that by having this serious health problem, we provide an
important community service. We remind people that things in their own lives may
not be as bad as they seem.

   ``I've learned to appreciate what I've got,'' she added. ``When all else is
going badly, I've got my family and my friends for support. I'd like to
encourage you to appreciate what you have. . . . Too often we take for granted
what is going well and focus on the negative. In the process, we lose sight of
the best aspects of our lives.''

   Kirsten Frohnmayer never did lose sight of the best part of her life. Along
the way, she taught her family and others about priorities.

   ``We will not surrender to despair,'' her parents wrote in their statement
Thursday. ``We will emulate Kirsten's unflagging courage. Her determination must
live on through us all.''

   Services are pending. In lieu of flowers, the family suggests donations be
made to the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund, 1902 Jefferson St., Suite 2, Eugene,
Ore. 97405.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo - The Frohnmayer family

   Photo by Robert Kaiser - for The Oregonian staff

   The following fields overflowed: BYLINETITLE = BRIAN T. MEEHAN  of the
Oregonian Staff

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                             2371 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    June 18, 1997, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: Osiris joins efforts with drug giant; Novartis, local firm to
collaborate on bone treatments; Gene therapies for tissue; Baltimore would get
manufacturing plant for approved products

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., the world's No. 1 drug company, said
yesterday that it will collaborate with Baltimore-based Osiris Therapeutics Inc.
to develop new drugs and other therapies for treating bone diseases and
injuries.

   The deal is the first big pharmaceutical alliance for 4-year-old Osiris,
which the state lured here from Ohio in 1995.

   As part of the five-year deal, Novartis is providing Osiris with $ 3 million
for research costs and making a $ 10 million equity investment, or about $ 8.50
a share, in the privately held company.

   Osiris is developing ways to stimulate bone and cartilage regeneration
through the use of what are known as mesenchymal stem cells. These cells play a
key initial role in the formation of bone, cartilage and other structural and
connective tissues.

   "Mesenchymal stem cell technology promises to revolutionize the treatment of
a number of common diseases such as arthritis and osteoporosis," Dr. Paul
Herrling, Novartis' research chief, said in a statement.

   Aside from wanting to taking advantage of the emerging science of tissue
regeneration, Novartis, formed last year by the $ 27 billion merger of Swiss
drug giants Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy, has been looking for ways to ensure that its
lucrative drug business remains a leader as older products lose their patent
protection.

   The companies plan initially to target developing new therapies for
osteoporosis, osteoarthritis and cartilage injuries. Osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis are potentially huge markets. The two diseases affect 40 million
people in the United States.

   "Our goal is to develop therapies which regenerate tissue to its original
architecture," said James S. Burns, president and chief executive officer of
Osiris.

   The collaboration will include attempting to develop three gene therapies
that use stem cells as a way to deliver genes that play a role in bone growth to
a damaged site, triggering regeneration.

   In addition to the upfront payment of $ 3 million, Novartis will pay Osiris $
50 million over five years for research and development work, the companies
said.

   Novartis also has agreed to foot the cost of all clinical trials, a
potentially huge expense, in seeking regulatory approval for any treatments
Osiris develops.

   The Baltimore company also stands to reap royalties from those treatments
that are commercialized, the companies said.

   Osiris, which has a 30,000-square-foot research and development facility in
Fells Point, would manufacture those products approved for marketing in the
United States.

   Should that day come, Burns said, he plans to build the manufacturing site in
Baltimore.

   The deal, Burns said, "probably represents just 20 percent of our opportunity
for [research] collaborations."

   The company, he said, believes other alliance opportunities for its
technology exist in the fields of cancer and orthopedics.

   Burns said he expects the deal to lead to a significant expansion of the
company, boosting staffing to about 110 from the current 64 by the end of the
year.

   Maryland lured Osiris with a $ 4 million financial incentive package,
including investing $ 700,000, or about $ 3.50 a share, in Osiris common stock.
That investment just saw its value more than double as a result of the Novartis
deal.

   Pub Date: 6/18/97

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1997


                             2372 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1997 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 17, 1997, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme, PharmaGenics holders OK $ 28m deal;
IPO planned for new Framingham molecular oncology unit

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Genzyme Corp. and PharmaGenics Inc. yesterday said shareholders of both
companies approved Genzyme's acquisition of PharmaGenics in a stock deal valued
at $ 28 million.

    PharmaGenics, a privately held, Allendale, N.J., developer of cancer drugs
using genomics technology, will become part of a new Genzyme division called
Genzyme Molecular Oncology. The unit will also include several oncology programs
within Genzyme General, the major business unit of Genzyme Corp. The new
division will be owned 60 percent by Genzyme shareholders and 40 percent by
PharmaGenics investors.

    After the acquisition, Genzyme Molecular Oncology will launch an initial
public offering of 10 million shares, of which Genzyme General shareholders will
own 6 million shares and PharmaGenics shareholders will get 4 million shares. No
date has been set for the public offering.

   In late April, Genzyme filed a registration statement with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, stating that Genzyme Molecular Onocology's products will
require "substantial additional funds."

   The proposed public offering follows an earlier financing arrangement which
created Genzyme Tissue Repair.

   As part of the transactions, 20 of 30 employees in New Jersey at PharmaGenics
will lose their jobs, explained Gail Maderis, the new president of the division.
She said less than 10 employees will be retained by Genzyme and relocated to
Framingham, the new home of Genzyme Molecular Oncology

   Michael Sherman, PharmaGenics founder and chief executive, will serve briefly
as a consultant to the new division, "but he is looking for new opportunities,"
said Maderis.

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology will start with about 100 Genzyme employees,
including some working part time at other Genzyme divisions, said Maderis.

   The division will initially focus on two products, one in gene therapy and
the other a tumor vaccine for melanomas, a darkly pigmented abnormal growth.
Maderis said Genzyme Molecular Oncology will continue to work closely with
cancer researchers at Johns Hopkins University who previously helped
PharmaGenics.

   Separately, Genzyme General said it is providing Genzyme Tissue Repair with $
10 million and receiving 1 million Tissue Repair shares. The funds will be used
for general business purposes, Genzyme Tissue Repair said.

   Yesterday, Genzyme General Division closed at 24 11/16, up 5/16, and Genzyme
Tissue Repair was down 1/8, closing at 10 1/2, both on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1997


                             2373 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     June 17, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z11

LENGTH: 4610 words

HEADLINE: Rebecca Lilly: Comes to the End of Treatment For Her Brain Tumor and
Enters Hospice Care

BYLINE: Don Colburn

BODY:


   As soon as she saw the doctor's face, Rebecca Lilly knew he had bad news
about her brain scan.

   "He was, like, puzzled," Becca said afterward, wrinkling her nose and
frowning. She was sitting with her mother, Maureen Lilly, in the cafeteria at
Children's National Medical Center in mid-April. They picked a table by the
window.

   They had just met with neurologist Roger Packer, who directs the brain tumor
program at Children's, to go over Becca's latest brain scan.

   The tumor had grown much bigger and "sort of burst through," Packer told
Becca and her parents. It filled the cavity left by her previous surgeries, its
sheer bulk beginning to press against the brain and shove it out of position.

   On the brain scan lit up on the wall the tumor appeared as a white blob above
her left ear.

   Because most of the growth still seemed confined to one spot, Packer broached
the possibility of another surgery to "debulk" the tumor and relieve pressure on
the brain. Surgeons couldn't get it all -- the tumor's "fingers" reaching into
her brain were impossible to remove -- but cutting out the major mass might
allow one more chance at treating the rest with chemotherapy.

   Perched on the examining table, Becca started to sniffle. "Will I have to
lose my hair again?"

   That would be up to the surgeon, Packer said, handing her a tissue. Maureen
Lilly moved next to Becca and put an arm around her. Becca held the tissue
between her hands in her lap and quietly sobbed.

   "There is also the option, which we've talked about before, to say enough is
enough," Packer told the Lillys. But with Becca still free of brain cancer's
worst symptoms, he believed he owed her one more shot at prolonging her life.

   In the cafeteria, Becca didn't say much. She sipped a Pepsi and nibbled an
oatmeal-raisin cookie. Her mom tried to cheer her up by mentioning the new
summer haircut they planned.

   "I won't be able to play softball," Becca said after a long pause.

   "I don't know," Maureen Lilly answered.

   "That sucks," Becca said.

   For 16-year-old Becca Lilly and her family, this spring has been a season of
transition and harrowing medical decisions.

   In her six-year battle against a brain tumor, Becca has undergone every major
form of cancer treatment -- five brain surgeries, two kinds of radiation and
four combinations of chemotherapy. In November 1995, during a nine-hour
operation at Children's Hospital, she became the first child with a brain tumor
ever treated with gene therapy.

   Those treatments held the cancer in check for a time, but could not keep it
from coming back. Becca's doctors always warned that when a malignant brain
tumor grows back, it can do so with terrifying speed.

   The Lilly family has witnessed firsthand what they meant.

   Three weeks ago today, Becca was in the Magic Kingdom at Walt Disney World in
Florida, having breakfast with Minnie Mouse, Pluto, Alice in Wonderland and Snow
White. Now she spends most of the day in a hospital bed in her sister's old room
on the ground floor of their Takoma Park home.

   Becca's family decided this month to forgo further medical treatment against
her rampant tumor and to concentrate every effort on keeping her at home and
free of pain in the time that remains. She has entered the home hospice program
of the Jewish Social Service Agency of Metropolitan Washington.

   She uses no intravenous lines, no catheters, no feeding tube. What little she
eats and drinks, she takes by mouth. To dull the pain, she takes 12-hour
morphine pills, supplemented as needed by a squirt of liquid morphine under her
tongue.

   A shelf above the foot of her bed holds a throng of stuffed animals. Stuck in
the mirror is a snapshot of Becca kicking a soccer ball in fifth grade, the year
her tumor was diag nosed.

   Becca's father, Joe Lilly, sleeps on the floor beside her bed, in case she
needs help in the night and because it comforts her to hold his hand while she
is falling asleep.

   "Joe's the night person, I'm the day person," said Maureen Lilly.

   "It's very rough," said neurologist Packer, who has treated Becca for more
than five years. Caring for someone with relapsing brain cancer is "a series of
transitions, and this is the worst one."

   Becca's memory plays more tricks than ever on her. She is rapidly losing
strength on her right side -- what her dad calls "having to tell her right arm
and leg what to do." Even sitting up to take a pill tuckers her out. Her
peripheral vision on the right is gone.

   But she still has her hair, and her trademark spunk.

   Early this month, she attended her sister Sarah's graduation from
kindergarten at St. Bernadette School in Silver Spring, sitting down front in
her wheelchair. She made it to the eighth-grade graduation party for her
brother, Joe. She watched Game 4 of the National Basketball Association finals,
cheering the Utah Jazz's come-from-behind victory over the Chicago Bulls from
her wheelchair in the living room. A week ago last Friday, she struggled to meet
friends and classmates at Good Counsel High School in Wheaton for a few minutes
in the cafeteria on the final day of class.

   Even before the mid-April scan confirmed it, there were signs of trouble. The
previous week, Becca missed school each day. She required at least two naps a
day, and had headaches and nausea when she was awake. Riding with her father one
evening to get ice cream, she had a brief seizure in the front seat of the car.

   Word-finding became more difficult. She could remember song lyrics and come
up with the right word if the doctor pointed to a ring or a watch or a dime. But
she had trouble completing her own thoughts.

   "If, like, I'm trying to say something," she explained, "I, um, can't."

   The day after the bad-news brain scan, Philip Cogen, chairman of pediatric
neurosurgery at Children's, advised the Lillys that if they chose surgery, it
could not wait. The tumor had doubled in size in the past month. He scheduled an
operation the following morning.

   "Tomorrow?" Becca looked stunned.

   "What about my kids?" She meant the class of 4-year-olds at St. Andrew's
School in Wheaton she visited three mornings a week when she was feeling up to
it. "And my friends, like Megan."

   She sat back in her chair, left hand at her mouth, eyes down.

   "We'll figure something out, Becca," her mother said.

   Cogen went over the details of the surgery and -- picking up on his patient's
concern -- assured Becca he would brush as much hair as possible out of the way
before he shaved her head for the operation.

   Minutes later, Becca was at a hallway pay phone. With her mother's help, she
made three calls. First, she left a message on her older sister Anne Marie's
answering machine: "Hi, Anne. I'm having surgery tomorrow. See ya. Bye." Megan
McArdle was at softball practice, but another Good Counsel classmate, Karen
Gangloff, was home, and they quickly came up with a plan. "You're a saint. Bye,"
Becca signed off.

   Her whole spirit lifted. She and Megan and Karen were going out to dinner by
themselves at Copeland's -- their own booth -- at 7 p.m.

   "We ordered seafood, the biggest plates I've ever seen," Megan said later.
"She was really talkative. You couldn't tell anything. She was laughing, joking
and making fun of people."

   Megan asked if Becca wanted her to tell their classmates. No, Becca said
adamantly -- she'd tell them when she got back.

   Close as they are, Megan recalled, Becca has never let on how scared she is.
She always puts up a positive front.

   "It's not fair," Megan said. "She should be playing soccer with me like she
used to. She should be driving! Her biggest problem should be homework!

   "It makes me so mad."

   Surgery this time took about four hours. Neurosurgeon Cogen removed what he
could -- chunks of mooshy white growth. "Like oatmeal," he said. In all, what
came out was the size of an egg.

   The pathology report confirmed that the tumor, a glioblastoma, had turned
even more malignant. Some of the tumor cells themselves were dead -- a
paradoxically bad sign. The cancer was growing so fast that it had outstripped
its own blood supply.

   It was no surprise that the tumor grew more aggressive, Cogen said. "Every
time you hit her with [a new treatment], it kills the most vulnerable cells, and
you end up with the most resistant cells." Surgery can never remove them all,
without sacrificing the normal brain.

   "Malignant brain tumors," he said with disgust, "always grow back."

   In the intensive care unit after surgery, Becca woke up groggy amid a tangle
of tubes, under an oxygen mask and a helmet of bandage. Her eyes half-opened
when her parents spoke her name.

   "They left most of your hair, kiddo," Joe Lilly said.

   "Becca, your hair looks beautiful," said Maureen Lilly, stroking her right
hand. "It's in a ponytail."

   The next day she was out of the ICU, but still confused, speechless and weak.
Becca is normally a champion pill-taker -- any size, any shape, any hour -- but
her tongue was swollen and numb, which made swallowing difficult. That annoyed
her.

   "What's wrong, Becca?" whispered Anne Marie Lilly, who is training to be a
nurse. "Is it the tongue thing, with the pills?"

   Becca didn't move or speak, but looked upset.

   "It's okay, Becca. It's because you just had surgery. It'll be better
tomorrow. Not a problem, okay? Just temporary. Just rest, okay? Rest."

   Without a word, Becca closed her eyes and slowly reached up and back with her
left hand to the top of the pillow and felt around. Her hair was still there.

   Five days later, she was home. The seizures and double vision abated, and she
gradually gained strength. "Remarkable," Packer said when he saw her 12 days
after surgery.

   But they were hurtling toward another critical decision.

   "This thing grew very quickly," Packer warned. "It's not going to slow down
just because we did a good surgery." At best, the operation had bought them a
month or two in which to try one more attack.

   He outlined two possibilities: one drastic, the other less so.

   The more drastic option, high-dose chemotherapy, was the only one with any
hope of stopping the tumor -- but that hope was slim and carried a risk of
fearsome side effects. It would start with heavy rounds of the proven
anti-cancer drug Cytoxan. If that significantly shrank the tumor, Becca would
receive an extraordinarily high dose of a newer drug. The "blast," as Packer
called it, would lower her blood counts, temporarily weakening her immune system
and making her vulnerable even to minor infections. It would be akin to a bone
marrow transplant, and almost as risky. Not only hair loss, Packer said, but
"more toxicity than she has ever seen."

   The data weren't much help. In one unfinished study of inoperable brain tumor
patients, the high-dose chemo kept a small number alive for at least two years.
Other studies were less encouraging.

   The other option, a promising but unproven drug called SU-101, had fewer
known side effects, but at best would merely slow the tumor's growth. Becca
would be the youngest patient ever to try it.

   Packer told the Lillys he would "absolutely" support either decision they
made. He himself was torn. But he felt a responsibility to tell them which
treatment he probably would choose: the high-dose chemo. For all its toxicity,
it offered a long-shot chance of gaining her a few more years.

   There wasn't time to hedge their bets and try both approaches. If they were
going to try the high-dose chemo, it was now or never.

   It was, Maureen Lilly said, the most difficult decision she had ever made.

   She and Joe pondered it for days. They went back and forth -- between and
within themselves -- before finally settling on the less toxic treatment.
Quality-of-life concern tipped the balance.

   "Our problem is that if [high-dose chemo] doesn't work, she'll spend the last
weeks of her life in miserable shape," Joe Lilly said.

   If anyone knew what the Lillys were going through it was their friends
Kathleen and Jim Bula, of Derwood, who faced a similarly agonizing choice for
their 8-year-old daughter, Kelley, last year. Kelley died of brain cancer in
January.

   "You do what your heart tells you to do," said Kathleen Bula. "It's a parent
looking at their own flesh and blood and not knowing what to do. It's horrible."

   In early April, Becca's parents drove her to New York to visit an unorthodox
health clinic headed by a 100-year-old Romanian doctor.

   Emanuel Revici first came to the Lillys' attention because of a recent
limited-edition book, "The Man Who Cures Cancer," which touts Revici's methods
and describes him as "perhaps the greatest medical scientist this world has ever
known." Among its many anecdotes, the book cites several cases of brain tumor
patients allegedly helped by Revici.

   Revici still shows up most days at the clinic on the 12th floor of a midtown
Manhattan office building. His approach to health is based on the belief that
cancer and other diseases are caused by a biological imbalance which may be
corrected by administering certain nontoxic substances.

   The Lillys spent about two hours at the clinic, mainly with Kenneth Korins, a
32-year-old physician who has taken over Revici's practice. He examined Becca
and prescribed for her a "protocol" consisting of several medicines produced at
the clinic, supplemented by a meatless diet emphasizing vegetable juices, herbal
tea and vitamin and enzyme supplements. The charge for the visit was $ 300.

   Revici entered Korins's office, steadied by an aide, and sat down on Becca's
left. Maureen Lilly went over to him, took his hand and introduced herself.

   "Brain tumor responds better to our treatment," the old man said. "She has a
good chance of survival. . . . With brain tumors, we are in general more
optimistic."

   "That's kind of the opposite of what we hear from most other doctors,"
Maureen Lilly replied.

   "With our treatment, brain tumors have one of the best results," Revici said.

   "My age is very interesting," Revici continued. "Do you know how old I am?"

   "100," Maureen Lilly said.

   "Over 100," he said, and got up to leave.

   Korins continued discussing his recommended treatment, including the diet and
every-other-day injections of "Revici compounds" -- labeled LU, SECOL and TT --
which he said were a nontoxic combination of selenium, sulphur, magnesium and
other minerals.

   Suddenly, they realized that Becca had left the room and not returned.
Maureen Lilly found her in the hallway, crying. "We should have known she would
bolt from the room as soon as he said the S-word [shots]," her mother said.

   "She's probably also picking up on the fact that we don't have a whole lot of
hope for what we're trying right now," Joe Lilly said.

   They left the clinic with several small bottles of "Revici compounds" --
still unsure whether they would ever use them.

   If they decided to adopt the Revici method, Joe Lilly announced, maybe the
whole family should join Becca on the natural food diet.

   "Everybody gets a shot too," Becca said without missing a beat.

   Revici's methods have come under sharp criticism. In 1985, the New York State
Board for Professional Medical Conduct recommended that his license be revoked,
stating that there was "no persuasive evidence that Revici's method of treating
cancer is effective" and that he was "grossly incompetent and grossly negligent"
for failing to recognize that. State authorities briefly suspended his license
in 1983, put him on five years' probation in 1988 and required that he refer all
cancer patients to a board-certified oncolo gist.

   The American Cancer Society last year urged patients with cancer "not to seek
treatment with the Revici method."

   "It's so far outside what we've been doing," Maureen Lilly said. As she tried
to explain to people what they were considering, she realized "how little I know
about what it actually involves."

   And would it complement -- or conflict with -- Becca's other treatment?

   Neurologist Packer saw no problem with nutritional supplements "as long as
they're not doing any harm," but he could not approve use of the Revici
compounds without knowing exactly what was in them.

   In the end, the Lillys decided against pursuing the Revici alternative. Becca
hated the idea of shots -- not to mention the vegetarian diet. Especially as her
symptoms mounted, Joe Lilly said, "it just didn't seem to make sense."

   Early last month, a group of Joe Lilly's Gonzaga High School classmates
conspired to send Becca and her family on a trip. They raised money and pooled
frequent-flier miles and soon -- with logistical help from Kathleen Bula -- a
week-long trip to Florida was in the works.

   A limousine whisked the Lillys to Dulles Airport on Memorial Day Sunday. In
Orlando, they stayed in a plush lakefront condominium with a balcony and a pool.

   In between naps and bouts of headache and nausea, Becca visited Walt Disney
World, Sea World and Universal Studios, and sunbathed by the pool. She rode the
Big Thunder Mountain Railroad and the Splash Mountain spillway and spun in a Mad
Hatter's teacup. She sat through "Earthquake" and "Terminator 2." At Sea World,
she enjoyed watching from her safely distant wheelchair as her dad, down front,
got soaked with water by Shamu the killer whale.

   "It could get a little scary in here," warned Anne Marie as they wheeled
Becca into the "Alien Encounter" in Disney's Tomorrowland.

   "Are you serious?" Becca asked.

   "Yes."

   "Cool!" Becca said.

   But the week was not all Fantasyland. Becca's symptoms were rapidly
overtaking her. For the first time in her life, she spent most of the day in a
wheelchair. Otherwise, she walked tentatively as if she were feeling her way in
the dark. She tired easily, didn't eat much and threw up sporadically. She had
trouble sleeping. Tylenol with codeine helped -- but not always. Consulting with
her doctors by long distance, the Lillys boosted her steroid dose to relieve
pressure in her brain, but also worried that the drug was making her restless
and "nutty" at night.

   "What if it isn't the drugs?" Anne Marie worried aloud. "What if it's the
tumor?"

   Midweek, after a long day at Universal Studios interrupted by a nap in the
First Aid station, Maureen Lilly asked Becca if there was any time that day when
she had felt okay. Becca said no.

   The hardest part was trying to include Becca in the schedule planning, her
mother said. "If you ask her what she wants to do, all she keeps saying is, 'I
don't know.' And she doesn't know."

   Still, for a week they were a family free of the at-home rat race of school,
work and doctor appointments. And they got away just in time. The Disney trip
was originally scheduled to begin yesterday. Early last month, Joe Lilly, who
has an instinct in such matters, insisted that they move it up three weeks.

   Less than 24 hours after returning from Florida, a very sick Becca was on her
way to Children's Hospital.

   She was exhausted and queasy. Her head hurt. She saw double and could barely
walk. She was confused and scared.

   It took her nearly two minutes to walk about 50 feet from the waiting room to
an examining room near Packer's office. She moved gingerly, in shuffling baby
steps, with her father holding one arm and her sister the other, while her
mother followed with a wastebasket in case Becca threw up. She plopped down in a
chair, winded by the short walk, and started to sob.

   Packer was shaken. He had never seen her so sick. Putting his hand on her
shoulder, he asked a few questions.

   "One or two?" he asked, holding up an index finger on her left -- her good
side.

   "Two," she whimpered.

   "How old are you?"

   "Sixteen."

   "When's your birthday?"

   "July 18." She said it slowly, as if figuring it out.

   "Where are you?"

   "Children's."

   "What's my name?"

   "Um-um-July 18." She frowned and winced, knowing it was the wrong answer, but
remained too flustered to come up with the right one.

   They helped her around the corner into Packer's office.

   "Where's Mom?" Becca suddenly wanted to know.

   Maureen Lilly had stepped into the hallway for a moment, crying. After
gathering her composure, she came back in and gave Becca a hug. "I didn't feel
good," she whispered to her daughter.

   "I don't think it's the medication," Packer announced. "I think it's the
problem we've been dealing with all the way through." He ordered an immediate
brain scan and told Becca he wanted to keep her in the hospital overnight "to
see if there's anything I can do to make you feel better."

   "Okay," Becca nodded. She seemed a bit less bewildered, as if a spell had
passed.

   her brain scan, Becca was admitted to a room on 4 Green -- familiar territory
to her -- and fell asleep. While she slept, Packer led her parents across the
hall into a small lounge and closed the door.

   "I don't think what I'm going to say will surprise you," he began. The tumor
was out of control. On the newest scan it was no longer one large white blob but
a series of spots throughout her brain. "Huge lumps," he called them -- a
dramatic change even since her previous scan 12 days earlier.

   There was no reason to continue chemotherapy or any other treatment for her
cancer. The major goal from now on was simply to keep her as comfortable as
possible.

   "I can't tell you whether this will take her life in a week or two or a month
or two," Packer said. "But usually this kind of spread doesn't give us months."

   Joe and Maureen Lilly sat silent on the couch.

   "I know you have been honest with her all the way through," he said. "I don't
know if you want me to speak to her, or if you want to wait for her to ask
questions."

   They would have to think about that.

   "I don't think she'll ask questions," Maureen Lilly said.

   "She's certainly frightened," Joe Lilly said.

   They talked about home care and getting hospice involved and how to balance
the effects -- and side effects -- of steroids and painkillers.

   "It's a terrible set of options, but I think pain is the major thing we want
to address," Packer said. "I don't want to take away Rebecca, but I don't want
her to be in pain."

   "We agree with you there," Joe Lilly said.

   Maureen Lilly would say later that the hardest part of that day was not when
she heard Packer confirm what she and Joe already had guessed, but earlier --
when she had to watch her distraught daughter struggle with pain, fear and the
doctor's simple commands.

   After two restless days and nights in the hospital, Becca came home on June
4. The hospital bed was already set up in Anne Marie's old room on the ground
floor, which had been transformed into Becca's, with her knickknacks and stuffed
animals and new pictures on the walls.

   The first thing Becca asked about was the holes in the wall where the
pictures had been hastily rearranged. She wondered what would happen when she
moved back to her old room upstairs.

   Did that mean she didn't know?

   Joe Lilly had talked with her that morning about how the tumor had come back
and her treatment wasn't working. She also had heard the discussions about pain
man age ment.

   Maureen Lilly was starting to hate the phrase "pain management." It was such
a medical term, such a euphemism for what no one had told Becca directly. "But
how do you talk to someone about the fact that they're dying?" she said.

   Her first night home, Becca asked what was going on with her right hand. She
had lost feeling in it and could barely raise the arm. Would it get better?

   Choosing her words carefully, Maureen Lilly said it might get a little bit
better but it probably wouldn't get better -- because the tumor was growing.

   It was a perfect opportunity to bring up the larger question.

   "She opened the door wide enough so I could have walked through," Maureen
Lilly said. "But I couldn't do it."

   To qualify for hospice care, a patient must have a limited life expectancy,
usually six months or less.

   Hospice care emphasizes pain control and comfort care -- in the home or a
homelike setting, if possible, rather than a hospital. Keeping the patient
comfortable takes precedence over prolonging life by all-out medical treatment
and machinery such as artificial ventilators.

   If there's one misperception that galls those who take care of the dying,
it's the one implied in phrases like "no more treatment" or "nothing more to be
done." Ask any cancer doctor, any hospice nurse, any social worker, any parent
of a dying child. Even when a life can be measured in days or hours, there's
plenty to be done.

   "We're doing lots," said Barbara Psotka, a hospice social worker with the
Jewish Social Service Agency. "It's just different stuff now."

   Hospice nurse Sue Eynon-Lark is on call and visits several times a week. But
for the time being, Becca's family handles most of her care.

   "There are no assigned roles," Maureen Lilly said, "but everybody does
something." They read to her, hold the cup of chocolate milkshake, change the
CDs on her boombox, tell her stories, watch over her sleep. They spend time with
her. They don't leave the house for long at a time.

   It's a huge comfort to them all that since she began taking morphine Becca no
longer complains of pain -- even headaches.

   A purposeful calm has settled over the Lilly household. Relatives and friends
continually come by. Food arrives from a network of St. Bernadette's
parishioners. There are balloons, and flowers, and sometimes laughter.

   But what to tell her?

   Sitting in the living room one afternoon while Becca slept, her parents
talked for nearly two hours with social worker Psotka about a subject still
nagging them both.

   "What do you want her to know?" Psotka asked.

   "I want her to know," Maureen Lilly said, "that we're not pursuing further
treatment, that the cancer is spreading and that our major concern is keeping
her comfortable and putting it in God's hands."

   Yet she didn't want Becca to think of it as "giving up."

   Psotka agreed. "You don't want ever to give her the idea that there's nothing
to do," she said. There was always something to do, always something to hope
for.

   They searched for a gentle way to be honest about all this. If Becca asked
them a direct question, Psotka said, they owed her a direct answer. Not brutal,
but honest. Otherwise she might begin to worry that there was something else she
wasn't being told.

   The question Maureen Lilly feared most: Am I gonna die?

   The question Joe Lilly feared most: How am I gonna die?

   But they didn't expect Becca to ask many questions -- she never had. They
were also pretty sure -- though not absolutely certain -- she knew the answer to
the first one.

   After all, she knew a lot already. She was nearly 17 and had been fighting a
terrible disease for six years. She knew how she felt, and knew her right arm
and leg were weaker by the day. She knew the tumor was spreading and there was
nothing they could do about it. She had friends from Camp Fantastic who did not
come back the following summer.

   "I think she knows, don't you?" Psotka said.

   "I do," Joe Lilly said.

   But what if she was confused? Or, as children will, avoiding the subject to
protect her parents? Or just plain afraid? They had to find out.

   A week ago this morning, Joe and Maureen got up their courage. They walked
into Becca's room, with Psotka. And for a few minutes they talked.

   They told Becca why she was at home now, in her sister's old room on the
ground floor. They told her about hospice care. They told her they would be
there for her, always.

   "Her eyes were open and she listened the whole time," Maureen Lilly said.
"And then she knew what we knew."


GRAPHIC: Photo, james a. parcell, Maureen Lilly comforts her daughter Becca on
the day before her fifth brain surgery.  On a scan of Becca's brain, at left,
the tumor shows up as a large white spot above her left ear. Below, neurosurgeon
Philip Cogen removes the stitches from her mid-April surgery at Children's
Hospital. Older sister Anne Marie comforts Becca after the surgery, above right.
Maureen Lilly talks with 100-year-old doctor Emanuel Revici, above, at an
alternative health clinic in New York City. Becca and her sister Anne Marie play
cards in the waiting room before her surgery. The operation last April bought
time for one more attack on the tumor.  The Lillys took a week-long trip to
Orlando, Fla., last month. Brother Joe wheels Becca through a thundershower at
Universal Studios, top. Above, the family enjoys fireworks at Sea World. Becca's
symptoms overtook her at times, at left.  In Becca's bedroom at home last week,
Good Counsel High School classmate Megan McArdle reads to her from "The Random
House Book of Humor." Head hurting and sick to her stomach, Becca waits with her
parents for neurologist Roger Packer to see her, at right. Top left, Packer
tells the Lillys that Becca's brain tumor is beyond medical treatment. Joe Lilly
comforts her the next day, top right.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1997


                             2374 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                     June 17, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z19; FORUM

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Are Transplants From Animals Too Risky?

BODY:


   Yes.

   Baboons, touted as potential organ donors, harbor several known infectious
agents that would probably be transmitted to humans by xenotransplants, and
several unknown that could be.

   The dangers of infectious diseases from nonhuman primates are underscored by
evidence suggesting that versions of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) that
causes AIDS came from chimps and sooty mangabeys.

   Simian foamy viruses, which are also retroviruses, are present in nearly all
adult baboons. Those who advocate these primates as heart donors argue that
foamy viruses are benign in baboons. But AIDS viruses inhabited monkeys
harmlessly for eons before being transmitted to humans, leading to the global
AIDS epidemic.

   Foamy viruses replicate in and kill human cells in tissue culture. In vivo
they may seem innocuous, or they may have the capacity to cause disease.
Retroviruses are impossible to eradicate once they have a foothold in humans.

   Diseases resulting from xenotransplants are most likely to be transmitted
sexually and otherwise. Baboons are scarce and will never be commonly used as
organ donors, so why take on the risk of getting their diseases for so little
benefit?

   Although pigs are less likely to transmit infectious disease into humans,
they too may harbor novel agents, including retroviruses.

   The future of xenotransplantation shouldn't be left to transplant surgeons
when decisions may adversely impact human health.

   The Food and Drug Administration's approval of xenotransplantation in spite
of the infectious risk is ironic in light of its prohibition of active
retroviruses in humans, as for gene therapy.

   Putting retrovirus-contaminating organs directly into humans and
circumventing all natural barriers makes very little sense from a public health
perspective.

   Jonathan S. Allan, DVM

   Department of Virology and Immunology,

   Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San Antonio

   No.

   In many cases, candidates for xenografts face death from underlying disease,
so the risk that infectious disease might accompany the transplant isn't an
overwhelming consideration.

   The larger controversy is over whether xenotransplants could transfer
infectious diseases to society as a whole.

   For xenotransplants from pigs, this risk is exceedingly low, and any disease
that might spread widely through a pig xenotransplant would probably do so by
other means. The risk of renouncing pig transplants is greater than of using
them.

   Primate xenotransplants are a different story. Humans are not regularly
exposed to nonhuman primates, their blood does not intermix, and nonhuman
primates harbor known infectious agents that could cause deadly epidemics.

   Yet the risk is limited because the numbers of primates suitable for donating
organs is small. Second, some diseases that might be transmitted from nonhuman
primates would kill so fast that widespread infection would be unlikely.

   Given the small numbers, it may be possible to protect society from epidemic
infections by careful screening and by preventing risky activities, such as
blood donation.

   The small but real risk to society from primate xenotransplants is balanced
by great potential benefits. For example, transplants from humans, which also
carried infection risks, have led to therapies now widely used for many
diseases.

   Every new medical advance has been heralded by warnings of the harm that
would result to society. I can think of few that have actually led to serious
and enduring harm, and many that have led to unanticipated great benefits.

   Jeffrey L. Platt, MD

   Professor, Department of Surgery, Pediatrics, and Immunology,

   Duke University Medical Center

   Reprinted by permission of Physician's Weekly, a publication of American
Passage Media Corp. (C) 1997

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1997


                             2375 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1997 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              The Sun (Baltimore)

                      June 15, 1997, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 2388 words

HEADLINE: Closing in on cancer; Research: Thanks to dramatic advances in
molecular and cell biology, tumor-fighting injections should be available within
several years for some types of cancer.

BYLINE: Mark Guidera, SUN STAFF

BODY:


   For years, Michael G. Hanna had a radical vision for how cancer might be
treated in the not-too-distant future.

   His dream: A cancer patient is given an injection of a drug that is so
"smart" it zooms directly to tumor cells, bypassing healthy ones. The body's own
defenses are alerted to attack the tumor, and the triggers for new cancer growth
are disarmed.

   Like Hanna, cancer researchers in the United States and Europe have long
toiled on just such a magic bullet. Hurdles, though, have been high.

   The main one: Cancer cells smartly mask their alien identity from the body's
immune system, making them difficult to target.

   But thanks to dramatic advances in molecular and cell biology that have
opened a window on cancer behavior, such therapies as the one Hanna dreamed of
could be available within several years for some types of cancer.

   Among the companies that appear close to commercializing new breakthrough
cancer treatments is PerImmune Inc., a Rockville biotechnology company headed up
by Hanna. The former National Cancer Institute researcher has spent more than a
decade deciphering how the body's immune system might be used to fight the
nation's No. 2 killer. More than 1.4 million new cases are diagnosed annually.

   Privately held PerImmune has developed a drug for colon cancer using what are
known as human monoclonal antibodies to block cancer growth. Monoclonal
antibodies, considered one of the more important medical science advances in
recent years, are genetically engineered agents that can recognize with a high
degree of accuracy different types of cells. PerImmune's colon cancer treatment
uses a patient's own tumor cells to stimulate an immune response which
recognizes cancer cells and fights growth.

   "We are allowing the body's own immune system to guide us in how to fight
cancer," says Hanna.

   His company's therapy, called OncoVax, is among a host of emerging treatments
taking shape in biotechnology, pharmaceutical, university and government
research labs in Maryland and elsewhere. Together, they hold the promise of
radically changing the anti-cancer arsenal in just a few years, say experts.

   Dr. Louise C. Strong, a genetics researcher at the University of Texas
Anderson Cancer Center and president of the American Association for Cancer
Research, is hopeful new therapies might soon replace, or at least reduce the
need for the current standard treatments -- chemotherapy, radiation and surgery.

   "There is a lot of excitement that at some point in the near future we'll
have much more targeted cancer treatments than we do today, and we won't have to
rely on some of these toxic approaches in which we go in and kill as many cells
as possible," says Strong.

   Many treatments

   Radical new cancer treatments being developed in Maryland that may be
available in a few years cover a broad range of approaches.

   Some, like PerImmune's, are designed to either help the body's own disease
fighting T-cells recognize cancer cells as foreign invaders and attack them, or
otherwise deactivate cancer's biological mechanisms for growth.

   One company is working on drugs that would shut off the blood supply to
tumors, a key factor in some cancer growth.

   Others are working on "vaccines" with antibodies and other materials that act
as homing devices, carrying therapeutic agents to cancer cells.

   Also in the pipeline at Maryland companies are gene therapies that seek to
stimulate "suppressor genes," which block cancer.

   For the near future, say experts, the therapies most likely to emerge on the
market will be aimed at preventing cancer's spread or recurrence.

   Experts such as Hanna at PerImmune and Dr. Strong believe these new therapies
initially will be used in combination with surgery, chemotherapy, radiation or
other treatments.

   For example, PerImmune's monoclonal antibody therapy is designed to prevent a
recurrence of cancer after tumors have been surgically removed.

   But, says Hanna, "The ultimate goal is to create a therapy that could be
given to people at a high risk for cancer," such as those with family cancer
histories, to prevent cancer from ever occurring. In other words, a true
vaccine.

   Laying the groundwork for companies like PerImmune in the
Baltimore-Washington area are institutions such as the Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, the University of Maryland and the National Cancer Institute.

   Their researchers have provided crucial scientific keys to developing new
treatments, and developed some of their own.

   NCI, for example, has eight monoclonal antibody cancer treatments in clinical
trials.

   Some researchers, like Angela Brodie, a University of Maryland professor of
pharmacology and experimental therapeutics, have developed treatments with such
strong potential that companies and venture capitalists are interested.

   Brodie has developed a compound that has been shown in animal studies to
inhibit production of the hormone androgen, a key element in the spread of
prostrate cancer. Her discovery is now the subject of negotiations between UM
and a venture capital group that wants to launch a company to further develop
the compound and commercialize it.

   The business dynamics of her discovery don't stir Brodie.

   "The more important reward," she says, "is how it might benefit patients."

   But PerImmune's Hanna and other biotechnology executives believe the
commercial impetus has spurred the biggest leaps in moving promising new cancer
treatments forward.

   The financial stakes are enormous for biotechnology and pharmaceutical
companies in Maryland and elsewhere. Failures will come at a high price.

   Development costs for a treatment, which include paying for clinical trials,
will run an average of $ 359 million, estimates the U.S. Office of Technology
Assessment.

   Getting a gene therapy to market could cost even more -- close to $ 600
million, experts estimate.

   It's that staggering cost that is driving many biotechnology firms to seek
partnerships with deep-pocket pharmaceutical houses, says Janice Gottschall, a
pharmaceutical industry expert with Frost & Sullivan, a Mountain View,
Calif.-based international marketing consultant.

   Huge potential profits

   Treatments that land Food and Drug Administration and foreign government
clearances stand to generate millions in revenue, say industry analysts.

   According to a recent Frost & Sullivan study, emerging cancer treatments such
as monoclonal antibodies could expand the current $ 7.8 billion world cancer
treatment market by more than 50 percent -- to $ 12 billion -- by 1999.

   One element favoring such growth is that sales prices for new treatments --
expected to average between $ 5,000 and $ 12,000 each -- shouldn't prove a
barrier to market acceptance, says Frost & Sullivan senior biotechnology analyst
Archana Asthana.

   "In the long term, some of these new cancer treatments will help contain the
cost of treating cancer by allowing more patients to be treated outside the
hospital and to stay off chemotherapy, which is three times as expensive as some
of these new therapies will be," said Asthana.

   Take the case of EntreMed, a small biotechnology company that is studying
Thalidomide, which was banned in the 1960s because it caused birth defects.
Entre-Med is developing the drug as a treatment for brain, breast and prostate
cancers.

   EntreMed researchers have found Thalidomide inhibits the mechanism by which
tumors grow new blood vessels, a process called angiogenesis. These new blood
vessels feed the tumor nutrients, allowing growth.

   The drug, says EntreMed's vice president for research and development, Edward
Gubish, has shown such promise that the company is evaluating whether to launch
late-stage clinical trials later this year or next.

   EntreMed and its marketing partner, drug giant Bristol Myers Squibb, could
see an estimated $ 25 million in first-year sales if they succeed in marketing
Thalidomide or a chemical relative as a cancer therapy, according to Volpe,
Welty & Co., an investment firm that follows the Rockville company.

   Sales could subsequently hit $ 75 million a year, making the six-year-old
company profitable by 2001, according to Volpe, Welty.

   EntreMed is also attempting to develop drugs from two natural proteins that
block tumor blood vessels. A drug based on one of these proteins could hit the
market by early in the next decade and have strong market appeal, says Volpe,
Welty.

   Asthana at Frost & Sullivan believes companies that are successful in
developing new cancer therapies will try to boost revenues by seeking to have
them approved as supplemental and first-line treatments.

   The stakes have fostered intense competition. The Pharmaceutical
Manufacturers Association (PHARMA) says that cancer is the leading research
target of biotechnology companies.

   Frost & Sullivan estimates about 80 cancer therapies are in development at
biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies.

   The competition EntreMed faces, for example, is fierce.

   While analysts consider EntreMed a front runner in its field, there are at
least 25 other companies pursuing therapies to curb blood vessel growth in
tumors, Volpe, Welty estimates. Competitors include Novartis and Merck & Co.,
Inc., two of the world's largest drug companies, and Genentech Inc., a leading
biotechnology company.

   Immunotherapy

   One of the most competitive arenas, say experts, is the field Hanna and his
team of scientists at PerImmune have been working on, called "active specific
immunotherapy."

   This approach seeks to use organic substances, such as human monoclonal
antibodies, to either specifically target cancer cells or to get the body's
immune system to recognize -- and attack -- them as an invader.

   For reasons not yet clearly understood, cancer cells don't trigger enough of
the body's natural response to disease.

   The monoclonal antibody cancer treatment PerImmune hopes to commercialize
first is a therapy for colon cancer. The deadly disease is diagnosed in about
134,000 people annually in the United States.

   That's not a huge market when compared to, say, diabetes, which affects 16
million, note analysts.

   But PerImmune, which recently built the country's largest human monoclonal
antibody production facility in Rockville, hopes to develop its treatment as a
therapy for other solid tumors, such as breast and prostate.

   Late stage human trials in Europe on PerImmune's therapy appear so promising,
says Hanna, the company hopes to see marketing approval in Europe next year.

   PerImmune's competitors in the monoclonal antibody field include Genentech,
the San Francisco biotechnology company, and privately held Jenner Technologies,
of Danville, CA.

   Jenner is developing a vaccine for bowel cancers, such as colon cancer. And
Genentech is seeking FDA approval to market a monoclonal antibody drug to treat
an often fatal form of lymphoma known as low grade non-Hodgkin's, which afflicts
240,000 in the United States.

   If approved as expected this year, Genentech's treatment, Rituximab, could be
the first monoclonal antibody for cancer available in this country, say
analysts. Salomon Brothers estimates Rituximab could generate $ 85 million in
sales in 1997 and $ 145 million in sales in 1998 for Genentech.

   Asthana, the biotechnology analyst, expects several more approved monoclonal
antibody cancer treatments to follow.

   Hanna says PerImmune has not calculated the potential revenue stream of its
colon cancer vaccine. But the CEO says PerImmune is seeking to license rights to
market the treatment to a large pharmaceutical company specializing in oncology
products.

   A slightly different approach to using antibodies is being investigated by
Cel-Sci Inc., a small biotechnology company with research labs in Baltimore.

   Cel-Sci is testing a vaccine made of a natural mixture of immune system
regulators called cytokines. The company has small-scale human clinical tests of
the drug, called Multikine, under way.

   At least two Maryland companies are working on an even more elusive, but
potentially powerful, cancer therapy designed to manipulate the genetic coding
that controls or prevents cancer.

   Genetic Therapy Inc., owned by Novartis and based in Rockville, and GenVec
Inc., a venture funded firm in Gaithersburg, are attempting to develop
treatments using genes that would activate enzymes and other mechanisms to shut
down cancer growth.

   Strong, the cancer genetics expert, says commercially available gene
therapies for cancer are probably some time away.

   "It's a very seductive idea that we might be able to correct defective genes
or provide some type of genetic protection against cancer," she says.

   Still that seduction has lured big money to bet on gene therapy. At least
eight companies, including GenVec and Genetic Therapy, have human clinical
trials under way, and a handful of other competitors are developing other gene
therapies.

   No has estimated the potential market value of a gene therapy that might
prove successful.

   But the $ 295 million Sandoz AG (now part of Novartis) paid for Genetic
Therapy in 1995 offers some sense of expectations.

   Paul Fischer, chief executive officer at GenVec, says that while more work
must be done to clear major hurdles in gene therapy, he believes it will be
commercially available in the near future.

   He expects that it will be used initially to prevent tumor recurrences. Also
gene therapy, says Fischer, will likely be used in conjunction with other
therapies, such as chemotherapy or new drugs.

   Fischer believes gene therapy will find a place in the market despite the
plethora of emerging treatments it will compete with.

   "My view is that you cannot possibly have enough new cancer treatments.
Cancer is still very difficult to treat and cure," says Fischer.

   "I see a day when we put a lot of these new therapies together in a treatment
plan and we see a lot more cures than we do today."

   But Strong warns that the buzz over the promise of potential breakthroughs
should be tempered with the voice of caution.

   In short, investors -- and patients -- beware.

   "If we've learned anything about cancer," says Strong, "it's that tumors are
very clever. They tend to get rid of that which prevents their growth and cleave
to that which allows it."

   Pub Date: 6/15/97

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, CHIAKI KAWAJIRI : STAFF PHOTO, Almost there: Michael G.
Hanna, is head of PerImmune Inc., a Rockville biotechnology company developing a
treatment for colon cancer recurrence. The company is hopeful the therapy,
called OncoVax, will be approved for commercial sale.; PHOTO, CHRIS USHER :
SPECIAL TO THE SUN, Thalidomide: Dr. John W. Holaday, head of EntreMed Inc., is
developing Thalidomide to treat cancer. The drug was banned in the 1960s because
it caused birth defects.; CHART, Company reports and executives., Cancer
treatments in development

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1997


                             2376 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 12, 1997 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:6,7,8; B-2:1,2,3,4,5

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: Angioplasty radiation averts artery re-clogging

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Tiny seeds of radiation temporarily inserted along the wall of heart arteries
can lower the risk of a common complication from angioplasty, in which scar
tissue forms and blocks the artery again, doctors in La Jolla have found. "This
is the first real breakthrough toward a solution to this problem," said Dr. Paul
Teirstein, director of interventional cardiology at Scripps Clinic and Research
Foundation and head of the team that did the research. He estimated that of the
500,000 patients a year in the United States who have angioplasties to clear
clogged arteries, about 30 percent have tissue formation within a few months
that re-clogs the artery.

   About 100,000 people might benefit from the finding because they would not
have to undergo repeat procedures, he said. The study, published in today's
issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, said only 17 percent of the
patients treated with iridium-192 after the angioplasty developed restenosis, or
artery re-clogging, compared with 54 percent of patients treated with a placebo.
The researchers placed a ribbon containing iridium-192 into the artery for 29 to
43 minutes and then removed it. The study evaluated a small number, 55 patients,
with follow-up six months after their angioplasties, in which a balloon-tipped
catheter is threaded through the arteries and expanded to clear a blockage. But
as of yesterday, Teirstein said, a total of 110 patients have been enrolled for
as long as 18 months, with similarly encouraging results. "The placebo group has
three times the need for repeat procedures as the treated group," Teirstein
said. Dr. Vince Massullo, radiation oncologist at Scripps and a member of the
research team, said it is unclear why radiation appears to prevent cell growth
along the arterial wall, but said it is thought radiation somehow makes the
cells unaware that they were injured from the balloon expansion so they don't
respond and grow. Similar gamma radiation compounds have been used to prevent
counterproductive tissue formation after other surgical procedures involving
knees and eyes, Massullo said. "We're ecstatic about these results," he said,
cautioning that it remains to be seen whether radiation will have long-term
effectiveness.

   "It may be that the cells eventually will remember the injury, wake up and
start to grow again." Researchers have tried numerous techniques to minimize
cell growth after angioplasty, including the use of about 50 pharmaceutical
agents and of gene therapy compounds. Many such compounds worked in animals but
failed in humans, Teirstein said. Researchers would have been quicker to try
radiotherapy except for another complication that made it difficult to prove the
radiation was effective. Insertion of a balloon at the end of a catheter into
the artery requires stretching the artery to clear the blockage.

   When the balloon is collapsed, the arterial walls sometimes recoil. But that
complication has been greatly reduced by the placement of stents, tiny
scaffoldlike cylinders that keep the walls apart. With increased use of stents,
now placed in half the patients undergoing angioplasty, researchers could
determine if radiation might be effective in preventing the formation of scar
tissue. All the study participants had an extremely high risk for restenosis and
many had undergone repeat procedures.

   The participants all had received stents earlier. "Thus far, it appears we
can definitely prevent restenosis and improve the quality of peoples' lives and
diminish the number of repeat procedures that carry a 1 percent mortality rate,"
Massullo said. He added that the patients are not radioactive after their
arterial walls are exposed to the iridium, and said the risk of cancer from
radiotherapy treatment is "vanishingly small."

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2377 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 10, 1997, Tuesday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: a; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: Clinton asks Congress to ban human cloning;
But technology could be used elsewhere

BYLINE: JODI ENDA, SHANKAR VEDANTAM; Knight-Ridder Tribune News

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Another Dolly the sheep would be acceptable;
another Bill Clinton would not.

   President Clinton asked Congress on Monday to ban human
cloning but to allow scientists to use the same technology to
re-create human cells and tissues as well as whole animals.

   ""Banning human cloning reflects our humanity.  It is the right
thing to do,'' Clinton said during a ceremony in the White
House Rose Garden.  ""Creating a child through this new method
calls into question our most fundamental beliefs. ''

   In proposing to outlaw human cloning, Clinton was accepting
the recommendation of the National Bioethics Advisory
Commission, a panel of scientists, religious scholars and
bioethicists that concluded it is neither morally acceptable
nor physically safe to clone human beings at this time.

   If approved by Congress, the ban would prohibit human cloning
for five years, extending to the private sector a moratorium
that Clinton placed on federally funded scientists in
February, following the news that British scientists had
cloned a sheep.  The bioethics commission will continue to
study the issue to determine whether the prohibition should be
extended or changed.

   Clinton stressed that ""there is nothing inherently immoral or
wrong'' with cloning techniques as long as they are used for
""proper purposes. ''

   ""In fact,'' he said, ""they hold the promise of revolutionary
new medical treatments and life-saving cures to diseases like
cystic fibrosis, diabetes and cancer, to better crops and
stronger livestock. ''

   For that reason, the commission did not recommend placing any
restrictions on cloning other than banning its use to create a
child.  Clinton's proposal will permit cloning to copy human
DNA, to manipulate genes to heal diseases and to replace
damaged tissues, the uses of cloning most precious to
scientists.

   It even permits the cloning of an embryo for research purposes
- as long as the intent is not to place the embryo in a
woman's womb, where it could grow into a fetus.

   Though there are no known experiments on human cloning under
way, Clinton said that any attempt to create a child using
that method ""has the potential to threaten the sacred family
bonds at the very core of our ideals and our society. ''

   ""At its worst,'' he said, ""it could lead to misguided and
malevolent attempts to select certain traits, even to create
certain kinds of children, to make our children objects rather
than cherished individuals. ''

   While the president's proposal to ban human cloning appears to
have widespread support in the public and the scientific
community, some said he should have done more to limit
research.

   Rep.  Vernon Ehlers, R-Mich., who has introduced legislation to
ban human cloning, said his bill would allow research into
cloning body tissues to continue but would draw the line at
embryo research.

   ""This is a major controversy in in-vitro fertilization,''
Ehlers said.  ""It's uncharted legal and moral territory.  At
this point, it would be a mistake to allow the research to go
in that direction. ''

   The other issue that promises to be divisive is how much
leeway a ban should give to scientists who are conducting
research that stops short of cloning.  One of the promises of
cloning research is that it could lead to genetic
enhancements, to help ""improve'' people's genes.

   ""We have to be on guard against any type of enhancement that
would reduce the diversity of the human race whether it comes
from gene therapy or cloning,'' warned Abbey Myers, president
of the National Organization for Rare Disorders in New
Fairfield, Conn.  The organization believes that manipulating
genes to make people conform to social pressures is wrong, she
said.

   ""There would be something amiss if we all looked like each
other, if we were the same height and weight,'' Myers said.  ""We
would be entering the world of George Orwell if we did do
enhancement.  Some people are smart, and some people are not -
that diversity has to remain.  That is the nature of the human
race. ''

   Harold Edgar, a law professor at Columbia University,
questioned whether Clinton's proposal was constitutional.

   ""It is by no means clear that Congress has the authority to
prohibit cloning research by persons who are not recipients of
federal money,'' said Edgar, who has studied issues related to
bioethics.  Cloning, he said, is an issue of family law much
like marriage, divorce and in-vitro fertilization, which
generally are covered by state law.  But White House
officials said that Congress has the authority to regulate
cloning through interstate commerce laws.

   Clinton said he will work with leaders of other countries to
prohibit the cloning of humans worldwide.

   ""We are still a long way from understanding all the
implications of the present discoveries,'' Clinton said, ""but
it is our moral obligation to confront these issues as they
arise and to act now to prevent abuse. ''

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1997


                             2378 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        JUNE 10, 1997 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 737 words

HEADLINE: CLINTON ASKS CONGRESS TO BAN HUMAN CLONING BUT ALLOW RESEARCH / HE
ACCEPTED THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF AN ADVISORY GROUP. IT BROUGHT UP QUESTIONS OF
MORALITY AND SAFETY.

BYLINE: Jodi Enda and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   President Clinton asked Congress yesterday to ban human cloning but to allow
scientists to use the same technology to re-create human cells and tissues as
well as whole animals.

   "Banning human cloning reflects our humanity. It is the right thing to do,"
Clinton said during a ceremony in the White House Rose Garden. "Creating a child
through this new method calls into question our most fundamental beliefs."

   In proposing to outlaw human cloning, Clinton was accepting the
recommendation of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission, a panel of
scientists, religious scholars and bioethicists that concluded it is neither
morally acceptable nor physically safe to clone human beings at this time.

   If approved by Congress, the ban would prohibit human cloning for five years,
extending to the private sector a moratorium that Clinton placed on federally
funded scientists in February, following the news that British scientists had
cloned a sheep.

   The bioethics commission will continue to study the issue to determine
whether the prohibition should be extended or changed.

   Clinton stressed that "there is nothing inherently immoral or wrong" with
cloning techniques as long as they are used for "proper purposes."

   "In fact," he said, "they hold the promise of revolutionary new medical
treatments and life-saving cures to diseases like cystic fibrosis, diabetes and
cancer, to better crops and stronger livestock."

   For that reason, the commission did not recommend placing any restrictions on
cloning other than banning its use to create a child. Clinton's proposal will
permit cloning to copy human DNA, to manipulate genes to heal diseases and to
replace damaged tissues, the uses of cloning most precious to scientists.

   It even permits the cloning of an embryo for research purposes - as long as
the intent is not to place the embryo in a woman's womb, where it could grow
into a fetus.

   Though there are no known experiments on human cloning under way, Clinton
said that any attempt to create a child using that method "has the potential to
threaten the sacred family bonds at the very core of our ideals and our
society."

   "At its worst," he said, "it could lead to misguided and malevolent attempts
to select certain traits, even to create certain kind of children, to make our
children objects rather than cherished individuals."

   While the President's proposal to ban human cloning appears to have
widespread support in the public and the scientific community, some said he
should have done more to limit research.

   Rep. Vernon J. Ehlers (R., Mich.), who has introduced legislation to ban
human cloning, said his bill would allow research into cloning body tissues to
continue, but would draw the line at embryo research.

   "This is a major controversy in in-vitro fertilization," Ehlers said. "It's
uncharted legal and moral territory. At this point it would be a mistake to
allow the research to go in that direction."

   The other issue that promises to be divisive is how much leeway a ban should
give to scientists doing research that stops short of cloning. One of the
promises of cloning research is that it could lead to genetic enhancements, to
help "improve" people's genes.

   "We have to be on guard against any type of enhancement that would reduce the
diversity of the human race whether it comes from gene therapy or cloning,"
warned Abbey Myers, president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders in
New Fairfield, Conn. The organization believes that manipulating genes to make
people conform to social pressures is wrong, she said.

   "There would be something amiss if we all looked like each other, if we were
the same height and weight," Myers said. "We would be entering the world of
George Orwell if we did do enhancement. Some people are smart and some people
are not - that diversity has to remain. That is the nature of the human race."

   Harold Edgar, a law professor at Columbia University, questioned whether
Clinton's proposal was constitutional.

   "It is by no means clear that Congress has the authority to prohibit cloning
research by persons who are not recipients of federal money," said Edgar, who
has studied issues related to bioethics.

   But White House officials said that Congress has the authority to regulate
cloning through interstate commerce laws.

   Clinton said he would work with other countries to prohibit the cloning of
humans worldwide.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2379 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 1997 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             June 10, 1997 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCANNER; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 683 words

HEADLINE: Clinton asks Congress to ban human cloning

BYLINE: Jodi Enda and Shankar Vedantam, WASHINGTON - Another Dolly the sheep
would be acceptable; another Bill

BODY:

   If approved by Congress, the ban would prohibit human cloning for five years,
extending to the private sector a moratorium that Clinton placed on federally
funded scientists in February, following the news that British scientists had
cloned a sheep. The bioethics commission will continue to study the issue to
determine whether the prohibition should be extended or changed.

    Clinton stressed that "there is nothing inherently immoral or wrong" with
cloning techniques as long as they are used for "proper purposes."

    "In fact," he said, "they hold the promise of revolutionary new medical
treatments and life-saving cures to diseases like cystic fibrosis, diabetes and
cancer, to better crops and stronger livestock."

    For that reason, the commission did not recommend placing any restrictions
on cloning other than banning its use to create a child. Clinton's proposal will
permit cloning to copy human DNA, to manipulate genes to heal diseases and to
replace damaged tissues, the uses of cloning most precious to scientists.

    It even permits the cloning of an embryo for research purposes - as long as
the intent is not to place the embryo in a woman's womb, where it could grow
into a fetus.

   Though there are no known experiments on human cloning under way, Clinton
said that any attempt to create a child using that method "has the potential to
threaten the sacred family bonds at the very core of our ideals and our society.

    "At its worst," he said, "it could lead to misguided and malevolent attempts
to select certain traits, even to create certain kind of children, to make our
children objects rather than cherished individuals."

    While the President's proposal to ban human cloning appears to have
widespread support from the public and the scientific community, some said he
should have done more to limit research.

    Rep. Vernon Ehlers (R-Mich.), who has introduced legislation to ban human
cloning, said his bill would allow research into cloning body tissues to
continue, but would draw the line at embryo research.

    "This is a major controversy in in-vitro fertilization," Ehlers said. "It's
uncharted legal and moral territory. At this point it would be a mistake to
allow the research to go in that direction." Genetic exceptions The other issue
that promises to be divisive is how much leeway a ban should give to scientists
who are conducting research that stops short of cloning. One of the promises of
cloning research is that it could lead to genetic enhancements, to help
"improve" people's genes.

    "We have to be on guard against any type of enhancement that would reduce
the diversity of the human race whether it comes from gene therapy or cloning,"
warned Abbey Myers, president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders in
New Fairfield, Conn. The organization believes that manipulating genes to make
people conform to social pressures is wrong, she said.

    "There would be something amiss if we all looked like each other, if we were
the same height and weight," Myers said. "We would be entering the world of
George Orwell if we did do enhancement. Some people are smart, and some people
are not - that diversity has to remain. That is the nature of the human race."

    Harold Edgar, a law professor at Columbia University, questioned whether
Clinton's proposal was constitutional.

    "It is by no means clear that Congress has the authority to prohibit cloning
research by persons who are not recipients of federal money," said Edgar, who
has studied issues related to bioethics. Cloning, he said, is an issue of family
law much like marriage, divorce and in-vitro fertilization, which generally are
covered by state law.

   But White House officials said that Congress has the authority to regulate
cloning through interstate commerce laws.

    Clinton said he will work with leaders of other countries to prohibit the
cloning of humans worldwide.

    "We are still a long way from understanding all the implications of the
present discoveries," Clinton "Diversity has to remain. That is the nature of
the human race." ABBEY MYERS, National Organization for Rare Disorders KRT NEWS
SERVICE

GRAPHIC: 1. Dr. Harold Shapiro, National Bioethics Commission chairman, joins
President Clinton yesterday in the White House Rose Garden, where Clinton
accepted the panel's report on cloning.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2007


                             2380 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      June 8, 1997, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: Biotech industry will grab limelight;
Meeting to attract 3,000 industry leaders and investors to Houston

BYLINE: BILL MINTZ; Staff

BODY:

   In the decade since Houston's biotech industry began,
companies have scraped for money and struggled in the
laboratory and clinical trials.

   Now, some of the companies - such as Zonagen and Texas
Biotechnology - are drawing close to commercial sales of their
products.

   While none of the companies is expected to achieve the success
of Houston's most famous venture capital start-up - personal
computer maker Compaq - commercial viability would be an
important milestone for the local biotech industry.

   ""Once someone breaks through with a viable product, you will
get a multiplier effect,'' said Clete D.Madden, a partner in
the health care and life sciences group at KPMG Peat Marwick.

   Houston's biotech industry will be on display this week, as
more than 3,000 industry leaders and investors gather for Bio
'97, the Biotechnology Industry Organization's annual
meeting.

   Success should make it easier for the industry to raise money
from local investors, recruit executives, attract
pharmaceutical industry backing and encourage more academic
scientists to try to commercialize their ideas, said Martin
Lindenberg, a consultant and former biotech chief executive.

   ""We have evolved to the advent of commercialization,'' said
venture capitalist Martin Sutter, general partner of Essex
Woodlands Health Ventures and an investor in many of the
Houston area's biotech start-ups.

   ""The decisions the companies make now will determine how big
they become,'' he said.

   Biotech companies rely on venture capitalists and investors
willing to take big risks on a stock because of the
possibility of big returns.

   Most of the companies will have to sign up big drug companies
as partners to get their products to a broad market.

   Zonagen has completed clinical trials of its Vasomax drug for
treating male impotence.  It expects to file for federal
approval of the drug and sign a marketing agreement with a
large drug company later this year.

   Texas Biotechnology also plans to seek Food and Drug
Administration approval of Novastan, an anti-clotting drug
that offers an alternative for patients who are allergic to
heparin, the most widely used anti-clotting medicine.

   Another company, Aronex, has been conducting the final phase
of clinical trials on its Nyotran anti-fungal drug.  However,
the company recently announced that it would extend the trials
to bolster its application for FDA approval.

   Some people detect other indicators of the local industry's
strength.

   David Nance, chief executive of Introgen, a company developing
gene therapies for cancer, said he's noticed more competition
for laboratory and office space near the Texas Medical Center,
which provides most of the ideas behind Houston's biotech
companies.

   ""There are a lot of small companies with big ideas and big
plans,'' he said.

   While some of the companies are nearing the end of the long
pipeline leading to approval of a new drug by the FDA, other
promising companies are just starting the journey.

   Introgen, using gene therapy technology developed by
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researcher Dr.
Jack Roth, has begun clinical trials.

   Introgen, which is still privately owned by venture
capitalists, has a three-year, $ 50 million deal with French
pharmaceutical giant Rhone-Poulenc Rohrer to back its research
and later commercialize its products, Nance said.

   It has 55 employees and sponsors the work of 22 M.D. Anderson
scientists, he said.

   GeneMedicine has received FDA approval to begin early clinical
trials of three gene therapies to treat cancer, emphysema and
nerve dysfunction in diabetes, said Chief Executive Gene
Tomlinson.

   GeneMedicine's products originated from research conducted at
Baylor College of Medicine by Dr. Bert O'Malley, Tomlinson
said.

   Houston-area companies continue to struggle to persuade local
investors to buy into their companies at an early stage.

   ""There has been a reluctance by local investors to invest in
biotech,'' said Tomlinson.  ""I think it is largely because they
aren't educated about it. ''

   The Houston industry has raised about $ 500 million, locally
and elsewhere, said Steve Banks, head of BCM Technologies, the
technology transfer arm of the Baylor College of Medicine.

   The speculative risk of biotech investing doesn't scare
Texans, said financier Gordon Cain, who made a fortune in the
chemical industry before investing in two biotech firms that
use technology from Baylor.

   ""It's the slowness with which everything happens,'' he said.

   ""People in the oil business are used to finding out in a month
or so if a deal is going to pan out.

   ""In this business, there is a lot of sitting around and
waiting. ''

   While they wait, they can expect the price of their stock to
swing wildly.  Zonagen's shares have climbed as high as 24 5/8
and dropped as low as 8 1/8 as investors reacted to news - real
and rumored - about its anti-impotence pills.

   Occasionally, success for investors comes before they have a
product to sell.

   RGene, a biotech firm in The Woodlands, was sold last year for
$ 15 million to Targeted Genetics in Seattle before it
completed development of its gene therapy technology, said
Lindenberg, the company's former chief executive.

   The Houston industry got its start in 1986 and 1987 in events
triggered by the oil industry bust.

   George Mitchell, chairman of Mitchell Energy & Development,
directed Sutter to find Texas Medical Center science that
could form the basis of new companies based in The Woodlands.

   About the same time, Baylor formed its tech transfer unit and
the Texas Legislature passed bills enabling M.D. Anderson and
the UT Health Science Center to commercialize breakthrough
technologies.

   The venture capital funds that were originated by funds
started by Mitchell and Sutter have helped start a dozen
companies, and four are now publicly traded, Mitchell said.

   BCM Technologies has launched about two dozen companies, and
18 are still operating, said Jack Carter, chairman of the
board.

   ""The biotech business is extremely risky,'' said Dr.C. Thomas
Caskey, a former Baylor researcher who is now senior vice
president for basic research at Merck Research Laboratories.

   ""The nature of science is you fail more often than you
succeed. ''

   But as long as the Medical Center institutions turn out
research breakthroughs, there will be investors waiting for
the chance to latch on to a big winner and scientists wanting
to become entrepreneurs.


LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1997


                             2381 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 6, 1997 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: San Diego and California

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Mitek gains on acquisition news The price of shares in Mitek Systems Inc.
gained more than 28 cents yesterday after the San Diego company said it had
acquired most of the assets of Virginia-based Technology Solutions Inc. Mitek
closed at $1.9375, a gain of almost 17 percent on average Nasdaq trading.

   Mitek, which specializes in converting handwritten documents to computerized
data, said the acquisition will strengthen its position in the document imaging
market.

   Terms were not disclosed. LMA-Unique makes debut Gensia Sicor Inc. announced
the introduction of a product, LMA-Unique.

   San Diego-based Gensia said the LMA-Unique was a variation on its existing
LMA line of products, designed to provide an airway during elective surgery and
for emergency cases. Pacific Air Charter acquired AirNet Systems Inc. of
Columbus, Ohio, said it acquired Pacific Air Charter, a San Diego-based regional
air courier, for $450,000. Pacific Air operates a fleet of eight aircraft on the
West Coast. DataWorks sells to Hitachi Telecom DataWorks Corp. received a
contract to provide its DataFlo resource planning software to Hitachi Telecom
USA Inc. The value of the contract wasn't disclosed.

   San Diego-based DataWorks said Hitachi Telecom will initially use the
software at its Norcross, Ga., facility. Trials completed by Dura Dura
Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it completed the clinical trials necessary for a new
drug application for Albuterol Spiros, a new type of asthma inhaler.

   San Diego-based Dura said it would file the application in the second half of
this year.

   Dura develops and markets prescription products to treat allergies, asthma
and related respiratory conditions. Prizm teams with Chiron unit Prizm
Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it had entered a collaborative agreement with a
subsidiary of Chiron Corp. San-Diego based Prizm and Chiron's Center for Gene
Therapy will combine Prizm's Directin targeting technology with a proprietary
Chiron gene delivery ability. Altris product purchased Altris Software Inc. of
San Diego said BW/IP Seal Division has purchased Altris' Pro EDM document
management software and will install the system in Temecula initially.

   BW/IP, an equipment company, also will install the software at sites in the
Netherlands and Germany, and may eventually add sites in Japan and Singapore,
Altris said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2382 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 6, 1997, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 446 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS HOPE GENE THERAPY CAN PROVIDE HEART-ATTACK CLUES

BYLINE: John Schieszer; Special To The Post-Dispatch

BODY:


   In a revolutionary approach to heart disease, the nation's No. 1 killer,
researchers in St. Louis are trying to pinpoint the gene that predisposes people
to heart attacks early in life.

   They hope to develop treatments that could help short-circuit heart attacks
before they strike.

   "It could have a major impact in the future of treating these high-risk
patients and preventing hundreds of thousands of deaths," said Dr. Frank Aguirre
of St. Louis University.

   He's one of 10 primary investigators for a landmark genetic research project
called GENEQUEST.

   The project seeks to enroll 1,000 people who've had a heart attack, bypass
surgery or an angioplasty and have a living sibling who meets the same criteria.
The researchers are specifically looking for males 45 or younger and women 50 or
younger.

   The volunteers will receive a blood test to search for genes that influence
premature heart attacks among related individuals.

   Each year in the United States, 1.5 million Americans suffer heart attacks.
Aguirre says about 15 percent of those occur among people under the age of 50.
Approximately 13 million Americans develop premature heart disease.

   Ten medical centers nationwide, including St. Louis University, are
participating in the study; about one-third of the volunteers have already been
recruited. Aguirre is contacting doctors in Missouri, Illinois, Kansas, South
Dakota, Nebraska and Oklahoma to try to find participants from the Midwest.

   "If we can identify these people early by a simple blood test, then we can
definitely modify their risk profile," said Aguirre.

   Such individuals would receive much more aggressive therapy in terms of
lowering their cholesterol levels or blood pressure. They also probably would be
put on certain types of heart medications much earlier than is done now, Aguirre
said.

   Even if a gene marker is found, it may mean that a gene therapy would have to
be developed to correct the defect, said Dr. Joseph Bodet, a cardiologist at St.
Mary's Health Center in Clayton.

   Just telling a person they have a genetic susceptibility probably won't
prevent heart attacks from occurring among people under 50, he said.

   In his experience, he said, most people aren't willing to make significant
lifestyle changes such as exercising regularly and watching their diet even when
told they're at higher risk for a heart attack.

   "You can identify people who are at risk, but unfortunately only a small
number will make significant changes in their lifestyle," said Bodet.

   Aguirre says that once enrollment in the study is completed, it should take
12 to 18 months to find out if there is a specific gene marker.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1997


                             2383 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       June 5, 1997 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: STAR BANC TO HOLD MEETING IN CLEVELAND

BYLINE: FROM STAFF REPORTS

BODY:

   Star Banc Corp. will hold its quarterly board meeting Tuesday at the Wyndham
Hotel in downtown Cleveland. It will be the first time in the company's history
that such a meeting will be held outside of Cincinnati, Star's home town. "I
think the fact that the board of directors decided to break a tradition of 134
years and move their meeting to Cleveland shows just how significant this market
is to the future of the organization," said Andrew Randall, Northeast Ohio
regional chairman. The company has 67 banking offices in Northeast Ohio.

   DNA COMPANIES JOIN FORCES

   Copernicus Gene Systems Inc., a Cleveland biotechnology company that emerged
in 1994 from research at Case Western Reserve University, announced its first
partnership to further develop its technology. Copernicus will collaborate in
research with Inex Pharmaceutical Corp., a small public company in Vancouver,
British Columbia. The two companies will explore the effects of combining their
systems for delivering DNA for gene therapy. They will test the response of DNA
processed by Copernicus and delivered using Inex's technology. Terms of the deal
were not disclosed.

   GOODRICH CHANGES RIGHTS PLAN

   B.F. Goodrich Co. will distribute one preferred-share purchase right for each
outstanding share of common stock. The rights will replace and are essentially
similar to the Richfield company's current shareholder rights plan, which was
adopted in 1987 and will expire Aug. 2. The rights will be exercisable only if a
person or group buys or announces plans to buy 20 percent or more of Goodrich
common stock. The rights will not prevent a takeover but should encourage anyone
seeking to buy Goodrich to negotiate with the board before attempting one.

   ALLEN EXPANDS IN ASIA

   Allen Telecom Inc. is expanding in Asia by creating two new companies, Allen
Telecom (Singapore) Pte Ltd. and Allen Telecom (Hong Kong) Ltd. Officials of the
Beachwood supplier of wireless communications products said the two companies
would provide a direct local source for installation, project management,
engineering, drive testing and other services. "These markets are growing so
quickly that they require a level of service and responsiveness that can only be
offered by local companies," said Jerry Stupka, vice president of international
sales. "We are seeing tremendous growth throughout Singapore, Malaysia and
Indonesia."

   PR EXECUTIVE PROMOTED

   Martha Bell was promoted to senior account executive of Edward Howard & Co.,
the nation's oldest independent public relations consulting firm. Bell joined
the firm as an account executive in September 1994. She previously was director
of marketing for the Northeast Ohio Salvation Army. She graduated from
Baldwin-Wallace College with a bachelor's degree in communications in 1991.

   OGLEBAY SANDS GROUP ADDS UNIT

   Oglebay Norton Co.'s industrial sands group acquired the Sports Turf division
of Kurtz Brothers Inc. of Independence. Sports Turf supplies sand and organic
materials to golf courses and other recreation facilities in Ohio and
neighboring states. "This acquisition is important to our continuing focus on
sand-related businesses, as sand is a substantial component of many of the
blended products sold by Kurtz Sports Turf," said R. Thomas Green Jr., chairman,
president and chief executive officer of the Cleveland supplier of sands,
metallurgical products and Great Lakes marine services.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO by: NO CREDIT; Bell

COLUMN: COMPANIES & PEOPLE

   LOCAL TICKER

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1997


                             2384 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 5, 1997 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 484 words

HEADLINE: San Diego and California

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Sizzler to emerge from bankruptcy A bankruptcy court in Los Angeles this week
approved Sizzler International Inc.'s restructuring plan, which will allow
Sizzler to repay in full the $95 million it owes creditors.

   The restaurant chain, which has 69 company-operated units and 199 franchise
operations, will emerge from bankruptcy reorganization in about a month.
Qualcomm signs $70 million deal Qualcomm Inc. said it signed a $70 million,
18-month contract to supply Canada's Bell Mobility with digital wireless phones,
including a dual-band, dual-mode phone and the local firm's palm-size Q phone.

   Bell Mobility, set to launch digital service later this year, said the
Qualcomm deal replaces a three-year, $125 million order for Oki Telecom Inc.
phones. Alaris on Nasdaq next week Alaris Medical Inc. said its shares will
begin trading on the Nasdaq Stock Market under the symbol ALRS on June 10. A
predecessor of the company, which was formed through the merger IVAC Medical
Systems Inc. and IMED, traded on the American Stock Exchange.

   The company manufactures medical pumps. Orincon gets $1.1 million in work The
Pentagon has awarded contracts totaling $1.1 million to Orincon Corp. of San
Diego.

   Orincon agreed to provide information processing software for use in
surveillance, intelligence and information warfare to a number of defense
agencies. Genetronics raises funds Genetronics Inc. said a recent stock offering
had raised more than $5 million, and a recently concluded 1995 issue of share
purchase warrants had brought in an additional $3 million.

   The San Diego-based company said it would use the money for trials on its
electroporation therapy for cancer patients and other research.

   Electroporation therapy involves brief pulses of electric fields to human
cells, which momentarily open and allow anti-cancer drugs to enter. Aurora
receives patent Aurora Biosciences Corp. said it received a patent for its green
fluorescent protein, a molecular tool for scientific research and drug
discovery.

   La Jolla-based Aurora designs and develops proprietary drug discovery
systems, services and technologies for the discovery of new medicines. Prizm
teams with Chiron unit Prizm Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it had entered a
collaborative agreement with a subsidiary of Chiron Corp. San-Diego based Prizm
and Chiron's Center for Gene Therapy will combine Prizm's Directin targeting
technology with a proprietary Chiron gene delivery ability. Qualcomm makes sales
Qualcomm Inc. of San Diego said its Omnitracs division sold its Qualcomm
Decision Support Software product to Sabre Decision Technologies of Texas and
its Qualcomm Trucking Operation System Local Area Network software product to
ITS of North Carolina.

   Terms of the deals were not disclosed. Qualcomm, which also recently sold
another of its software programs, said it was selling the individual products to
tighten the company's corporate focus.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2385 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      June 4, 1997 Wednesday THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 005

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: Husband of patient gives $ 10M to MGH; Retired shoe baron thankful

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   A retired footwear magnate has repaid Massachusetts General Hospital for
treating his wife's cancer with a $ 10 million donation - one of the largest in
its history.

   "The hospital has been an important part of our lives for many years," said
Melvin Nessel, 77, of Palm Beach, Fla., whose wife, Barbara, has been receiving
treatments for breast cancer at MGH. "Those treatments have literally kept her
alive."

   Yesterday, the Nessels were honored for their donation as the hospital
officially created Barbara and Melvin Nessel Cancer Services as part of its
cancer center.

   "This is a great day in the history of the MGH," said Dr. John Mongan,
hospital president.

   The gift will be used to hire new cancer researchers and to improve support
services for patients.

   Nessel said he realizes the fruits of his donation won't be harvested in time
to be able to help his wife, who is continuing to fight for her life.

   "But it makes us feel good knowing this will help so many other people," he
said.

   "I've got a lot to be grateful for," said Barbara Nessel, 72, who is still
fighting valiantly against the disease, which has spread to her liver.

   "I'm really proud of her," said her son, John, of Lexington. "Every time she
gets knocked down, she gets right back up. She's gutsy."

   The Nessels, who retired to Palm Beach in 1987, have been coming back to
Boston once a month in recent years for her treatments.

   Nessel began his rags-to-riches story as a 13-year-old shoe salesman in 1932.
He opened his first shoe manufacturing plant, Fenton Shoes, in Cambridge in
1952.

   He later opened factories in Italy, Spain, Brazil, Argentina, India and
China, becoming one of the first businessman to enter China after President
Nixon opened trade with the Communist giant in the early 1970s.

   Dr. Bruce Chabner, clinical director of the MGH Cancer Center, said the money
will pay for three researchers "to help bring new ideas from the lab to the
clinic."

   In addition, he said it will go to provide support services for patients,
including counseling, nutrition and cosmetics. Such services are not usually
paid for by insurance.

   Nessel Cancer Services will comprise all clinical areas in the hospital's Cox
Building, which houses most outpatient cancer programs, the inpatient cancer
floor and some labs.

   The $ 10 million gift is not the first one the Nessels have made to MGH. In
1994, they donated $ 500,000 to help found the Barbara and Melvin Nessel Gene
Therapy Center.

LOAD-DATE: June 05, 1997


                             2386 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 4, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-3

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: QUEST;
Field Samples

BYLINE: Scott LaFee

BODY:

   A survey of selected articles published this month in magazines and journals
covering science, medicine and the environment. Terror Take Two Discover
Dinosaurs went extinct 65 million years ago, right? Of course they did, but that
doesn't mean large, bipedal, meat-eating monsters disappeared forever, not when
nature loves a good design. In the 1880s, paleontologists in Argentina began
unearthing some very strange fossils dating back 24-29 million years.

   These were bones from ancient birds, but unlike any other kind of bird known
before or since. They were, writes Carl Zimmer, like avian linebackers: 6 feet
tall and weighing up to 350 pounds.

   The bones soon earned their former owners the nickname terror birds because
their physiology suggested the creatures didn't peck for their dinner.

   Rather, they had 2-foot-long heads comprised mostly of beak and large feet
with 4-inch claws. These birds ate meat.

   They were hunters.

   And their probable prey was likely small, grazing mammals. Scientists surmise
the terror birds prowled savannas, running as fast as ostriches, lying in ambush
like lions awaiting unsuspecting victims.

   Terror bird wings were comparatively small, with heavy, solid bones.

   Such arms would have been incapable of flight but might have made decent
weapons. They were the velociraptors of their time. 50 Years After Roswell
Popular Science Half a century ago, something crashed outside the New Mexico
town of Roswell.

   Some folks say it was an alien spacecraft and that government authorities
quickly and furtively scooped up the remains (including perhaps surviving
extraterrestrials), then spirited them away to a secret air base where untold
experiments took place. The government denies everything. Now, among
aficionados, Roswell, N.M., is the Lourdes of UFOlogy.

   True, there might not be much in the way of incontrovertible evidence that
space aliens ever set foot anywhere near the place, but really, what have facts
got to do with a good story? And besides, the whole thing is supposed to be a
nefariously clever government cover-up. Whatever the truth, one thing is
certain: Roswell has done well by the stories.

   The town has converted a theater into a UFO museum, and locals are happy to
point out various signs of alien visitation.

   These include large rocks split in half, allegedly by spaceship impact.
Aliens may or may not have gone to Roswell, but alien-loving tourists arrive
daily by the dozens. Making Gene Therapy Work Scientific American The idea of
gene therapy, that is treating disease by altering genes in some way, remains
compelling.

   It's the practical results that have been less than startling. In this
special report, Theodore Friedmann, a pioneer in the science and a professor of
pediatrics at UCSD, discusses the obstacles to successful gene therapies.

   These include identifying the appropriate genes, and then getting them to do
what you want, efficiently and quickly. The report also includes articles on
gene therapies using non-viral hosts, gene therapy and cancer and what cloning
means for gene therapy. The message overall: The promise is still there, but the
road to success is a lot longer than anyone ever imagined.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2387 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1997 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    June 3, 1997 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCI; Pg. 10F

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: NEW ATTACKS ON CANCER INCLUDE VACCINES AND GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: JACQUELINE STENSON Medical Tribune;, Free Press medical writer PATRICIA
ANSTETT, contributed to this report

BODY:

   The current arsenal of anticancer drugs can be highly effective at killing
cancer cells. The problem is that these treatments -- chemotherapy and radiation
therapy -- also destroy healthy cells, often leading to severe side effects such
as nausea, vomiting, fatigue, diarrhea and hair loss.

   As a result, scientists have been trying to develop therapies that target
only the cancer cells. "As we gain greater insight into the basic processes
responsible for turning a normal cell into a cancer cell, we are identifying new
weapons and new targets for treatment," said Dr. Mace Rothenberg of the
University of Texas Health Science Center in Houston, who moderated a session
entitled "Beyond Chemotherapy" at the annual meeting of the American Society of
Clinical Oncology.

   Preliminary results suggest that years of research in the lab are starting to
pay off for cancer patients. Among the findings:

   * A melanoma treatment vaccine. Early results showed that injecting melanoma
tumors with modified tumor cells engineered to secrete a substance called
GM-CSF, which stimulates the production of infection-fighting white blood cells,
can help the body battle this potentially fatal form of skin cancer. The vaccine
was found to be safe in 32 patients studied. After about 18 weeks of therapy,
biopsies showed tumor cells appeared to be dying in some of the patients,
reported Dr. Robert Soiffer of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.

   * A new cell production system. Developed by Aastrom Biosciences Inc., an Ann
Arbor company, it may make bone marrow procedures easier, cheaper and safer.

   Now, patients with leukemia and many other life-threatening tumors undergo
bone marrow transplants that use large volumes of stem cells, a component of
blood, or bone marrow to help rebuild a person's immune system. High-dose
chemotherapy that precedes a transplant typically destroys a person's immune
system and makes people vulnerable to infection. But sometimes, the cells retain
traces of cancer and leave a person vulnerable to a cancer recurrence.

   In the new system, only a small amount of stem cells are collected and grown
in the laboratory, raising hopes that transferring cells with cancer can be
avoided.

   The collection method could open the door for use of umbilical cord blood as
a source of stem cells, reported Dr. Patrick Stiff, director of bone marrow
transplantation at Loyola University Medical Center in Maywood, Ill. Now, cord
blood use is limited because it can't supply the amount of cells needed in a
bone marrow transplant.

   The system is experimental and many questions remain before federal approval,
said Dr. Roy Baynes, director of bone marrow transplantation at the Barbara Ann
Karmanos Cancer Institute in Detroit.

   * Gene therapy for lung cancer and possibly other cancers. Researchers say
they believe about half of all cancers result from a missing or mutated p53
gene. The healthy form of the gene regulates the natural process of cell death,
known as apoptosis. But a defective form of the gene allows cells to divide
uncontrollably, leading to cancer.

   In a new study, researchers at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center in Houston reported that injecting a modified cold virus into tumor cells
could help shut down cancer growth. The virus was engineered to contain healthy
copies of p53.

   The treatment was found to be safe in 21 patients with advanced lung cancer
who received it for up to six months. In addition, the therapy appeared to delay
tumor progression in some patients, particularly those who received high doses
of the treatment and those who also received the chemotherapy drug cisplatin.

   * Vaccine for cancers of the colon, pancreas and lung. Dr. Samir Khleif, of
the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., reported that injecting tumors
with a protein produced by a cancer gene called Ras may enable the body to
attack cancer cells. The process teaches the immune system to recognize the
protein and then attack it as a foreign invader, he said.

   Initial laboratory results show that the approach resulted in an
immune-system response in cancer cells from three of eight patients with
advanced cancers of the colon, pancreas and lung, Khleif reported.

   Free Press medical writer Patricia Anstett contributed to this report.

   ***

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2002


                             2388 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1997 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 3, 1997 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: World and nation

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Amoco to divest properties Amoco, in one of its largest divestitures ever,
plans to sell about one-third of its oil and natural gas properties in the
United States to cut costs.

   The company, based in Chicago, said yesterday it did not know how many jobs
would be affected, but it indicated many of the field employees' positions would
be transferred to any buyers.

   Amoco, the fifth-largest U.S. oil company, refused to comment on what it
expects to earn from the sales or the amount of overhead costs that will be
reduced as a result. Dow transports dropping Conrail Conrail was dropped from
the 20-stock Dow Jones transportation average yesterday because of its impending
takeover by Norfolk Southern and CSX Corp. USFreightways, a trucking company
based in Rosemont, Ill., will be added to the list starting today, Dow Jones
said.

   Conrail shares ceased trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.

   The rail freight network agreed in March to a $10.5 billion takeover by CSX
and Norfolk Southern after a heated bidding war. Amgen drop tied to competitor
Shares of Amgen, a biotech company, fell sharply yesterday in a drop some
analysts linked to a competitive threat to its blockbuster Epogen drug. They
said the threat comes from Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge, Mass., which is
developing a product similar to Epogen, the Amgen drug widely used to treat
renal failure in kidney dialysis patients.

   Amgen fell $3.875 to $63 while Transkaryotic's stock rose $1.625 to $23.375
on Nasdaq. Seagate sees weaker results Seagate Technology, one of the nation's
largest makers of computer disk drives, warned yesterday that earnings for its
fourth quarter would be below expectations due to weak demand for its
high-performance disk drive products.

   In a statement issued after markets closed, Seagate said revenues for the
quarter ending this month are expected to be 6 percent to 10 percent below the
$2.5 billion reported for the third quarter ended in March. LSI, Micron to
develop chip LSI Logic and Micron Technology have agreed to jointly develop and
manufacture specialized microprocessors for a variety of consumer electronics.

   The companies will design a logic chip that includes embedded memory, a
design that will replace several chips with a single one, reducing manufacturing
costs, they said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2007


                             2389 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      June 3, 1997, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: Children's asthma, costs rising rapidly

BYLINE: Marilyn Elias

BODY:

   Annual health care costs for children with asthma are more than
double the total for non-asthmatic youngsters, shows a study out
Monday.

   With incidence of the disease steadily rising, and no key breakthrough
in sight, "it's clear an increasing proportion of pediatric health
care dollars will be going into asthma care," says Paula Lozano
of University of Washington Medical School, Seattle.

   Her one-year report of 72,000 children in a Seattle HMO shows
an asthma diagnosis adds an average of $ 615.17 more per child
every year. The report, in Pediatrics, finds asthmatics'
costs were $ 1,060.32, compared with $ 445.15 for children without
the disease.

   About 5 million U.S. children have asthma, the most common chronic
illness of childhood. Rates rose 73% between 1982 and 1994.

   Experts don't know what's causing the surge. One possible reason:
American kids are spending more time indoors, where asthma-triggering
dust mites and other allergens lurk.

   Also, our skill at knocking out childhood infectious diseases
may have an ironic downside: Some infections curtail an inflammatory
molecule linked to asthma.

   Most patients have a genetic vulnerability to the disease. A promising
new line of research involves identifying asthma genes and creating
a gene therapy, says Marshall Plaut of the National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. But treatments could be years
away, if they emerge at all.

   New federal guidelines emphasize using state-of-the-art drugs,
such as inhaled steroids. "Some newer medications are underused,"
says Plaut, despite evidence they reduce asthma severity and costs.

LOAD-DATE: June 03, 1997


                             2390 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                              June 1, 1997, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL, Pg. 7C

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: TEST FOR DISEASE DEVELOPED AT OSU

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   Ohio State University neurologists said yesterday they have developed the
first effective genetic screening test for family members who may be carriers of
spinal muscular atrophy, an often-fatal disease in infants.

   The disease results from a genetic defect that causes muscle-controlling
nerve cells in the spinal cord to malfunction, leading to progressive wasting of
the muscles.

   Most infants with the disease die before age 2, said Thomas Prior, associate
professor of pathology and neurology at OSU and principal investigator on the
screening project.

   Children usually survive milder forms of the disease, called Type 2 and Type
3, into adulthood, although it prevents some from sitting up or moving normally
as children.

   ''We're not going to population screening, but this will help families with
this terrible disease,'' said Prior.

   The disease usually afflicts those with an incomplete gene, called SMN, in
both chromosomes of the fifth pair.

   In about 5 percent of cases, however, those with the disease have the
incomplete gene in only one chromosome of the pair but also have a defective SMN
gene on the other chromosome.

   Likewise, carriers of the genetic defect are missing only the gene on one
chromosome of the fifth pair.

   A genetic screening test has been available since 1995 for those who have the
incomplete gene on both chromosomes in the pair. That test, however, does not
identify carriers or that minority of those afflicted because of one missing
gene.

   The new test, which detects the missing gene on one or both of the fifth
chromosome pair, is available only at Ohio State, said Prior.

   Jim Brown, director of public affairs for the Muscular Dystrophy Association
in Tucson, Ariz., said the test is more accurate in identifying carriers in
families at risk of spinal muscular atrophy than the current procedure, which
involves obtaining blood samples from four or more family members.

   Working with Prior to develop the new test were Jerry Mendell, chairman of
the Department of Neurology; Arthur Burghes, associate professor neurology; and
Patricia McAndrew, a postdoctoral student.

   Their results were announced yesterday in the American Journal of Human
Genetics.

   There is still no treatment, however, for spinal muscular atrophy, which
afflicts some 25,000 Americans, said Prior.

   ''Hopefully, down the road, we'll have an effective gene therapy,'' he said,
''but this is a significant improvement in diagnostics.''

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1997


                             2391 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post

                      May 27, 1997, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. Z10

LENGTH: 3907 words

HEADLINE: The Dark Side of the Sun

BYLINE: Sally Squires

BODY:


   Nobody seems to tan better than the shapely cast members of the popular
television show "Baywatch."

   They sport a perfect golden glow as they patrol the Southern California
beaches, saving the lives of swimmers, surfers and beachcombers. Except that
Hollywood being Hollywood, things are not as they seem. The burnished skin on
the "Baywatch" cast comes not from spending hours basking in the sun, but from
the latest in bottled lotions that "tan" without any exposure to the harmful
rays of the sun.

   The members of the "Baywatch" cast understand one of the most important rules
in Hollywood: Too much sun can produce ugly wrinkles and lines that shorten
careers and increase the risk of skin cancer, especially the most severe -- and
often deadly -- form known as malignant melanoma.

   "We have a strict regimen that we follow," said Baywatch makeup artist Joanna
Connell, who has worked on two other television shows shot in the sun --
"Gidget" and "China Beach" -- and seen Hollywood attitudes about tanning change
dramatically in recent years.

   "Baywatch" cast members use sunscreen with a sun protection factor, or SPF,
of 15 before applying the sunless tanning lotion that turns their skin golden.
Between takes, they spend their time in the shade, nestled under broad umbrellas
and wrapped in full-length robes, to avoid rays reflecting from both sand and
water. "It's why their skin does look so good," Connell said. "It's why it will
keep looking good longer, and it's why they are less apt to get melanoma."

   Too Much Sun

   Public health officials wish that more people would follow suit. One million
new cases of skin cancer will be diagnosed this year, most the result of too
many blistering sunburns and too many days spent working on that great tan.
Although most of those skin cancers are easily treatable, about 4 percent will
be melanoma.

   Particularly worrisome is the way that teens and college students have
rediscovered tanning. Dermatologists report a disturbing trend among adolescents
to grease up with tanning products designed to darken their tans rather than
protect their skin. Sales of specialized tanning oils that produce the deepest
tans -- and the most skin damage from the sun -- rose sharply in 1996.

   For dermatologists, watching teens and young adults return to baking in the
sun "is very disheartening," said Darrell Rigel, associate professor of
dermatology at New York University School of Medicine. "If you were to do one
thing to try to lower your risk from melanoma, it would be to limit your sun
exposure as a child or adolescent."

   The vast majority of reported skin cancers are basal or squamous cell
cancers. These skin cancers are highly curable and are not even included in the
toll of invasive cancers reported by the American Cancer Society. Melanoma,
however, is a very serious cancer, striking about 40,000 Americans each year.
Altogether, 9,500 people die each year from skin cancers, 7,000 with malignant
melanoma, according to the American Cancer Society.

   What's more, the number of melanoma cases is increasing. In 1930, melanoma
was so rare that only one in every 1,500 Americans could expect to get the
disease over a lifetime. Today, cancer experts predict, one out of every 84
people in the United States will be diagnosed with melanoma sometime in their
lives.

   "If that trend continues, we predict that melanoma will strike one out of
every 75 Americans by the year 2000," said NYU's Rigel.

   Why melanoma is increasing is not yet understood, but researchers believe
that it is linked in part to increased sun exposure. The disease is a cancer of
melanocytes, the melanin-producing cells in the skin that give it color and
allow light skin to tan. Sun damage poses the greatest risk of melanoma to
fair-skinned people.

   At the same time, there are a number of other factors -- including inherited
risks -- that can play a role in the development of this cancer. Melanoma can
occur on parts of the body that never see the light of day. Earlier this year, a
local dermatologist diagnosed a melanoma between the toes of an 11-year-old boy.
In African Americans, who have a lower rate of melanoma that do whites, more
than half the cases of melanoma occur on palms, nail beds and the soles of feet,
according to University of Pittsburgh dermatologist Arthur Rhodes.

   Melanoma usually begins as a mottled, light brown blemish or as a flat black
blemish with irregular borders, according to the American Academy of
Dermatology. It is often at least a quarter-inch across, or about the size of a
pencil eraser, and it may change to shades of red, blue or white. Melanoma can
also develop a crust or bleed. But it can be tricky to diagnose, and for this
reason many experts recommend seeing a dermatologist to biopsy suspicious areas
of skin. "We just had a doctor who died from a melanoma in his armpit," Rhodes
said. "He and his wife both looked at it and thought it couldn't be melanoma
because it wasn't exposed to the sun."

   Bob Robertson, who works for the Australian Embassy in Washington, asked his
doctor three years ago to check what appeared to be a pimple at the edge of the
T-shirt line on his arm. "I thought it was acne," said Robertson, 44. The doctor
referred Robertson to a dermatologist who thought it appeared to be benign but
took a biopsy anyway. The lab results came back showing an advanced case of
melanoma. He had the growth removed with surgery and has undergone treatment
with an experimental cancer vaccine. Recent tests have shown no cancer in his
body, he said.

   Because melanoma frequently arises from an existing mole, the American
Academy of Dermatology recommends seeking prompt medical attention for any mole
that suddenly changes or begins growing. Also important to check out are moles
that are irregular, asymmetric or varied in color.

   Recent findings from a National Cancer Institute (NCI) study of more than
1,700 people highlight why regular skin checkups may be essential for certain
high-risk individuals. The study, which appears in the Journal of the American
Medical Association, found that having just one small, irregular mole doubled
the lifetime risk of developing melanoma. "If you have more than 10 or more
irregular moles, you have a 12-fold increased risk of melanoma," said Margaret
Tucker, chief of the genetic epidemiology branch at the NCI and lead author of
the study.

   Detected early, melanoma can be effectively trated. But left untreated, the
cancer cells can get into the deepest layers of the skin and reach blood
vessels, from which they can spread throughout the body.

   Treatment begins with surgery to remove the melanoma and normal skin around
it. Today, because of advances in surgical technique, less normal tissue has to
be excised than before. Doctors also check the lymph nodes closest to the
melanoma to see whether they are enlarged. Nodes that can be felt or palpated
are surgically removed to check further for the presence of malignant cells --
an important sign that the cancer has spread.

   CT scans and other tests can help determine where cancer cells have traveled.
Combinations of chemotherapy and new experimental cancer vaccines or new drugs
such as alpha-interferon are giving more options to the most advanced melanoma
patients. Some patients also receive lymphokines, chemicals naturally produced
in the body that stimulate white blood cells to kill melanoma and other cancer
cells.

   Playing Sun Roulette

   Experts say that the challenge in controlling skin cancer is in changing the
American psyche that considers a tan healthy and stylish. Tanned skin signals
harm, not health, according to Robert Katz, a dermatologist in Montgomery
County.

   The elastic fibers beneath the skin surface are severely damaged by sun
exposure, giving the skin a tight, leathery look. Chronic sun exposure also
increases the pigmentation of skin and robs it of its ability to rebound from
stretching, which is what helps etch deep wrinkles.

   Baby boomers, many of whom spent summers greasing up with baby oil and lying
in the sun with reflectors, seem to have gotten the message that pale is better
than tan. But their children have brought sunbathing back in vogue, despite
warnings about the dangers.

   "We thought that we were educating people better about the dangers of
sunbathing than we actually are," said Robert Friedman, clinical assistant
professor of dermatology at New York University. "There seems to be this
turnaround, sort of like an invincibility syndrome. They are back out in the sun
again, and I am hard pressed to figure out why."

   Youth have trouble connecting sun exposure now with the possibility of one
day developing skin cancer. "They think that nothing bad can happen to them,"
said Carmen Myrie Williams, professor of dermatology and pathology at George
Washington University Hospital. "They're interested in the short fix and the
immediacy of looking great, and a little extra color is always associated with
being healthy."

   For an increasing number of young adults, reality hits far sooner than they
expect. Melanoma is now the leading cause of cancer among women aged 25 to 29
and the second most frequent cause of cancer among women 30 to 34.

   Lisa Moore, a 27-year-old graduate student in genetics at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, was 24 when she noticed that a mole had changed on one
of her legs. Doctors diagnosed malignant melanoma "that was already deep enough
to cause some concern," Moore said. Surgeons removed the mole and checked nearby
lymph nodes for evidence of spread. Doctors have found no evidence that the
cancer had spread, but Moore returns every six months for skin checks and has a
bone scan every few years to make sure.

   Like many who have been diagnosed with melanoma and other forms of skin
cancer, Moore grew up spending most of her leisure time outdoors. She went
hiking, jogging and camping frequently and her family home in Northern
California had a deck and a pool. From ages 13 to 18 she competed with friends
for the best suntan, spending hours basking poolside.

   The trouble was that Moore, who has fair skin, blue eyes and light hair,
always had to get sunburned first and let her skin fade to a tan. Her mother
warned her about skin damage and urged her not to spend so much time in the sun.
"But I never knew that there was a direct correlation between my sunburn and the
possibility of getting skin cancer," Moore said.

   Her experience is typical. According to the CDC, 80 percent of lifetime sun
exposure occurs before age 18, one reason that public health officials stress
the importance of instilling smart sun habits early. A team of University of
Arizona researchers found that by the fourth grade children's ideas of sun
exposure are pretty much in place.

   Many parents also fail to understand that "a bad sunburn is a terrible
thing," said the NCI's Tucker. Just one blistering sunburn raises the standard
lifetime risk of developing melanoma about 50 percent, Tucker said. Ten severe
sunburns raise the standard risk 400 percent. "We really need to make a definite
effort very early to teach children about sun damage," Tucker said.

   That means encouraging parents to apply sunscreen to their children from
infancy. It means avoiding the sun during the peak hours of 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.
when ultraviolet rays are strongest. It means wearing long-sleeved shirts and
pants instead of sleeveless shirts and shorts and routinely reaching for hats
and sunglasses during the summer months just as we wear coats and gloves in the
winter. And it means doing all this at a time when "sunbathing is becoming a fad
again," said Glen Fuchs, a dermatologist who practices both in Washington and in
Northern Virginia.

   Old habits are hard to change, even among those who have had a brush with
skin cancer. New York University's Friedman often treats skin cancer patients
who come in after "accidentally getting sunburned," he said. "They should know
better." At George Washington University Hospital, dermatologist Williams has
fielded calls from patients pleading for her permission to go to a tanning booth
or back to the beach to look good for a big party.

   Safer Sun Down Under

   American experts are looking "down under" for some pointers in changing
attitudes about the sun. Australia has some of the highest rates of skin cancer
in the world because of its unusual combination of year-round sunny weather and
a predominantly fair-skinned population of Northern European lineage. Twenty
years ago, Australia launched a major public health campaign urging people to
limit sun exposure, which resulted in a leveling-off of melanoma rates there at
a time when the incidence is soaring elsewhere in the world.

   "The Australian effort in this is quite remarkable and a model for us all,"
said Nancy Lee, associate director for science in the federal Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention's Division of Cancer Prevention and Control.

   Australian public health officials worked with advertising councils to use
untanned models on billboards and in commercials. They arranged for public
schools to make it a policy that children wear a hat and sunscreen when they go
out to play, and shady areas are provided on each playground. "They have also
changed the timing of large-scale sporting events so that they are not scheduled
at peak times of the day," Lee said.

   Sunbathing, once a national pastime, is now frowned upon in Australia. Those
are messages that embassy official and melanoma survivor Robertson wishes had
been available when he was growing up.

   "I always got a lot of sunburns," said Robertson. "My parents never even
thought about putting sunscreen on me. That's the problem. Part of growing up
was getting a tan."

   But he isn't making the same mistake with his three children, aged 9, 7 and
3. "My kids are covered up and creamed up with sunscreen every time they go out
into the sun," he said. "They just expect it. They don't even think about it."

   * TYPES OF SKIN CANCER MORE COMMON THAN MELANOMA

   Although malignant melanoma is the most lethal skin cancer, there are other
types caused by exposure to the sun. These types of cancer are nearly always
treatable.Basal cell carcinoma is the most common form of skin cancer,
afflicting 900,000 people annually in the United States. Because its appearance
varies widely, experts advise having suspicious skin lesions checked out. Look
for open sores that fail to heal, reddish patches of skin, a shiny bump, a
scar-like area or a smooth growth.

   Nearly all cases of basal cell skin cancer -- 95 percent -- occur on the
face, ears, neck, scalp, shoulder and back, prime spots for frequent sun
exposure. The cancer affects cells from the innermost skin layer. People with
the fairest skin, the lightest colored eyes and red or blond hair are at the
greatest risk for basal cell skin cancer. But the disease also often strikes
darker-skinned individuals who have spent a great deal of time outdoors. And the
closer people live to the Equator, the greater the risk. This cancer is
generally treated with surgery or radiation.

   Squamous cell skin cancer is the second most common form of skin cancer,
accounting for 100,000 cases annually in the United States. It arises from the
epidemis, the outer layer of the skin, and like other forms of skin cancer is
closely linked to sun exposure. Like basal cell cancer, it can vary in
appearance from a scaly red patch of skin with irregular borders to a wartlike
growth that crusts and occassionally bleeds. Squamous cell carcinoma can also
occur at sites of previous injuries such as burns, long-standing sores, chemical
exposure or X-rays. Doctors often treat these cancers with surgery or radiation.

   Thousands of people also are diagnosed each year with actinic keratoses.
These rough, scaly patches range in color from brown to red and can be up to one
inch in diameter. They are often slightly raised growths and are a pre-cancerous
skin condition that can be treated by freezing skin with liquid nitrogen.

   ** It's possible to reduce sun exposure and still be outdoors. Here's what
experts recommend:

   * Avoid the sun as much as possible from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. when the
ultraviolet (UV) rays are strongest.

   * Start the day by applying a broad spectrum sunscreen that protects both
types of ultraviolet rays, A and B. Use a sunscreen with a sun protection factor
(SPF) of 15 or higher. Put it on 30 minutes before going out in the sun.

   * Keep infants, six months and younger out of the sun as much as possible. If
they go in the sun, dress them in protective clothing and shield their faces
with a hat or umbrella. For older babies, lotion with zinc oxide is recommended
to protect their skin.

   * Despite what the package says, reapply sunscreen every two hours when
outdoors, even if you are using a "water-proof" sunscreen. Be sure to put on
more sunscreen right after swimming or if you are perspiring. Use waxy sticks of
sunscreen to draw half-circles above the eyebrow. This will help reduce
irritation from sunscreen dripping into the eyes.

   * Use enough sunscreen. "You need a lot more than most people think," said
Margaret Tucker, chief of genetic epidemiology at the National Cancer Institute
in Bethesda. "Most people think that a tiny dab is enough, but you need closer
to a tablespoon per limb and you really have to slather it on and rub it in."

   * To avoid developing allergies to sunscreens,

   New York University dermatologist Robert Friedman advises avoiding products
that contain para-amino benzoic acid (PABA). Other products that may cause
problems for those with extremely sensitive skin contain benzophenones,
chemicals that are often added to makeup to give some sun protection. The
American Academy of Dermatology advises using sun blocks containing zinc oxide,
talc or titanium dioxide. These sun blocks carry a reduced risk of skin
allergies. Wear protective, tightly woven clothing outdoors. The darker the
color and the closer the wear, the better the protection. Some clothing is
specially made to offer extra sun protection and rated with its own SPF.

   * Slap on a hat whenever you go outdoors. Be sure that children wear hats
too. Best choices are closely woven hats with four-inch wide brims.

   * Wear sunglasses to protect eyes (and reduce the risk of cataracts) as well
as to spare the tender skin around the eyes from sun exposure. Look for glasses
that shield between 90 to 100 percent of UV light. Wrap-around lenses are best
because they will block out light from peripheral vision.

   * Seek the shade whenever possible. Remember that even under an umbrella,
sand and water still reflect up to 85 percent of ultraviolet rays into the
shade.

   For more information, contact:

   American Academy of Dermatology, 930 N. Meacham (cq), Schaumburg (cq), Ill.
60173. On the internet: http://www.aad.org.

   American Cancer Society,1-800-ACS-2345, or via the internet at
http://www.cancer.org/cancinfo.html.

   National Cancer Institute, 1-800-4-CANCER.

   Skin Cancer Foundation, Box 561, New York, N.Y. 10156. Phone: 212-725-5176

   ** Confused about skin cancer? Test your knowledge with the following
true/false quiz, prepared by the American Academy of Dermatology.

   1. Skin cancer is the most common form of cancer in the United States.

   2. The development of a new mole or a change in an existing one may be a sign
of skin cancer.

   3. People with dark skin can't get skin cancer.

   4. You can't die from skin cancer.

   5. You have an increased risk of the most serious form of skin cancer, known
as malignant melanoma, if your parents, siblings or children have had melanoma.

   6. If you stay out of the sun, you will never get skin cancer.

   7. Malignant melanoma, the serious type of skin cancer, cannot be cured.

   8. Melanoma can occur anywhere on your body.

   9. Redheads and blondes are more likely to get melanoma.

   10. If you were born with one or more moles, you are more likely to develop
malignant melanoma.

   Answers:

   1. True. Estimates are that more 1 million new cases will be diagnosed in
1997. However, the vast majority of those cases are easily treatable and not
even classified as cancer cases by the American Cancer Society.

   2. True. A new mole or any changes in size, color, shape or texture of a mole
can be an important warning sign of skin cancer. See your physician or a
dermatologist.

   3. False. Skin cancer can afflict anyone. Darker-skinned people have more
melanin, a brownish pigment in their skin. This serves as a chemical buffer by
absorbing ultraviolet rays from the sun. Darker skin lowers, but does not
eliminate, the risk of skin cancer.

   4. False. Estimates are that skin cancer will claim 9,500 lives this year.
One person dies nearly every hour of malignant melanoma.

   5. True. Risk rises with a family history of melanoma.

   6. False. There is a strong link between sun exposure and an increased risk
of all types of skin cancer. But you can still get skin cancer if you stay out
of the sun, which is why the American Academy of Dermatology recommends
examining your skin regularly for signs of cancer no matter how little your
exposure to the sun.

   7. False. In many cases, melanoma can be successfully treated when it is
detected early. Several experimental treatments, including gene therapy and
cancer vaccines, are also being investigated to help treat more advanced cases
of melanoma.

   8. True. Melanoma can occur on parts of the skin exposed to the sun, but may
also appear on areas that get little sun, including the scalp, groin, between
the toes, and the palms and soles of the feet.

   9. True. Redheads and blondes have two to four times the risk of developing
melanoma as darker-haired people.

   10. True. Most moles develop after birth. But moles that are present at birth
increase the risk for developing melanoma. So does the presence of one or more
irregular moles.

   SUNLESS TANNING LOTIONS

   For sun worshipers who miss tanning during the summer, there are a growing
array of sunless tanning lotions. Also known as self-tanners, these products
contain chemical stains that darken the skin much the way the sun would but
without the aging changes and increased cancer risk that accompanies natural sun
exposure. Sunless tanning lotions have been available for several decades, but
the latest generation of products gives a more natural tan, with fewer of the
orange tones that plagued some of the first self-tanners.

   The self-tanners last for about three to five days then need to be reapplied,
according to Joanna Connell, a make-up artist for the television show Baywatch.

   Connell says that it is best to apply the self-tanners after first
conditioning skin with moisturizer. "Use round circular motions, like giving
yourself a massage," she said. "That will help ensure that you don't get
streaks." It's also best not to apply the self-tanners after a warm shower,
because the heat and moisture can affect how well the lotions go on the body.

   What the long-term consequences -- or benefits -- of using sunless lotions
are is not clear. "We don't have information on what happens to your skin after
using that product for 20 years," Tucker said.

   But one thing that self-tanners generally don't do is to protect against UV
light, which means they must be worn with regular sunscreens or sunblocks to
avoid skin damage and sunburns.


GRAPHIC: Photo, all american tv inc.; Illustration, coco masuda; Photo, bill
o'leary, Bob Robertson, who was diagnosed with melanoma on his arm three years
ago, said he "always got a lot of sunburns" as a child growing up in Australia.
Melanoma patient Bob Robertson believes his cancer may be related to his heavy
sun exposure as a child. He says he goes to extremes today to protect his kids,
who "are covered up and creamed up with sunscreen every time they go out into
the sun."

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1997


                             2392 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1997 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 26, 1997, Monday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: DISCOVERY; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 2286 words

HEADLINE: GATHERING MOMENTUM;
Discovery of exotic genes spurs researchers' hope for new drugs

BYLINE: PAUL SALOPEK; Chicago Tribune

BODY:

   For years, researchers have been collecting DNA samples from
peoples around the world to find out how closely human beings
are related.  Their conclusion?  All of us are amazingly
similar, and traits that determine cultural notions of ""race''
- skin color, eye shape - are irrelevant.  Now scientists want
to create a U.S.-funded global storehouse of DNA samples
before many remote tribes vanish.  But critics call the
proposed Human Genome Diversity Project ""genetic piracy'' and
want no part of it.

   CHICAGO - It was supposed to be a simple bargain - an honest
if somewhat bizarre deal struck between one of the last Stone
Age peoples and the most technologically advanced society.

   Soon after the Hagahai emerged from the forests of Papua New
Guinea in the late 1980s and made their first contact with the
outside world, anthropologists stumbled across a remarkable
secret flowing in the tribesmen's blood.

   The Hagahai, who have harvested yams and hunted wild boar
along the remote Yuat River for millenniums, carried a rare
virus in their white blood cells.  It was a pathogen similar to
ones that cause leukemia, but it did not harm the
tribesmen.

   American scientists wanted to understand why, so they made the
tribe a quiet offer: Let the U.S.government patent their
cells in exchange for half of the royalties from any
breakthroughs in leukemia research derived from their
blood.

   The Hagahai, who by then were familiar with money, agreed.

   After donating a few test tubes of blood to the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., they promptly went back
to stalking wild game.

   If the story of U.S.Patent No. 5,397,696 - for a DNA sequence
dubbed ""Papua New Guinea human T-lymphotropic virus (PNG-1)'' -
had ended there, it probably wouldn't rank as a footnote in
the saga of the genetic revolution in the 1990s.

   But the tale of the 1995 Hagahai patent and its bitter
aftermath is far from forgotten in scientific circles.

   Instead, it has become the defining morality fable for one of
the most intriguing and highly controversial new frontiers in
human biology: the hunt for genetic cures in the DNA of small
ethnic groups.

   Buoyed by technical advances that make massive DNA testing
economically feasible and spurred by the realization that
humanity's genetic diversity is yielding to cultural
assimilation day by day, researchers are scrambling to the
most secluded corners of the Earth, hoping to tap the ""healthy
genes'' in the Cherokee, the Amish, Solomon Islanders, the
Hagahai and others.

   So far, the quest has fired the imagination of academic
researchers and biomedical companies.  Probably the most
compelling proposal on the horizon is the Human Genome
Diversity Project, a plan put forth by a loose coalition of
international geneticists to collect and preserve the DNA from
400 human populations and ethnic groups.

   If funding is approved by Congress after a recommendation by
the National Academy of Sciences, the diversity project could
officially begin gene sampling this year, adding to samples
collected without government involvement.

   ""We've always known the strength of any species lies in its
diversity,'' said Victor McKusick, a geneticist at Johns
Hopkins University.  ""Now, we're finally beginning to put those
differences to useful work.  These are truly exciting
times. ''

   To some, the case of the Hagahai genes proves otherwise.

   When news of the New Guinea patent spread, howls of outrage
came from human-rights groups.

   News releases declared that the United States had done the
unthinkable and ""patented itself a foreign citizen. '' Rattled
by the publicity, Papua New Guinean officials summoned the
U.S.ambassador for an explanation.  The anthropologist who
brokered the deal was hauled off a flight at Port Moresby, the
Papua New Guinean capital, and interrogated like a spy.

   What the Hagahai made of the fracas is not recorded.  The NIH,
however, was stunned: Though the blood still remains frozen in
its freezers, the NIH quietly dropped its claim on the
intellectual property rights to the tribesmen's cells and the
research is largely dormant.

   Flaps over patenting biological material, especially DNA,
are not new, but they are growing louder as science reaches
out across the human family tree to pluck at exotic genes that
could form the basis of new and expensive drugs.

   The thrust of such ""diversity research'' has gathered momentum
only in the last decade as experts began unraveling the
biological mysteries of race and ethnicity.  Along the way,
they have discovered that different human populations have
evolved unique resistances or susceptibilities to common
diseases.

   The key lies hidden within the 3 billion nucleotides of DNA
within each of our cells that code for who we are, what we
look like and how we function.

   Though the similarity in all ethnic groups' DNA is boggling -
all our blueprints differ on average by just one nucleotide in
every 10,000 - enough minute differences can accumulate over
the generations to impart subtle advantages in warding off
infections and illnesses.  In effect, natural selection has
thousands of such complex experiments running in diverse human
populations all the time.

   ""We basically let Mother Nature do our work for us,'' said
Georgia Dunston, a Howard University geneticist who has helped
plan the gene survey proposed by the diversity project.  ""Why
waste years of research trying to come up with cures from
scratch?  Evolution tells us that there are groups out there
whose genes have been tinkering with ways to fight disease
since Day One. ''

   How do beneficial genes settle out in different ethnic
groups?

   Scientists credit three elusive forces of evolution: time,
isolation and group size.

   It is difficult for unique traits to gain a foothold within
large, dynamic populations, geneticists say, because they can
be easily swamped or diluted by the constant influx and
outflow of genes, the swirling of genetic tides.

   Only in smaller, more stable populations - especially ones
where oceans, deserts or mountains minimize outmarriage - can
the subtlest genetic ticks become accentuated and magnified.

   In these cases, a positive mutation, such as one that imparts
a tougher immune response, can percolate widely through the
gene pool within a few thousand years.

   ""You can't really go gene hunting in Chicago,'' said Alan
Shuldiner, a geneticist at the University of Maryland who
recently uncovered genes associated with obesity in Native
American tribes.  ""There's so much intermixing and so much
environmental variability that the job would be a nightmare.

   That's why remote populations make perfect laboratories. ''

   One human experiment that has become legendary among
geneticists is the village of Limone Sul Garda in Italy.

   The medieval village, perched on a lake, was untouched by
Italy's road system until the 1950s.  Its gene pool remained
largely unrippled by outside gene flow until that time.

   Researchers have discovered to their amazement that the
residents, though they eat the same rich foods as neighbors,
suffer almost no heart disease.

   Geneticists have now isolated a peculiar mutation - thought to have first
appeared randomly in a resident in the 1700s - in
the villagers' DNA called the A-1 Milano gene, a localized
oddity that appears to gird them against the ravages of
atherosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries - one of the
most common diseases in the industrialized world.

   ""You can imagine the sort of therapeutic potential discoveries
like these have,'' said Robert Farrell, a professor of human
genetics at the University of Pittsburgh who is studying
diabetes and hypertension in different population groups.

   ""That town has been combed by dozens of researchers looking
for ways to translate whatever that gene does into some sort
of synthetic drug.  The payback would be amazing. ''

   In the new world of diversity research, places such as Sacaton
- home of the Pima Indians of Arizona, who have the highest
diabetes rate of any ethnic group in the world - are becoming
the unlikely new capitals of disease research.

   So are the battered trailers and tents of Israel's Bedouin,
who are being studied for clues to obesity and certain
inherited forms of deafness.  And so are the remote villages of
the Arhuacan Indians of Colombia, who, like the Hagahai, play
host to a type of virus associated with leukemia and AIDS.

   ""The irony of all this is that by focusing our attention on
the white European populations that can afford advanced
medical care . . .we've been missing the boat on genetic
variation for a long time,'' said Roger Rosenberg, a University
of Texas researcher who is studying Oklahoma's Cherokees for
their resistance to Alzheimer's disease.  ""This is a whole new
frontier. ''

   If there were any doubts about the promise of such research,
one need only follow the rainbow of human diversity down to
the pot of biomedical gold - an economic reality that is
triggering the most volatile debates over the
commercialization of DNA from small and often poor
populations.

   Big pharmaceutical companies are quietly sinking millions of
dollars into the sort of massive DNA surveying that purely
anthropological proposals such as the diversity project have
been pushing for years.

   The stakes, even at this early stage, are tantalizing:

   Multiple sclerosis researchers supported by Genethon, a French
biomedical firm, have discovered a remote population on
Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean that seems to be immune
from the crippling effects of the illness, even though they
carry the disease genes.  A ""protective'' genetic factor might
be in play and, if ever isolated, could lead to lucrative new
drugs for millions of MS sufferers.

   Asthma experts are testing a hotbed of bronchial disease on
Tristan da Cunha island in the South Atlantic, where a third
of the roughly 300 interrelated farmers suffer from the
ailment.  The California firm Sequana Therapies has signed a
$ 70 million deal with Boehringer Ingelheim, a German
pharmaceutical company, to help find the Tristanians' disease
genes and develop a broad-scale genetic therapy from them.

   Sequana expects to announce the discovery of its first
asthma-related gene as soon as next year, one of the first
tangible returns from diversity research.

   Which is why indigenous-rights advocates are crying foul.

   ""You've got this potentially lucrative traffic in human DNA
zipping from lab to lab across the world and none of it
benefits the donors,'' said Edward Hammond, an activist with
the Canada-based Rural Advancement Fund International, a group
concerned with biodiversity and tribal property rights.

   ""There's just this huge potential for exploitation. ''

   These are untested waters,'' said Dunston.  ""Scientists have
to start by learning to treat people like people, not
scientific subjects.  After all, this whole exploration is
about sharing what makes us human - scientists are truly part
of the experiment in this case. ''

   Dunston described one of the more serendipitous discoveries of
diversity research that convinced her of its ultimate
righteousness:
 In seeking organ donors for African-Americans, doctors have
found that in some cases tissue from whites is a closer match
than tissue from other African-Americans.

   The reason?  African populations are so ancient that they have
diverged into the most genetically variable peoples.  Hence,
the differences between two African-Americans could be greater
than those between a white and an African-American, vivid
proof that skin color can mask DNA affinities.

   ""It would be a shame to lose such insights to fears about
commercialization of DNA,'' she said, worrying aloud that the
diversity project, whose aim is pure science, is being sullied
by the profit-driven motives of pharmaceutical companies.

   ""This is medicine helping tear down old ways of thinking about
race. ''

   But some, especially those caught in the middle of the gene
hunters, remain deeply ambivalent.

   For Pennsylvania's Amish community, whose religious strictures
against outmarriage have kept their gene pool unclouded for
almost three centuries, the issue boils down to accountability
and respect for the sense of ownership kindled by DNA.

   ""They came, they took blood, they made promises and they never
reappeared,'' said Rebecca Huyard, a medical administrator in
Strasburg, Pa., who remembers how researchers from Johns
Hopkins University collected hundreds of genetic samples among
the farming folk of Lancaster County in the 1970s and
1980s.

   ""Eventually, people here got fed up with it.  They wondered
where their blood was going.  ''
 Huyard, who is Amish, said she and her neighbors fear that
their molecular inheritance has somehow slipped beyond their
control.  She said she hoped that Amish DNA samples weren't
being shared without the donors' knowledge.  She also bemoaned
the lack of awareness about a momentous scientific quest that,
however noble, is speeding ahead almost without public
debate.

   ""Now, we don't trust any of them anymore,'' Huyard said.  She
added that if diversity researchers showed up again in Amish
country, they probably would be turned away politely but
firmly.

   What she didn't know was that several biotech firms already
have acquired Amish DNA and are interrogating it for clues to
everything from Alzheimer's disease to diabetes.  That Amish
DNA, frozen and cultured in petri dishes, sits alongside
thousands of other human cell lines in laboratories and
refrigerators around the world.


TYPE: Series

NOTES: Part 2 of a two-part report.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1997


                             2393 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        May 25, 1997 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: 'MY WIFE THOUGHT I WAS A BIT NUTS' TO START PROJECT

BYLINE: BY ULYSSES TORASSA

BODY:

   Gil Van Bokkelen has always had a head for business.

   The grandson of the founder of a San Francisco construction company, Van
Bokkelen always knew he wanted to marry his interest in science with his desire
to become an entrepreneur.

   At the University of California at Berkeley, he simultaneously earned degrees
in economics and microbiology.

   He stayed at Berkeley for a few years, doing research. By the late 1980s, he
was inspired by the work of French Anderson, who performed the world's first
gene therapy by giving genetically altered blood cells to a North Olmsted girl
suffering from a rare immune disorder.

   He later enrolled in a graduate program at Stanford, where his interest in
gene therapy led him to Huntington F. Willard and to the pursuit of making the
first artificial human chromosome.

   It took a lot of convincing by Willard to get Van Bokkelen to come to
Cleveland, especially since it meant leaving behind his wife, who had a good job
in the Bay area and was studying for her master's degree in business
administration.

   "You have to understand, my wife thought I was a bit nuts when I first told
her, 'John and I are going off to Cleveland to build synthetic human chromosomes
with Hunt. I'll be gone for about six months to a year. Don't worry - we know
what we're doing.'

   "Remember, this is the woman that lived with me through my personal hell in
graduate school, where I had spent 3 years and failed to build an artificial
chromosome. Her view was, 'Wait a minute - you're leaving me to go off and waste
another year of your life on this stupid project? When are you going to give it
up?'

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1997


                             2394 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        May 25, 1997 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2994 words

HEADLINE: A HUNCH, A GAMBLE AND THEN, A SCIENTIFIC BREAKTHROUGH;
HOW A GROUP OF SCIENTISTS CAME TO CLEVELAND AND CREATED THE WORLD'S FIRST
ARTICIAL HUMAN CHROMOSOME.

BYLINE: By ULYSSES TORASSA; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   It was 1:30 a.m. in a deserted Case Western Reserve University genetics lab
when Gil Van Bokkelen peered into a microscope and saw a tiny red dot that would
change his life.

   That fuzzy dot meant his decision to leave his wife and family in California,
to work 16 hours a day, seven days a week for a year, and sink his life savings
into a risky biotechnology endeavor, just might pay off after all.

   That dot also meant that Case Western Reserve University and University
Hospital's gamble to spend $15 million to lure a hotshot genetics whiz from
Stanford University just might have been right, too.

   And it meant that a tiny, obscure biotech company would soon become a hot
property, the object of intense interest from pharmaceutical companies and
investors who now want a piece of what the firm's owners optimistically predict
could be a "billion dollar company in five years."

   That red dot was the world's first artificial human chromosome, a much
smaller version of a natural one that its inventors hope will one day become a
weapon in the fight against genetic disease. And except for infections and the
damage done solely by our environment or lifestyle, virtually all diseases are
in some way genetic - from cancer to heart disease to muscular dystrophy and
Alzheimer's.

   Being a part of a cure for even a fraction of those diseases will secure the
scientists involved a permanent place in history books of genetics, as well as
great wealth. Once gene therapy becomes a reality, it will likely become a
several-billion-dollar a year industry, analysts say.

   The microchromosome's potential was immediately recognized by the
international science community when it was announced last month. Newspapers and
televisions stations from around the world featured the team's work and its
potential for gene therapy.

   A breakthrough

   On that pre-dawn morning in the summer of 1995, Van Bokkelen may not have
thought through all of those ramifications. But his gut told him this was big.
Very big.

   With no one else in the lab to share it with, Van Bokkelen carefully stowed
his slides and paperwork and went home for a fitful night's sleep. First thing
the next morning, he pulled aside John Harrington, his close friend and
collaborator who had also been working late hours in the laboratory of
Huntington F. Willard, the chairman of genetics at CWRU and University
Hospitals, who had convinced them to come to Cleveland for the pursuit.

   As soon as Harrington saw the slides with the fuzzy red dots he, too, felt it
was the moment they'd been waiting for. They called over another lab researcher
and a genetics faculty member, who concurred.

   Finally, they brought in Willard.

   "The four of us were standing around Hunt, very hushed and silent, waiting
for him to make his assessment," Van Bokkelen recalled. "Hunt is the master of
understatement. He said something to the effect of, 'Well, that's good work. But
now you guys have a lot of things you need to do.'

   "It wasn't deflating in any way. It was clear from his attitude that he was
very proud of what we'd been able to do," Van Bokkelen said. "We'd sort of
broken through the barrier and demonstrated to ourselves that we could do what
we set out to do."

   Indeed, while the CWRU team can rightfully claim the first artificial human
chromosome, the question remains whether they can take the conceptually
interesting achievement and turn it into a working therapy.

   What they have created is a synthetic package for carrying genes, which are
sets of molecules that contain the instructions for building and running our
bodies. Each of us has 46 chromosomes in every cell of our body (except sperm
and egg cells, which have 23). They have been likened to a 46-volume set of
encyclopedias, with individual genes representing sentences in the text.

   For years, scientists have been frustrated in their attempts to get working
copies of genes into cells to fix ones that were malfunctioning. A
once-promising technique using disabled viruses to carry the genes into cells
has repeatedly run into roadblocks. The microchromosome could get around some,
but not all, of those problems.

   So far, the story of the artificial chromosome is one of gambles that paid
off. Whether the team's string of wins will continue and one day make them all
megamillionaires or their technology will hit a snag or some unseen competitor
will blindside them with a better way, at least for now they feel they are on a
roll.

   A joint gamble

   Already, the wave of attention and excitement over the achievement has been
something of a vindication for University Hospitals and CWRU, which decided in
1991 to spend $15 million to bring Willard to Cleveland.

   In the late 1980s, powerful local business leaders got together and decided
that Cleveland was falling behind other cities in high technology areas. It was
clear human genetics was a key area for any research institution, yet CWRU did
not have a stand-alone genetics department.

   Armed with a five-year, $6 million grant from the Markey Foundation, a $7.5
million commitment from University Hospitals and another $1.5 million from
within the medical school, a search committee in 1991 was able to reel in
Willard. At that time, he was an up-and-coming geneticist at Stanford University
who was already getting national attention for his work on chromosomes.

   Only a small fraction of the five-year, $15 million package went to Willard's
salary. Most of it went to let him build a genetics department in his own image,
an enticing prospect for a young scientist whose work was only a fraction of the
action at a place like Stanford.

   "It offered freedom and the kind of support necessary to develop human
genetics in the way I thought it should be done," Willard, now 43, said. "It was
the opportunity, if you will, to play in my own sandbox and instead of someone
else's sandbox."

   So far, Willard has invited more than 20 faculty members into his sandbox at
CWRU. They, in turn, have brought in their own grants in a variety of genetics
research areas, while Willard has continued his own lifelong interest in
chromosomes.

   Locked data

   To Willard, chromosomes are the "ultimate black box" - a crucial element of
our genetic make-up whose underlying mechanisms have remained a mystery.

   In the mid-1980s, researchers made a major breakthrough by creating the first
artificial yeast chromosome. It was helpful in many genetic studies, but it
couldn't be used to test the function of human genes; for that scientists needed
an artificial human one.

   But making a synthetic human chromosome required a key element called the
centromere, which works like a motor, controlling their orderly break-up when
cells divide so each gets its own copy of the chromosome. For years, scientists
searched for the genetic elements that create this crucial function in humans.
Without it, building a synthetic chromosome that could divide and live on like a
natural one would be impossible.

   Some labs were using a brute force method to search for the centromere -
chopping away at chromosomes bit by bit to the point where just the code for the
centromere is left. But it had yet to prove successful.

   Willard decided to take the opposite approach, searching for it directly in a
string of genetic code called alpha satellite DNA. Every chromosome has many
copies of that highly repetitive code which appeared to have no discernible
function, leading many researchers to dismiss it as "junk DNA."

   But evidence was beginning to accumulate that alpha satellite DNA wasn't so
meaningless. And its location near the site where chromosomes divide suggested
it might in some way be important in that function.

   "I felt this stuff was going to be key. I probably couldn't have articulated
very well at that time why, but we needed a place to start," Willard said.

   "Many people had hypothesized that the real centromere was hiding in the
middle of all this junk. For a while, I was spending all my time worrying about
the junk and was never going to find the magic sequence. But there is no magic
sequence. The junk is the magic. That was the beauty of it. It's the alpha
satellite itself, which everyone else thought was junk, which turns out to be
the actual sequence."

   In retrospect, the centromere discovery was in 1992 - seven years after
Willard began searching for it, although at the time, he could only claim to
have found strong evidence of it. It wasn't until the microchromosome using the
centromere code was made and divided in the CWRU lab, that most scientists were
convinced.

   In any event, by 1992 - the same year Willard arrived at CWRU - he believed
he had the tools to begin trying to make the world's first artificial human
chromosome.

   Working team

   The idea to pursue that goal and its implications for treating genetic
diseases had its roots in a 1989 conversation between Willard and Van Bokkelen,
then an eager 28-year-old Stanford graduate student bent on one day starting a
biotechnology company focused on gene therapy.

   Van Bokkelen knew that one of the problems with using disabled viruses to
carry genetic fixes had been that some of them threatened to disrupt the working
parts of people's chromosomes. Others failed to remain with the cell as it
divides, making the genetic fix useless after one generation.

   But an extra chromosome added to a person's regular complement of 46 would,
in theory, have none of those problems, he realized. So, aware of Willard's work
on chromosomes, Van Bokkelen showed up in his lab one day to talk to him about
his idea.

   Willard was intrigued, and the two hit it off immediately, talking for 2
hours about the possibilities. But Willard still hadn't nailed down the
centromere, which they needed before they could even think about making their
own chromosome.

   "I told him it was too soon," Willard said.

   Biotech entrepreneurs

   Committed to the concept, Van Bokkelen embarked on an effort to try and find
the centromere using the brute force approach. But the chromosomes became
unstable and unmanageable as he tried cutting them down, leaving him no closer
after 3 years of trying.

   All the while, Van Bokkelen and his close friend and graduate school roommate
John Harrington began to nurse a common dream of starting a biotechnology
company.

   The two had met in the late 1980s, when they were both recruited to
prestigious graduate programs. Although both had opportunities to stay on an
academic research path, neither one saw themselves as professors. They wanted to
be entrepreneurs, taking concepts from the laboratory and turning them into
profitable, meaningful therapies for people with disease.

   Meanwhile, Willard, too, was toying with the commercial potential an
artificial chromosome might have. Even as he was interviewing for the CWRU job,
he talked with officials here about his eventual desire to link his research
into a biotechnology venture.

   By 1994, Willard believed the time was right, and he convinced Van Bokklen
and Harrington to give it a go in his lab. Van Bokkelen left his wife and family
in the San Francisco Bay area, Harrington turned down two prestigious
post-doctoral offers and his fiance terminated her promising graduate program.
In September, they arrived in Cleveland committed to spending an intense year
trying to make a chromosome.

   "You really have to burn all the bridges behind you so the only way you can
go is forward. That's basically what happened here," said Harrington, now 29. "I
gave up a lot of post docs, and as soon as I gave them up I couldn't come
crawling back. Gil and I put ourselves in a position that forced us to make this
work."

   They gave themselves a year, and did little else but sit at their lab
benches, culturing cell lines and looking in microscopes into the night, every
night.

   "It was animalistic, nonstop, nose-to-the-grindstone," Van Bokkelen said.

   Finally, just shy of year from when they started, the team put the most basic
elements of a chromosome - the centromere, telomeres that act like caps on the
ends to keep them from fraying and some DNA - and tricked a cell into taking
them inside. Once there, the cell managed to fit them together and it showed up
as a glowing red dot on Van Bokkelen's slide three weeks later.

   "As perverse at it sounds, as I recall, we didn't really celebrate, we kept
working," Van Bokkelen said. A few weeks later, there was a low-key lab lunch at
the Mad Greek in Cleveland Heights where they toasted their success, but "for
the most part, we just kept going."

   It really wasn't until the story broke more than a year later on the front
pages of newspapers around the world that it really hit home.

   "My wife phoned me in tears, and told me, 'Honey, I'm sorry I ever doubted
you,' Van Bokkelen said. "I have to admit, I was pretty moved at that moment."

   This week, his wife and their 3-month-old son will move to Cleveland.

   But back in the summer of 1995, the most noticeable difference was simply a
change in the atmosphere in the lab. Until then, the pressure sometimes led to
heated debates and plenty of tension. After they saw the red dot, "it totally
went away," Van Bokkelen said.

   High stakes

   So did their money problems. Mark Lampert, manager of a $250 million West
Coast biotechnology fund, committed $2.5 million for a sizable stake in
Athersys, Inc., the company they created in 1994. By then, the company was also
working on an immunology technology developed in another CWRU lab as a way to
diversify its efforts.

   Van Bokkelen, now Athersys' president and CEO, declined to give a present
estimate of the company's value, but analysts say it is surely worth, at least
on paper, many times what it was before the breakthrough's announcement.

   And in exchange for licensing the technology that was developed in Willard's
lab, Van Bokkelen said CWRU also has a 5 to 10 percent stake in Athersys and
will receive royalties on the technology, which could earn the university
millions.

   At the least, the chromosome technology seems destined to be a powerful tool
for genetics researchers who could plug human genes into it to test their
function.

   But the bigger hope is that it will become the package that delivers gene
fixes into people with diseases. To get there will require more key advances,
the most important one being how to get it into cells in large enough numbers to
cure diseases.

   The delivery issue has been a major stumbling block for all potential gene
therapies, and the microchromosome is no different.

   But Willard and Athersys claim high confidence that it will happen. They are
looking at a number of potential delivery systems, including one being developed
by another infant Cleveland biotech company, Copernicus, which arose out of work
done by another CWRU researcher, Richard Hanson.

   There is still months of lab work yet before any animal trials can begin
using the microchromosome. Only if those go well, can human trials begin.
Federal approval of any gene therapy for general use will likely take a few
years after that.

   If everything goes as hoped, they will probably first try to use the therapy
with blood disorders like hemophilia and sickle cell anemia, Harrington said.
That's because so-called stem cells that create our blood could be removed from
bone marrow, given the extra chromosome, and then injected back into the bones
to begin creating healthy blood cells.

   If the more complex delivery issues involved in diseases like cystic fibrosis
or muscular dystrophy can be overcome, the microchromosome might work there,
too, he said.

   A flood of inquiries

   Since last month's annoncement, Van Bokkelen has been fielding calls from a
number of pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies interested in investing and
partnering with what now appears a hot prospect.

   More poignant have been the phone calls, e-mail and letters from people
around the world who have read about the microchromosome and its promising
potential and who are desperate to find a cure for their own or a loved ones'
disease.

   Willard has already received more than 200 inquiries, including many from
Europe, the Middle East and South America, seeing if they could be involved in
some of the earliest human experiments. Some have offered to get on a plane
immediately and fly to Cleveland if Willard thinks it would help.

   The family of a Georgia girl suffering from a chromosome mutation that has
left her with several medical conditions including mental retardation, sent
Willard an inch-thick stack of her medical records and her photograph. He stuck
the letter and picture on the wall next to his desk to remind him of the people
his work will one day help.

   "They're really touching. They're in broken English, some of them. People are
just reaching out for anything," said Willard, who has already replied
personally to about 75 of the inquiries.

   "I try to offer some hope, but realistic hope," he said. "This thing has
already taken 15 years. We may have another five or 10 or 15 years to work on
this. But I'm a patient man. We'll get there someday, but we're not there yet."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY JAMES A. ROSS / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER; PHOTO 1; Gil Van
Bokkelen, left, and John Harrington, center, left California in 1994 to work in
the Case Western Reserve University genetics laboratory of Huntingon F. Willard,
right. The three men created the world's first artificial human chromosome there
in 1995.; PHOTO 2; Gil Van Bokkelen, left, and John Harrington worked around the
clock seven days a week for a year before they finally created the world's first
artifical human chromosome in a genetis laboratory at Case Western Reserve
University. Today, they are both officers in a biotechnology company that hopes
to turn the chromosome into a cure for genetic diseases.; PHOTO 3; Letters,
calls and emails from around the world began pouring into Cleveland after it was
reported that researchers at CWRU had synthesized the first artificial human
chromosome. Families of people with genetic diseases wrote in, desperate for
word that the breakthrough might mean a cure was near for their loved ones. Some
offered to volunteer for human experiments with the chromosome.; PHOTO 4; As
seen through a microscope, the artificial human chromosome made by researchers
at CWRU picks up a greenish-yellow glow as the result of a portion of it
reacting with a flourescent dye. The blue figures are natural human
chromosomes.; BOX: STEPS TO BREAKTHROUGH; SOURCE: Case Western Reserve
University; GRAPHIC BY PLAIN DEALER

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1997


                             2395 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                       May 23, 1997, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: UCLA SURGEON TO RUN NEW CEDARS INSTITUTE;
 MEDICINE: DR. KEITH BLACK WILL BRING A TEAM OF RESEARCHERS AND OTHER STAFFERS
TO START THE MULTIMILLION- DOLLAR CENTER.

BYLINE: JULIE MARQUIS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   One of UCLA Medical Center's star surgeons is moving to Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center to head a new multimillion-dollar neurosurgical institute specializing in
brain cancer.

   Dr. Keith L. Black, a specialist in malignant tumors who has been lauded by
colleagues at UCLA as a "superstar" and by patients as a "miracle worker," will
assume his new position at Cedars' Neurosurgical Institute on July 1. He said he
will bring with him two brain researchers, a neuro-oncologist and a gene therapy
specialist, and about 10 support staff members. Though he plans to retain his
professorship in neurosurgery at UCLA and will continue to collaborate with
colleagues there, his move to Cedars is a coup for the private medical center
and a loss for UCLA, one of the leading neurosurgical centers in the country.

   Cedars officials said it was Black who approached them, and that his desire
to head his own program fit in with their expansion plans in specialty areas
including neurosurgery, cardiac services and transplantation.

   "We seized the opportunity," said Cedars surgery chairman Dr. Achilles
Demetriou. "There was nothing tactical, nothing hostile, about it.

   "Essentially, what we are trying to do is establish a major presence in
neurosurgery in California, nationally and internationally," he said.  "Our
strategy was to recruit someone with the credentials and the stature of Dr.
Black to serve as the anchor."

   Black said he could not resist Cedars' offer to invest tens of millions of
dollars in the new institute, including a "21st century operating room."

   "The resources they are putting into this are really just an incredible
opportunity to fulfill a dream," Black said. "We are going to build a
world-class center that does state-of-the art research."

   Black initially will focus on developing less invasive treatment of tumors,
using computer and brain-imaging technology, gene therapy, immune therapies and
more selective delivery of drugs to the brain. Within three years, he hopes to
recruit a staff of 48, including neurosurgeons, neurologists and other
scientists. The staff will include specialists on staff at Cedars.

   Black, 39, who is head of UCLA's Comprehensive Brain Tumor Program, has
published more than 100 scientific articles and performs more than 200 brain
tumor operations annually.

   Dr. Donald Becker, head of the UCLA division of neurosurgery, said the
university wishes Black well and is grateful for his contributions, but that his
departure in no way diminishes UCLA's stature in neurosurgery.

   "UCLA just continues in the normal mode of providing excellent teaching and
clinical programs. We have centers of excellence in virtually every
neurosurgical program, and we will continue to have those programs function."

   Becker, who two years ago described Black as "spectacular" and a "superstar
in our field," said Thursday that UCLA does not see Black "as leaving a void."

   He said UCLA is recruiting Dr. Eric Holland, a specialist from the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., to pursue research into the genetic
mutations that cause neurological cancer.

   Becker said Black's departure is not related to that of a prominent pediatric
neurosurgeon, Dr. Warwick Peacock, who after 11 years at UCLA has accepted a
similar position at UC San Francisco for personal reasons.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dr. Keith Black will run new neurosurgical institute at Cedars-
Sinai specializing in brain cancer.  PHOTOGRAPHER: KIRK McKOY / Los Angeles
Times

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998


                             2396 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 May 22, 1997, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 06D, HEALTH NEWS

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NEWS

BODY:


ANOREXIA NERVOSA

Prozac Can Help Prevent Relapses

   Prozac can help keep people who have recovered from anorexia nervosa from
falling back into self-starvation, a study found.

   Many psychiatrists already have been prescribing the drug for that purpose in
the past few years. One expert called the work the best evidence yet that Prozac
can help.

   "This is very promising and it's very exciting" because relapses are common
in anorexia, said Dr. Walter Kaye, main author of the study and a psychiatry
professor at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's Western Psychiatric
Institute and Clinic.

   He cautioned that Prozac can't treat the disorder itself. And he said that
other studies suggest that Prozac won't help if an anorexia nervosa patient is
still underweight.

   The work was paid for in part by Eli Lilly & Co., which makes Prozac. It was
presented Wednesday at a meeting of the American Psychiatric Association.

ASTHMA

Island Residents Aid In Discovery

   Researchers say they have for the first time identified a mutated gene that
makes people susceptible to asthma. The scientists discovered it lurking on one
of the world's most isolated islands.

   Sequana Therapeutics analyzed DNA, or genetic material, from about 300 people
on Tristan da Cunha, a South Atlantic island about 1,500 miles from South
Africa. About 30 percent of the island's residents have asthma, apparently
passed on from an original settler.

   The pinpointing of the mutated genes eventually could help identify people at
risk of getting sick and also could suggest new drugs for treatment.

   Researchers also confirmed that the mutated gene affects other people with
high asthma rates in the United States, Canada and Australia.

DEPRESSION

Brain Changes Noted In The Elderly

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania have discovered biological
changes in the brains of elderly people suffering from minor depression.

   Mental health experts said they hoped the findings would encourage older
people to seek treatment for minor depression and not dismiss it as a byproduct
of old age.

   The two-year study examined 18 healthy elderly patients who experienced minor
depression for the first time late in life and compared them with 31
non-depressed patients. Patients' median age was 69.

   Using an MRI, researchers discovered the prefrontal lobe - the region of the
brain associated with emotional states and behavior - was significantly smaller
in elderly patients suffering minor depression than in their non-depressed
counterparts.

WOMEN AND STROKES

Weight Gain In Adults Raises Risk

   Obese women and women who gain a lot of weight as adults increased their risk
of suffering the most common form of stroke, researchers say.

   After adjusting for risk factors such as smoking, age and postmenopausal
hormone use, researchers at Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital found that
extremely obese women were more than twice as likely to suffer ischemic stroke
compared with lean women.

   About half the 866 strokes recorded in the study were ischemic strokes, in
which an artery or vessel blockage stops blood and oxygen from reaching the
brain. About 80 percent of strokes are ischemic.

CANCER

Tumors Shrink After Gene Therapy

   Gene therapy designed to kick-start the body's immune system has shown early
promise in treating patients with advanced cancer, more than halving the size of
some patients' tumors.

   Doctors at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute injected pat ients
with cells genetically engineered to produce interleukin-12, a hormonelike
substance that plays a key role in controlling the body's disease-fighting
mechanisms.

   Tumors noticeably shrank in eight of 21 patients, said Dr. Michael Lotze,
co-director of the institute's biological therapeutics program.

SMOKING

Drug May Make Patch More Effective

   Just days after the government approved one new drug to help smokers kick the
habit, a new study shows early promise for another.

   Naltrexone, a drug now used for treating alcoholism, helped people in one
study who were trying to quit smoking by using a nicotine patch.

   Patch users who took naltrexone smoked fewer cigarettes than those taking a
dummy pill. Naltrexone users also didn't gain weight, a common side effect of
quitting, and they craved nicotine less.

   The work is very preliminary, said Stephanie S. O'Malley, an associate
professor of psychiatry at the Yale University Medical School. Only 22 people
were in the study, and they were followed for only four weeks.

   Just last week, the Food and Drug Administration approved another drug - the
anti-depressant Zyban - to help smokers quit.

PACEMAKERS

Keep Cell Phones Away From Chest

   Cellular phones carry little risk to people with pacemakers as long as they
don't carry them in their shirt pockets or hold them next to their chests, a
study suggests.

   The research was first reported by The Associated Press when it was presented
a year ago at a meeting of the North American Society of Pacing and
Electrophysiology in Seattle.

   Dr. David L. Hayes of the Mayo Clinic led the study, which tested whether
cell phones interfere with pacemakers, as some earlier research suggested.

   The study found that signals from the phones can indeed cause pacemakers to
stop sending signals to the heart or make the heart beat too fast. However,
there was virtually no risk while people held the phones to their ears.

THALIDOMIDE

Sedative Eases Mouth Sores In AIDS

   Thalidomide, the sedative banned since the 1960s for causing birth defects,
has re-emerged as the only effective treatment for AIDS-related mouth ulcers.

   A study found that a month of treatment dramatically relieves this painful
condition and clears it up entirely in about half who take it.

   The drug also has proved useful against leprosy and also may help control
some kinds of cancer.

   Thalidomide, once sold in 48 countries as a sleeping pill and morning
sickness cure, was banned worldwide in 1962 after about 12,000 babies were born
with missing or malformed limbs, serious facial deformities and defective
organs. It was never sold in the United States. From Post-Dispatch Wire Services



LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1997


                             2397 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 1997 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       May 21, 1997 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-02

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Cancer therapy research holds promise

BYLINE: Denver Post Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:
 As the American Society of Clinical Oncology conference came to a close Tuesday
in Denver, researchers presented a handful of studies regarding promising new
cancer therapies.

   Products under development by G.D. Searle & Co. and Aastrom Biosciences Inc.
can help cancer patients produce larger numbers of the building-block cells they
need to regenerate bone marrow destroyed in chemotherapy, researchers said.

   Two new studies indicate that an anti-nausea tablet for chemotherapy patients
works as well as traditional intravenous treatments - and costs about half as
much. SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals' Kytril pill is easy for patients to
take, researchers said.

   And a doctor from Stanford University Medical Center said early tests of a
gene therapy developed by Isis, based in San Diego County, Calif., are
promising. The therapy, called Isis 3251, inhibits production of a protein
implicated in the growth of a range of solid tumors.

   The year's biggest cancer conference brought 14,000 researchers, doctors and
other clinicians to Denver. Some 2,000 scientific abstracts dealing with cancer
and cancer therapies were presented.

   Although much of the research presented during the four-day conference was
interesting, Dr. Douglass Torme, executive director of Lakewood's AMC Cancer
Research Center, said he "didn't walk away overly excited."

   "These things run in cycles. We are in a consolidation-of-concepts period.
It'll be another two to three years before we get a whole new crop" of
therapies, he said.

   Among Tuesday's presentations:

   Researchers led by Dr. John DiPersio of the Washington University School of
Medicine evaluated Searle's drug, daniplestim, combined with Amgen Inc.'s growth
factor G-CSF. They compared their effectiveness to the effectiveness of G-CSF
alone in 22 breast-cancer patients. Searle is owned by St. Louis-based Monsanto.

   The researchers found that 75 percent of the patients getting both drugs were
able to produce the concentration of blood stem cells necessary for patients to
receive high-dose chemotherapy. Only 17 percent of the other patients achieved
the same level.

   The finding is significant because many patients have trouble reaching the
required level of blood stem cell production, researchers said.

   A report on a new device made by Aastrom, an Ann Arbor, Mich., company, said
doctors can collect a small amount of bone marrow from patients and grow enough
stem cells outside the body for reinfusion. Reinfusions of the cells allow
patients to recover from chemotherapy.

   The study was the first to show that bone-marrow cells grown outside the body
can retain the building elements needed to help patients recover, researchers
said.

   SmithKline Beecham, based in the United Kingdom, said its anti-nausea pill,
Kytril, is as effective as intravenous drugs. The drug also is cheaper and
easier to use.

   Research in the 1980s showed that fear of nausea and vomiting cause grave
anxiety in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. Other studies have shown that
controlling those side-effects of the harsh chemical treatment greatly improves
patients' quality of life.    Finally, an early report on Isis' gene therapy,
which inhibits production of the protein kinase C - alpha, showed that a handful
of patients receiving the drug experienced reductions in tumor size.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1997


                             2398 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                    May 21, 1997, Wednesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY KICKSTARTS IMMUNE SYSTEM;
PITT CANCER RESEARCH SAW TUMORS SHRINK IN 8 OF 21 PATIENTS

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Gene therapy designed to kickstart the body's immune system has shown early
promise in treating patients with advanced cancers, more than halving the size
of some patients' tumors.

   Doctors at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute injected patients
with cells genetically engineered to produce interleukin-12, a hormone-like
substance that plays a key role in controlling the body's disease-fighting
mechanisms.

   Tumors noticeably shrank in eight out of 21 patients, said Dr. Michael Lotze,
co-director of the institute's biological therapeutics program.

   Findings from the study were presented yesterday by co-principal investigator
Dr. Hideaki Tahara at the American Society for Clinical Oncology meeting in
Denver.

   ''That's very encouraging,'' said Dr. Jeffrey Weber, an immunologist at the
University of Southern California Norris Cancer Center in Los Angeles.
Particularly notable was that some patients saw shrinkage not only in tumors
that were injected, but also other tumors. That suggests that the body's immune
system, not just the injections, was fighting the cancer.

   ''That's pretty darned impressive and merits a repeat trial,'' Weber said.

   Within the month, in fact, Lotze will launch a follow-on study to see if the
therapy can effectively treat patients with head and neck cancers and with
melanoma, a type of skin cancer. Another study may be launched to test the
therapy in breast, prostate and pediatric cancers.

   The study Tahara reported on yesterday was designed to demonstrate that the
therapy was safe, not necessarily to improve the health of patients, Lotze
emphasized. All the patients had melanoma, head and neck cancer, or breast
cancer that had failed to respond to conventional therapy.

   ''It's gravy if you see any anti-tumor response'' in such a trial, he added.

   Dr. Robert Fenton of the National Cancer Institute is also studying cancer
gene therapy that employs interleukin-12, but for now is limiting his study to
animals.

   Therapies based on interleukin-12 tend to have dramatic effects in some
patients but fail in most patients, Fenton said. He contended that more needed
to be learned about how interleukin-12 works before it is likely to become an
effective therapy and merit human testing.

   Interleukin-12 is produced by the body's dendritic cells, which play a
central role in identifying viruses, bacteria and other threats and in selecting
immune system cells and antibodies to destroy those threats. Cancer cells,
however, produce substances that inhibit interleukin-12 and thus help the tumor
escape targeting by the immune system.

   Simply injecting interleukin-12 directly into the tumor or into the
bloodstream can be toxic, however. Lotze and his colleagues hoped that placing
interleukin-12-producing cells into a tumor could get the immune system rolling
without poisoning the patient.

   The researchers removed skin cells from each of the patients and processed
them so that they grew in the laboratory. Genes that produce interleukin-12 were
then inserted into each cell's DNA, using retroviruses specially developed at
Pitt for this purpose. Some of the genetically altered cells produced up to 100
times the amount of interleukin-12 normally produced by a cell.

   ''We can now really goose them to make lots of IL-12,'' Lotze said.

   The altered cells were then injected into or around the tumor sites.

   Doctors in South Korea last month launched their first gene therapy trial
using the Pitt-developed retroviral vectors for interleukin-12, Lotze said.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1997


                             2399 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        MAY 20, 1997 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1356 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   IN THE REGION 7 VANGUARD FUNDS SUE THOMSON, BROKERS OVER PRICING Seven
Vanguard Group Inc. mutual funds are suing Thomson Publishing Corp. and six
municipal brokers, alleging they mispriced the municipal-bond futures contract
that is listed on the Chicago Board of Trade.

   Vanguard spokesman Brian Mattes yesterday said the funds claim they lost
$3.25 million on Dec. 19, 1995, because the settlement price for the contract -
based on the Bond Buyer Municipal Bond Index - didn't reflect a cut in interest
rates taken that day by the Federal Reserve Board.

   The suit was filed May 12 in Chicago in the U.S. District Court for the
Northern District of Illinois.

   Michael Harris, Thomson Publishing's general counsel, said the company did
nothing wrong in calculating the index.

   ANALYSIS OF AF COMMAND SHIFT IS PROMISED * Rep. Tom Foglietta (D., Pa) said
he's been assured by Air Force Secretary Sheila Widnall that a cost analysis
would be completed before deciding whether to move the Air Mobility Command
eastern gateway from Philadelphia International Airport. The Air Force has said
it may relocate the AMC operations, including 35 military and civilian
employees, to Baltimore/Washington International Airport.

   CASTLE ENERGY TO SELL PART OF TEXAS PROPERTIES * Castle Energy Corp., Radnor,
said it has entered into an agreement to sell its Rusk County, Texas, oil and
gas properties and pipeline to Union Pacific Resources Co. for approximately $54
million. Closing is expected before the end of the month. Castle will retain two
operating segments after the sale: the gas marketing operations relating to a
Lone Star Gas Co. contract, and its non-Texas exploration and production
operations.

   MERCK TO SEEK FDA APPROVAL FOR 80-MG ZOCOR TABLET Merck & Co. Inc.,
Whitehouse Station, N.J., said it will seek Food and Drug Administration
approval to sell 80-mg Zocor tablets. But the company has discontinued the
highest-dose, 160-mg tablets, part of two large studies involving the
cholesterol-lowering medication. The 80-mg tablet is designed to produce greater
cholesterol lowering for certain patients. Merck had studied the 160-mg dose in
about 400 people but said it stopped the trial after three patients were
hospitalized for rhabdomyolysis, a rare injury of skeletal muscle fiber that
causes pain and weakness.

   DRUG-PRICE INCREASES MATCH MARKET PRICE TRENDS * Prescription drug prices
rose 2 percent in this year's first quarter but were in line with the
government's Producer Price Index and Consumer Price Index, according to IMS
America Ltd., a Plymouth Meeting research group that tracks the pharmaceutical
industry.

   ELSEWHERE EQUITABLE TO ACQUIRE NORTHEAST ENERGY * Equitable Resources Inc.
will acquire Northeast Energy Services Co., another oil and gas company, in a
cash and stock deal worth about $77 million. The Pittsburgh-based company said
the value is based on the $29.625 closing price of its stock on Friday.
Equitable rose 25 cents to $29.88 on the New York Stock Exchange in yesterday's
trading. Northeast, based in Framingham, Mass., will retain its current
management team and its brand name.

   CSX PLANS 270-MILE TRACK IMPROVEMENT * CSX Corp. said it plans to spend about
$220 million to improve and expand its 270-mile rail route between Greenwich,
Ohio, and Chicago. The Richmond, Va.-based transportation company said the
expansion is necessary for its acquisition of Conrail Inc.'s lines.

   T-BILL INTEREST RATES INCREASE * Interest rates on short-term Treasury
securities rose in Monday's auction. The Treasury Department sold $7.52 billion
in three-month bills at an average discount rate of 5.17 percent, up from 5.08
percent last week. An additional $7.52 billion was sold in six-month bills at an
average rate of 5.35 percent, up from 5.30 percent. The new discount rates
understate the actual return to investors - 5.31 percent for three-month bills,
with a $10,000 bill selling for $9,869.30, and 5.58 percent for a six-month bill
selling for $9,729.50.

   YIELD IS DOWN FOR SECONDARY-MARKET T-BILLS * The Federal Reserve said that
the average yield for one-year Treasury bills in the secondary market, the most
popular index for making changes in adjustable-rate mortgages, fell to 5.86
percent last week from 5.90 percent the previous week.

   MOBIL SEEKS LINK WITH ANOTHER OIL PRODUCER Mobil Corp. said it is negotiating
with several companies on a possible deal to link its refining and marketing
operations, but it declined to comment on a report it was discussing a merger of
those businesses with Amoco Corp. A newspaper article in London speculated the
deal would involve around $20 billion of assets. Amoco officials were not
immediately available for comment.

   TUMOR SUPPRESSOR GENE FOUND TO BE SAFE * Researchers from the University of
Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center reported that the first gene therapy study
using a tumor-suppressor gene known as p53 was safe and showed evidence of
clinical activity in patients with head and neck cancer. The results were
presented at an oncology meeting in Denver. The Anderson work is being sponsored
as part of a collaboration between Introgen Therapeutics, Inc., of Austin,
Texas, and RPR Gencell, the gene therapy division of Collegeville's
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.

   NEW USE REPORTED FOR SMITHKLINE'S HYCAMTIN * Hycamtin, a drug made by
Britain's SmithKline Beecham, may help patients with advanced squamous cell lung
cancer, according to research presented at an oncology conference in Denver. In
testing by the University of Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, patients
treated with Hycamtin as first-line therapy achieved a 23 percent response rate.
There is no standard treatment for non-small cell lung cancer, one of the most
common and lethal cancers, which affects an estimated 135,000 Americans each
year. Hycamtin is currently indicated for use in the treatment of patients with
recurrent, metastatic ovarian cancer.

   TOP COURT LETS INVESTORS SUE DENVER AIRPORT * The U.S. Supreme Court let
investors in the Denver International Airport proceed with a lawsuit alleging
bonds they bought were overpriced because officials concealed problems with the
project. The court, without comment, turned away Denver officials' argument that
municipal bond issuers cannot be sued under federal securities law. The $4.9
billion airport opened in February 1995, more than a year late and $3.2 billion
over budget. The opening was delayed because of construction problems, including
an automated baggage system that chewed up luggage.

   TIGER WOODS SIGNS AD DEAL WITH AMERICAN EXPRESS * Tiger Woods, who won the
Masters golf tournament last month, signed a multimillion-dollar deal to be an
advertising spokesman for American Express Co. Terms of the deal were not
disclosed. The trade magazine Brandweek said it was for $30 million for five
years, but a person familiar with the agreement but speaking on condition of
anonymity said it was worth less than that. Woods already has multiyear
endorsement deals estimated to be worth $40 million with Nike Inc., the sports
show and apparel marketer, and $20 million with the sports equipment
manufacturer Titleist.

   ITT SELLS 5 SHERATON HOTELS TO FELCOR * ITT Corp. is shedding more assets in
its effort to fend off hostile bidder Hilton Hotels Corp. This time, the
embattled company is selling some of its Sheraton hotels. ITT announced
yesterday it would raise $200 million with the sale of five hotels to FelCor
Suites Hotels Inc., a deal that marks the birth of a long-term strategic
alliance with FelCor. ITT will continue to manage the hotels for 20 years. The
company said it had been in talks for more than a year with FelCor, a real
estate investment trust that ranks as the largest single owner of Embassy Suites
hotels.

   THE BOTTOM LINE Home Health Care Corp. of America Inc., King of Prussia,
completed the purchase of Diamond Home Health Inc., which provides home health
services in Hazleton and Stroudsburg. . . . Japan's trade surplus soared 163.7
percent to $7.23 billion in April.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2002


                             2400 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1997 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times

                       May 18, 1997, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words

HEADLINE: U.S. PANEL TO URGE HUMAN CLONING BAN

BYLINE: ROBERT A. ROSENBLATT, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   A special presidential commission, taking an unexpectedly tough stand, is
preparing to call for a new federal law banning the creation of a human being by
cloning.

   The National Bioethics Advisory Commission, which met here Saturday, wants to
extend to private corporate and medical laboratories the same kind of
prohibition against cloning now imposed on researchers using federal dollars.

   Members of the commission voiced strong sentiments against the creation of a
human clone, a baby with just one biological and genetic parent.

   The commission's final report will be delivered to President Clinton on May
27. He had imposed the moratorium on federal funding while awaiting the report.

   Although the commission did not complete final language for the report, it
was clear there is strong support for tough, restrictive federal legislation.
Rather than rely on voluntary cooperation by researchers and fertility clinics,
the commission would make it illegal for anyone to make a human clone.

   "It's a safety concern" because babies created by cloning would have a high
risk of "developmental defects and other physical abnormalities," said Dr. David
Cox, professor of genetics and pediatrics at Stanford Medical School.

   "There is an increased physical risk--that is why I feel it is an awful
idea," Cox, a commission member, said in an interview. "I believe safety is an
ethical issue."

   "We're all agreed it shouldn't be done. We need to make it a firm
prohibition," Dr. Eric J. Cassell, clinical professor of public health at
Cornell Medical College, told his fellow panel members.

   Commission members are strong supporters of continuing research in the
cloning of animals, and of further work to develop medical treatments linked to
gene therapy.

   But they want to draw a clear line between these activities and the attempt
to create a human baby that is a genetic carbon copy of just one parent.

   To keep the line distinct, they are willing to take what for scientists is
the rare step of calling for curtailment of the freedom of researchers.

   Most federal commissions, faced with controversial issues such as this, have
typically endorsed freedom for medical or scientific research while calling for
procedural safeguards.

   This time, however, the potential opportunities for abuse, and the intense
publicity and concern over cloning, prompted a very different approach.
Virtually all members of the commission, including scientists who have been
quick to oppose any legislative restrictions on research in the past, are
endorsing the proposed law.

   Commission members include doctors, professors of ethics and religion,
research scientists and a pharmaceutical company executive. Scottish
researchers' cloning of a lamb named Dolly, which grew into a healthy adult,
precipitated the current highly publicized debate.

   Cloning is the production of an exact genetic duplicate of a living organism.

   In the normal reproductive process, an egg and a sperm fuse, combining the
genetic background of two parents, to produce an embryo. The embryo becomes a
third adult, combining the genes contributed by each parent.

   Cloning uses only the genes from one parent. Dolly was created with the
genetic material from a cell from the udder of a ewe. Her only parent was her
mother.

   In human cloning, the child would not be a unique combination of genes with
physical and mental aspects from two people, as is the case with every human
being. Instead, the child would be an identical copy, genetically speaking, of
the sole parent contributing the genes.

   The commission's goal through a law is to "prohibit the first successful
cloning of a human being," said Dr. Bernard Lo, professor of medicine and
director of the medical ethics program at UC San Francisco.

   A key target of the proposed law would be fertility clinics, where the egg
from the mother and sperm from the father are combined to produce an embryo,
which is then implanted in the mother.

   Commission members fear fertility clinic doctors would produce embryos using
the genes from just one parent. Perhaps a billionaire wanted to replicate
himself in children, or a politician wanted a child identical to herself.

   "For most of us, safety is a profoundly ethical issue. Safety is a moral
issue," said the commission chairman, Princeton University President Harold
Shapiro. "The chances of abnormal development in fetuses created this way is
very high," he said.

   Laws barring human cloning have been adopted in Britain, Denmark, Spain,
Germany and Australia.

   Commission members emphasize that the ban would apply only to cloning
research aimed at making a human being.

   "It is critical" to continue cloning research, which is the "foundation of
modern biomedicine," Shapiro said.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1998
