
                              1 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           December 31, 2005 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 376 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
Gene Therapy Trials in the Works to Treat Hereditary Blood Diseases

BYLINE: Delthia Ricks, Newsday

BODY:

   Scientists in New York have developed a gene therapy they say may cure two
pervasive blood disorders, and the first round of human trials is expected to
begin within six months.

   Sickle cell disease and thalassemia are related genetic disorders typified by
red blood cells that are incapable of effectively transporting oxygen. The
diseases affect tens of thousands of people worldwide, and can prove fatal.

   Scientists at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan reported
this week in an online edition of Nature Biotechnology that they have developed
a form of gene therapy that targets stem cells and restores effective oxygen
delivery.

   The report focuses on sickle cell disease, but the team has completed
preliminary work on thalassemia and is expected to begin clinical trials by
summer.

   "The goal here is ambitious because the purpose of this is to achieve cures
for both diseases," said Dr. Michel Sadelain, the study's lead investigator.

   Gene therapy is the technique in which a healthy new gene is incorporated
into patients' cells to correct a debilitating defect.

   Patients with thalassemia and sickle cell disease are hobbled by a defective
form of globin, the oxygen-carrying compound in red blood cells. The researchers
will use a killed lentivirus -- HIV-1 -- to ferry healthy globin genes into stem
cells. HIV-1 was selected for the task because of its keen ability to integrate
into the chromosomes of cells.

   Bone marrow transplants are now used to treat thalassemia and sickle cell
disease, but finding appropriate donors can be difficult, Sadelain said. Even
when a donor is found, patients still face the possibility that their immune
system will reject the transplant.

   Gene therapy offers a way to infuse patients with their own cells. The
process begins with stem cells, which are produced in the bone marrow and
collected from a patient's blood. The cells are then cultured under sterile
laboratory conditions, and healthy genes are transferred into the cells'
chromosomes with the help of the killed HIV-1.

   Before the cells are reinfused, patients are given a medication to tamp down
their immune system and boost the likelihood that the newly altered stem cells
will produce a healthy blood supply. The procedure is virtually painless.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2005


                              2 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            December 30, 2005 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; V.C. NATION; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: A New Wariness as the Risks Shift in Biotech Investing

BYLINE: By Andrew Pollack

BODY:

   WHEN it comes to biotechnology start-ups, venture capitalists typically cash
out when the start-up goes public. Buying that newly issued stock, however, can
be risky for investors.

     ''Usually, V.C.'s make three to five times their money and the public sees
their money going down the drain,'' said Alan G. Walton, senior general partner
at Oxford Bioscience Partners in Westport, Conn.

   Nowadays, stocks sold in initial public offerings might not be so risky for
the public, Mr. Walton noted. That is because the market values of newly public
biotech companies are so low that it is now the venture capitalists who lose
money on the I.P.O.

     The difficulty of taking companies public, especially at values they find
attractive, has become a lament of biotech venture capitalists, and it is
forcing changes in their strategies. Instead of a way to cash out, the initial
offering is now a chance to keep a company going until, hopefully, the venture
investors can sell their stock later.

     ''I.P.O's are no longer liquidity events, they are financing events,'' said
Lowell Sears of Sears Capital Management, a venture firm in Los Altos, Calif.

     Only 17 drug development and diagnostic companies went public in the United
States in 2005, down from 30 in 2004, according to Recombinant Capital, a life
sciences financial consulting and research firm based in Walnut Creek, Calif.
Several companies, most recently Prestwick Pharmaceuticals, based in Washington,
and Voyager Pharmaceutical, in Raleigh, N.C., have canceled planned offerings,
citing poor market conditions.

     Specialists say public investors are being more conservative because they
were burned by a spate of genomics companies that went public in 2000 and then
foundered. There are now a relatively small number of biotech-oriented funds
willing to buy stock in initial offerings.

     ''Because it's so concentrated, the buyers have more leverage,'' said
Andrew J. Weisenfeld, head of biotechnology investment banking at Banc of
America Securities. ''The values have to be low enough that they are willing to
take the risk associated with development-stage biotech.''

     For venture capitalists, the problem is not only low I.P.O. prices but also
a higher level of investment needed to get a company to the stage where it can
be taken public. In the past, companies could go public on sheer technological
promise. Nowadays, they usually have to show effectiveness for at least one drug
in clinical trials.

     Brian G. Atwood, a managing director of Versant Ventures in Menlo Park,
Calif., said that venture capitalists now had to put about $100 million into a
start-up biotech company before it could go public, compared with $60 million
for companies that went public in 2000 and $30 million for those that went
public in 1995 and 1996.

     In some cases, like Avalon Pharmaceuticals, of Germantown, Md., companies
are going public at valuations less than the money the venture firms have
already put in. Or the valuation is only slightly above that amount.

     ''Even at a $200 million I.P.O. valuation, if you can get it, you're not
getting anything like venture-like returns,'' said Mark Edwards, president of
Recombinant Capital.

     So venture capitalists have changed tack. ''As the exit valuations have
gone down, the only variable left in the equation is how much money you put in
before you exit,'' said Drew Senyei, managing partner of Enterprise Partners in
San Diego.

     Enterprise ran Celladon, a start-up developing gene therapy for heart
disease, as a ''virtual company,'' farming out laboratory work and animal
testing. Only now, with human clinical trials approaching, is Celladon
recruiting full-time management.

     Exit strategies are also changing. More companies are looking to be
acquired by big pharmaceutical companies, which want to bolster thin pipelines.
Peninsula Pharmaceuticals and Salmedix were acquired this year by Johnson &
Johnson of New Brunswick, N.J., and Cephalon, of La Jolla, Calif., respectively,
after they filed to go public.

     Some companies are going public through reverse mergers. Advanced Cell
Technology of Worcester, Mass., known for its stem cell research, went public
last January after merging with Two Moons Kachinas, a company formed to sell
Hopi Indian dolls over the Internet.

     Some private companies are merging with public biotech companies that have
suffered severe setbacks, with the business going forward being mainly that of
the private company. One example of that is the privately held AlgoRx
Pharmaceuticals of Secaucus, N.J., which merged with the publicly traded
Corgentech of South San Francisco, Calif. Jonathan MacQuitty, a partner at
Abingworth Management in Menlo Park, Calif., predicts several American companies
will go public next year on European exchanges, where they hope demand would be
greater, rather than on the Nasdaq market. To be sure, investors' receptivity to
biotech initial offerings tends to wax and wane and the current phase may be
temporary. Biotech venture funds still raised about $7 billion in 2005, up from
$5 billion in 2004, according to Burrill & Company, an investment and research
firm in San Francisco. But Mr. Walton of Oxford Bioscience said some
institutional investors that once willingly gave his company money were now
being more cautious. Many other venture funds could be in the same boat.

     ''If those funds don't make decent returns, there will be a greatly reduced
amount of money flowing into biotech venture capital,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 4, 2006

CORRECTION:

   Because of an editing error, the V.C. Nation column in Business Day on Friday
about biotechnology start-ups misstated where Cephalon, a pharmaceutical
company, is based. It is Frazer, Pa., not La Jolla, Calif.

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Dave Ember)

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2005


                              3 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 29, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: Panel Further Discredits Stem Cell Work of South Korean Scientist

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Thursday, Dec. 29

BODY:

   Hwang Woo Suk, South Korea's disgraced star scientist, could present no
evidence to corroborate his landmark claim that he had cloned human embryos and
extracted from them stem cells that genetically match patients, a university
panel said Thursday.

     The announcement by the panel, from Seoul National University where Dr.
Hwang did his research, suggested that he did not just grossly exaggerate his
work in an article published in the journal Science in June, but fabricated the
entire paper. ''So far we could not find any stem cells regarding Dr. Hwang's
2005 paper that genetically match the DNA of patients,'' said Roe Jung Hye, the
university's dean of research affairs, in a statement. ''According to our
judgment, Dr. Hwang's team doesn't have scientific data to prove that it has
produced such stem cells.'' There was no immediate comment from Dr. Hwang, who
apologized last week for falsifications in his paper and resigned from the
university.

    The latest revelation added more skepticism to his persistent claim that he
at least had the technology to clone human embryos and extract stem cells from
them, which would be a breakthrough in the quest to help patients with
hard-to-treat diseases to produce their own, regenerated tissues. If his claim
proves false, the goal of such treatment, known as therapeutic cloning, may be
considerably further off than it seemed a few months ago, when Dr. Hwang's fame
was at a peak.

     Hopes for therapeutic cloning soared after he published a stunning paper in
Science in February 2004, claiming to be the first to clone a human embryo by
transferring an adult cell's nucleus into an egg, and extracting a stem cell
line from it. He further solidified his fame with his June paper, in which he
claimed to have not only repeated the process with 11 patients but also did so
with a far fewer number of human eggs.

     But the university committee that has been investigating allegations of
fabrications said last Friday that he had falsified data for 9 of the 11
patient-derived embryonic stem cell lines in his June paper. Of the remaining
two lines, the panel had said it did not yet know whether they had been derived
from patients or from fertilized human eggs.

     In a follow-up report Thursday, the committee, citing extensive DNA tests,
said that none of the stem cells Dr. Hwang said he had created for his June
paper was produced through cloning. All the samples presented for the paper that
still exist in his laboratory were stem cells extracted from fertilized human
eggs at Seoul's MizMedi Hospital, which participated in Dr. Hwang's research,
Dr. Roe said.

     ''We have asked three independent labs to conduct DNA tests on the samples,
and all three came out with the same conclusion,'' she said. ''None of the stem
cells were patient-specific. They were all fertilized-egg stem cells from
MizMedi.''

     Apparently anticipating such an outcome, Dr. Hwang had claimed that his
authentic stem cells were stolen from his lab and were replaced with MizMedi
samples. MizMedi scientists accused Dr. Hwang of a cover-up.

     The panel is still investigating his 2004 study, and the authenticity of an
Afghan hound Snuppy, which was unveiled by Dr. Hwang in August as the world's
first cloned dog.

     Verifying the 2004 paper holds the key to the question of whether the
fallen South Korean researcher had ever cloned a human embryo. Dr. Roe said the
panel would announce its final findings in mid-January.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2005


                              4 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            December 25, 2005 Sunday
                                Bulldog Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1117 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Getting to the Roots of Hair-Loss Problems;
Working with expanded knowledge of the human genome, researchers hope to use
cloning to counter male pattern baldness.

BYLINE: Associated Press Writer

DATELINE:  NEW YORK

BODY:

   Look around a crowd, and you'll see that lots of middle-age men are losing
their hair. What is science doing about this? Quite a bit, it turns out.

   A British company, for example, says five guys are walking around with
hundreds more hairs than they had before, thanks to an early test of what's been
called hair cloning. A U.S. outfit hopes to start testing a similar approach
next year.

   Other scientists are tracking down genes that make some men susceptible to
hair loss to understand the process. For example, why do some lose hair on their
heads while their beards keep going strong?

   Black men are far less susceptible, but about a third of 30-year-old white
men have signs of what doctors call male pattern baldness. By the time they're
50, about half of them do. The condition creeps across the head, one patch
starting at the back, and two making inroads from the front.

   Some men say bald is beautiful. And others smear on Rogaine or take Propecia
pills, or get hair transplants.

   In fact, right now is "the best time in history to be going bald, because
there's an awful lot of things that can be done," said Dr. Ken Washenik,
executive vice president of the Aderans Research Institute in Philadelphia,
which is investigating the "hair cloning" approach.

   But the drugs don't help everybody, and not everyone is interested in a
transplant. So the search for therapies continues. To understand the search for
new treatments, it helps to know a little about hair and male pattern baldness.
(Women can also get hormone-induced baldness, but it's not clear if it's really
the same condition.)

   Everybody starts out with a lifetime supply of about 100,000 follicles on the
scalp, each primed to produce a single hair shaft. Normally, any given follicle
pumps out that shaft for two to six years, then takes a break for a few weeks.
Then it sheds the hair and starts over.

   Each day, we lose about 100 hairs this way. No big deal; about an equal
number of follicles enter the growth phase on the same day, and at any one time
about 90% to 95% of the follicles are busy growing new hair.

   But in some men this orderly process goes awry.

   In some places, the hair-growing phase gets progressively shorter and the
resting phase gets longer. So the resulting hairs get shorter and shorter with
each trip through the cycle. Eventually, they don't even poke out through the
scalp.

   What's more, affected follicles take longer to start growing hair again after
they've shed one. And they shrink, so the hair they produce is finer. And the
total number of remaining hairs slips by about 5% a year.

   What causes this? The full picture isn't known, but it involves a combination
of genetic susceptibility and hormones, including testosterone.

   Researchers are eager to identify the biochemical actors within follicles
that could be manipulated to fight baldness. As for genetics, some studies have
implicated a particular gene that may be necessary to get the condition but not
sufficient to produce baldness on its own, said Stephen Harrap of the University
of Melbourne in Australia.

   In all, it might take inheriting certain versions of about five genes to get
the condition, like getting a bad poker hand, suggested Rodney Sinclair of the
University of Melbourne.

   In England, meanwhile, a company called Intercytex has just begun human
studies of an approach sometimes called hair cloning. It focuses on a particular
kind of cell, found at the base of the follicle, that can team up with skin
cells to produce new follicles.

   Scientists extract some cells from the areas of a man's head that resist
balding, put them in a lab dish and expand their numbers by thousands of times.
Then inject these new cells back into the scalp, where they'll work with skin
cells to form new follicles. So, unlike transplants, the guy actually ends up
with more hairs than he started with.

   The company has recently tested this on seven men with thinning hair due to
male pattern baldness, and five of them gained hair, says Intercytex chief
scientific officer Paul Kemp. This was just an initial study to look for side
effects such as inflammation, Kemp said, and no such problems appeared.

   Not that this restored a full head of hair. The treated areas were just the
size of a quarter, and covered places that already had hair, rather than bald
spots.

   "We didn't want to create these weird and wonderful patterns on their head,"
Kemp said. "It's such a small area in the hairy area anyway, I would be
surprised if they really knew any difference."

   Eventually, if further studies go well, the technique could allow hair
transplant surgeons to cover more of a bald head, Kemp said. The next round of
human research is expected to start next summer.

   Someday, men might avoid transplants altogether, just getting periodic shots
of their own cells to counterbalance their hair loss. "You would be going thin,
and you'd be maintained," Kemp said.

   "Sometime in the future, I think baldness will be a choice rather than
something you have to suffer," said Kemp. "Any bald people will have chosen to
be bald."

   Within five years, Kemp said, his company may have a commercial product.

   Washenik, of the Aderans Institute, said his group's efforts in hair cloning
have shown promise in mice. He hopes studies on people can begin next year.

   He said follicles that grow from the transplanted cells should resist
balding, because they come from a part of the head that balding doesn't touch.
Ordinary hair transplants show that follicles from these resistant regions stay
resistant even when planted in bald regions, he said. But even if the
transplanted cells do eventually succumb, "you've got years of hair on your
scalp that's of benefit to you," said Washenik, who also works for a hair
transplantation business called Bosley.

   Ultimately, he said, scientists would love to accomplish the same goal with a
cream that could be smeared on the scalp and deliver just the right chemical
signals to stimulate new follicles to grow.

   In any case, he said, it's not just about hair.

   Hair follicles, after all, are organs. So follicle research may help other
scientists who are working to regenerate bigger organs like the liver and
kidneys, Washenik said.

   Sinclair agreed, saying follicle research allows scientists to approach not
just organ regeneration, but also questions about stem cells, cell growth and
gene therapy that may pay off someday in new treatments for diseases such as
cancer and Alzheimer's. He is testing a skin cream in mice that may alter
follicle behavior by fiddling with genes

   "The idea of growing hair on a bald scalp is only of moderate interest,"
Sinclair said in a telephone interview. "If we find the cure for baldness we're
not going to stop studying hair."

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2005


                              5 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            December 25, 2005 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1696 words

HEADLINE: CRITICAL STEPS / TREATING PARKINSON'S;
A chance for relief;
Procedure offers hope for Parkinson's sufferers

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   First of two parts

    Phil Lammers is sitting in his kitchen with an array of prescription bottles
spread out in front of him.

    He puts six pills in his mouth and, with a shaky hand, brings a glass of
water to his lips. Six down and 19 to go.

    Lammers takes 25 pills a day to control his worsening Parkinson's disease.
He has to use a partially filled glass of water, just like everything else he
drinks, because his tremors cause spills.

    Since he was diagnosed with the disease 22 years ago, his life has been a
glass half empty.

    When doctors told him he would have to add more medication to his daily
regimen, he had had enough.

    "That's when I looked into this procedure," he said.

    Lammers decided to join a growing number of people with advancing
Parkinson's who have put their fate in the hands of neurosurgeons and an
operation known as deep brain stimulation. For Lammers, who celebrated his 65th
birthday Christmas Eve, the result has been a remarkable gift.

    The surgery involves drilling two nickel-size holes in the top of the head,
pushing a thin, metal guide tube deep into the brain and implanting long
electrodes no thicker than angel hair pasta. The electrodes are attached to a
pacemaker device implanted under the collarbone so that a steady stream of
low-voltage shocks can be delivered to a specific spot in the brain.

    Doctors don't know exactly how the therapy works, although it is believed to
disrupt electrical impulses in the brain that cause movement disorders such as
the tremors and rigidity that are hallmarks of Parkinson's.

    First approved for Parkinson's in 2002, deep brain stimulation and other
neuromodulation procedures are being studied more and more as potential
treatments for a variety of neurological and psychiatric disorders, including
epilepsy, obsessive compulsive disorder, pain, addiction and depression.

    A total of 18 ongoing clinical trials involve deep brain stimulation,
according to the National Institutes of Health.

    The versatile therapy actually allows doctors to change the way different
brain regions talk to each other, said Michael Okun, an assistant professor of
neurology and neurosurgery at the University of Florida.

    "There is a small revolution going," said Okun, who also is co-director of
the university's movement disorders center. "The boundaries are endless."

    However, although deep brain stimulation is a "wonderful treatment" in
properly selected patients, "it's not a cure," he said.

   First, a buzz cut

    At 7:08 a.m. Dec. 5, Lammers was put in a wheelchair and brought into the
pre-operation area of Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital for a quick, painless
and low-tech first procedure in a day that he hoped would change his life.

    He got his head shaved.

    The buzz cut provided a bit of light diversion, but the mood got serious
when neurosurgeon Brian Kopell assembled a metal frame that soon would be
screwed into Lammers' skull.

    The stereotactic frame would be a crucial component to the surgery, allowing
doctors to precisely place the electrodes in a deep region of the brain known as
the subthalamic nucleus.

    If the frame moves even the smallest bit during the surgery, "you're done,"
Kopell said. "It's like being in the middle of the ocean and losing your compass
and sextant."

    With a large syringe filled with a local anesthetic, Kopell injected four
spots on Lammers' head, two in the forehead and two in the back of the head.

    Using a screwdriver and an Allen wrench, Kopell turned the screws deeper,
firmly affixing the frame to Lammers' cranium.

    When Lammers is in stressful situations, his tremors often get worse. His
right hand and arm shook vigorously as the frame was attached.

    "This is where it gets tight," Kopell said, making one last turn. "All
right, you're headed off to a CAT scan. I'll see you in the operating room."

    The metal box now spread across his eyes, nose and ears evoked an image of
Frankenstein's monster meets Hannibal Lecter.

    With his right hand shaking, Lammers was placed on the movable table of a CT
scanner and rolled inside a large ring for one more picture of his brain, this
time with the metal frame around his head.

    The frame, as well as a guide device and other attachments that get bolted
to it, allows doctors to precisely insert the metal probe that will be driven
down into the brain.

    The positioning is done by merging a magnetic resonance imaging picture of
Lammers' brain that was taken a week earlier with the CT scan of his brain and
the head frame taken the morning of the surgery.

    Ultimately, doctors need to place the tip of the electrode at an exact spot
about five inches beneath the top of the skull.

    And then they need to do it a second time for the corresponding spot on the
other side of the brain.

    The target brain region for both electrodes - the subthalamic nucleus - is
an oblong mass of cells about the size of a small black olive that sits near the
bottom of the brain. It is involved in regulating movement.

    "Hitting the right part of the subthalamic nucleus is like being in Earth's
orbit and trying to hit home plate at Yankee Stadium with a baseball," said
Kopell, an assistant professor of neurosurgery at the Medical College of
Wisconsin. "If you put it in the wrong area, you're going to get more side
effects or you're not going to get the (beneficial) effects you are looking
for."

   Worsening condition

    Although Lammers, of Oostburg, has had Parkinson's for more than two
decades, much of his decline has taken place over the last five years, including
worsening tremors, rigidity, slowness of movement and dyskinesia, a type of
involuntary movement such as jerking or twisting caused by levodopa, the main
drug used to treat Parkinson's.

    He had to retire from his job as a precision woodworker in 1999 because his
work pace had slowed so much.

    When he walks, at times, it looks as if he is marching in place.

    "It's especially bad in crowds," said his wife, Joan. "He can't walk without
me pulling him."

    She said they try to do things during his "good" hours of the day, usually
in the later morning and early afternoon.

    "Nights are almost always a no-no," she said. "When he gets tired, he's had
it. He just can't function."

    In the right patients, deep brain stimulation can reduce symptoms by about
50% as well as allow them to significantly reduce their medications.

    Two years ago, researchers writing in the New England Journal of Medicine
found that many of the benefits of deep brain stimulation persisted for at least
five years.

    The researchers concluded that the therapy works best for relatively young
patients who can carry out the activities of daily living independently and who
have motor complications caused by their levodopa treatment.

    The study involved 49 patients.

    Three of the patients died after their surgeries, including one who suffered
a brain hemorrhage during the surgery and was bedridden for three years and
another who was severely depressed and committed suicide six months after the
surgery.

    An editorial that accompanied the study called the treatment a major advance
in the treatment of Parkinson's.

    In 2004, another study involving 81 patients who were followed for an
average of 17 months found no serious surgical complication resulting in death
or permanent neurological problems.

    However, hardware complications such as cracks in wires and malfunction of
the pacemaker occurred in 26% of patients, according to the study in the journal
Neurology.

    In addition, about 3% of patients developed infections that required removal
of some or all of the hardware.

    But nearly everyone who undergoes the treatment gets some improvement, said
Bradley Hiner, one of Lammers' doctors and an assistant professor of neurology
at the Medical College of Wisconsin.

    "This is not a cure for the disease," Hiner said. "If Parkinson's is a long,
downhill slide, we're pushing you back up the ramp five or 10 years."

    But those years could be especially important because they may keep patients
functional until new breakthroughs such as stem cell transplants or gene therapy
are developed, he said.

     Unlike Parkinson's surgeries developed in the 1940s and '50s that actually
destroyed brain tissue permanently by heating it, deep brain stimulation is
reversible.

    More and more patients now are opting for the treatment, which costs about
$60,000 and normally is covered by insurance and Medicare.

    Before September 2004, Froedtert did only a couple of the surgeries a year,
Hiner said. Now, the hospital is doing one or two a week.

    Other Wisconsin hospitals, including the University of Wisconsin Hospital in
Madison, St. Luke's Medical Center in Milwaukee and the Marshfield Clinic, are
performing a growing number of the surgeries.

   'A lot of people praying'

    Deep brain stimulation is done without general anesthesia because at various
times the patient is asked to move body parts or respond to questions.

    The brain doesn't feel pain, at least not the kind caused by a 5-inch-long
metal probe.

    At 8:32 a.m., Lammers was snoring as he lay on the operating table.

    While he slept, the back of his head frame was bolted into the table.

    About 10 minutes later, Lammers awoke.

    "Phil, what side is your worst side?" Kopell said.

    "The right," Lammers said.

    "We're going to start on your left," Kopell said.

    "There's a lot of people praying for us," Lammers said.

    Kopell then marked the spots on top of Lammers' head where holes would be
drilled in the skull.

    "OK, let's scrub," Kopell said after marking the second spot.

   ABOUT THIS SERIES

    TODAY: After 22 years of living with Parkinson's disease, Phil Lammers puts
his fate in the hands of neurosurgeons and an operation called deep brain
stimulation.

    Monday: In an effort to relieve the extreme shaking and jerking that come
with Parkinson's disease, electrodes descend deep into Phil Lammers' brain -
it's all so he can have his life back.

   On the Web

    For an audio slideshow following Phil Lammers through his surgery, go to
www.jsonline.com/links/brain

    Coming tomorrow: Results of the surgery.

   Copyright 2005, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2005


                              6 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 24, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1187 words

HEADLINE: Korean Cloning Scientist Quits Over Report He Faked Research

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN and NICHOLAS WADE; Choe Sang-Hun of The International
Herald Tribune reported from Seoul for this article, and Nicholas Wade from New
York.

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea, Dec. 23

BODY:

   Dr. Hwang Woo Suk, the South Korean scientist whose research on stem cells
and cloning propelled him to international stardom, resigned from his university
on Friday, after an investigative panel there reported earlier in the day that
he had fabricated the paper in which he claimed to have created stem cell
colonies from 11 patients.

     The South Korean government, which had vigorously promoted Dr. Hwang as the
symbol of its drive to carve out a niche in biotechnology, admitted to
''crushing misery'' and said it planned to halt research funds for the
53-year-old scientist.

   In both Korea and the United States, supporters of stem cell research
expressed concern that the setback would damage the image of what was already a
controversial field. Many critics have long worried that the high-profile
tactics of famous scientists like Dr. Hwang fundamentally distort the scientific
method. [News analysis, Page A6.]

     The panel at Seoul National University pledged to impose a heavy punishment
on Dr. Hwang, and said it was investigating his other claims, including his
report of having cloned a dog and his announcement last year that he had
achieved the first cloning of a human cell.

     As he announced his resignation, surrounded by weeping students, Dr. Hwang
said, ''I apologize to the South Korean people for creating an unspeakable shock
and disappointment.''

     But he insisted that he had invented the technology needed to clone human
embryos and to produce stem cells that genetically match patients.

     ''Technology for patient-specific embryonic stem cells belongs to South
Korea,'' he said before leaving his lab. ''And you will find out that this is
true.''

     The nationally televised announcement by the university, which examined
data from his lab and questioned members of his research team, was the first
official confirmation of a series of criticisms of his work in the last month,
many of them posted on Web sites used by young Korean researchers.

     Dr. Hwang had already retracted the stem cell paper, which appeared in May
in the American journal Science, after critics and associates pointed out that
photographs used to support it appeared to have been faked. He cited ''human
errors.''

     But on Friday, Roe Jung Hye, dean of research affairs at the university,
said at the panel's news conference that the erroneous data ''were not
accidental mistakes, but were an intentional fabrication.''

     Dr. Roe said that Dr. Hwang had created only 2 stem cell lines by March 15,
when he submitted his paper to Science, but concocted DNA fingerprinting and
other lab data to make it look as if he had produced 11 lines that genetically
matched patients.

     ''We determined that this is a grave misconduct that damages the foundation
of science,'' she said.

     The panel has not yet determined whether the two existing embryonic cell
lines were derived from a patient, as Dr. Hwang reported, or were simply
generated in the usual way from fertilized human eggs.

     Dr. Roe also reported as false a principal claim by Dr. Hwang in the
Science paper, that he had made human cloning far more practical by using fewer
eggs to establish each cell line. He had reduced the average requirement from
the 242 eggs he needed to establish the first cloned human cell line in 2004, to
a mere 17 per cell line, he wrote.

     ''We believe that the number of eggs he used was far more than he has
reported,'' Dr. Roe said.

     Another Korean scientist, Roh Sung Il, a former associate of Dr. Hwang's,
has said as many as 1,100 eggs might have been used in research for the paper.

     The breakthrough Dr. Hwang said he had achieved would have been a
significant advance in therapeutic cloning, in which a wide range of
degenerative diseases could be treated with tissues generated from a patient's
own cells. On Friday, that potential was cited -- wistfully, angrily or with
renewed determination -- by scientists and others in South Korea and in the
United States.

     The Rev. Kim Je Eun, a Methodist pastor whose 10-year-old son uses a
wheelchair after a car accident and was one of the 11 patients cited in the
Science paper, said he vividly remembered the day in April 2004 when the boy
first met Dr. Hwang.

     ''My son asked him, 'Doctor, can you make me stand up and walk again?' ''
Mr. Kim said. ''And Dr. Hwang said, 'You will walk again, I promise.' ''

     Dr. John Gearhart, a stem cell expert at Johns Hopkins University, said Dr.
Hwang's falsifications ''will produce cynicism about the stem cell field and
science in general.'' He added that scientists would need to convince the public
and policy makers that people commit fraud in science, just as in any
profession, and that as scientists ''we must make it apparent that we do our
best to prevent the corruption of the scientific process.''

     A critic of stem cell research, Richard Doerflinger, the deputy director of
pro-life activities for the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, said
the field had been seriously damaged.

     ''It's all very well to say one scandal shouldn't set back the field,'' he
said. ''But Hwang's team was the field. If his results are false, then after
seven years of attempts worldwide no one has succeeded in getting even the first
step in 'therapeutic cloning' to work on a practical scale.''

     Scientists, however, argued that the damage was narrower. ''There may be
some political flareback,'' said Dr. Donald Kennedy, editor of Science. ''But I
hope people would consider the many exciting experiments that have worked,
rather than focusing on one very embarrassing failure.''

     Dr. Zach Hall, president of the California Institute of Regenerative
Medicine, said that it was too soon to say whether Dr. Hwang's failure would
prove a political setback for stem cell research, but that it was evidently a
scientific reverse.

     ''It's a technological setback,'' he said, ''and ground we thought we had
won must now be re-won.''

     A group of young scientists who helped reveal flaws in Hwang's papers
through a Web site frequented by science students issued a statement saying that
any leniency toward Hwang would further damage the credibility of South Korean
scientists.

     Dr. Hwang's rise from peasant's son to international fame has often been
attributed to South Koreans' eagerness to embrace new technology and their
fiercely nationalistic desire to become No. 1 in the world, as exemplified by
the South Korean computer chip and shipbuilding industries.

     But Han Jae Kak, a policy coordinator for the opposition Democratic Labor
Party, said South Korea's ''overriding emphasis on quick achievements'' and its
''need for a hero who can put the country together at a time of economic
uncertainty helped make Dr. Hwang what he is today.''

     Mr. Han said, ''The government depended on Hwang to justify its policy of
support for cloning.'' Since 1998, the government has provided Dr. Hwang's team
with an estimated $65 million in research funds.

     ''Popular support was total; people had not listened to suspicions about
Hwang,'' said Mr. Han, who was among the first to question the work. ''In a way,
we were all chasing an optical illusion.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hwang Woo Suk apologized ''for creating an unspeakable shock.''
(Photo by Won Dai-Yeon/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A1)
 Hwang Woo Suk said farewell to students as he left his office at Seoul National
University yesterday, after resigning from his post there. (Photo by Nam
Kang-Ho/Newsis, via Reuters)(pg. A6)

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2005


                              7 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           December 24, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: The fall of a stem-cell star;
A cloned dog made him famous. His lies were exposed.

BYLINE: Dawn Fallik, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   It took just eight months for Hwang Woo Suk's stem-cell work to go from
"seminal research" to "fraudulent science."

   The man who reached star status in South Korea after creating "Snuppy," the
world's first cloned dog, plummeted from grace yesterday after an investigation
found that Hwang lied about many of the stem-cell lines he said he created in a
paper published in May in the journal Science. Yesterday, Hwang resigned from
Seoul National University and apologized.

   The news shook the scientific world as researchers worried that Hwang's fraud
would affect future funding and progress in an already politically fragile area.
And they wondered why such a respected figure would lie, when it was obvious he
would be found out.

   "It's so easy to check on and validate," said John Gearhart, a stem-cell
expert at Johns Hopkins University and member of Science's board of reviewing
editors. He said he did not review Hwang's work.

   "I just can't understand anyone realizing the high visibility of this work
and thinking that they would get away with it."

   Hwang, who stressed his ethical standards as a guest lecturer at the
University of Pennsylvania last month, had had a 20-month collaboration with
University of Pittsburgh researcher Gerald Schatten. In November, Schatten ended
the partnership citing ethical concerns and a "breach of trust."

   The University of Pittsburgh is investigating the duo's work. A school
spokeswoman said the professor would not talk about the issue until the query
ended.

   Although all of Hwang's recent stem-cell research is now under scrutiny -
including "Snuppy," the Afghan hound - Gearhart said, the main issue is with the
May 2005 article.

   In the journal, Hwang said that he had taken 11 patients who had spinal cord
injuries, diabetes and immune disorders, and cloned their stem-cell lines.

   The process involved removing a cell from the patient and placing a nucleus
from the cell inside a woman's donated egg. The egg then reacts as if it's been
fertilized and replicates - using the patient's genetic material.

   The news was exciting because it opened up possibilities in gene therapy and
transplant research, said neurobiologist Lorraine Iacovitti, an embryonic
stem-cell researcher at the Farber Institute for Neurosciences at Thomas
Jefferson University.

   "You could theoretically study defects and try to correct them and take the
healthy cells and put them back in the person's body with no rejection of
tissue," said Iacovitti. "That's a major breakthrough if it's real."

   Scientists think Hwang simply reworked photographs of already published
stem-cell images and claimed they were new stem-cell lines, Gearhart said. Hwang
also replicated DNA by splitting biopsy results from the patients in two parts,
and claiming one was the stem-cell line.

   Hwang's problems surfaced when his fellow researchers came forward with
concerns.

   The experiment could not have been exactly duplicated because the researchers
did not share how they performed the experiment, Gearhart said. But the lies
would have surfaced when Hwang shared his cell lines with other researchers.

   Scientists worried that one researcher's fabrication would lead to an even
stronger backlash against their work.

   "I hope people don't try and take advantage of this situation," said
Iacovitti. "The fraud is in the science, it has nothing to do with the fact that
it involved an embryonic source."

   But others said that the fraud discovery showed the scientific process of
peer-review worked. Brooks Hanson, a deputy editor at Science, said the magazine
would not change the way it reviews publications.

   "The problem was picked up within weeks," said Ira Black, a neuroscientist
and founder of the Stem Cell Institute of New Jersey. "In a perverse way, this
is quite positive."

   In fact, the greatest impact may be felt by Hwang, whose reputation
scientists described as "incalculably damaged."

   "I have a feeling he's going to be in a DMZ somewhere with a bull's-eye on
his lab coat," said Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   The U.S. differs from other countries, such as Britain and China, because the
government will not fund research using newly created embryonic stem cells.
Instead scientists, such as Iacovitti, must use a limited number of stem-cell
lines that existed in August 2001, when the federal funding ban went into
effect. Scientists have said that those lines are contaminated and problematic.

   Caplan believed that any uproar from the stem-cell research opponents would
be short-lived, but Gearhart was not so sure.

   "The more serious issue may be the effect this has on the public and on the
policy-makers," he said. "They may think that the stem-cell people are out of
control and not honest, so there well may be a bit of an issue in rebuilding
credibility in general."

   Post a question for Dawn Fallik at http://go.philly.com/askdawn or contact
her directly at dfallik@phillynews.com or 215-854-2795.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2005


                              8 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            December 23, 2005 Friday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: Trials here first to use stem cells for brain injuries;
Doctors try to devise a therapy that would assist child patients

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Staff

BODY:

   Houston doctors soon will begin treating brain-damaged children with their
own stem cells in an attempt to develop the first-ever therapy to repair injured
brains.

   Pediatric surgeons at the University of Texas Medical School at Houston and
Memorial Hermann Children's Hospital said this week they have received Food and
Drug Administration approval to test the new treatment, which is based on
therapeutic abilities of adult stem cells considered unthinkable a decade ago.

   "This would be an absolutely novel treatment," said Dr. James Baumgartner,
who, along with Dr. Charles Cox, is one of the trial's principal investigators.
"Given what a big problem brain trauma is in society, any new therapy could make
an important difference."

   The trial, the first to use any kind of stem cells in brain trauma, will
enroll 10 patients between the ages of 5 and 14 within 48 hours of a head
injury. It will be a Phase One trial, meaning its main emphasis will be to make
sure the procedure is safe.

   Existing treatment for brain injuries is limited. Although brain injury
victims can regain some function through rehabilitation, the brain does not
repair itself effectively like bone, muscle and other organs.

   Drugs and surgery can reduce swelling that leads to secondary injuries but do
nothing for the primary damage.

   Surprising properties

   As a result, brain trauma is the No. 1 cause of death and disability among
people 25 and under. Roughly 80,000 U.S. adolescents suffer severe head injuries
each year, up to a quarter of them fatal. Survivors of even moderate injuries
often are debilitated for life.

   Additionally, the trial could further demonstrate the potential of adult stem
cells, whose use is hailed by many as more ethical than destroying embryos to
harvest their stem cells. Although scientists say embryonic stem cells are more
versatile, they have been surprised at the properties uncovered in adult stem
cells in recent years.

   One of the most impressive showings was demonstrated by cardiologists at the
Texas Heart Institute and St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital. In a study in Brazil,
they showed that stem cells taken from patients' bone marrow and injected
directly into the heart not only improved blood flow and blood-vessel formation,
but grew new tissue as well. In early 2004, the doctors began a similar study in
the Texas Medical Center.

   But it was other research that prompted Baumgartner and Cox to consider the
stem cell trial for brain injuries.

   Previous studies had indicated that bone marrow can migrate to an injured
area of the brain, differentiate into new neurons that support cells, and induce
brain repair. In the earlier research, brain-damaged rats' motor functions and
memories improved dramatically after they were injected with stem cells.

   In the trial, bone marrow will be extracted from the patient's hip and
processed to derive two types of progenitor stem cells: those that differentiate
into bone, cartilage, fat cells and neurons; and those that form the cells
needed for blood.

   Baylor College of Medicine's Center for Cell and Gene Therapy will process
the bone marrow and return it to Memorial Hermann Children's, where it will be
given to patients intravenously. Because researchers expect the stem cells to
migrate to the brain, the cells will be injected into the patients' arms.

   The study is expected to start in late January or early February. Baumgartner
said the bulk of patients should come as the weather warms up and injuries occur
more frequently.

   Under the FDA's protocol, the researchers must enroll patients one at a time,
each new enrollment coming only after the treatment has been shown to be safe
over a two-week period with the previous patient.

   The patients will be reviewed at one month and six months after being
discharged.

   The proposal was under review for a year before the FDA and the UT-Houston's
institutional review board for research projects approved it.

   Baumgartner and Cox said they have heard some criticism about starting
research on the untested therapy with children. But noting the dimension of the
problem among young people, the therapy's potential with adolescents and the
differing responses likely in adults, they said denying it to children "would be
a disservice."

   Federal regulations provide special protections for children in clinical
trials, requiring institutional review boards to hold researchers to a higher
standard when evaluating the risks and benefits.

   Dr. Stacey Berg, a Baylor pediatric hematologist/oncologist and associate
dean for research assurances, said an important consideration is a child's
inability to give informed consent. That role is ceded to parents.

   Potential impact

   Cox said the trial could lead to a whole new paradigm in brain trauma
treatment and prognosis. Even marginal improvement could mean a great deal, he
said.

   "This could have a huge impact on families and society," Cox said. "It could
be the difference between being able to recognize your loved ones and not being
able to, or between doing things for yourself or having to rely on others."

NOTES: todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2005


                              9 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           December 22, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 390  words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers hope for treating Parkinson's: Pilot study finds
it may repair brain damage as well as ease symptoms

BYLINE: Kathleen Fackelmann, Gannett News Service

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy is offering some relief from the steady march of
Parkinson's disease.

   The technique is being tested in a pilot study that might lead to therapy
that would not just control symptoms of the disease but also repair some of the
damage to brain cells, says researcher Roy Bakay at Rush University Medical
Center.

   If the therapy pans out, it could offer new hope for as many as 1 million
people in the United States who suffer from Parkinson's, says Deborah Brooks,
president of the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research.

   No one has discovered what causes Parkinson's. It damages the brain and leads
to a shortage of dopamine, a neurotransmitter that is crucial for normal
movements. That shortage of dopamine leads to the symptoms of the disease, which
include tremors, stiffness and slowness of movement.

   So far, researchers at Rush Medical Center and the University of
California-San Francisco have treated seven people. The study's lead
investigator, neurologist William Marks Jr., says the team has seen no adverse
effects.

   MAY LEAD TO LARGER STUDY

   Ceregene, a San Diego company, developed the novel therapy, in which a gene
that codes for a protein is inserted into the outer shell of a virus not known
to be associated with any diseases.

   Surgeons at the two medical institutions take the gene-virus solution and
inject it into a region of the brain affected by Parkinson's. The inserted gene
then tells the cells to make a protein called neurturin.

   Neurturin is a member of a family of proteins shown to protect and fix brain
cells in monkeys and other animals that can contract a disease that resembles
Parkinson's, says Raymond Bartus, a senior vice president at Ceregene.

   The preliminary study hints that humans might get some benefit from the
treatment.

   ''Some patients have symptoms that seem less severe,'' Marks says.

   That pilot study, which will end this spring, will tell researchers whether
the treatment is safe enough to launch a larger study. If all goes well,
Ceregene plans to start a trial of 60 patients in the fall.

   But don't count on a new drug for Parkinson's just yet. The larger trial
might turn up a side effect that did not show up in earlier studies, one that
could derail the promising new treatment, Marks says, adding: ''Things that work
well in the lab don't always work for humans.''

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2005


                              10 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                           December 20, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy appears to relieve Parkinson's symptoms;
Pilot experiment needs to expand to larger study

BYLINE: Kathleen Fackelmann

BODY:

   Brad Arens believes  an experimental gene therapy  has offered him a miracle
this holiday season: some relief from the steady march of Parkinson's.

   Arens is one of the first people to get the unproven treatment, in which
researchers use a viral shell to deliver a protective gene to brain tissue
affected by Parkinson's.

   The 52-year-old chiropractor from Vista, Calif., thinks the treatment has
helped ease some of the symptoms of his disease.

   "I used to have a shuffling gait," he says. "Now there are times that I can
walk almost normally."

   Arens is part of a pilot study that might lead to therapy that would not just
control symptoms of the disease, but repair some of the underlying damage to
brain cells, says researcher Roy Bakay at Rush University Medical Center in
Chicago.

   If the unproven therapy pans out -- and that's a big if -- it could offer new
hope for as many as 1 million people in the USA who suffer from Parkinson's,
says Deborah Brooks, president of the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's
Research.

   Parkinson's, for which there is no known cause, damages the brain and leads
to a shortage of dopamine, a neurotransmitter that is crucial for normal
movements. That shortage of dopamine leads to the symptoms of the disease, which
include tremors, stiffness and slowness of movement.

   So far, researchers at the University of California-San Francisco and Rush
Medical Center have treated seven people, including Arens. The study's lead
investigator,  neurologist William Marks Jr., says  the team  has seen no
adverse effects from the therapy.

   Ceregene,  a San Diego company, developed the novel therapy, in which a gene
that codes for a protein is inserted into the outer shell of a virus not known
to be associated with any diseases.

   Surgeons at the two medical institutions take the gene-virus solution and
inject it into the striatum, a region of the brain affected by Parkinson's. Once
the viral shell is in the brain, the inserted gene tells the cells to make a
protein called neurturin.

   Neurturin is a member of a family of proteins that have been shown to protect
and fix brain cells in monkeys and other animals that can contract  a disease
that resembles Parkinson's, says Raymond Bartus, a senior vice president at
Ceregene. The animal studies suggest  the therapy repairs some of the damage
done by the Parkinson-like disease, easing the symptoms in the process.

   There's no proof,  but the preliminary study hints that humans might get some
benefit from the treatment. "Some patients have symptoms that seem less severe,"
Marks says.

   That pilot study, which will end this spring, will tell researchers whether
the treatment is safe enough to launch a larger study. If all goes well,
Ceregene plans to start a trial of 60 patients in the  fall.

   But don't count on a new drug for Parkinson's just yet.

   The larger trial might turn up a side effect that did not show up in earlier
studies, one that could derail the promising new treatment, Marks says, adding:
"Things that work well in the lab don't always work for humans."

   Charles Inlander, president of the People's Medical Society, says patients
don't always understand what can go wrong in a trial.

   "I think people have to be cautious," Inlander says.  An experimental therapy
such as this one might end up triggering serious or even deadly complications.

   Arens says that he understands that the treatment is a gamble. "I did my
research, and I went with my best bet," he says.

   Still, he thinks  the gamble will pay off. "It's given me a second chance,"
he says.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2005


                              11 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                           December 20, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy appears to relieve Parkinson's symptoms;
Pilot experiment needs to expand to larger study

BYLINE: Kathleen Fackelmann

BODY:

   Brad Arens believes  an experimental gene therapy  has offered him a miracle
this holiday season: some relief from the steady march of Parkinson's.

   Arens is one of the first people to get the unproven treatment, in which
researchers use a viral shell to deliver a protective gene to brain tissue
affected by Parkinson's.

   The 52-year-old chiropractor from Vista, Calif., thinks the treatment has
helped ease some of the symptoms of his disease.

   "I used to have a shuffling gait," he says. "Now there are times that I can
walk almost normally."

   Arens is part of a pilot study that might lead to therapy that would not just
control symptoms of the disease, but repair some of the underlying damage to
brain cells, says researcher Roy Bakay at Rush University Medical Center in
Chicago.

   If the unproven therapy pans out -- and that's a big if -- it could offer new
hope for as many as 1 million people in the USA who suffer from Parkinson's,
says Deborah Brooks, president of the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's
Research.

   Parkinson's, for which there is no known cause, damages the brain and leads
to a shortage of dopamine, a neurotransmitter that is crucial for normal
movements. That shortage of dopamine leads to the symptoms of the disease, which
include tremors, stiffness and slowness of movement.

   So far, researchers at the University of California-San Francisco and Rush
Medical Center have treated seven people, including Arens. The study's lead
investigator,  neurologist William Marks Jr., says  the team  has seen no
adverse effects from the therapy.

   Ceregene,  a San Diego company, developed the novel therapy, in which a gene
that codes for a protein is inserted into the outer shell of a virus not known
to be associated with any diseases.

   Surgeons at the two medical institutions take the gene-virus solution and
inject it into the striatum, a region of the brain affected by Parkinson's. Once
the viral shell is in the brain, the inserted gene tells the cells to make a
protein called neurturin.

   Neurturin is a member of a family of proteins that have been shown to protect
and fix brain cells in monkeys and other animals that can contract  a disease
that resembles Parkinson's, says Raymond Bartus, a senior vice president at
Ceregene. The animal studies suggest  the therapy repairs some of the damage
done by the Parkinson-like disease, easing the symptoms in the process.

   There's no proof,  but the preliminary study hints that humans might get some
benefit from the treatment. "Some patients have symptoms that seem less severe,"
Marks says.

   That pilot study, which will end this spring, will tell researchers whether
the treatment is safe enough to launch a larger study. If all goes well,
Ceregene plans to start a trial of 60 patients in the  fall.

   But don't count on a new drug for Parkinson's just yet.

   The larger trial might turn up a side effect that did not show up in earlier
studies, one that could derail the promising new treatment, Marks says, adding:
"Things that work well in the lab don't always work for humans."

   Charles Inlander, president of the People's Medical Society, says patients
don't always understand what can go wrong in a trial.

   "I think people have to be cautious," Inlander says.  An experimental therapy
such as this one might end up triggering serious or even deadly complications.

   Arens says that he understands that the treatment is a gamble. "I did my
research, and I went with my best bet," he says.

   Still, he thinks  the gamble will pay off. "It's given me a second chance,"
he says.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Bob Riha Jr., USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2005


                              12 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            December 18, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE/ENVIRONMENT; Pg. H6

LENGTH: 1109 words

HEADLINE: Losing our hair;
Scientists seeking new treatments for male-pattern balding

BYLINE: By Malcolm Ritter - Associated Press

BODY:

   Look around a crowd, and you'll see that lots of middle-aged men are losing
their hair. As baby boomers, they have every right to demand, What is science
doing about this?

   Quite a bit, it turns out.

   A British company, for example, says five guys are walking around with
hundreds more hairs than they had before, thanks to an early test of what's been
called hair cloning. An American outfit hopes to start testing a similar
approach next year.

   Other scientists are tracking down genes that make some men susceptible to
hair loss, and struggling to understand the mysterious biology behind it. For
example, how can men lose hair on the top of their heads while their beards and
even eyelashes keep going strong?

   Black men are far less susceptible, but about a third of 30-year-old white
men have signs of what doctors call male-pattern baldness. By the time they're
50, about half do. The condition creeps across the head like three tiny armies
bent on deforestation: one starting at the back, and two making inroads from the
front.

   Some men say bald is beautiful. And others can smear on minoxidil (Rogaine)
or take Propecia pills, or get hair transplants.

   In fact, right now is "the best time in history to be going bald, because
there's an awful lot of things that can be done," says Dr. Ken Washenik of the
Aderans Research Institute in Philadelphia, which is investigating the "hair
cloning" approach.

   But the drugs don't help everybody, and not everyone is interested in a
transplant. So there's room for new approaches.

   To understand the search for new treatments, it helps to know a little about
hair and male pattern baldness. (Women can also get hormone-induced baldness
like this, but it's not clear if it's really the same condition).

   Everybody starts out with a lifetime supply of about 100,000 follicles on the
scalp, each primed to produce a single hair shaft. Normally, any given follicle
pumps out that shaft for two to six years, then takes a break for a few weeks.
Then it sheds that hair, and starts the cycle over again.

   Each day, we lose about 100 hairs this way. No big deal; about an equal
number of follicles enter the growth phase on the same day, and at any one time
90 to 95 percent of the follicles are busy growing new hair.

   But in some men, in selected places on the scalp, this orderly process goes
awry.

   The hair-growing phase gets progressively shorter and the resting phase gets
longer. So the resulting hairs get shorter and shorter with each trip through
the cycle. Eventually, they don't even poke out through the scalp.

   What's more, affected follicles take longer to start growing hair again after
they've shed the last one. And they shrink, so the hair they produce is finer.
It's like replacing mighty trees with saplings. And the total number of
remaining hairs slips by about 5 percent a year.

   What causes this? The full picture isn't known, but it clearly involves a
combination of genetic susceptibility and hormones, including testosterone.

   Researchers are eager to identify the biochemical actors within follicles
that could be manipulated to fight baldness. As for genetics, some studies have
implicated a particular gene that may be necessary to get the condition but not
sufficient to produce baldness on its own, said Stephen Harrap of the University
of Melbourne in Australia.

   In all, it might take inheriting certain versions of about five genes to get
the condition, like getting a bad poker hand, suggested Rodney Sinclair of the
university.

   In England, meanwhile, a company called Intercytex has just begun human
studies of an approach sometimes called hair cloning. It focuses on a particular
kind of cell, found at the base of the follicle, that can team up with skin
cells to produce new follicles.

   Here's the idea: Extract some cells from the areas of a man's head that
resist balding, put them in a lab dish and expand their numbers by thousands of
times. Then inject these new cells back into the scalp, where they'll work with
skin cells to form new follicles. So, unlike transplants, the guy actually ends
up with more hairs than he started with.

   The company has recently tested this on seven men with thinning hair due to
male-pattern baldness, and five of them gained hair, says Intercytex chief
scientific officer Paul Kemp. This was an initial study to look for side effects
like inflammation, Kemp says, and no such problems appeared.

   Not that this restored a full head of hair. The treated areas were just the
size of a quarter. Eventually, if further studies go well, the technique could
allow hair transplant surgeons to cover more of a bald head, Kemp said. The next
round of human research is expected to start next summer.

   Someday, men might avoid transplants altogether, just getting periodic shots
of their own cells to counterbalance their hair loss. "You would be going thin,
and you'd be maintained," Kemp said.

   "Sometime in the future, I think baldness will be a choice rather than
something you have to suffer," he said. "Any bald people will have chosen to be
bald."

   Washenik, of the Philadelphia-based Aderans institute, said his group's
efforts in hair cloning have shown promise so far in mice. He hopes studies in
people can begin next year.

   He said follicles that grow from the transplanted cells should resist
balding, because they come from a part of the head that balding doesn't touch.
Ordinary hair transplants show that follicles from these resistant regions stay
resistant even when planted in bald regions, he said.

   Ultimately, he said, scientists would love to accomplish the same goal with a
cream that can be smeared on the scalp and deliver just the right chemical
signals to stimulate new follicles to grow.

   In any case, he said, it's not just about hair. Hair follicles, after all,
are organs. So what's learned from follicle research may help other scientists
who are working to regenerate bigger organs like the liver and kidneys, Washenik
said.

   The same notion was expressed by Sinclair, who's testing a skin cream in mice
that may alter follicle behavior by fiddling with genes. (He says he can't
discuss the results because they are a commercial secret.)

   Sinclair said follicle research allows scientists to approach not just organ
regeneration, but also questions about stem cells, cell growth and gene therapy
that may pay off someday in new treatments for diseases like cancer and
Alzheimer's.

   "The idea of growing hair on a bald scalp is only of moderate interest,"
Sinclair said in a telephone interview. "If we find the cure for baldness we're
not going to stop studying hair."

   That's just great, Doc. But if you do find the cure for baldness, lots of men
would like to know.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press Dr. Ken Washenik of the Aderans Research Institute in
Philadelphia is investigating the "hair cloning" approach to treating
male-pattern baldness. Hair loss follows consisten patterns in men Why male hair
loss falls into recognizable patterns remains a mystery

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2005


                              13 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           December 15, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: Animals receive human cells;
Study is promising, but chimeras pose ethical questions

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER and SUSANNE RUST, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Human stem cells genetically engineered to produce a substance that might
protect the brains of Parkinson's patients were successfully transplanted into
the brains of monkeys and rats by University of Wisconsin-Madison scientists, a
feat that represents a crucial step in developing a promising treatment for the
disease.

    The transplanted cells appeared to do what they were designed to do: They
migrated to a target location in the brain, pumped out the substance and helped
the animals' brain cells survive and sprout new fibers.

    However, as often is the case with stem cell research, the experiment also
migrated into the murky world of biomedical ethics.

    By transplanting human cells into animals, the researchers created chimeras,
creatures that contain cells of two species.

    It was the second time this week that researchers reported they had created
human/animal chimeric brains.

    This week, researchers from California reported that they had injected human
embryonic stem cells into the brains of embryonic mice. Again, the cells not
only survived, but also migrated into different areas of the developing brain
and became several kinds of neural cells.

    Although both experiments involved chimeric animals, their bioethical
considerations are different, according to Norman Fost, a biomedical ethicist at
UW-Madison.

    The concern about putting human stem cells into animal brains is that you
could create a situation that Fost calls the "help, let me out of here
scenario," in which human cortical tissue is created in the skull of an animal,
potentially creating a human-thinking being in a non-human body.

    In the UW paper, which appears today  in the journal Gene Therapy, the
concern for this happening is negligible, Fost said. The cells were injected
into adult animal brains.

    For their study, the UW researchers did not use embryonic stem cells. They
used neural stem cells derived from aborted fetuses obtained from a fetal tissue
bank in Seattle.

    The cells then were infected by an inactivated virus that was genetically
engineered to produce a substance known as glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor, or GDNF.

   Buying time for patients

    Neurotrophic factors, also known as growth factors, are a family of proteins
that nourish brain cells, helping them develop and maintain function. They also
may be able to repair damaged brain cells and regenerate new ones.

    Short of a cure, it is hoped that these proteins someday may buy time for
patients with diseases such as Parkinson's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or
ALS or Lou Gehrig's disease, and even Alzheimer's - more than now is offered by
the best available medicines and possibly enough to keep the diseases at bay for
years.

    In animals and some preliminary human studies, GDNF has been found to
improve symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

    Citing safety concerns, Amgen Inc. announced earlier this year that it had
stopped supplying GDNF for early clinical trials involving 48 Parkinson's
patients who had been getting the drug pumped directly into their brains via a
catheter.

    However, several of the patients who say they got substantially better have
pleaded with the company to resume supplying GDNF, so far to no avail.

    Rather than using pumps and catheters, the UW researchers injected their
engineered cells directly into the brains of seven rats and three rhesus
monkeys.

    The cells not only survived for up to three months, but also were releasing
significant amounts of GDNF, which led to improved survival of brain cells that
made dopamine and growth of new cell fibers. Parkinson's is a disease of brain
cells that make dopamine, a brain chemical that regulates movement.

    The rats in the study also appeared to have improved function.

    By injecting drug-making cells directly into the brain, scientists can avoid
problems caused by the blood-brain barrier, a layer of protective cells that
keeps many toxins - and many beneficial drugs - out of the brain.

   Cells used as Trojan horse

    "The beauty of this is you can use the stem cells as the Trojan horse," said
Clive Svendsen, a UW neuroscientist and senior author of the paper. "And once
you put them in the brain, they make it (GDNF) for free."

    In addition, Svendsen said he believes he has a viable method for turning
the cells on and off by using a common antibiotic, even though that technique
did not work in his most recent study.

    Using fetal tissue cells also gets around a lingering concern about
embryonic stem cells: their potential for causing tumors.

    However, the downside to using fetal cells is that such an approach most
likely will require the use of potent anti-rejection drugs.

    The UW paper is an important step in a potential therapy that likely will be
tried in Parkinson's and ALS patients within the next five years, maybe sooner,
said Theo Palmer, an assistant professor of neuroscience at Stanford University
School of Medicine.

    "It's the first milestone," said Palmer, who was not involved with the study
but who is collaborating with Svendsen on other research.

    The study's findings are fascinating and the approach clearly shows promise,
said Bradley Hiner, an assistant professor of neurology at the Medical College
of Wisconsin who treats Parkinson's patients at Froedtert Memorial Lutheran
Hospital.

    However, it is a disservice to Parkinson's patients to call it a potential
new treatment. Doing so gets their hopes up when clinical trials likely are
years away, he said.

    "It's a little premature to think about this as a potential treatment for
humans when only three primates were done and the results were equivocal at
best," Hiner said. "There's obviously quite a bit of work before anyone is
getting this transplanted into humans."

    And while Fost, the UW bioethicist, didn't comment on the ramifications of
the study, he did say that it was clean from an ethical standpoint. Although he
said the aesthetics of the work - putting human brain cells into the brains of
animals - might strike some as repugnant.

    "But the 'yuck factor' isn't an ethical consideration," Fost said.

   Copyright 2005, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2005


                              14 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            December 12, 2005 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: G Pulse; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 384 words

HEADLINE: FIT NEWS

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Pilates passes test in wellness report

    Pilates-based exercises continue to grow in popularity, but do they work?

    Except as a technique for helping dancers recover from injuries, very little
research has been published on Pilates, according to a report in the University
of California Berkeley Wellness Letter. Still, Pilates appears to be a good
low-impact conditioning technique.

    Pilates consists of exercises done to strengthen core muscles of the
abdomen, back and buttocks. The idea is that exercising the center of the body
will build strength, flexibility and balance.

    However, there are a few dubious claims about Pilates, the report said.

    It won't make you taller, although it can improve posture. It won't make
muscles longer, although it may increase muscle mass. It won't replace aerobic
exercise, although it can be part of an overall fitness program.

    A variety of professionals, from physical therapists to teachers at clubs
and studios, offer training at various prices.

    For more information, go to http://pilatesmethodalliance.org/.

   Less smoking linked to playing sports

    Participation in sports was associated with less cigarette smoking,
according to a new study.

    The study, done in Belgium, looked at 208 students ages 14 to 20.

    Playing sports less than three hours a week was associated with smoking in
70% of boys and 66% of girls.

    When sports participation increased to at least eight hours a week, 64% of
boys and 57% of girls smoked.

    The study was presented at the American College of Chest Physicians meeting
last month.

   Exercise, therapy help ALS mice survive

    A study in mice suggests that the combination of exercise and gene therapy
might someday help extend the lives of people with amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis.

    Mice with ALS that got the gene therapy and were allowed to exercise lived
an average of 210 days, compared with 120 days in mice that received no
treatment. The normal mouse life span is one to two years.

    "Somehow the two treatments complement each other," lead author Brian
Kaspar, an assistant professor of pediatrics at Ohio State University, said in a
statement.

     - John Fauber

   Copyright 2005, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2005


                              15 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                December 10, 2005 Saturday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: SCOTTSDALE REPUBLIC NORTH; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: MAYO RECEIVES BIG GRANT;
$49 MILLION TO FUND RESEARCH ON CANCER

BYLINE: By Kate Nolan, Scottsdale Republic

BODY:

   A $49 million grant to Mayo Clinic will have an immediate impact on cancer
research at the Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale and is likely to speed development of
new cancer treatments here, said Mayo's chief of research in Arizona, Dr.
Laurence Miller.

   Deputy director of the multi-campus Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Miller said
the grant from the Richard M. Schulze Family Foundation, announced this week,
will immediately step up hiring at Mayo's growing research campus in northeast
Scottsdale.

   "We will be recruiting new scientists at a rate that is faster than before,"
said Miller. Mayo is seeking six additional scientists to work on cancer
projects in its second research building in Scottsdale, which opened this year.
A third research structure is on the drawing boards, but is not directly related
to the grant.

   The largest philanthropic gift given to the Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, the
grant establishes the Mayo Clinic Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics at Mayo
Clinic in Rochester, Minn. Schulze, a Minnesota native, founded Best Buy, the
retail electronics chain.

   The new center will provide resources for cancer research and care at the
three Mayo campuses in Rochester, Scottsdale and Jacksonville, Fla.

   Research will target all cancers, with a special focus on areas where Mayo
has established extensive clinical experience, including cancers of the breast,
ovary, uterus, kidney, lung, blood and liver.

   A major focus of the research involves the growing science of bioinformatics,
the use of computers to manage medical and biological information.

   Through the grant, each of the Mayo sites will contribute bioinformatics
research.

   "It fits into our focus in Scottsdale on cancer drug development," said
Miller. Mayo Scottsdale is focused on developing new drugs on a greater scale
than are the other two Mayo campuses. The grant will support the use of
bioinformatics to streamline the complicated analysis of genes and the proteins
that trigger cancer, an even more complicated area.

   Miller and his colleagues are already partnering with a pioneering
bioinformatics department at Arizona State University, he said.

   "There are 30,000 human genes and hundreds of thousands of proteins. The fun
part is that information science is getting to the point where it can actually
handle that information," said Miller. He predicts that in the near future, an
individual's genome (genetic composition) will typically be part of his or her
medical record.

   The work financed by the grant is expected to produce leaps in understanding
systems biology, the science of how genes, proteins, and other cell elements
interact.

   "Thinking in those terms gives us the best clues for where to direct our
cancer research, said Miller. The goal is to produce drugs and other treatments
involving antibodies and gene therapy.

   The Schulze grant arrived at the end of a courtship process, according to
Miller.

   "We presented the most exciting research projects in the Mayo portfolio, and
they were excited about the activities as much as we were," Miller said. "We're
thrilled with this gift."

   The funds also will endow two professorships and support postdoctoral
fellowships and an annual cancer research symposium that will meet in Scottsdale
every three years.

GRAPHIC: The Mayo Clinic in Scottsdale will use a grant from the Richard M.
Schulze Family Foundation to further cancer research.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2005


                              16 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                     December 6, 2005 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Groups unite to fight cancer

BYLINE: By Peggy O'Farrell Enquirer staff writer

BODY:

   3 centers form pediatric program

   A new research partnership among Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, the
Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center and Columbus Children's
Hospital will let scientists broaden their research into childhood cancers and,
officials hope, get new treatments to patients more quickly.

   The new collaborative pediatric oncology program, announced Monday, has
received the blessing of the National Cancer Institute, which funds research at
all three centers.

   Dr. David A. Williams, director of the division of experimental hematology at
Cincinnati Children's, said the collaboration means patients will benefit from
the three institutions' combined skills and resources.

   Researchers will share information and treatments related to cancers in
children and adults.

   The partnership will "further our abilities to ultimately find cures for
cancers in kids," said Keith Goodwin, CEO of Columbus Children's Hospital.

   Two collaborative studies under way between Cincinnati Children's and OSU are
looking at gene therapy for brain tumors - a study developed at Cincinnati
Children's - and new leukemia treatment protocols developed at OSU and now being
used at Cincinnati Children's.

   More collaborations are in the works, said Dr. John Barnard, president of the
Columbus Children's Research Institute and a professor of pediatrics at OSU.

   The collaboration will focus on both basic research, including what causes
cells to become cancerous, and at developing treatments for pediatric cancers,
said Dr. Fred Sanfilippo, CEO of the Ohio State University Medical Center.

   More partnerships between academic research institutes are springing up
across the state as a result of Ohio's "Third Frontier" initiative, Sanfilippo
said.

   Participating faculty will include 40 pediatric cancer researchers at
Cincinnati Children's.

   E-mail pofarrell@enquirer.com

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2005


                              17 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            December 6, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Sports Desk; Sports Briefing; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 449 words

BYLINE: AP

BODY:


   COLLEGE BASKETBALL

SEX ASSAULT CHARGES DISMISSED -- Sexual assault charges against Dzaflo Larkai, a
former La Salle player, were dismissed yesterday because his accuser, a member
of the women's basketball team, decided not to proceed with the case on the day
the trial was to begin in Philadelphia. Larkai, 23, was accused of raping a
19-year-old woman in April 2003. She told authorities she did not make a report
right away because coaches discouraged her from coming forward. The prosecutor
declined to say why the woman decided against taking the matter to trial.

     The woman testified during a preliminary hearing last year that she was
drunk and asleep in her dormitory room when she awoke to find Larkai on top of
her.

   The case, as well as another rape case that ended in acquittal for two other
La Salle players, ultimately led to the removal of the men's coach, Billy Hahn,
and the women's coach, John Miller.

COLLEGE FOOTBALL

SAN DIEGO STATE COACH FIRED -- San Diego State Coach Tom Craft was fired
yesterday after four seasons in which his Aztecs failed to post a winning
record. Craft, who had one year left on his contract, was 19-29 in four seasons.
His best finish was 6-6 in 2003. Craft had never been a head coach at a Division
I-A college when he was hired from a local junior college to replace the fired
Ted Tollner in December 2001. He played quarterback for the Aztecs from 1975 to
1976 and was the offensive coordinator under Tollner from 1994 to 1996.

OLYMPICS

RULES SOUGHT FOR GENE DOPING -- Jacques Rogge, president of the International
Olympic Committee, called for regulations against changing genes to increase
athletic performance. Rogge said yesterday that progress in the field of
genetics made it possible for the World Anti-Doping Agency, which held a
conference in Stockholm on gene therapy and doping with about 50 scientists and
sports officials, to start formulating rules.

     Methods to detect the use of genetic modification to enhance athletic
abilities are still in the early stages. But Theodore Friedmann, a leading gene
researcher and chairman of the agency's gene-doping panel, said he was confident
technology would become available to detect athletes using gene doping.
(Reuters)

SOCCER

TWO DEAD AFTER RIVALS CLASH -- Two people were shot to death in a clash between
rival fans after a match in Rio de Janeiro, the police said yesterday. About 20
supporters of the visiting club Fortaleza were attacked by a group of Botafogo
supporters after leaving the Brazilian championship match Sunday night. The
police said a 28-year-old Fortaleza supporter died after he was shot in the head
and stomach. A Botafogo fan, also 28, died when the Fortaleza fans fired back.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2005


                              18 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            December 4, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1908 words

HEADLINE: Life's loud noises leave a generation struggling to hear;
Noise takes toll on a generation

BYLINE: FRANK D. ROYLANCE, SUN REPORTER

BODY:

   For most of his 20 years as a Montgomery County firefighter, Kurt Evers raced
to emergencies in a torrent of noise from his truck's roaring diesel engine,
blasting horn and wailing siren.

   By the time he retired this year on disability, he had lost more than a
quarter of his hearing. The last straw came when he missed a turn on an
emergency run - he didn't hear his officer's directions.

   Just 43, Evers wears a $5,700 pair of hearing aids. He works part time with
his brother-in-law at a garage door company, but he misses his old job as a
firefighter, "the only thing I really ever wanted to do."

   "If this would have happened to me at 55," he says, "it would probably not be
that big a deal. But in my 40s ... "

   Evers is one of many among the 75 million Americans born during the postwar
baby boom who are discovering that their mothers were right - all that noise did
damage their hearing.

   Whether it was at rock 'n' roll concerts, between stereo headphones, on the
job or on foreign battlefields, hearing experts believe millions of boomers have
done permanent injury to their ears.

   Now ages 41 to 59, increasing numbers are realizing they've lost sensitivity
to high-frequency sounds - including those they need to distinguish among "th,"
"f," "s" and other consonants critical to understanding speech.

   "It's perceived as, `I can hear you, but I can't understand the words,'" says
Dr. David J. Eisenman, medical director at the University of Maryland Medical
Center's Hearing and Balance Center.

   The problem is worst when there's lots of background noise, such as at
parties or in restaurants. And hearing loss is often accompanied by a persistent
ringing or buzzing in the ears, called tinnitus.

   Hearing experts don't have studies to prove that baby boomers' hearing is
worse than their parents' at the same age. But audiologists say more boomers
seem to be seeking help earlier than their parents did.

   "There's no question that baby boomers have been exposed to different sources
of noise than any generation before them," says Dr. James F. Battey Jr.,
director of the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders. "We're certainly seeing people in their 40s and 50s who notice their
hearing is not as good as it used to be."

   Montgomery firefighters now must wear ear protection. Sirens have been moved
from fire engine cab roofs, where they were close to firefighters' ears, to the
front bumpers.

   The county's fire officials say five active firefighters are known to wear
hearing aids. And a round of testing in June found 15 percent of the county's
1,038 fire fighters have some hearing loss - a third of it moderate to severe.

   "I think it's much higher than that," says Kenneth M. Berman, a personal
injury lawyer in Gaithersburg. He has enlisted 1,000 veteran firefighters -
including 100 from Montgomery County - to join in lawsuits against Federal
Signal Corp., one of the nation's largest siren manufacturers. Nationwide,
nearly 2,500 firefighters with hearing loss have joined lawsuits.

   Some hearing loss is normal with aging. A 1995 study noted by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention found that more than one-third of men and 22
percent of women reported hearing impairments by their early 70s - proportions
that rose to about half by age 85.

   The problem is that noise-induced damage accumulates throughout life, piling
on top of impairments driven by age or genetics.

   A 1997 study of the elderly in Alameda County, Calif., found that the
incidence of hearing impairment had doubled between 1964 and 1994.

   "It seems pretty obvious that hearing loss is increasing, probably because of
environmental noise," says William J. Strawbridge, a medical sociologist at the
University of California, San Francisco and co-author of the study.

   Sound intensity is measured in decibels. An increase of 10 decibels
represents a 10-fold boost in power. Twenty decibels reflects sound 100 times
more powerful. The impact on humans depends on intensity, duration and distance.

   Charlie McCollum knows this well. He figures he lost about 10 percent of his
hearing during the late 1970s, during three years of full-time work as a rock
'n' roll writer for the now-defunct Washington Star newspaper. He was in his
early 30s then.

   "As a critic, you frequently got seats that were inside a VIP area that was
even closer to the banks of speakers than most audiences," he says. "The last
full year I did it, it was 285 concerts. ZZ Top and Kiss and bands like that
were probably doing 150 decibels."

   Any sound above 85 decibels can damage hearing with long or repeated
exposure. Above 125 decibels - about usual for a chain saw - safe exposure is
measured in seconds.

   "Suddenly, I realized I was not hearing people telling me things," he
recalls. "I kept saying, `Huh?'"

   McCollum is now 57 and a TV writer for The Mercury News in San Jose, Calif.
"I still have problems hearing out of my left ear," he says. "If I'm talking to
somebody, if there's a lot of ambient noise, I have to be careful to point my
right ear toward them."

   The list of rock musicians with hearing impairments is long and
distinguished, including Bob Seger, Jeff Beck, Sting, Eric Clapton, Peter
Frampton and Bob Dylan.

   Fans' ears may be naked, but many performers today wear custom earplugs to
avoid the damage early rockers suffered, according to Kathy Peck, executive
director of H.E.A.R., a nonprofit group working to prevent hearing loss among
musicians, fans and stage crews.

   As a bass player, singer and songwriter with The Contractions, a 1980s,
all-women punk band, Peck was nearly deafened by loud music. She says fading
bands often play smaller venues with the same sound systems they once used to
fill stadiums.

   "Why don't they just turn it down? I wish people would," she said. "It's
like, you don't have to be that loud. A lot of times their hearing is shot."

   Music played through earphones can damage hearing, too, especially when it's
turned up for hours to drown out other sounds.

   In April, a survey by Australia's National Acoustics Laboratories, reported
in the International Journal of Audiology, found that 25 percent of headphone
wearers stopped on city streets were listening at damaging volumes.

   Just how does loud noise damage the ear? Scientists say we perceive sound
when sonic pressure waves strike our eardrums, then pass through the structures
of the middle and inner ear to rows of "hair" cells inside a snail-shaped
structure called the cochlea.

   They're not true hairs, scientists say, but they vibrate in response to the
sound and dispatch electrical impulses to the brain. They can be killed by
noise, infection, and certain cancer drugs and antibiotics. Like adult teeth,
once lost, they don't grow back.

   UM's Eisenman says some noise damage is probably physical: Violent
vibrations, such as those caused by gunshots and explosions, simply destroy cell
membranes.

   By some accounts, nearly a third of the combat personnel returning from
Afghanistan and Iraq are reporting significant hearing loss and tinnitus. "It's
a big problem for the military," says Dr. Richard Salvi of the University at
Buffalo's Center for Hearing and Deafness.

   Nearly 300,000 U.S. veterans received disability payments for hearing loss in
fiscal 2004. It is the single most common service-connected disability paid by
the Department of Veterans Affairs. Tinnitus ranked third, with 290,000
veterans.

   Of those receiving hearing-related disability payments, the VA says, 29
percent were Vietnam-era vets - largely baby boomers.

   Scientists believe hair cells also succumb to "oxidative stress." Overworked
sensory cells accumulate the toxic byproducts of metabolism faster than they can
get rid of them, and the byproducts destroy vital cell structures.

   While the damage is permanent, there is help for dwindling hair cells - the
hearing aid.

   "They're much better than they used to be," Eisenman says. Modern digital
hearing aids can be tuned to amplify the patient's lost frequencies, boosting
them above background sounds. Many also have built-in directional microphones
that can pick up a conversation in front of the wearer while damping the rest.

   Still "none of these hearing aids ... provides hearing as good as that we're
born with," Eisenman says. And there is a persistent stigma attached to them, so
people who need them often delay.

   Evers wore his hearing aids on fire calls for four years. But off-duty, he
took them off because he felt they made him appear disabled. "I thought people
were staring at me," he says.

   The most radical treatment for hearing loss is the cochlear implant, which
converts sound into electrical signals and sends it to the auditory nerve. But
it's generally reserved for people who are no longer helped by hearing aids.

   Noise-induced hearing loss often comes with tinnitus, a ringing in the ears
that drives some victims to distraction.

   The sound isn't really coming from the ears, Salvi says. People whose
auditory nerves are cut during cancer surgery still hear it.

   Salvi likens it to the phantom limb pain experienced by amputees: "As we get
more and more hearing loss, the brain turns up the volume control to try to hear
the very weak signals coming from the ear."

   Eventually, like a radio that's too far from the transmitter, all the brain
hears is neural "static."

   Some victims - perhaps three-quarters - simply ignore it. The others can't
and may have significant distress. For them, doctors may offer counseling and a
low-level masking noise that reduces the distraction of the ringing.

   Researchers are also experimenting with gene therapy to improve the survival
rates of beleaguered hair cells - or even to convert nonsensory cells in the
cochlea into new hair cells.

   In February, scientists led by Dr. Yehoash Raphael of the University of
Michigan's Kresge Hearing Research Institute reported that they had restored
partial hearing to guinea pigs whose auditory hair cells had been destroyed by
chemicals.

   Using a modified cold virus as a vehicle, they introduced into the guinea
pig's cochlea a gene called Atoh1 that instructs undifferentiated cells in
developing embryos to become hair cells.

   Atoh1 worked in mature guinea pigs, too, stimulating nonsensory support cells
in the cochlea to become new hair cells. Tests showed the animals recovered some
hearing.

   "It doesn't mean the hearing is good," Raphael says. And more progress is
needed before any clinical trials in humans: Getting the genes into the human
cochlea would require opening the skull.

   Even so, Raphael says, it's "the first time anybody can take a deaf animal
and give it back some hearing. We think it's a great start."

   Until the right technology comes along, millions of baby boomers will
continue to muddle through with muddled hearing. McCollum, the former rock
critic, says he has resisted hearing aids, even though he misses some
conversation.

   "My hearing never got so bad I felt I wanted to go there, maybe out of
vanity," he says.

   But his wife has threatened to buy him an ear trumpet.

   frank.roylance@baltsun.com

   ASK A DOCTOR

   Do you have difficulty understanding conversation in restaurants or at loud
parties? Do your ears ring? If so, you may have noise-induced hearing loss.
First, ask your doctor to give you a hearing screening. He or she might
recommend further testing by an audiologist.< For answers to common questions, a
hearing health "quick test" and links to audiologists in your area, visit the
Web site of the American Academy of Audiology at audiology.org/consumer/.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / CHART(S)
 1. Kurt Evers, 43, retired from the Montgomery County Fire Department this year
after losing more than a quarter of his hearing. 2. A delicate system of sound
 1. ANDRE F. CHUNG : SUN PHOTOGRAPHER 2. SUN NEWS GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2005


                              19 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            December 4, 2005 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1731 words

HEADLINE: Last hope for heartache;
New gene therapy could help untreatable angina sufferers grow new blood vessels,
muscle cells

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   On a cool, invigorating fall evening, Jerome Schillaci trudged slowly around
his block as though it were a sweltering summer day.

    Less than 100 yards from his front door, he already was breathing fast and
his chest was tightening.

    Schillaci stopped for a moment, took a nitroglycerin dispenser out of his
pocket and put a few drops under his tongue.

    "It takes the pain away in about 30 seconds," he said.

    At 55, Schillaci was a heart patient who was out of options. The blockages
in his coronary arteries no longer could be helped by surgery or stents.

    His well-being hinged on nitroglycerin, a handful of other medicines and the
sedentary life of a "vegetable," as he puts it.

    But in October, doctors at St. Luke's Medical Center in Milwaukee offered
him one last option.

    They were starting a clinical trial of a promising gene therapy for
untreatable angina, a condition that afflicts between 100,000 and 250,000
Americans. It is believed to be the first gene therapy trial for heart disease
in Wisconsin.

    When Schillaci agreed to take part in the trial, he was thrust into the
forefront of a new field of medicine: cardiac regeneration.

    It's a therapy that doctors could only dream about a few years ago.

    With genes, stem cells and growth factors, it is now plausible that hearts
with damage once thought to be irreversible might someday be repaired and
restored to healthier function.

    These experimental therapies are showing promise in growing new blood
vessels in the heart and even in regenerating heart muscle cells, feats once
thought to be impossible.

    For decades, the field of cardiac biology was pervaded by a bleak dogma: We
are born with all the heart muscle cells we will ever have and if some die, such
as through a heart attack, they can never be replaced, according to a recent
editorial in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology.

    Just how far biotechnology will go in dispelling this belief remains to be
seen, but several clinical trials are advancing around the world.

    The trial that Schillaci is a part of involves a gene known as vascular
endothelial growth factor-2, or VEGF-2.

    VEGF-2 seems to encourage the growth of new blood vessels, a process known
as angiogenesis.

    It is hoped that by injecting the gene directly into blood-deprived areas of
the heart, it will incorporate itself into the DNA of those heart cells and
prompt them to pump out the VEGF protein.

    The protein works like a biological plant fertilizer, but instead of growing
tomatoes, it sprouts tiny blood vessels, the kind that are too small to be
propped open by a stent or bypassed with a grafted vein.

    And with more blood flow, the angina and the shortness of breath can
improve.

    If the therapy works, Schillaci's heart essentially would grow its own
bypass.

   A cancer risk

    To be included in the gene therapy trial, Schillaci had to undergo a variety
of diagnostic tests to make sure that introducing the gene into his body would
not do more harm than good.

    If the gene traveled beyond his heart to an undetected cancer growing
somewhere else, the tumor could be supercharged by the additional blood vessels
that might grow.

    After negative results from a couple of cancer tests, he next had to undergo
an eye exam.

    On Oct. 27, the day before his treatment, Richard Lernor, an
ophthalmologist, peered into Schillaci's eyes with a flashlight. He found some
micro aneurysms, but he was looking for the more ominous proliferative diabetic
retinopathy, a retinal blood vessel disorder and a leading cause of blindness.

    Schillaci has Type 2 diabetes, which increases his odds of developing that
condition.

    Finding retinopathy probably would disqualify him from the gene therapy
trial.

    "It (the gene) could encourage those vessels to grow wildly," Lernor said.

    Schillaci passed his exam.

    At about 1:30 p.m. the next day, he was wheeled into a cardiac
catheterization lab at St. Luke's.

    The room was filled with doctors and nurses as Schillaci, awake and alert,
lay on a table looking at real time X-ray images of his heart on an overhead
monitor.

    A catheter device called a Stiletto was navigated through an artery in his
groin up to the inside of the left ventricle, the main pumping chamber in his
heart, where it was positioned to begin injecting a clear liquid.

    Based on previous imaging that showed where the blood supply to Schillaci's
heart was impaired, cardiologist Tanvir Bajwa had a pretty good idea of where he
wanted to inject the gene.

    Watching the monitor, Bajwa inserted the needle at a spot inside the left
ventricle. The needle remained in the wall injecting the liquid for 60 seconds.
And Schillaci's heart rate accelerated from 80 beats a minutes to about 110.

    "Is your heart going pitter-patter?" a nurse asked Schillaci.

    "A little bit," he replied.

    Bajwa repeated the injection procedure five more times.

    "We're all done with the injection," Bajwa said, pulling off his gloves and
shaking the hand of another doctor. "No problems at all."

   Placebo or gene?

    The good thing about getting poked in the heart is it doesn't hurt. The bad
news is it may not do any good.

    Under the protocol of the trial, only three of four patients will get the
gene, which will be given in three different doses. Every fourth patient will be
injected with a saline placebo solution. Initially, neither the patients nor the
doctors will know who got the gene.

    "I hope I got the medicine," Schillaci said a week later. "I'd be going
through all of this for nothing if I got the placebo."

    In a couple of months, diagnostic tests and Schillaci's own symptoms should
provide a big clue as to whether he got the gene and if it was improving the
blood flow to his heart.

    Beyond the uncertainty of what actually was injected into his heart is an
even bigger question: Does gene therapy work?

    Some preliminary trials with VEGF-2 suggest there may be some significant
short-term benefits, including a substantial reduction in the severity and
frequency of angina symptoms.

    However, another large trial involving the gene for a different growth
factor was halted last year when it failed to show a significant benefit.

    The nationwide trial that Schillaci is a part of, which involves 404
patients, should tell a lot about the effectiveness of the therapy.

    If the trial fails, it could spell the end of gene therapy trials for heart
disease, said Nabil Dib, director of cardiovascular research at the Arizona
Heart Institute who has done previous gene therapy trials.

    "If it succeeds . . . it will be a major revolution," he said.

    However, Robert Simari, a professor of medicine at the Mayo Clinic and an
investigator in the VEGF-2 trial, said that, either way, the field is likely to
continue.

    Even though the first gene therapy trials started 10 years ago, the field
still is in its infancy, he said. To date, no rigorous gene therapy for
cardiovascular disease has been shown to be clearly effective.

     But the VEGF-2 trial and future therapies, including injecting multiple
genes for a variety of growth factors or the combination of adult stem cells and
genes, hold promise, he said.

     "I think it's the end of the beginning," said Simari, chairman of
cardiovascular research at Mayo who also served on a gene therapy advisory
committee to the National Institutes of Health.

    Last month,  the Food and Drug Administration granted "fast track"
designation for the trial, which may expedite the approval of the therapy should
it show a significant benefit.

    Schillaci, whose family has a history of heart disease, got into the trial
because heart surgeons and interventional cardiologists essentially had run out
of procedures for his ailing heart.

    In 1992, he had two angioplasty procedures.

    In 1993, he had quintuple bypass surgery. The Schillacis were married on
Valentine's Day in the chapel at St. Luke's while he recovered from that
surgery.

    "I asked the minister if it was legal because he was on morphine," his wife,
Karen, recalled. "He was in a wheelchair at our wedding. I spent the night on a
recliner in his room."

    In 1995, he had a triple bypass, including two bypasses of the arteries that
became blocked after the first bypass surgery.

    He had another angioplasty in 1996; cardiac catheterizations in 1998 and
2004; and a final angioplasty with a stent earlier this year.

    "They don't want to open me up a third time," Schillaci said. "And they
can't put any more stents in."

    But his condition has gotten worse. The smallest amount of exertion brings
on a bout of debilitating angina, which forces him to sit down or take
nitroglycerin.

    "He was hitting the nitro so much, they (the insurance company) wouldn't
pay," Karen said.

    Schillaci has dealt with his condition by doing less and less.

    Until about a year ago, he worked as a computer operator for the Milwaukee
Police Department. Job stress and having to move around too much caused him to
go on disability.

    Now, he often hangs out on the patio in his backyard, where he has put up a
canopy and has assembled a variety of comforts such as grill, a wood burner, a
large candle, a glider and a hammock.

    By late October, the shady, fenced-in yard had begun filling up with leaves.

    "It needs to be raked, but I just don't have the energy," he said.

    Schillaci spends much of his time making fishing lures. Disappearing into
his basement, he returned, breathing deeply, carrying several plastic boxes
filled with some of the 500 spinners and 400 jigs he has made.

    "These are musky and Northern size," he said. "I didn't even go fishing this
year. I didn't feel up to it."

     More than a month has passed since he was treated, and Schillaci said he
thinks he's noticed some changes.

    He said he feels more tired, but his chest pain has diminished slightly and
he's using less nitroglycerin.

    However, it is entirely possible that any benefit he's noticed is due to a
placebo effect, which can be felt in as many as 40% of patients in such trials.

    That's especially true when the clinical trials use treadmill exercise time
or subjective measures such as chest pain to assess success.

    For the time being, Schillaci will have to wait and see.

    "I hope I get new arteries," he said. "I'm 55. I would like to take some
long walks with my wife without hitting the nitro."

   Copyright 2005, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2005


                              20 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            December 4, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1394 words

HEADLINE: SECOND LINE: Sports briefs, TV listings, and upcoming schedules

BODY:

   GENE DOPING NEXT? Anti-doping officials and scientists want to be prepared
for what is most likely the next generation of cheats in sports  --  gene
dopers. Although it is not known if gene doping exists, World Anti-Doping Agency
chairman Dick Pound said the possibility cannot be ruled out. "We don't believe
it does, but you can't exclude it," Pound said Saturday night in Stockholm,
Sweden, on the eve of a two-day WADA symposium. "We don't have any test that
everybody in the scientific community approved, to say 'yes, if we find x, y and
z, that means genetic doping has occurred,' " he added.

   "That's one of the purposes of the update at this symposium. Where are we in
the development of the kind of test that will identify this?" Gene doping
involves transferring genes directly into human cells to blend into an athlete's
own DNA to enhance muscle growth and increase strength or endurance. Unlike
steroids or drugs, the added genes are not detectable. "There are some
experiments that one of the scientists who is here in Stockholm has done," Pound
said. "Playing with the genes, he has increased muscle bulk in laboratory
animals by 15 percent with no exercise, nothing. That's the kind of thing we
have to anticipate. Anything that might assist the body to use the oxygen
better, might increase endurance. So we have to be alert to that, meet with
these scientists, find out what they're doing, figure out whether some of those
applications might be interesting for people who want to cheat in sport and then
work on devising tests." Some 50 leading scientists in gene technology and gene
therapy from around the world will attend the conference at Karolinska
Institutet, one of Europe's largest medical universities. Professor Arne
Ljungqvist, a former second-in-command at Karolinska Institutet and an
International Olympic Committee member, does not believe there will be evidence
of gene doping at the Turin Games. "What about Beijing, and what about the
future?" he asked. "So there is a need for some clear statement from a real
group of experts. Where are we? What are the possibilities? What are the risks?
And what can we do?"

   NFL

   Cowboys release Price

   Dallas released wide receiver Peerless Price on Saturday. Price caught six
passes for 96 yards in seven games after signing with Dallas as a free agent in
September. He was used as a backup and also returned 12 punts for 63 yards.
Price, 29, spent his first four seasons with Buffalo before being traded to
Atlanta in 2003 for a first-round draft pick. He signed a $37 million contract
with the Falcons and played two seasons with the team before being released in
August.

   COLLEGE FOOTBALL

   Stadium railing collapses

   A section of the railing at Reliant Stadium in Houston collapsed in the
postgame celebration following No. 2 Texas' 70-3 win over Colorado in the Big 12
championship game, sending several fans tumbling to the ground. Nina Jackson, a
spokeswoman for Reliant Stadium, said no one was seriously injured. A group of
Longhorns were shaking hands with the fans when a section of the railing on the
lowest level near one of the tunnels gave way. Emergency personnel responded to
treat a few people.

   UTEP TO PLAY TOLEDO: Texas El-Paso will play Toledo in the GMAC Bowl at
Mobile, Ala., on Dec. 21, bowl president Jerry Silverstein announced.

   HORSE RACING

   Saint Augustus triumphs

   Saint Augustus took the lead at the top of the stretch and pulled away to win
the What A Pleasure Stakes for 2-year-olds at Calder. Big Lover finished 2½
lengths back in second, with Rehoboth was third in the 1 1-16th-mile race. Saint
Augustus, an 11-1 long shot, was ridden by Ramon Dominguez and paid $24 to win.
The winning time was 1:47.94. Calder had three other stakes on its Grand Slam I
card. Stolen Prayer, with jockey Eddie Castro, upset 8-5 favorite Capozzene and
won the Three Ring Stakes for 2-year-old fillies. Stolen Prayer returned $7.40
to win. Silver Tree, ridden by Jerry Bailey, won the Tropical Turf Handicap by a
neck, and paid $4.60 to win. Demeteor finished second, with Settle Up third.
Snowdrops came from behind and beat La Reina in the My Charmer Handicap.

   BORDONARO VICTORIOUS: California-bred Bordonaro raced to his sixth victory in
eight starts, beating Turnbolt by three lengths in the $100,000 Vernon O.
Underwood Stakes at Hollywood Park. Bordonaro, ridden by Patrick Valenzuela, ran
six furlongs in 1:08.11 and paid $6.40 to win. Captain Squire was third in the
four-horse field.

   LILAH WINS AT AQUEDUCT: Lilah beat Secret Forest by a head in the $83,250
Garland of Roses Handicap for fillies and mares 3 years and older at Aqueduct.
Ridden by Channing Hill, Lilah covered six furlongs in 1:11.13 and paid $21.80
to win. The 8-year-old Defrere mare won for the fifth time in 11 starts this
year and earned $49,950 for Barry R. Ostrager and Roddy J. Valente. Bank Audit
was third.

   TENNIS

   Hingis eyes Aussie Open

   Martina Hingis hopes to make her return to Grand Slam tennis at the
Australian Open next month. Hingis, who announced earlier this week that she is
coming back after a three-year retirement, is considering Australian Open warmup
tournaments in Hong Kong or Gold Coast, Australia. "It's going to be great  --
four more weeks to go probably 'til I play my first tournament," Hingis said.
The Hong Kong exhibition and Gold Coast tournament are scheduled for Jan. 2-9.
The Australian Open begins Jan. 16. Australian Open director Paul McNamee said
this week he planned to give Hingis, 25, a wild card. Hingis retired in 2002
after battling foot, heel and ankle problems.

   NHL

   Ottawa's Chara suspended

   The NHL suspended Ottawa's Zdeno Chara for one game and fined Coach Bryan
Murray $10,000 for Chara's fight during a game against Los Angeles. Chara
scuffled with Kings defenseman Tim Gleason in the Senators' 5-1 win Friday
night. Chara, 6 feet 9, was given an instigating penalty, a fighting major, a
misconduct and a game misconduct for the incident at 16:39 of the third period.
NHL rules state that a player who is an instigator of an altercation in the
final five minutes of regulation or overtime will receive an automatic one-game
suspension and the player's coach will be fined. Chara will miss Monday's game
at Florida.

   WINTER SPORTS

   Miller gets first victory

   Defending overall World Cup champion Bode Miller picked up his first victory
of the season, leading a 1-2-4 U.S. finish in the giant slalom at Beaver Creek,
Colo. Miller, who tied for the lead after the first run, nearly went down twice
in the second, but managed to stay up and stayed fast, finishing with a total
time of 2 minutes, 34.56 seconds. Daron Rahlves, who beat Miller in a 1-2 U.S.
downhill Friday, wound up in second place in the giant slalom, 0.49 seconds
back. Kalle Palander of Finland  --  tied with Miller after the first run  --
finished third, 1.23 seconds off the pace. Erik Schlopy of the United States was
fourth, just another 0.01 behind.

   AMERICAN KILDOW WINS: Lindsey Kildow of the United States edged Sylviane
Berthod of Switzerland by three-hundredths of a second at Lake Louise, Alberta,
for her second World Cup downhill victory. Kildow triumphed on the same Lake
Louise hill where she won her first World Cup race a year ago. Fighting swirling
winds and blowing light snow, Kildow won in 1 minute, 49.51 seconds. Berthod was
second in 1:49.54.

   ETC.

   Former cheerleader sued

   A woman who contends she was punched at a bar has sued a former Carolina
Panthers cheerleader, seeking more than $15,000 for her injuries. Melissa Holden
of Tampa, Fla., filed the lawsuit Friday. It said Victoria Renee Thomas
"intentionally, willfully and maliciously assaulted and battered" her. Holden,
26, is a University of South Florida student and nurse. Thomas' attorney,
William Bunting Jr., declined to comment because neither he nor Thomas had seen
the lawsuit. Holden was waiting in line in the bathroom of a Tampa bar Nov. 6
when Thomas punched her, police said. Thomas, 20, of Pittsboro, N.C., faces a
battery charge and two other charges of using a false name.

   STANFORD, USC IN FINAL: Marcello Pantuliano scored two goals to help
second-seeded Stanford beat No. 3 Loyola Marymount 7-6 in the NCAA water polo
semifinals at Lewisburg, Pa. The Cardinal (20-6) will face top-ranked Southern
California (25-1), which beat St. Francis of New York 14-8 in the first
semifinal, in the championship game today.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2005


                              21 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           December 3, 2005 Saturday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 572 words

HEADLINE: Mayo Clinic's cancer center receives gift of $49 million;
Best Buy Co. founder's donation - one of the clinic's largest - is for
development of new treatments.

BYLINE: Maura Lerner, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Richard M. Schulze, the founder and chairman of Best Buy Co., has pledged
almost $49 million to the Mayo Clinic to create a center to develop new
treatments for cancer.

   The gift, announced Friday, is one of the biggest donations in Mayo's history
and the largest ever to the clinic's cancer center.

   Dr. Denis Cortese, Mayo's president, said the money would have "an enormous
impact" on patients. "We are thankful the Schulze family has chosen to share
their personal wealth and interest in a way that can make such a difference for
so many people," he said in a statement.

   Schulze, 64, declined to talk about the gift, which his family foundation
will pay out over seven years. His first wife, Sandra, was treated at Mayo
before she died of cancer in 2001.

   In a statement issued through the Mayo Clinic, however, Schulze said the
chance to support such research was "too strong an opportunity to pass up."

   The money will allow Mayo to expand its efforts to develop new tests and
treatments using gene therapy and other cutting-edge science, said Dr. Franklyn
Prendergast, director of Mayo's Cancer Center. It will also launch a program
aimed at understanding and treating the "horrific pain" often associated with
advanced cancer.

   "We really do have a responsibility to translate our discoveries into
tangible results, meaning something that directly benefits the patient,"
Prendergast said.

   He said Mayo will hire as many as a dozen more scientists as part of the new
Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, which will be based at the clinic's Gonda
Building in Rochester. Schulze and several family members will serve on an
advisory committee overseeing its work.

   Schulze, who has been called the wealthiest man in Minnesota, has given
millions of dollars to cancer-related causes in recent months. In May, his
foundation gave $7.5 million to the American Cancer Society to build or expand
housing for patients and family at the Mayo Clinic and the University of
Minnesota.

   The family has said it wants to focus research efforts on types of cancer
that usually receive little funding. Some of the designated priorities include
cancers of the breast, ovaries, uterus, lung, brain, liver and kidneys.

   Staff Writer David Shaffer contributed to this story. Maura Lerner -
612-673-7384

   GIFTS TO THE MAYO CLINIC

   The Mayo Clinic has been the recipient of other large gifts from wealthy
donors. Here are some of them.

   $128 million in 1995 from the estate of Barbara Woodward Lips, a Texas gas,
oil and ranching entrepreneur.

   $80 million in 1991 from the estate of George Eisenberg of Chicago, whose
bequest appreciated with the sale of his American Decal & Manufacturing Co.

   $45 million* in 1997 from Leslie and Susan Gonda, owners of a California
airplane leasing company, to fund a building that bears their name.

   $28 million in 1995 from the estate of Ruth Charlton Mitchell Masson, an heir
to the founder of F.W. Woolworth Co.

   $25 million pledged in 1996 and paid over several years from Sheikh Zayed bin
Sultan Al-Nahyan, former president of the United Arab Emirates.

   $12 million in 2004 from Wisconsin businessman Samuel Johnson for research.

   $10 million in 2003 from the family and an anonymous donor in the name of
Pauline Phillips, who wrote the "Dear Abby" advice column under the name Abigail
Van Buren.

   * Another, comparable gift from the Gondas was not publicly announced, a Mayo
Clinic spokeswoman said.

   Source: Star Tribune research, Mayo Clinic.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2005


                              22 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            November 27, 2005 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: TRAVEL; Features Desk ; Part L; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3306 words

HEADLINE: CRITIC'S CHOICE | CHILE;
ADVENTURE, DUE SOUTH;
One car, 16 days and 4,500 miles of Chilean roads.... You call this a dream
drive?

BYLINE: Dan Neil, Times Staff Writer

DATELINE:  Salar de Atacama, Chile

BODY:

   I 'VE got a thousand miles behind me and three thousand to go. I've got a
dashboard tan. Hammer down. Radar love.

   It's the middle of the night in the middle of the Atacama Desert, along a
stretch of haunted ground called the Pampa del Indio Muerto. I don't speak
Spanish but I get the idea. This is the land that rain forgot.

   Guidebooks call this part of northern Chile "lunar" or "Martian," and during
the day it's understandable because the cracked lifelessness stretches to the
ashy horizon. Water seems like folklore. But at night, well, night is different.
Northern Chile has dark and transparent air -- silver-lidded observatories eye
the heavens from nearby mountaintops -- and the sky is whitewashed with stars.
You will never feel more Earthbound. Here you can appreciate your significance
in the universe, and the news is not good.

   And so I'm driving, which is what I do and, in a bit of existential irony,
who I am. I'm a driver. I'd rather be known for pioneering gene therapy or
inventing the politician who doesn't lie. Instead, my identity is tangled up
with this simple-minded and sensual act, piloting these wonderful, awful
machines. It started when I was 8 years old and stole my mother's Mercury Comet.
Three-million driving miles later, I'm here, endlessly falling into the well of
my headlights.

   I couldn't be happier. My respiration syncopates with the cadence of white
lines.

   I reckon when the editors asked me to take my ultimate car-centric trip, they
expected that I would want to take a Ferrari down the Autobahn until the car's
nose-cone glowed, or maybe bump and thump with a macked-out Rolls-Royce on
Miami's South Beach.

   I've done those things and they were nice. But the fact is, most of the world
isn't paved, and that's the part I long to see. And so, even before I had an
itinerary in mind, I knew what kind of car I wanted to drive: a big, ornery Land
Rover LR3.

   I really like these cars. Even as they have shed their agricultural
dispositions and grown more refined and comfortable -- and become the
status-laden lorries of pampered suburbia -- Land Rovers are still ferociously
tough and capable off-road. Land Rover is still clubby and British, with the
slight reek of Empire, still a secret handshake among owners and enthusiasts.

   It seems simple enough, though it's not often said. We fall in love with cars
because of what inner need they satisfy. I grew up poor and anxious and
ignorant; I've spent a lot of my adult life traveling to far corners of the
planet so I could claim some worldliness as my own.

   And then there is Chile. The drag strip of nation states, Chile is more than
3,000 miles long and no more than 300 miles wide, like a geographic plumb bob
running along its own curious longitude. This gives the country a satisfying,
almost irresistible sense of ordinal direction, of destination, of here to
there-ness -- a quality all road trips need.

   I do my guidebook homework. Two highways stitch Chile together: The Ruta
Cinco, also known as the Pan-American Highway, from Arica on the Peruvian border
to Puerto Montt. North of La Serena, Ruta Cinco is a ragged and scary filament
of one- or two-lane asphalt. South, it changes suddenly into a gorgeous and
virtually uninhabited four-lane toll road that ends at Puerto Montt.

   Beyond Puerto Montt, bridged by ferries, is the Carretera Austral, a tortuous
gravel road 500 miles long.

   Along these routes, Chile is a geographic changeling: In the north is the
high-altitude desolation of the Altiplano. Farther south, sloping toward the sea
for 750 miles, is the cruel Atacama Desert, one of driest places on Earth. At
about the 30th southern parallel, the stern and arid landscape finally yields.
There's the vineyard-strewn valleys of the central coast; the pen-ink-blue lakes
and geometrically perfect, snowcapped volcanoes south of Temuco; and then,
finally, the disordered flotilla of forested islands that run for 1,000 miles
along the Pacific coast, the Chilean Archipelago. Hot springs, undiscovered
beaches, hissing whitewater, rain forest, tumbling mountains of glacial ice, and
all of it ends, as if with exclamation points, with the jutting spires of Torres
Del Paine National Park in southern Patagonia.

   It sounds like road-trip nirvana.

   My driving partner, Charles LeGrand, and I fly into La Paz, Bolivia, on Oct.
27 to meet representatives from Land Rover, who hand over the LR3 HSE. This
particular vehicle was already in Bolivia as part of Land Rover's G4 Challenge
program -- an extreme-sports competition held in some of the wildest parts of
the globe. So the square, pumpkin-colored truck is expedition-ready, with roof
racks, jerrycans for gasoline, winch and dazzling auxiliary lights. In the
abysmal black of the high desert, Charles will observe, the lights make the LR3
look like a terrestrial mini-sub.

   We leave La Paz on Oct. 28. The game plan seems simple enough: Drive the
length of Chile from north to south, from a place called Tambo Quemado on the
Bolivian border to Punta Arenas on the shore of the Magellan Straits, on the
frayed tip of the continent. But any idea of simple dries up pretty quickly. The
road from La Paz to the Chilean border is forbidding and unnerving. This is the
Altiplano, an unearthly sprawl of pretty pastel lagoons that pool like acid,
endless fields of padlock-hard rock and volcanoes that rip cloudy seams in the
sky. It looks a lot bigger and meaner from ground level. As we cross into Chile,
I reset the odometer -- 0.0 miles.

   In the end, I'll drive more than 4,500 miles in 16 days, over every kind of
road -- from rock-thorned cart path to polished superhighway -- and it will turn
out to be more of an adventure than I ever bargained for. I'll make new friends
and alienate an old one, feel the warm embrace of Chilean hospitality and the
back of its thieving hand, pull a truck out of a ditch and unlock another with a
coat hanger. I will kill an armadillo and Death will whisper in my ear half a
dozen times. And still, I'll drive, because that's what I do and who I am.

   It's party time

   BY Day 5, Charles and I are heading west on a hardpan mining road across the
Salar de Atacama, 50 miles of pink-salt crust in a stupendous valley east of the
Cordillera de Domeyko. The Land Rover boils up a trail of dust that drifts
behind like a smokescreen.

   "Driest ... place I've ever seen," Charles writes grumpily in my notebook.
"Spa treatment in order."

   It's been an eventful few days. In Pica, a tiny oasis town out in the
talc-white nothingness, we encounter Nicolas and Orion at a dusty cafe. They
invite us to Nicolas' mother's birthday party. We're behind schedule, but he
insists. "OOF-ah!" Nicolas says grandly over and over, which apparently is some
kind of Peruvian affirmation. He claps my back with an oak-brown hand.

   As we enter the dirt-floor dwelling, 12 people are gathered around a large
table in a kitchen piled high with possessions -- clothes and broken clocks and
sewing machines, odd bottles retrieved from the desert. It's a great party and
the food and wine flow. As a birthday gift, I stand and sing the old country
song "Silver-Haired Daddy of Mine." All seem pleased with the gringo.

   We don't always find the Chileans so hospitable. We stop in Calama to stock
up on food and get some cash. We pull into the improbable Mall of Calama, a
brightly lighted modern shopping mall, the only one of its kind for 500 miles.
Unfortunately, the cash machine in the mall eats my ATM card. It takes an hour
to explain myself to the manager in my infantile Spanish -- far longer than we
would normally leave the truck unguarded. As we walk out of the supermarket, I
see broken glass around the truck. Thieves have bashed in a window and stolen my
professional camera rig and Charles' backpack.

   "\o7Policia\f7, \o7policia\f7?" I say to the security guard, making the
telephone-to-the-ear gesture with one hand. He just keeps smoking. I'm pretty
angry. \o7"Carabinieri,"\f7 he says finally.

   With some difficulty, after midnight, we find the squalid \o7carabinieri
\f7station and I wait for two hours to make a report to an indifferent clerk.
All the while the cops are beating the ever-loving hell out of someone in the
back.

   There are a lot of ways to measure a trip like this. Miles under the keel,
obviously, or hours or days on the road. Given Chile's unique geography, there's
also degrees of latitude.

   We could also measure by gallons of gas. The Land Rover is getting about 15
miles per gallon and, because of an intermittent fuel-pump problem, we have to
keep the tank above half full (in Copiapo, the LR3 quits on us at 3 a.m.,
blocking a hotel's car park). As the trip progresses, the truck's appetite for
gasoline -- and the scarcity of gas stations -- increasingly rules our
itinerary.

   For me, this trip has some shade of valediction about it. I love driving, but
I understand better than most that the gas-powered automobile is an
unsustainable technology, and something about the limping, station-to-station
tempo of our trip makes it seem crazy. And yet I also understand what a miracle
gasoline is -- compact, lightweight, its golden thermochemical power able to
push the railcar-shaped Land Rover through the air at 70 miles per hour with
ease. Gasoline has a karmic quality. With gasoline, it's possible to see the
sights of many lifetimes in a single incarnation -- did the Buddha ever reckon
on 97 octane?

   What happens to the road trip, the self-authored adventure of miles, when
gasoline goes away? Will there be a Jack Kerouac and Neal Cassady, Tod and Buz,
Thelma and Louise, Charles and Dan, post-petroleum?

   Unfortunately, wherever the automobile goes, it leaves its mark. In the
dirt-street oasis of San Pedro de Atacama, we are chased into a doorway by a
platoon of desert-rigged Citroen Deux Cheveux buggies brought over by French
rally drivers. I thought I'd seen them in the desert the day before, churning up
clouds of dust that looked like phosgene gas rising from among the rocky swales.
It made me wince. All across the face of the Atacama, for hundreds of miles, are
the winding, erratic tracks of off-road vehicles. In this climate, with zero
precipitation, those tracks could be there for centuries. This is what the
American West would look like if off-roaders had their way.

   "There are some people here who tread lightly and watch where they are
going," says Adrian Germishuizen, a tour guide for a company called Azimut.
"There are others who don't give a damn where they go and just think of today."

   Music to drive by

   DAY 10. For the first part of the trip, we think the CD player is broken. It
turns out it's just hard to operate. At 1,280 miles, at 26 degrees southern
latitude, the car sound system erupts with Prince's greatest hits. Charles and I
high-five each other. A good day.

   Along the coast north of Santiago, we make a more-or-less random right turn
onto a farm road, which leads for miles through a beautiful cactus garden dusted
with purple and yellow flowers. The trail ends at a black cliff plunging into
the incandescent blue ocean. If this place were in California, it would have
guards around it.

   Around Santiago, we head for the Termas de Chillan, the country's best ski
area, with its natural hot springs. But the drive into the Andes takes three
hours on a narrow gravel road, and we arrive after midnight. The next morning,
road-weary and needing a good soak, we talk our way into the private hot springs
on the property of the Grand Hotel. It's a series of interlocked, bubbling pools
at the foot of a grassy expanse, the winter piste. It looks like Aspen. It's all
I can do to get Charles out of the hot springs to face another day in the car,
and, I think, I lose him right there.

   On we drive, hour after hour, down the Pan-American Highway, with the
serrated horizon of the snowy Andes ever to the east. At the speed limit of 120
kilometers per hour (74 mph), the Land Rover thrums like a Tibetan throat
singer, the engine turning at 2,100 rpm. Hour after hour after hour. What others
might find monotonous I think of as a kind of centering peace, a spiritual
retreat in the whistling wind, a soul migration.

   But that's me. Charles is just bored. It's not easy spending so much time on
the road with another person, and Charles and I are feeling the strain. The lag
in the conversations, the thin-skinned irritation. The road can cement
friendships or expose their fault lines. We drove across the United States six
years ago for a story in Car and Driver. We got along well then, but now he's 30
years old and I wouldn't blame him if he's weary of playing copilot to my pilot.

   About midnight, approaching the city of Puerto Montt, almost 3,000 miles into
the trip, I look over at him. He's sleeping, held upright by his seat belts, his
head hanging heavily. He looks miserable. When he wakes up, I tell him he can go
home if he wants to.

   "Man, I'm just sick of being in the car," he says. That right there is the
difference between him and me.

   Eleven hours later, Charles is on a plane headed north and I'm pondering a
solo drive of the Carretera Austral and the Argentine pampas. I'm not sure I can
do it.

   An all-seeing new copilot

   DAY 12. Less than two hours after Charles leaves, at a ferry crossing south
of Puerto Montt, a place that looks like something in the Greek isles, I meet
Juan Pablo Chovar, a 26-year-old tour guide from Temuco. In 10 minutes, he
volunteers to serve as navigator for the rest of my trip. He's a charmer, a
shaman, a gleeful dharma bum and polymath who tapes a tiny Olmec statuette on
the dash after he throws his gear in the back. We talk about Kerouac and
Ginsberg and "The Celestine Prophesy."

   "When I get sleepy I get ... prophetic," Juan says mysteriously.

   "Well, tell me," I say, "are we going to run out of gas?"

   UFOs, past lives, Atlantis. Juan accuses me of being a skeptic. "Open
yourself up to the universe," he says. "This is such a pristine blue
experience!"

   He's winning me over.

   At another ferry crossing, we meet Col. Henry Day and Paul Newby, British
mountaineers on a climbing vacation through South America. They are driving a
1998 Land Rover Defender 110, a brute of a machine rigged with a rooftop tent,
propane gas, water system, roll bars and security cages.

   I've got total vehicle envy and ask for a tour of the Defender. They happily
oblige.

   It's hard to explain how odd this coincidence is. Their vehicle is actually a
retired Camel Trophy truck -- Camel Trophy was the famously grueling off-road
competition Land Rover sponsored for years, much like the G4 Challenge. Both men
have had lifelong romances with these trucks. Newby, who worked as a surveyor
for the British government in some of the wildest holdings of the Empire,
actually spent his honeymoon training at Solihull, England, where Land Rovers
are made.

   Day is interested in the LR3, but he's not sure it's quite got the rhino hide
of the old Defenders. "I'll wait to see what the new Defenders are like," he
says.

   Obviously, we're a matched set of some kind -- mates, in fact -- and we
decide to caravan south together.

   A day later, at an unmarked crossroad somewhere on the Carretera Austral,
Juan and I pick up a couple of trekkers, Tomer and Shukyy, who have recently
mustered out of the Israeli army. Now we are an impromptu expedition of six, and
when we stop in Puerto Aisen we find -- miraculously arranged for us by Juan --
a proper Patagonian feast waiting for us.

   In a community house, a wooden structure called a \o7quincho\f7, we find two
long tables laden with salads, relishes and roasted vegetables. In an adjacent
room are two lamb carcasses roasting over a pit fire. The smoke is as thick as
incense.

   Soon steaming plates of the grilled meat are passed around. After we've eaten
our fill, the travelers take turns reciting poems for our supper. I recite
"Jabberwocky," the universal poem.

   In the fire-lit night, I look around to admire all my new friends, people I
would never have met except for the strange workings of a thing called
automobile. And not just these. The beautiful tollbooth worker with black hair
and glacier-blue eyes -- she looked as if she wanted to climb in and drive away.
The old woman who lives across from the crashed airplane -- she sold us the best
eggs I've ever eaten. The scallop divers and gas-station attendants and the
police clerk who types with one finger. If, as Mark Twain said, travel is the
death of prejudice, the automobile is the sword.

   It's getting late, and Juan and I have another 1,000 miles of fierce
Patagonian road ahead. Juan has a rendezvous with a beautiful Norwegian he
hasn't met yet. As for me, with the end in sight, every mile brings me closer to
home. All I ask is an orange truck and a star to steer her by.

   *

   ()

   Long and sport of it

   GETTING THERE:

   From LAX, La Paz, American, Lan Air and Aero California have connecting
service (change of plane) to La Paz, Bolivia. Restricted round-trip fares begin
at $979 until Dec. 7, increasing to $1,059 until Dec. 24.

   La Paz is 150 miles from Tambo Quemado, Chile.

   TELEPHONES:

   To call the numbers below from the U.S., dial 011 (the international dialing
code), 56 (country code for Chile) and the local number.

   WHERE TO STAY:

   Santa Rosa Resort, Pica; 55-741711, resortsantarosa.cl. (Only Spanish
spoken.) A small complex of bungalows in a fruited oasis in the heart of the
Atacama Desert. Rooms for two $67, cabins for two $87. Reservations can also be
made through Extremo Norte, 57-326606, extremonorte.cl.

   Hostelria San Pedro de Atacama, 460 Toconao, San Pedro de Atacama; 55-851011,
diegodealmagrohoteles.cl. Upscale hacienda-style complex in tourist-hip San
Pedro de Atacama, with inviting pool and great service. Doubles $100-$120.

   Los Balcones de Aragon, 289 Cienfuegos, La Serena; 51-212419,
www.losbalconesdearagon.cl. In the heart of the city, with secure parking and
quiet courtyard. Doubles from $57.

   Hotel Viento Sur, 200 Ejercito 200, Puerto Montt; 65-258701,
hotelvientosur.cl. Seafarers' residence overlooking the port converted into a
stylish but understated tourist hotel. Doubles $70.

   Hotel Bellavista, 060 Avenida Vicente Perez Rosales, Puerto Varas; 65-232011,
www.hotelbellavista.cl. Lives up to its name, with extraordinary waterside view
of Lake Llanquihue and the Osorno volcano, plus impeccable amenities. Doubles
$67, including breakfast.

   TO LEARN MORE:

   Embassy of Chile, (202) 785-1746, chile-usa.org.

   -- Dan Neil

   *

   Driving tips

   Vehicles: If your route includes the high deserts of the north or the
Carretera Austral in the south, or if you plan to visit in fall and winter (our
spring and summer), rent a high-clearance 4x4 vehicle -- particularly with extra
fuel cans, spare tires and other off-roading gear. The Toyota Hi-Lux 4x4, a
four-door pickup with a diesel engine, is fuel efficient, comfortable and
virtually indestructible.

   Rentals: Because of Chile's linearity, anyone renting a car for an extended
visit probably will want to return it in another city. Be prepared to pay for
the convenience. A one-month rental from Hertz of a Toyota Hi-Lux, with pickup
in Arica and drop-off in Punta Arenas, costs $4,860.65, including a whopping
$1,360 drop-off fee.

   Driving: The rules of the road are familiar, and other drivers are aware and
courteous. Most of Chile's natural wonders are accessible from main highways on
well-groomed hardpan dirt and gravel roads, easily negotiated in a front-drive
car.

   Fuel: In El Norte Grande, running out of fuel is a serious hassle. For this
reason, most vehicles use diesel fuel, which gives better range.

   Maps: The best is the Guia Rutera of Chile and Argentina, available at YPF
service stations. This is indispensable in the north because it indicates
service station locations.

   Money: Most large towns and cities have bank machines that allow you to
withdraw up to 100,000 Chilean pesos ($189.23) a day. Most hotels and merchants
accept credit cards.

   -- Dan Neil

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: MAP: Chile  CREDIT: Leslie Carlson Los Angeles Times PHOTO:
WIDE-RANGING TERRAIN: Chile's string-bean dimensions make for a varied driving
experience for auto writer Dan Neil, traversing Volcan Sinbad, top, in a Land
Rover. Above, at a Caleta la Arena ferry crossing, locals collect seaweed.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Dan Neil Los Angeles Times PHOTO: WIDE-RANGING TERRAIN: Chile's
string-bean dimensions make for a varied driving experience for auto writer Dan
Neil, traversing Volcan Sinbad, top, in a Land Rover. Above, at a Caleta la
Arena ferry crossing, locals collect seaweed.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Dan Neil Los
Angeles Times PHOTO: GREENER LATITUDE: The rolling pampas along a section of the
Chile-Argentina border can be a welcome respite for those passing through arid
landscape on the long road south.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Dan Neil Los Angeles Times
PHOTO: ATACAMA DESERT OASIS: A courtyard fire warms patrons dining alfresco at
the Cafe Adobe, a rather chic outpost in San Pedro de Atacama.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Dan Neil Los Angeles Times PHOTO: SIGNPOST AHEAD: The Pan-American Highway
stretches thousands of miles, ending in Chile at the island of Chiloe.  PHOTO:
FORGING AHEAD: The Land Rover LR3 pushes on through the slack tide on a Chilean
beach near Pichidangui, just north of Valparaiso.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Charles LeGrand

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2005


                              23 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           November 26, 2005 Saturday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; BITS & BYTES; Pg. A-12

LENGTH: 688 words

HEADLINE: MURDOCH MAY BE EYEING SQUIRREL HILL SEARCH ENGINE

BYLINE: Corilyn Shropshire

BODY:

   Clusty.com founder Raul Valdes-Perez has been notoriously resistant to money
from outside investors, instead choosing to "bootstrap" or subsist on operating
revenue generated by his young Squirrel Hill-based search engine firm, Vivisimo.
But, now, billionaire media baron Rupert Murdoch, chairman and chief executive
officer of New York-based News Corp., could be eyeing Clusty.com for a possible
buy.

   It's been widely reported that Mr. Murdoch is sniffing around smallish
Internet operations with the intent to spend up to $2 billion gobbling them up.
Mr. Murdoch's recent mention of Clusty to a Fortune Magazine reporter in October
has yielded speculation that Clusty.com, often referred to as the search engine
with the unfortunate name, could be on Mr. Murdoch's wish list.

   In an interview with Fortune reporter Adam Lashinsky, Mr. Murdoch mentioned
an Internet search he'd done using Clusty. "As he talks about these
technologies, about the only thing that's clear is that he's determined not to
be a follower," Mr. Lashinsky wrote about Murdoch. Mr. Valdes-Perez could not be
reached for comment.

   *

   The Pittsburgh Technology Council said that a bill passed by the House
earlier this week contained a provision that improves the use of net operating
loss carryforwards and provides for a single sales factor in calculating
corporate income -- both wins for the local economic development and business
advocacy group, which says that changes will make Pennsylvania's business
climate more competitive.

   Pennsylvania currently caps at $2 million the amount of net-operating losses
that can be used against a profit in a future year to reduce or eliminate the
income tax bill. This puts Pennsylvania a disadvantage, according to the
council, because 45 other states allow for an unlimited "carryforward" tax break
in future years.

   House Bill 515 was amended to include a provision increasing the cap to $5
million in 2007, $7.5 million in 2008, $10 million in 2009 and $10 million or 75
percent of available losses, whichever is greater, after that. Proponents of the
carryforward maintain that it is important, especially tech start-ups, which
almost always experience losses in their early years.

   According to the council, an average start-up takes five to seven years to
show a profit. The state Senate is expected to pass the amended version of HB
515, which could land on Gov. Ed Rendell's desk for signature on Dec. 5.

   *

   Biotechnology start-up Nurel Therapeutics was sold for $1.5 million in stock
this week to Stockholm-based pharmaceutical firm Diamyd Medical AB, which Nurel
CEO Michael Christini said has committed to building its U.S. operations in
Pittsburgh. Nurel was spun out of the University of Pittsburgh in 2003, with Mr.
Christini, a lawyer by training, relocating here in 2004 to run the firm
alongside co-founder Dr. Joseph Glorioso the chairman of the Department of
Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry at Pitt.

   Mr. Christini said the exit for the company, which is developing localized
gene therapy for pain, wasn't planned but the opportunity to develop the product
with an established, publicly traded firm was too good to pass up. "They have
resources and abilities we wouldn't have," Mr. Christini said.

   For now, Nurel has two employees, Mr. Christini and a scientist, while Dr.
Glorioso remains a consultant. Despite the seemingly early buyout (Nurel is
pre-clinical trials) and relatively low valuation, Mr. Christini said the merger
was an ideal match for two firms with mutual interests.

   "We found a company that has expertise in our areas," he said. "We're [he and
Dr. Glorioso] intensely committed to this technology. At some point, it becomes
much more than about personal return."

   *

   A very important final note: Last week, I failed to include the e-mail
addresses to which companies seeking to present at the Angel Venture Fair
sponsored by Hazelwood-based Innovation Works and the Pittsburgh Technology
Council could submit their business plans. Interested companies should e-mail a
business plan or inquiries to angelfair@innovationworks.org or
angelfair@pghtech.org. Entries are due by 5 p.m. on Dec. 8.

NOTES: Got tech buzz? Contact Corilyn Shropshire at cshropshire@post-gazette.com
or 412-263-1413.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2005


                              24 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           November 24, 2005 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-9

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS VENTURE INTO EVER MORE AGGRESSIVE DEMENTIA TREATMENTS

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A fog is slowly creeping over Dr. William Deutsch's brain. He'd try a risky
experiment, even one requiring brain surgery, in hopes of at least stalling his
incurable dementia. But scientists have little to offer.

   Families battling Alzheimer's disease and similar dementias increasingly are
calling for a shot at riskier therapies that might bring bigger benefits than
today's pretty safe but largely disappointing drugs.

   It's a conundrum: Dementia robs its victims of the ability to fully consent
to medical experiments. When loved ones can do so for them varies in part
according to how much risk is involved.

   Critics say that's one reason scientists and regulators have generally
treated Alzheimer's more like a chronic disease than the killer it is,
tolerating fewer side effects than for, say, cancer therapies. Further chilling
was the 2002 halt of a study of a vaccine designed to attack Alzheimer's
brain-clogging gunk that caused serious brain inflammation in a few patients.

   Now, the tide seems to be turning. Scientists are tentatively exploring a
handful of bold, sometimes invasive, approaches -- from another vaccine attempt
to a gene therapy that requires brain injections -- prompting an ethical debate
about how to study a vulnerable population.

   Patients and caregivers want a voice in those decisions, and often accept
more risk than doctors predict, was the overarching message when the Alzheimer's
Association arranged an unusual meeting between families, drug developers and
the Food and Drug Administration.

   "No one has ever survived this disease," Frank Broyles, the University of
Arkansas' athletic director whose wife recently died of Alzheimer's, reminded
the meeting.

   "We would take any risk," even a drug with a 50 percent chance of death if
there were an equal shot at benefit, he said of his own family.

   Added Dr. Deutsch, a former New York podiatrist in the early stages of a
similar dementia: "You're going to have to have some more invasive procedure
done to get dramatic results. ... You should at least be given the choice."

   The first formal study of family risk tolerance, published in this month's
journal Neurology, supports those calls. University of Michigan researchers
wondered: Is it OK for Grandma to undergo a spinal tap when she doesn't
understand why? What if the research won't help her but might lead to future
Alzheimer's treatments?

   Using 10 research scenarios, they surveyed 229 elderly people at increased
risk of developing Alzheimer's because a close relative had it. Most accepted
even the greatest potential for side effects, such as gene therapy or a painful
spinal tap, for themselves, and were only slightly less risk-tolerant when
deciding for a loved one.

   Yet until now, "the patient community's been conspicuous by its absence," Dr.
Russell Katz, FDA's neurologic drugs chief, told the recent Alzheimer's
Association meeting, to which a reporter was invited.

   In contrast, a handful of cancer survivors helps the FDA privately deliberate
what cancer drug research to allow, and the agency is starting a similar pilot
project in Parkinson's disease -- two patient groups that requested a role.

   Caregivers differ on how much risk they'll tolerate; one called it
gut-wrenching to watch a loved one suffer even a minor side effect.

   But Dr. Deutsch, still able to measure how his abilities are melting away,
boils the question down to family choice: "I don't think it's the scientists'
job to pick who's going to get the treatment."

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2005


                              25 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           November 22, 2005 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 344  words

HEADLINE: Families say they're eager to try risky treatments for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- A fog is slowly creeping over Dr. William Deutsch's brain. He'd
try a risky experiment, even one requiring brain surgery, in hopes of at least
stalling his incurable dementia. But scientists have little to offer.

   Families battling Alzheimer's disease and similar dementias increasingly are
calling for a shot at riskier therapies that might bring bigger benefits than
today's pretty safe but largely disappointing drugs.

   Scientists are tentatively exploring a handful of bold, sometimes invasive,
approaches -- from a vaccine attempt to a gene therapy that requires brain
injections -- prompting an ethical debate about how to study a vulnerable
population.

   Patients and caregivers want a voice in those decisions and often accept more
risk than doctors predict, was the overarching message when the Alzheimer's
Association arranged an unusual meeting among families, drug developers and the
Food and Drug Administration.

   'NO ONE HAS EVER SURVIVED'

   "No one has ever survived this disease," Frank Broyles, the University of
Arkansas' athletic director whose wife recently died of Alzheimer's, reminded
the meeting.

   ''We would take any risk,'' even a drug with a 50 percent chance of death if
there were an equal shot at benefit, he said of his own family.

   Added Deutsch, a former New York podiatrist in the early stages of a similar
dementia: ''You're going to have to have some more invasive procedure done to
get dramatic results. . . . You should at least be given the choice.''

   The first formal study of family risk tolerance, published in this month's
journal Neurology, supports those calls. University of Michigan researchers
wondered: Is it OK for Grandma to undergo a spinal tap when she doesn't
understand why? What if the research won't help her but might lead to future
Alzheimer's treatments?

   They surveyed 229 elderly people at increased risk of developing Alzheimer's
because a close relative had it. Most accepted even the greatest potential for
side effects for themselves, and were only slightly less risk-tolerant when
deciding for a loved one.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2005


                              26 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           November 22, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: Riskier Alzheimer's treatments urged

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A fog is slowly creeping over William Deutsch's brain. He'd try a risky
experiment, even one requiring brain surgery, in hopes of at least stalling his
incurable dementia. But scientists have little to offer.

   Families battling Alzheimer's disease and similar dementias increasingly are
calling for a shot at riskier therapies that might bring bigger benefits than
today's pretty safe but largely disappointing drugs.

   It's a conundrum: Dementia robs its victims of the ability to fully consent
to medical experiments. When loved ones can do so for them varies in part
according to how much risk is involved.

   Critics say that's one reason scientists and regulators generally have
treated Alzheimer's more like a chronic disease than the killer it is,
tolerating fewer side effects than for, say, cancer therapies. Further chilling
was the 2002 halt of a study of a vaccine designed to attack Alzheimer's
brain-clogging gunk that caused serious brain inflammation in a few patients.

    Now the tide seems to be turning. Scientists are tentatively exploring a
number of bold, sometimes invasive, approaches - from another vaccine attempt to
a gene therapy that requires brain injections - prompting an ethical debate
about how to study a vulnerable population.

   Patients and caregivers want a voice in those decisions, and often accept
more risk than doctors predict, was the overarching message when the Alzheimer's
Association arranged an unusual meeting among families, drug developers and the
Food and Drug Administration.

   "No one has ever survived this disease," Frank Broyles, the University of
Arkansas' athletic director, whose wife recently died of Alzheimer's, reminded
the meeting.

   "We would take any risk," even a drug with a 50 percent chance of death, if
there were an equal shot at benefit, he said of his own family.

   The first formal study of family risk tolerance, published in this month's
journal Neurology, supports those calls. University of Michigan researchers
wondered: Is it OK for Grandma to undergo a spinal tap when she doesn't
understand why? What if the research won't help her but might lead to future
Alzheimer's treatments?

   Using 10 research scenarios, they surveyed 229 elderly people at increased
risk of developing Alzheimer's because a close relative had it. Most accepted
even the greatest potential for side effects, such as gene therapy or a painful
spinal tap, for themselves, and were only slightly less risk-tolerant when
deciding for a loved one.

   Yet until now, "the patient community's been conspicuous by its absence,"
Russell Katz, the FDA's neurologic drugs chief, told the recent Alzheimer's
Association meeting, to which a reporter was invited.

   In contrast, a handful of cancer survivors helps the FDA privately deliberate
what cancer drug research to allow, and the agency is starting a similar pilot
project in Parkinson's disease - two patient groups that requested a role.

   It's easy to say you'll accept more risk in hope of more gain. How to
quantify that is the vexing problem of regulators like Katz.

   An experiment is just that: Nobody knows the full risks until participants
have been treated, something difficult for desperate families to grasp,
cautioned Steven DeKosky, the University of Pittsburgh's neurology chief.

   Still, Katz said the FDA ultimately allows most Alzheimer's proposals.

   Among the most invasive: Scientists at Rush University in Chicago recently
injected six patients' brains with a virus carrying a nerve growth factor that
might reverse deterioration. A slightly different gene therapy approach, in
California, produced promising preliminary results, although two patients
experienced dangerous bleeding in their brains. The Chicago researchers are
tracking patient reactions, and a follow-up study could begin in a year.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              27 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2005 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                            November 21, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-02

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: Research knocks out pain STUDY FINDS KEY LINK A CU psychologist
discovers that opiates irritate certain cells, making the drugs less effective.
The finding offers hope for chronic sufferers.

BYLINE: Katy Human Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Boulder - Morphine works wonders for a broken bone, but barely takes the edge
off the phantom pain of an amputated limb.

   Chronic pain is notoriously difficult to treat, and University of Colorado
psychologist Linda Watkins thinks she knows why. Her answer has the potential to
change the way doctors manage patient pain.

   "It's the glia," Watkins said, referring to a class of cells that has
suddenly emerged as the hottest target of anti-pain medicine.

   "Glia don't like morphine. It irritates them," Watkins said.

   Irritated glial cells, Watkins has discovered, mess with the ability of
morphine to calm down everyday pain neurons.

   A research team, including Watkins, reports its findings in a paper scheduled
for the December issue of the academic journal Trends in Neuroscience.

   The research could help explain why opiate withdrawal is so painful.

   It has already spawned a business connection between Watkins and the
California company Avigen Inc., which is studying two drugs to calm down
overexcited glia.

   Drugs currently used to manage chronic pain are woefully inadequate, Watkins
said. For the ongoing agony of a back injury, an amputation or chemotherapy,
pain drugs considered "good" still fail 60 percent to 80 percent of the time,
she said. Chronic-pain victims respond poorly to opiates, or need very high
doses, she said.

   "It's a horrible situation. These are not minor issues. These are people who
commit suicide," Watkins said.

   The American Pain Foundation estimates that one in four U.S. adults suffers
chronic pain, and for some, it's completely debilitating.

   Robert Schwartzman, chair of the neurology department at the Drexel
University College of Medicine in Philadelphia, works with people who develop a
complicated pain syndrome after seemingly minor injuries, such as whiplash.

   "They get narcotics but they remain in terrible pain," Schwartzman said.
"They sit home and lose their jobs and friends."

   Schwartzman and others have known for several years that certain chemicals -
called cytokines - are somehow involved in that ongoing pain, but it took
Watkins to explain how.

   Glial cells, which become overactive during exaggerated pain responses, pump
out cytokines, she found. Opiate drugs make it worse, exciting glia and
counteracting the effect of the pain drug.

   "That's a really major advance," Schwartzman said. "Now we're finally
starting to understand this pain business."

   Watkins used a gene-therapy technique to treat overexcited glial cells in
laboratory rats suffering chronic pain, with clear results. She injected genes
that coax spinal cells to make anti-inflammatory cytokines. The treatment calmed
the glial cells, but didn't affect normal pain neurons.

   Rats that previously avoided using a painful paw began running around,
Watkins said. "We turned off neuropathic pain completely."

   Watkins said she expects Avigen to begin clinical trials with a similar
technique next year.

   Staff writer Katy Human can be reached at 303-820-1910 or
khuman@denverpost.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2005


                              28 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 20, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; IDEAS & TRENDS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1238 words

HEADLINE: The Problem With an Almost-Perfect Genetic World

BYLINE: By AMY HARMON

BODY:

   MIA PETERSON is not a fan of tests. Because she has Down syndrome, she says,
she cannot always think as fast as she would like to and tests end up making her
feel judged. A recent driving test, for instance, ended in frustration.

     Ms. Peterson, 31, the chief of self-advocacy for the National Down Syndrome
Society, prefers public speaking and travel. And her test aversion extends to
the latest one designed to detect Down in a fetus. ''I don't want to think like
we're being judged against,'' Ms. Peterson said. ''Not meeting their
expectations.''

    Heralded in the Nov. 10 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine, the
new prenatal test provides earlier, more reliable results for all women than the
current test, which is routinely offered to only older women who are at higher
risk. But for people with Down syndrome and the cluster of other conditions
subject to prenatal screening, the new test comes with a certain chill.

     Because such tests often lead to abortions, people with conditions from
mental disability to cystic fibrosis may find their numbers dwindling. As a
result, some fear, their lives may become harder just as they are winning the
fight for greater inclusion.

     ''We're trying to make a place for ourselves in society at a time when
science is trying to remove at least some of us,'' said Andrew Imparato,
president of the American Association of People With Disabilities, who suffers
from bipolar disorder. ''For me, it's very scary.''

     Some bioethicists envision a dystopia where parents who choose to forgo
genetic testing are shunned, or their children are denied insurance. Parents and
people with disabilities fear they may simply be more lonely. And less money may
be devoted to cures and education.

     The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, for instance, does not endorse prenatal
testing, which the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
recommends offering during pregnancy.

     ''If you can terminate pregnancies with a condition, who is going to put
research dollars into it?'' said Nancy Press, a professor of medical
anthropology at Oregon Health and Science University.

     Indeed, the $15 million spent on the new test for Down by the National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development might have gone instead toward
much-needed research on the biochemistry of people living with the condition,
said Michael Berube, co-director of the disabilities studies program at
Pennsylvania State University.

     Mr. Berube, whose 14-year-old son has Down syndrome, worries that if fewer
children are born with the condition, hard-won advances like including them in
mainstream schools may lose support. ''The more people who think the condition
is grounds for termination of a pregnancy, the more likely it will be that
you'll wind up with a society that doesn't welcome those people once they're
here,'' he said. ''It turns into a vicious cycle.''

     Anthony Shriver, founder of Best Buddies, a nonprofit organization that
helps people with intellectual disabilities form friendships, said smaller
numbers will mean even greater social isolation for the people his group serves.

     ''Loneliness is one of the most significant challenges they face,'' Mr.
Shriver said. ''And it would only become more acute as they became a smaller
segment of the population.''

     Beyond the impact on the disabled, disabilities activists say, the
implications of prenatal testing for diversity and democracy require more
attention than they have so far received.

     Lisa Hedley, whose 10-year-old daughter has dwarfism, said the condition is
usually not detected prenatally. It is so rare that it has traditionally not
been considered worth the expense of the genetic test. Soon, though, pregnant
women may be offered a gene-chip technology that can perform hundreds of tests
at once for a few hundred dollars.

     ''It's so complicated,'' said Ms. Hedley, president of the Children of
Difference Foundation. ''Would I choose to have my child have a disability? Oh
my goodness, no. It's difficult for her. It's difficult for everyone. But
difference is what makes the world go round.''

     Supporters of abortion are especially wary of wading into a discussion over
the ethics of prenatal testing, lest they be seen as playing into the opposing
side in the fraught national debate over abortion rights. But advocates for
people with disabilities are troubled by how much faster the science of prenatal
testing is advancing than the public discussion of how it ought to be used.

     If no child is ever born again with the fatal childhood disease Tay-Sachs,
many might see that as a medical triumph. But what about other conditions,
including deafness, which some do not consider to be a disability, and
Huntington's Disease, an adult-onset neurological disorder?

     Among the difficult choices facing prospective parents in coming years,
genetics researchers say, will be the ability to predict the degree of severity
in chromosomal abnormalities like Down syndrome, which can cause mild to
moderate retardation.

     ''Where do you draw the line?'' said Mark A. Rothstein, director of the
Bioethics Institute at the University of Louisville School of Medicine. ''On the
one hand we have to view this as a positive in terms of preventing disability
and illness. But at what point are we engaging in eugenics and not accepting the
normal diversity within a population?''

     Abortion, Mr. Rothstein and others fear, could become a kind of ''poor
man's gene therapy,'' if cost-conscious health insurance companies see it as
less expensive than treating a disabled child. Others argue that prenatal
testing will be limited to those who can afford it, leaving the poor to grapple
with genetic disability and disease.

     Of course, as more conditions are diagnosed in utero, many parents may
simply decline testing, or use the information to prepare themselves. But
studies have shown that women are considerably more likely to terminate their
pregnancies if they know of fetal anomalies.

     One study of 53,000 women's choices, published in Obstetrics & Gynecology
in 2002, found that the termination rate ranged from about 1 percent for
conditions that were classified as having no impact on the quality of life, to
50 percent for those considered to have a serious impact.

     Women were far more likely to choose abortions for disabilities that have a
high probability of affecting cognitive functioning. For conditions that have
little or no impact on the quality of life but might require medical or surgical
therapy, the abortion rate was 16 percent, but doubled for those likely to cause
mental dysfunction.

     As for Down syndrome, doctors estimate that about 80 percent of women who
get positive test results choose abortion.

     Still, some who work with Down syndrome children don't believe the future
is that grim. Allen C. Crocker, director of the Down syndrome program at
Children's Hospital Boston, believes that number of women who choose to continue
their pregnancies will go up in the coming years.

     Even as genetic tests appear to have lowered the number of Down syndrome
births, he said, social conditions for people with the conditions have improved
markedly.

     ''We're in the midst of a gentle social revolution,'' said Dr. Crocker,
and, he believes, it may just outpace the scientific one.


     PREDICTED: 4,649
ESTIMATED: 3,962

2000
PREDICTED: 7,262
ESTIMATED: 3,654

(Source by University of Connecticut Health Center)(pg. 14)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo:  Strength in Numbers -- Genetic testing may adversely affect
children with Down syndrome. (Photo by The Boston Globe)Chart: ''Fewer Born With
Down Syndrome''Given the increasing age of birth mothers, the number of Down
syndrome births should be increasing, according to experts' projections.
Instead, a study has found that the total has declined.Experts believe that the
number of Down syndrome births dropped because more pregnant women have been
able to test for the condition and have chosen to abort.Graph tracks predicted
and estimated Down syndrome births since 1990.1990

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2005


                              29 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            November 20, 2005 Sunday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 293 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell production site to open at Case;
Facility will help increase local research

BYLINE: Regina McEnery, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Cleveland researchers will christen a brand-new production facility Monday
capable of churning out billions and billions of nonembryonic stem cells for
clinical trials.

   The facility, on the top floor of Case Western Reserve University's Wolstein
Research Building, represents an important step in the city's drive to build a
biotechnology sector, which needs cells for research.

   It also enhances the work of experimental research projects that have been
relying on adult stem cells from bone marrow, blood and umbilical cord blood to
treat leukemia and other cancers.

   The production facility is a new venture by the National Center for
Regenerative Medicine, a partnership of Case, University Hospitals and the
Cleveland Clinic.

   The facility will allow researchers to increase the number of clinical trials
being conducted simultaneously from three to six.

   Dr. Stanton Gerson, director of both the Ireland Cancer Center and the
regenerative medicine center, heads up one of the trials, a gene therapy to help
patients withstand chemotherapy, that has been relying on the cell production
facility.

   "We probably produce about 2 billion stem cells per transplant," Gerson said.

   Along with the academic partners, the center also has several commercial
partners, Athersys, Arteriocyte and RegenRx.

   "To be poised to do the latest clinical trials using stem cell therapy, a
facility like this is really necessary," said Dr. Paul DiCorleta, chairman of
the Clinic's Lerner Research Institute and co-director of the regenerative
medicine center.

   The center, which was supported with state tax dollars earmarked for the
development of high-tech jobs, will be reapplying next month for a new $8
million state grant. The money would be used to help run the facility, said
DiCorleta.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2005


                              30 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 19, 2005 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 64 words

BODY:

   An article and a headline in Business Day on Thursday about China's
regulatory approval of a new cancer therapy referred imprecisely to how unusual
it was. The approval was the first anywhere for a cancer therapy using a virus
that attacks tumor cells; it was not the first for a gene therapy, which China
granted in 2003 to a different company, SiBono GeneTech, for a cancer treatment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2005


                              31 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                           November 19, 2005 Saturday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 1255 words

HEADLINE: Big results in study to treat cancer;
Modified gene helps offset chemo

BYLINE: Regina McEnery, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   In a field littered with doubts, disappointments and downright failures,
Bernice Thomas represents a crucial step forward.

   Four months ago, the 62-year-old skin cancer patient from East Cleveland
began growing blood stem cells that had been genetically altered to withstand
the debilitating effects of chemotherapy. Researchers detected the cells in
Thomas' marrow and blood after she was injected with a gene nicknamed MGMT as
part of a tiny study at University Hospitals of Cleveland's Ireland Cancer
Center.

   The long-awaited molecular evidence showed Dr. Stanton Gerson, the study's
principal investigator and Ireland director, that the body's immune system could
be manipulated in a good way. Gerson had trusted this as a theory and doggedly
pursued it for more than 20 years. But until Thomas, he couldn't say for sure
whether the response he had achieved in test tubes and animals would ever be
replicated in humans.

   Whether his preliminary study will result in a new treatment for stubborn
killers like melanoma -- the deadliest form of skin cancer -- is hard to
predict, even for believers like Gerson. The cancer geneticist treasured his
eureka moment, but he is sensitive to the hype and clouds that have complicated
this maverick field of gene therapy since its pioneer days in the early 1990s.

   In gene therapy, modified genes such as MGMT are inserted into a patient's
cells and tissues to treat a disease. But its promise has been offset by some
spectacular setbacks.

   Perhaps the most notable was the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an
18-year-old volunteer in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trial.
Gelsinger, who had a rare metabolic disease, died after developing a severe
immune reaction to the virus being used to deliver the modified gene to liver
cells.

   In 2003, the Food and Drug Administration halted 27 gene therapy trials,
including Gerson's, after an experimental gene therapy being conducted in France
apparently triggered a leukemia-like disease in a 3-year-old. The Paris-based
study never reopened, but the FDA lifted the embargo on the U.S. studies last
year.

   Different types of viruses are required to ferry the modified genes that
scientists create into patients' cells. Like cars on a highway, some move
smoothly through traffic while others break the rules and wreak havoc. In the
Pennsylvania and Paris studies, the viral "cars" caused the deaths, raising
questions about the future of gene therapy.

   The safety issue has combined with the disappointing realization that while
gene therapy seems to work in animals, primarily mice, it doesn't translate very
well to humans. All remain experimental.

   There are no guarantees that Gerson's MGMT will pay off with the kinds of
dividends for which clinical researchers strive in the laboratory, but Gerson is
hopeful.

   MGMT is a mutant gene produced in Gerson's lab that is designed to help
patients boost their immune system by growing new adult stem cells needed to
withstand chemotherapy.

   In Thomas' case, blood stem cells were collected and exposed to a retrovirus
containing the MGMT gene. She was then injected with her own genetically
modified cells and treated with chemotherapy. The hope was that the stem cells
containing the new gene would be able to stand up to the chemotherapy.

   A leading expert said Gerson's approach could lead to a new way to treat
chronic conditions, although the future is still murky.

   "Things lead to things, but it's not always clear where the path is going,"
conceded Dr. Kenneth Cornetta, professor and chairman of medical and molecular
genetics at Indiana University School of Medicine. "We've done similar work, and
the type of gene [Dr. Gerson] is looking at is, we think, a pretty attractive
system."

   While the gene therapy could benefit chemotherapy patients, MGMT also has
implications for such diseases as sickle cell anemia, where the body's normal
red blood cells are outnumbered by oxygen-deprived ones shaped like sickles.

   Cornetta said if cells can be engineered with the MGMT gene and combined with
the gene missing in sickle cells, theoretically the disease may be treated more
effectively and perhaps even cured.

   Because the MGMT study is ongoing, results of the trial have yet to be
published. But Gerson reported at a June meeting of the American Society of Gene
Therapy that 41 percent of the MGMT gene had transferred to either bone marrow
or blood stem cells, giving these immune-fighting soldiers a better chance of
overcoming chemotherapy. Better yet, none of the patients had developed any
complications from the therapy.

   Gerson sounded even more optimistic during a Sept. 12 meeting with Rep.
Stephanie Tubbs Jones, a Shaker Heights Democrat and a co-sponsor of legislation
that would expand stem cell research. He showed off the new cell production
facility at the Wolstein Research Building, an important tool for projects like
Gerson's.

   Thomas, the sixth patient in Gerson's study, sat next to Tubbs Jones. Thomas
had received her injection of MGMT in July and had just finished three cycles of
chemotherapy. She was tolerating the treatment well.

   As an African-American, Thomas represented an unusual case for Gerson.
Dark-skinned people are less likely to develop melanoma than Caucasians. But
several years ago, her daughter spotted a lesion on the sole of Thomas' foot.
She ignored it until it started to grow, and then her right side developed a
puzzling ache.

   "It never occurred to me that I had skin cancer," Thomas said in an interview
at her home. "Not even in my wildest dreams."

   University Hospitals doctors began treating the cancer with chemotherapy and
surgery, but she relapsed four times in as many years. In March, Gerson
approached her about participating in the gene therapy study.

   Thomas fit two important criteria for the study. She already had developed
resistance to at least one common chemotherapy regimen, and she was in the
advanced stages of melanoma. With her treatment options limited and her cancer
advancing, Thomas agreed to the trial. Gerson admired Thomas' propensity to ask
lots of questions and appreciated her desire to get more minority men and women
to join clinical trials.

   But Thomas didn't realize the significance of the research until she was
seated next to Tubbs Jones, listening to Gerson's explanation of how MGMT works.

   Tubbs Jones had visited to learn more about the National Center for
Regenerative Medicine, a relatively new partnership of UH, Case Western Reserve
University and the Cleveland Clinic seeded by a $4.5 million state grant. The
center, which draws on existing research projects at all three medical giants,
has a strong focus on non-embryonic stem cell research. About 40 principal
investigators are part of the virtual center.

   Scientists remain a long way from bringing gene therapy to mainstream
medicine. Experts liken the endeavor to chemotherapy, a therapy that was
introduced more than three decades ago and still has many false starts.

   "How many chemotherapy drugs have cured mice but not made it to clinical
trials because of the side effects?" Cornetta noted.

   Scientists will need time to develop gene therapy products that work, but "we
will get to that point," he said.

   As for Thomas, she had to leave the study in September because her cancer no
longer was responding. But she already had made her contribution. The Food and
Drug Administration granted clearance to increase the chemotherapy dosage next
time, and Gerson is searching for his seventh patient.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: rmcenery@plaind.com, 216-999-5338

GRAPHIC: C.H. PETE COPELAND THE PLAIN DEALER DR. STANTON GERSON, DIRECTOR OF
UNIVERSITY HOSPITALS OF CLEVELAND'S IRELAND CANCER CENTER AND THE NATIONAL
CENTER FOR REGENERATIVE MEDICINE, REVIEWS CT SCANS WITH BERNICE THOMAS, A
PATIENT IN A GENE THERAPY STUDY THAT COULD LEAD TO NEW TREATMENTS FOR CERTAIN
CANCERS AND BLOOD DISORDERS. MERLIN ID: 4139940
C.H. PETE COPELAND THE PLAIN DEALER Min Liu, a research assistant in Dr. Stanton
Gerson's lab, collects adult stem cells spun down from umbilical cord blood that
are being used for clinical research.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2005


                              32 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 795 words

HEADLINE: Timid Mice Made Daring By Removing A Single Gene

BYLINE: By BENEDICT CAREY

BODY:

   Scientists working with mice have found that by removing a single gene they
can turn normally cautious animals into daring ones, mice that are more willing
to explore unknown territory and less intimidated by sights and sounds that they
have learned can be dangerous.

     The surprising discovery, being reported today in the journal Cell, opens a
new window on how fear works in the brain, experts said.

   Gene therapy to create daredevil warriors is likely to remain the province of
screenwriters, but the new findings may help researchers design novel drugs to
treat a wide array of conditions, from disabling anxiety in social settings to
the sudden flights of poisoned memory that can persist in the wake of a
disaster, an attack or the horror of combat.

     The discovery may well prove applicable to humans, the experts said,
because the brain system that registers fear is similar in all mammals.
Moreover, the genetic change did not appear to affect the animals' development
in other ways.

     ''Potential clinical applications could be quite important'' for people
with ''fear-related mental disorders,'' said Dr. Gleb Shumyatsky, an assistant
professor of genetics at Rutgers, who led a team that included investigators
from Columbia, Harvard, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine.

     Brain scientists who were not involved in the study said the study's
finding was unexpected.

     ''The way I see it, there are three types of studies in science: one that
moves a theory along, one that closes it and another that opens a new door
altogether,'' said Dr. Thomas Insel, director of the National Institute of
Mental Health, which helped finance the research. ''This one opens a new
chapter, introducing an entirely new molecular candidate for the study of
anxiety, and we're going to be hearing a lot about it in the next 10 years.''

     The researchers found the fear-related gene by analyzing brain tissue, in
particular the tiny prune-shaped region called the amygdala, which previous
studies had shown to be especially active when animals and humans were afraid or
anxious. They found that a protein called stathmin, produced by the stathmin
gene, was highly concentrated in the amygdala but hard to detect elsewhere in
the brain.

     Using genetic engineering, the scientists removed the gene from mice and
bred a line of the animals, all missing the same gene. Those animals developed
into normal adults, as far as the researchers could tell, and learned as ably on
standard tests as a group of normal mice.

     In one test, they learned to expect a small shock to their feet after
hearing a loud tone.

     ''They looked normal,'' Dr. Shumyatsky said. ''They weren't stupid. They
would run away if you tried to pick them up.''

     But when presented with the same loud tone 24 hours later, the genetically
engineered mice froze in place -- a standard measure of learned fear -- only
about 60 percent as long as the control group.

     When left alone on an unfamiliar white surface, the engineered mice also
spent about twice as long exploring as did the normal mice. This ''open field''
test is standard measure of innate caution.

     To be sure that it was the gene change and not some other quality that
explained the differences, the researchers tested hearing and pain sensitivity
in the altered mice. Both were normal.

     In the paper, the authors suggest that stathmin, the protein that the
engineered mice were missing, may help brain cells form new memories in the
amygdala, where unconscious fears appear to be stored. (Conscious memories are
filed elsewhere.)

     In theory, a drug that inhibits the activity of stathmin could prevent or
slow that process. That, in turn, might blunt the impact of traumatic
experiences in people who are vulnerable to disabling memories of those
experiences.

     Reducing stathmin activity in the amygdala might also allow people to
overcome innate or learned anxieties. Dr. Shumyatsky said doctors already had a
drug that acts on the same brain molecules as stathmin does; it is Taxol, a
cancer drug.

     Taxol works throughout the brain, however, and not exclusively in the
amygdala, which the new study suggests is the best target.

     ''It would be very interesting to study things like this, but it is still
very early,'' Dr. Shumyatsky said. ''This study is only a first step.''

     Still, it is a step that could take the study of fear in a new direction.
In an e-mail message, Dr. Joseph LeDoux, a neuroscientist at New York University
wrote: ''While we are a long ways away, it is possible in the future that we
will be able to identify amygdala-specific genes that can be used to play a role
in amygdala-specific drug therapy. Studies like this are the kind we need in
order to get to this point.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2005


                              33 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 17, 2005 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Pg. 5

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: China Approves a Selective Cancer Drug

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A cancer therapy using a virus that attacks tumor cells but not healthy ones
has been approved in China, the first regulatory approval for this type of
treatment anywhere in the world, according to the company that developed the
treatment.

     The drug is essentially a copy of one developed and then abandoned by an
American biotechnology company. The move is an example of how some therapies can
win quick approval in China, perhaps because regulatory hurdles are lower. China
is also the only country so far to have given regulatory approval to any gene
therapy.

   The company, Shanghai Sunway Biotech, received clearance to sell its drug,
H101, in China as a treatment for a type of head and neck cancer, according to a
news release prepared by Sunway that it is expected to issue soon.

     H101 uses a type of cold virus that has been genetically engineered so that
it attacks only cells with a particular genetic defect typical of cancer cells.
It is a modified version of Onyx-015, a treatment initially designed and tested
in early clinical trials by Onyx Pharmaceuticals, a biotechnology company in
Emeryville, Calif.

     Although the approach generated excitement among scientists, there were
problems putting it into practice. Onyx dropped Onyx-015 in 2003, in part to
devote its resources to a more conventional drug that is awaiting approval by
the Food and Drug Administration.

     Onyx was not aware at the time, however, that scientists at Sunway had
duplicated the approach on the basis of a paper published by Onyx scientists,
according to Sunway executives and to Frank McCormick, Onyx's founder.

     Because Onyx had no patent in China, Sunway was not infringing. But in
February, after revealing itself to Onyx, Sunway licensed world rights to
Onyx-015. It said it wanted to conduct clinical trials aimed at winning approval
in the United States and Europe.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: November 19, 2005

CORRECTION:

   An article and a headline in Business Day on Thursday about China's
regulatory approval of a new cancer therapy referred imprecisely to how unusual
it was. The approval was the first anywhere for a cancer therapy using a virus
that attacks tumor cells; it was not the first for a gene therapy, which China
granted in 2003 to a different company, SiBono GeneTech, for a cancer treatment.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2005


                              34 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 14, 2005 Monday

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1442 words

HEADLINE: Hair where none was there;
Surgical transplantation, a follicular art, is becoming more precise, more
acceptable and more popular among the balding and thinning.

BYLINE: Rory Sweeney, For The Inquirer

BODY:

   On a cool morning last week, Alan Smith, a 49-year-old car salesman, walked
into Dr. Theodore Katz's office in Washington Crossing to retrieve something
he'd been losing for seven years: his hair.

   It wasn't all gone yet. But that scraggly patch hanging on in front would one
day fall out, Katz had assured him. This was a chance to be preemptive and keep
his thinning scalp from becoming a shiny, bald beacon of advancing age.

   He has plenty of company. Many of the estimated 60 million Americans losing
the war on the hairline front are turning to transplants, especially women and
young men.

   While techniques are more precise and results more acceptable, many of the
old doubts about the 40-year-old industry still hold. It is essentially
unregulated. Results require time - often several procedures plus about a year
for the hair to grow back - and money - $8,000 to $12,000 is not uncommon.
Besides, the patchy areas can't all be covered, so patients often have to accept
some baldness. The crown, the hardest area to cover, is sacrificed first.

   Surgery isn't for everyone, doctors say. Age, finances and expectations are
considerations. Unless a bald ring becomes fashionable, young men shouldn't get
surgery until the full extent of hair loss is apparent.

   For those people, nonsurgical remedies such as hairpieces are the best bet,
Katz said.

   Some surgery patients fear they will be seen as vain, like somebody who
bought a sports car for the look it created. Many hesitate for years and keep
the surgery confidential, sometimes not even telling their families, said
Jonathan Ballon, a Bala Cynwyd surgeon.

   Most patients see the surgery as discretionary and will pull the trigger only
if the mix of financial security and social acceptance is right, said Mark
Solomon, a Bala Cynwyd plastic surgeon and spokesman for the American Society of
Plastic Surgeons.

   The economic decline in 2000-01 caused a 35 percent drop in hair transplants
performed by surgeons certified by reputable medical boards, according to the
society. But as the economy rebounded, so did transplants, which rose 69 percent
from 2002 to 2004.

   For those counting lost hairs in the shower every day, the allure is obvious.
But it might seem odd for doctors who have spent much of their lives hunched
over medical books to stoop to the surgical equivalent of reseeding a lawn.

   The attractions, however, are considerable: good money, flexible hours and
relaxing work. Health insurance companies say hair transplants are nonessential,
so patients pay doctors directly. The surgeons set their own schedules. And
though the work is repetitive, many doctors say knowing exactly what to expect
each day means less stress and anxiety about mistakes.

   "When I go home, I don't worry a lick," said Joseph Gallagher, a former
orthopedic surgeon who now does hair transplants in Bala Cynwyd. "It's hair, not
deep-cavity surgery."

   The surgery can be relaxing for the patients, too. With local anesthetic,
music, movies and sedative drugs such as Valium, they often snooze the time
away, doctors say. Depending on the size of the surgery and speed of the staff,
patients sit in the chair four to 12 hours.

   "It was really a gabfest," said Arthur Passic, a marketing executive from
Newtown Square who had surgery in January.

   There are several procedures, but the most precise uses a strip of shaved
scalp about eight millimeters wide, which is sliced from the back and sides of
the head. The scalp is then sutured together to cover the missing hair, and the
removed section is cut into follicular units, each containing one to four hairs.
These are resistant to the hormone DHT, a testosterone derivative that
researchers believe causes male-pattern baldness. They are inserted into bald
spots to grow naturally, pointing down the head with finer, single hairs in the
front and multiple follicle groupings further back.

   While there are medications, such as Propecia and Rogaine, that doctors say
generally work to slow or halt hair loss, Smith, the car salesman from Solebury,
Bucks County, skipped right to surgery when he decided he'd had enough of
combing his hair forward to hide the bare spot. Though he was hardly bald, his
1,000-hair transplant was an attempt to keep the hair coming in as fast as it's
falling out, Katz said.

   Wearing a pair of magnifying eyeglasses and using a scalpel called a minde -
it looks like a small Xacto hobby knife - Katz stabbed 1,000 slits into the top
and front of Smith's head as an assistant counted and wiped up the oozing blood.

   Hair-transplant surgeons pay particular attention to the hairline because,
above all things, they take pride in an undetectable surgery. A straight, overly
thick hairline screams surgery.

   "There's a surprising attention to detail and technique," said Ballon, who
left neurosurgery for hair transplants about a year ago. "What I've enjoyed is
the artistry."

   When Katz, who has performed about 7,000 hair transplants, finished his
surgical pointillism, two medical technicians descended upon Smith's head,
plugging a follicular unit surrounded with fat into each slit.

   The room was quiet, and Smith reclined with his eyes closed, opening them
only when addressed.

   Does it hurt?

   "No, not at all. It's been great," he said, with no mention of the xylocaine
and epinephrine anesthetic cocktail being injected into his scalp every two
hours.

   Why'd you do it?

   "I wanted to maintain a certain look," he said, adding that as a car
salesman, he has to impress people with his appearance every day.

   After surgery, he'll probably have an itchy scalp and see some of his
existing hair fall out, both common, short-term side effects.

   If he doesn't like the results, he won't have many more chances to get it
right. Donor hairs are finite, and the transplant can cover only so much,
especially if the hair and skin colors contrast. Even if donor hair is abundant,
surgeries are limited because the scalp can stretch to be sutured only three or
four times, Katz said.

   That might not matter in about 15 years, according to Penn dermatology
professor Sarah Millar. By then, stem cells could be harnessed to grow donor
hair, and gene therapy might be able to remove hair-loss genes altogether. In
her lab, Millar is studying gene expression in mice hair follicles.

   "It allows us to identify what important genes are and how they talk to each
other," she said.

   Until science can manufacture hair, patients will have to live with
conventional remedies. Dr. Gregory Pistone keeps his Marlton hair-transplant
office stocked with several nonsurgical treatments. He said creams, flakes,
tied-on hair and tattoos can be used to fake density and camouflage past surgery
scars.

   It's not just doctors pushing alternatives. Years ago, Upper Darby
cosmetologist Kim Nesmith noticed that many female clients were asking for hair
weaves to hide bald spots. She decided to find ways to help.

   Now, her customers at Endless Creations of You welcome her style of gentle
braiding, crocheting and sewing to combine existing hair with additional locks
or hairpieces.

   Nonsurgical procedures might seem less expensive at first, but their costs in
time and maintenance add up. Synthetic hairpieces can cost less than $100, but
the initial visit runs about $300 and monthly maintenance is around $100 and can
take several hours.

   That's why Smith, like many patients, prefers the permanency of transplants.

   Around noon, he stepped out of Katz's office, feeling fine. Even after four
hours of surgery, he drove himself home, satisfied with the initial results.

   "You just can't tell anything's done," he said. "To me, right now, it's well
worth it."

Hair-Raising Issues

      Who regulates the field? "That's a good question," said Brian McDonald, a
spokesman for the Pennsylvania Department of State. Other than requiring that
licensed doctors do the surgeries, states have little or no oversight of the
hair transplant industry.

      That lack of guidelines makes it imperative for patients to choose
carefully.

   Scrutinize doctors' experience: How many surgeries have they done? (More is
generally better.) How long have they been doing them? It's a plus if they do
hair transplants exclusively.

   Find out if doctors are board-certified in a related field, such as cosmetic
surgery. Ask which medical school the doctor attended and which fellowship, if
any.

   Ask for "before and after" pictures of many past patients. Talk to those
people to make sure their surgeries were done by the doctor who cited them as
patients.

   Get more than one consultation. It may help sort through doctors' claims.

   Source: The International Society of Hair Restoration Surgery

   Contact Rory Sweeney at 215-854-2625 or rsweeney@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2005


                              35 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 13, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: NEIGHBORS CHESTER; Pg. L24

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: Ask... the Department chairman

BODY:

   David M. Nunamaker

   Chairman of the department of clinical studies at the New Bolton Center in
East Marlborough, part of the University of Pennsylvania's School of Veterinary
Medicine. Nunamaker is also the Jacques Jenny professor of orthopedic surgery
there.

   Question: You grew up in the New Hope area. Is that where you developed your
interest in animals?

   A:Yes. The countryside around New Hope was rural when I was growing up. I
worked for a husband-and-wife [Jack and Doris Emerson] veterinary practice in
Buckingham while in high school and entered college with the desire to go into
veterinary medicine.

   Q:What are the fiscal challenges facing the New Bolton Center?

   A: The Widener Hospital for Large Animals at New Bolton Center was built as
Penn's School of Veterinary Medicine's large-animal hospital and research center
in the 1960s. Since that time, additions and improvements have been added, but
much of the facility is over 40 years old, and the technology of modern
veterinary medicine demands new facilities to support modern health-care
delivery.

   We need to redesign our hospital to minimize future problems with infectious
diseases and provide the best patient care possible. We have developed a master
plan for the hospital that includes all of our needs. The plan will add new
facilities and re-purpose and remodel existing space to accommodate a modern
veterinary hospital.

   The cost estimates for this plan exceed $50 million. As with any large
program, we will be seeking support from the public and private sectors.

   Q: There was a controversy over culling deer on the New Bolton property after
the deer were eating the corn fed to the dairy cows at the center. Has that
controversy been resolved, and, if so, how?

   A: We consulted neighbors, students, faculty and alumni of our school before
contracting with the USDA Department of Wildlife Services to help us control the
deer overpopulation at New Bolton Center. We had generally good local support
for our efforts. In the fall of 2003, we didn't get to harvest 40 acres of our
corn that is used to feed the cows in our dairy. The deer had eaten the crop to
the ground.... Presently we have completed the contract with the USDA group.

   Q: What are some of the cutting-edge endeavors in equine therapy and
veterinarian medicine?

   A:Diagnostic modalities such as the new MRI for large animals at our George
D. Widener Hospital make possible diagnosis of subtle injuries or may describe
injuries and pathologies that have not been documented except in postmortem
examinations. Arthroscopic surgery of joints in horses has been available for a
number of years.

   Endoscopic abdominal surgery and minimally invasive techniques reduce
morbidity and provide new methodologies to approach previously difficult
surgeries in large animals. Orthopedic devices that allow animals immediate
weight-bearing following long bone fractures have been developed and are used
commonly.

   Gene therapy has restored the sight in a dog and has been used to treat
genetic diseases in cats. Kidney transplantation in cats is a common clinical
event in large referral hospitals such as Penn's Ryan Hospital for small animals
in Philadelphia. Kidney dialysis is also available. The list can go on and on.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2005


                              36 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            November 8, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: Scientific American cites UB chemist

BYLINE: By Stephen T. Watson - NEWS STAFF REPORTER

BODY:

   For the second time in three years, Scientific American magazine has named a
University at Buffalo chemist one of its 50 international leaders in science and
technology.

   The magazine announced Monday that it has named Paras N. Prasad, a SUNY
distinguished professor of chemistry, to the latest Scientific American 50.

   Prasad was cited for his cutting-edge research that uses extremely tiny,
customized particles to deliver genes safely into the cells of the body.

   "It is indeed a great honor, not only for me but for UB and Buffalo," said
Prasad, who also is executive director of UB's Institute for Lasers, Photonics
and Biophotonics. Prasad learned of his selection in a letter from the magazine
he received Monday.

   In 2003, Thomas Szyperski, a fellow professor in UB's chemistry department,
was named to the list for his work in using magnetic resonance techniques to map
the structure of protein molecules.

   Selection to the Scientific American 50 recognizes "outstanding acts of
leadership in science and technology from the past year."

   This year's list appears in the December issue, which goes on sale on
newsstands Nov. 22.

   Prasad is an acclaimed UB researcher who holds 10 patents, has published more
than 500 scientific papers and has co-edited six books. He works in the emerging
field of nanomedicine, which uses extremely small-scale technology to drive
advances in medical care and relies on contributions from researchers working
across several different fields.

   "Dr. Prasad and his work are prime examples of the multidisciplinary focus
that will guide the future of scientific research in the 21st century," said
Jorge Jose, UB vice president for research. "This is a well-deserved
recognition, and we're very proud that Dr. Prasad is a member of our faculty."

   Scientific American cited Prasad for his work in gene therapy, one approach
to nanomedicine that Prasad and others find particularly promising.

   Prasad and other UB scientists have been using tiny nanoparticles --
custom-made from organically modified sand -- as a new way to deliver genetic
material into the body's cells.

   Previously, scientists typically transferred genes into the nuclei of cells
by attaching them to viruses, a riskier method.

   Prasad and his UB colleagues -- notably Michael K. Stachowiak, an associate
professor of pathology and anatomical sciences -- have been testing the
nanoparticles in mice.

   They say this gene therapy could someday be used to treat Parkinson's
disease, cardiovascular disease or cancer.

   Last month, Prasad received a $3.46 million grant from the National Cancer
Institute to help develop products for earlier detection and better treatment of
pancreatic cancer.

   e-mail: swatson@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2005


                              37 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 7, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; MARKETING; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 532 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy in a Bottle of Mouthwash

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Brush your teeth and rinse with gene therapy. That could be the future of
oral health care as envisioned by Colgate-Palmolive and Introgen Therapeutics,
an Austin, Tex., biotechnology company.

     The companies announced an alliance Friday to incorporate gene therapy --
an exotic, experimental and so far largely unsuccessful form of medicine -- into
mouthwashes, gels and similar products to treat and prevent oral cancers.

   Colgate is buying about 3.6 million shares of Introgen, or a 9.7 percent
stake. Colgate will pay $20 million, or $5.54 a share, the same as Introgen's
closing price on Thursday. On Friday, Introgen shares climbed 8 percent, to
$5.96.

     Gene therapy involves putting genes into cells in the body, often to
replace native genes that are malfunctioning. The technique has rarely worked in
the 15 years it has been tried, largely because of the difficulty of getting
enough functioning genes into cells.

     Introgen's method puts so-called tumor suppressor genes into cancerous
cells to stop the growth of tumors. The company's most advanced drug, which is
in late-stage clinical trials, is a treatment for head and neck cancer that it
hopes will be the first gene therapy approved in the United States. In that
treatment, viruses containing the desired gene are injected directly into
tumors.

     Working with Colgate, Introgen will try to put the tumor suppressor genes
into an oral product to treat leukoplakia, a precancerous condition
characterized by lesions on the cheeks, gums or tongue. In some cases the
lesions turn cancerous, usually after many years. Dr. Robert E. Sobol,
Introgen's senior vice president for medical and scientific affairs, said an
initial product would probably be a prescription drug that would require
approval by the Food and Drug Administration. But he said he hoped eventually
the product could be sold over the counter.

     The company is already in early stages of human testing of a mouthwash
containing a tumor-suppressor gene. The mouth is ''just such an easy place to
apply these therapies,'' said Dr. Sobol, explaining that it was easy to reach
and see the damaged cells. Nevertheless, getting enough genes into cells in the
mouth could still be difficult.

     Introgen puts its gene into a disarmed cold virus, called an adenovirus,
which infects cells and carries in the gene. While Dr. Sobol said the technique
was safe, an adenovirus was used in a gene therapy experiment that killed a
teenager at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999. Dr. Sobol said that if
Introgen wanted to develop a product that would be used widely by people who do
not yet have cancer, it might have to use a gene therapy approach that did not
involve a virus.

     Colgate, which is based in New York, said in a statement that the alliance
would give it ''insight into a very exciting technology with potential
application to oral health.''

     The company said the alliance was not a move into the pharmaceutical
business but rather one of many research efforts it has involving oral health.
Known mostly for consumer products, Colgate sells products used by or prescribed
by dentists, including the PerioGard antibiotic rinse to fight the gum disease
gingivitis.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2005


                              38 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 7, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Yahoo to Add Online Services Using Set-Top Boxes by TiVo
Yahoo and TiVo plan to announce a deal that will connect Yahoo's vast online
service to TiVo's set-top boxes, which, in addition to recording television
programs, have a largely unused capability to connect to the Internet.   [Page
C1.]



   Internet Portals Introduce Travel Features
Expedia, Travelocity and Orbitz already have their hands full with airlines and
hoteliers luring consumers away with sites that look like full-service travel
agencies. Now Yahoo and AOL and maybe even Google are entering the fray. Yahoo's
new ''Trip Planner'' tool allows people to create, store and print virtual trip
folders and post them in a public database for others to view. James Slavet, who
oversees Yahoo's travel and autos divisions, said: ''The notion is to create a
personalized itinerary that's almost like what a really good executive assistant
or maybe a travel agent could do for you.'' Bob Tedeschi: E-Commerce Report.
[C9.]

Uncertainty Surrounds Potential Deal for AOL
Microsoft has emerged as the front-runner in the talks surrounding the potential
sale of a stake in America Online, two people involved in the negotiations said.
But despite interest in AOL from Microsoft, Google and others, reaching a deal
has been harder than Time Warner may have hoped.   [C1.]

Drug Companies Cut Back on Assistance for Elderly
Some companies are eliminating charity programs for seniors, saying that the
recipients are now eligible for Medicare drug coverage.   [C1.]

Deal Said to Be Near on Chinese Textiles
An agreement to limit for three years the surging growth ofChinese textile
imports to the United States is expected to be completed as early as this week,
Bush administration officials said.   [C9.]


     Report Is a Warning on Global Oil Prices
Oil prices will keep rising over the next two decades unless the oil-rich
nations of the Middle East and North Africa substantially increase investments
in their energy sectors, a new report warns.   [C5.]

Chung and Povich to Be Co-Hosts of News Program
Connie Chung will return to cable news in January as the host of a weekly show
on MSNBC, along with her husband, Maury Povich.   [C4.]

Colgate Forms Alliance With Gene Therapy Company
Colgate-Palmolive and Introgen Therapeutics, a biotechnology company, are
collaborating to incorporate gene therapy into mouthwashes, gels and similar
products to treat and prevent oral cancers.   [C6.]

Microsoft Aims to Bring Arcade Games to Xbox
Microsoft is banking on buyers of the Xbox 360 to play small arcade-style video
games, purchased and downloaded from the Internet.   [C8.]

Deal Creates Stand-Alone Open-Source Software Firm
A Silicon Valley private equity firm plans to announce that it is buying the
Ingres database software from Computer Associates and setting it up as a
stand-alone open-source software company.   [C8.]

Embarrassments at the End of the Data Trail
What happens when documents with hidden editing traces make their way into the
public arena? Tom Zeller Jr.: Link by Link.   [C5.]

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2005


                              39 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                            Philadelphia Daily News

                            November 7, 2005 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 06

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Jeff cancer researcher discusses his plans

BYLINE: MICHAEL HINKELMAN, hinkelm@phillynews.com

BODY:

   He's the latest big-name cancer researcher who's moving to Philadelphia to
try to cure cancer.

   Dr. Richard G. Pestell, 47, said he decided to take the job as director of
the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University - as was announced last
week - because the region has a "critical mass" of top-notch researchers and
doctors, and is at the "epicenter" of the fight to stamp out the dread disease.

   "People do vote with their feet," he said, explaining why he was leaving his
post as the top official of the Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center at
Georgetown University in Washington.

   We asked him about the future of cancer research here and his plans for the
Kimmel Cancer Center.

   Q. Cancer research, as you know, is big business here. What must Philadelphia
do to protect its investment?

   A. What I've always done is work in a very collaborative way. This is like
any sporting game: You want to play at the next level, and when you play with
outstanding people, everyone's game rises.

   The competition here is really cancer. When you get people to work together
and you remember the enemy is cancer and we're all here for the patients, I
think that's the heart of it.

   Q. You mentioned collaboration. Some observers have said that if we had more
collaboration between directors of the four cancer centers here we could
strengthen our hand. Do you agree with that?

   A. First, I know and respect the cancer center directors here. In fact, I was
on the review committee that examined Penn's application for renewing its
NCI-cancer center designation.

   I have a track record at places where I've worked before of building
inter-institutional collaborations. As an example, I set up a six-hospital
system with networks for clinical oncology care in D.C.

   Q. What are your plans for the Kimmel Cancer Center?

   A. We want to develop and deploy clever technologies which will improve the
quality of life for our patients. So we're bringing together the clinical and
research components of the cancer center.

   There's a new breast-cancer center opening up which will bring breast-cancer
researchers here. We will be doing a multidisciplinary clinic to bring together
clinicians, radiation therapists, imaging and mammography, as well as
researchers, which are driving management to the highest quality of clever care.

   Q. Has Jefferson committed to providing additional lab facilities, offices
and the like to accommodate these new investigators?

   A. There's a very substantial commitment by the board and the university to
build the Kimmel Cancer Center and take it to the next level. That was obviously
part of the attraction for me to come here.

   Lab space is already being renovated and revamped for the new researchers.
The university is spending $15 million to create the Jefferson Breast Cancer
Center [at 1100 Walnut St.]. So, yes, there will be new financial resources,
which will allow us to build the group over the next five to 10 years.

   Q. Can Philadelphia be the place where a major breakthrough in cancer
treatment occurs, maybe gets the region on the cover of Time or Newsweek?

   A. There are three things that can put us on the map. We're bringing in a
group to work on nanotechnology. The opportunities for very early detection with
this technology and targeted therapies will revolutionize the way we treat
cancer.

   The second is a very specific type of therapy, which I've been involved with,
called LAG therapy, or light-activated gene therapy. This changes completely the
way we treat cancer; it allows us to selectively tune on or off a single gene in
a single cell.

   The third is global collaboration. I serve on one of these organizations, the
International Network for Cancer Treatment and Research. The central office of
that will be moving with me to the Kimmel Cancer Center and this will help us
integrate collaboration in cancer education, treatment and research around the
globe.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2005


                              40 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 6, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 2; Magazine; Pg. 68

LENGTH: 7791 words

HEADLINE: A Doctor for The Future

BYLINE: By Lisa Belkin.

   Lisa Belkin, a contributing writer for the magazine, last wrote about whether
strep infection can cause obsessive-compulsive disorder in children.

BODY:

   Dr. D. Holmes Morton stood at the front of the red-and-white-striped tent set
up in a farm pasture in Lancaster County, Pa. Behind him were a horse and a
buggy -- his host's main mode of transportation -- and a whitewashed barn and
silo. To his left was a sunken barbecue pit, with 60 chickens cooking inside a
homemade wire-mesh spit. Before him were seven families, upward of 50 people.
The women wore bonnets and aprons, the men, long pants and long sleeves, in
keeping with their Mennonite ways. Many of the youngest were in wheelchairs. One
teenage girl had her left heel in her mouth. A boy was chewing on the handout
Morton had distributed. It was two pages long and titled ''Pretzel Syndrome.''

   The families had gathered here at the Weaver farm on this sticky July
afternoon so that Morton could tell them what was wrong with their children. He
could not give them a scientific name for their disease, because it did not have
one yet. Morton and his team had discovered the existence of this illness only a
few weeks earlier. Nor could he tell them how to cure it, or how to ease its
symptoms, or what the future held for their kids -- though he said he hoped that
would come in time. All he could tell them then was why -- why their children
looked different, and had seizures, and could not speak, and died young. Why the
youngsters' joints were so elastic that they could rest their feet behind their
heads, their bodies twisted like pretzels. The cause, he could say with
brand-new certainty, lay in their genes.

     Morton, his gray hair blending with his faded jeans and herringbone jacket,
his bow tie untied and draped around his neck, is a glimpse of the medicine of
the future. And that future does not look the way we once thought it would. It
has been five years since the first rough draft of the human-genome map was
completed, five years since President Clinton predicted that ''with this
profound new knowledge, humankind is on the verge of gaining immense new power
to heal.'' At the time, scientists told us they would soon be able to tinker
with our DNA, repair our imperfect chromosomes and eliminate inherited disease.
Gene therapy would be like penicillin, they said -- a significant breakthrough,
a complete cure.

     That has not happened yet, and it is not likely to happen any time soon.
''The enthusiasm has dimmed,'' says Dr. David Ginsburg, a professor of medical
genetics at the University of Michigan. ''Many in the field have been accused of
overhyping it.''

     But while all eyes were fixed in recent years on the gene-therapy prize, a
quieter transformation has been taking place. From a single drop of blood,
scientists can now read our DNA -- looking for which genes are present or
missing, intact or broken, making diagnoses of disorders that were once either
unheard-of, uncertain or misunderstood. From that they have been able to begin
to decipher the consequences for a patient's life, longevity and health -- a
process some have taken to calling ''genomic medicine.'' ''This really is the
future,'' says Edward R.B. McCabe, co-director of the University of California
at Los Angeles Center for Society and Genetics. ''Genomic medicine will be
predictive, preventive and personalized,'' meaning that treatment will be shaped
by, and tailored to, each patient's DNA. Perhaps doctors won't be able to fix
genes, he says, but ''it won't be enough to just diagnose'' either. The time is
past for knowledge for knowledge's sake, he says. ''You have to use that
information to help the patient.''

     Eventually doctors will be able to do that for all patients. Does heart
disease run in your family? Your genes will one day reveal your personal risk in
intricate detail. Is your genetic legacy Alzheimer's? Diabetes? Stroke? We're
nearing the day when a quick blood test can refine your odds and allow you to
prevent or mitigate what's etched in your DNA.

     At the moment, though, this genetic approach to medicine applies mostly to
clusters of rare disorders, ones caused by a single gene, making them easier to
identify and, because they occur in a limited population, easier to study. And
no doctor in the country treats more of those than Holmes Morton. Among his 700
pediatric patients, there are more than 60 rare disorders, making his practice,
in the farmlands of Pennsylvania, both a model and a test of medicine as it will
eventually be. In time, all patients will come to understand genes as clearly as
they now understand germs. Morton's patients already do. Someday soon, patients
will expect that doctors will look into their genes as surely as they look down
their throats. Morton's patients are used to that, too. Eventually new parents
will assume that their babies will be given a battery of tests at birth,
screening for every possible disorder. Morton's patients are almost there.

     Medicine combined completely and seamlessly with genetics is so unformed at
the moment that it doesn't really have a name. Some universities have
departments of ''human genetics'' and ''molecular medicine,'' though the former
term implies research rather than treatment, and the latter connotes medicine on
the cellular level, not the DNA level. Other schools use the term ''medical
genetics,'' which is the name of the board-certified specialty, but Dr. Victor
A. McKusick, who is known as the father of the entire field for his studies
dating back to the 1950's, says the description is obsolete. He prefers
''genetic medicine,'' as in ''the McKusickNathans Institute of Genetic Medicine
at Johns Hopkins,'' which was named after him. '''Medical genetics' conjures up
visions of rare diseases that are only of interest to a few people,'' he says.
'''Genetic medicine' tells it the way it is. Genetics pervades all of medicine.
It is starting with the rare conditions that Holmes is seeing. But it involves
hypertension, it involves heart disease, it involves us all.''

     McCabe, at U.C.L.A., is among those who think that even the newer term
''genetic medicine'' is too limited in that it is used to describe genetic
counseling and prenatal testing. Prediction (testing carriers, testing embryos),
with its labyrinth of ethical dilemmas, is a different realm than treatment, so
this label is lacking, too. McCabe uses the term ''genomic medicine'' to
describe the implied promise of treatment in the mapped genome.

     Whatever it is called, it is taking root in Lancaster County, home to one
of the nation's largest populations of Old Order Amish and Mennonites.
Genetically these are two separate groups with some shared culture and beliefs
whom history brought to the same place. To outsiders, the Amish are the men with
the beards and the Mennonites are the men without. Both separate themselves from
the modern world, which they call ''the English,'' shunning technology, taking
their children out of school after eighth grade, never becoming doctors or
scientists, rather farmers and craftsmen.

     At first, the juxtaposition seems a paradox -- this simple culture being
treated at Morton's high-tech clinic, which sits literally in the middle of an
alfalfa field in Strasburg, Pa. But look more closely, and it makes perfect
sense. These groups, known collectively as the Plain People, have long been
entwined with genetic research in the United States. Because members keep to
themselves and marry within their communities, they rarely get to shuffle their
genetic decks, and they are afflicted with a wide variety of rare diseases in
far greater frequency than the population as a whole. For more than 30 years,
genetic researchers have flocked here to study them, identifying the mutations
that cause dozens of disorders by using samples of Amish and Mennonite blood.
(McKusick's groundbreaking book, ''Medical Genetic Studies of the Amish,'' was
published back in 1978.) Most researchers, though, swoop in from their
universities, collect their samples, then return to their labs. Morton is the
first who has stayed, not just researching but also treating -- taking
tomorrow's health care to a world that lives in yesterday.

     ''Think of the rest of medicine trying to catch up with people in a horse
and buggy,'' says G. Terry Sharrer, a curator of health sciences for the
Smithsonian Institution, who has spent time studying Morton's clinic. ''We think
of molecular medicine as being far off in the future. Well, molecular medicine
is being practiced in an alfalfa field in Strasburg.''

     Friends and colleagues describe him as a cross between Albert Einstein,
Albert Schweitzer and the doctor in a Norman Rockwell painting, but back in his
teens, Holmes Morton was a high-school dropout who wanted to be a writer. Born
55 years ago in Fayetteville, W.Va., then a town of 2,000 people, he figured he
would have more to write about if he saw the world, so he spent six years as a
boilerman and engineman in the Merchant Marines and the Navy. He read
voraciously during those years, then talked his way into Trinity College and
went on to Harvard Medical School. (When he won the prestigious Albert
Schweitzer Prize for Humanitarianism for his work in Lancaster County, in 1993,
his high school awarded him an honorary diploma.) Gravitating toward the care of
children, he did his pediatrics residency at Children's Hospital in Boston,
followed by research work at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

     He does not consider himself a geneticist. He considers himself a
pediatrician. He stumbled onto the crossroads between the two worlds one night
in 1988 when he was working in a hospital lab in Philadelphia and was asked to
analyze a urine sample from a 6-year-old Amish boy named Danny Lapp. The child
had the signs of cerebral palsy, but his parents insisted that he had been
perfectly healthy for more than a year after he was born, whereas C.P. tends to
make itself known much earlier. Morton ran a test and found glutaric acid in the
boy's urine, the unmistakable sign of glutaric aciduria Type 1, known as GA1. It
was a disease so rarely diagnosed as to be thought almost nonexistent. There
were only seven or eight reported cases in the medical literature when Morton
made his diagnosis, and not one of those was in Lancaster County.

     Intrigued, Morton drove his old brown Honda to Amish country for the very
first time. ''None of us had ever seen a case,'' he says. ''I came mostly out of
curiosity.'' Danny's parents, John and Ida, told him how the boy had been
crawling and babbling until he was 14 months old. Then he came down with a
simple stomach virus and within a few hours became paralyzed and unable to
speak. His uninsured farm family had amassed tens of thousands of dollars in
bills trying to figure out what was wrong with him.

     It was Morton's introduction to the Amish view of medicine. Although they
keep their distance from most technology, they have developed a trust in doctors
because they suffer from so much disease. It was also an introduction to their
ways of paying for health care. The Old Order Amish do not accept government
assistance, and therefore they do not get Medicaid. They also don't carry
private insurance but rather rely on the community to cover bills that
individuals cannot cover themselves. The system worked well for decades, back
when medicine was simpler, but it was already struggling with the rising costs
of treatment by the time Morton first arrived.

     Morton tends to listen more than he talks, and only after the Lapps had
told their story did he take his turn. GA1 works like that, he explained. It
devastates swiftly and suddenly. GA1 patients lack an enzyme that fully breaks
down protein. As a result, excess amounts of glutaric acid, a protein byproduct,
accumulate in the brain and other organs. What happens next was unclear when
Morton met the Lapps and remains fuzzy. But somehow the stress of what would
normally be a mild childhood illness -- chickenpox, diarrhea, a simple cold --
can trigger a strokelike episode. Once the brain is ''injured,'' Morton said,
the damage is irreversible.

     Having read McKusick's work on Amish genetics, Morton theorized that if
there was one patient with a rare genetic disorder in this contained population,
there were likely to be others. (GA1, like nearly everything else Morton treats,
is a recessive disorder -- to get it, a child must have a copy of the defective
gene from each parent; if only one parent is a carrier, the couple will not
produce a child with the disease, and if both parents are carriers, each of
their children has a 25 percent chance of having the disease and a 50 percent
chance of being a carrier.) When Morton asked Danny's parents if they knew of
any other children like their son, they sent him to a neighboring family of
seven children, two of whom had died, it appeared, of whatever had damaged
Danny, and three of whom were still living but physically devastated. The gene
for GA1 had not yet been found -- that would not happen for four more years --
but the biochemical urine tests Morton ran showed that these children, too, had
glutaric aciduria. By the end of the summer, he had found 20 more cases among
the Amish, some of whom had been told that their children had cerebral palsy,
while others had never received a diagnosis.

     And GA1 was not all he found. Every family knew someone with a child who
was ''not right,'' and the list of rare disorders living behind the walls of the
simple Lancaster County farms steadily grew. Many were metabolic disorders,
which arise from the inability to fully break down proteins, fats or sugars,
putting patients at risk for the sudden strokelike episodes. The isolation of
these families, both physical and cultural, meant that their children could not
quickly get the care they needed. The local pediatricians were not familiar with
such obscure ailments. The nearest hospital was miles away, a trip the Amish
make by horse and buggy or, if necessary, in a hired car or van. If help were
closer and more attuned to their unique needs, Morton thought, these diseases
might not be death sentences.

     Against the advice of his mentors -- who believed he was throwing away a
prestigious academic career -- he decided to open a clinic in Amish country. His
goal, at first, had nothing to do with reading genes but was simply to treat
disease. He kept his day job in the laboratory where he had diagnosed Danny
Lapp's illness and also his night job in the newborn I.C.U. at a hospital near
his suburban Philadelphia home. Once a week he would drive out to Lancaster
County and make house calls on his growing list of Amish patients.

     He did this for a year, while he applied for grant money, the traditional
way of financing medical projects. He needed enough for some office space in
Lancaster, a computer and a mass spectrometer, which cost about $80,000 at the
time, to analyze urine and blood samples, as he had done with Danny Lapp. His
wife, Caroline, would be his executive director. He would be the sole
practitioner available to patients around the clock.

     He did not get the grant, as his mentors warned, because as a junior
clinician he was not good grant material. And most government and academic
institutions prefer to finance pure research. He and Caroline were about to take
a second mortgage on their house when The Wall Street Journal wrote about his
struggle. Readers sent several hundred thousand dollars, Hewlett-Packard donated
equipment and he was able to set up his clinic.

     Today the Clinic for Special Children is probably the only place in the
country with a mass spectrometer inside and a hitching post outside. The
building itself was ''raised'' by a team of Amish and Mennonite carpenters, in
the traditional post-and-beam style: it is held together by pegs, not nails. The
two and a half acres of land on which it sits are in the middle of a field owned
by the grandparents of some of the first children whose illnesses Morton
diagnosed and who sold it to him at less than half the market price. As his
office manager, Morton hired Rebecca Smoker, an Old Order Amish woman and aunt
to the three children he met through the Lapps. Smoker greets patients wearing
her traditional bonnet and apron and speaks to them in familiar Pennsylvania
Dutch.

     Ask Morton how his practice is different from every other medical office
anywhere else in the country, and he will not start with the buggies and the
bonnets and the clash of cultures. Nor will he begin with the fact that he no
longer applies for research grants, because ''they take too much time to fill
out, time I'd rather spend with patients,'' or that he raises most of his $1.2
million budget through the nominal fees he charges his patients and four annual
auctions, organized entirely by the community, extravaganzas of handmade quilts,
furniture and crafts.

     What he will tell you is that he gets the rare chance to watch disease up
close. Time was, he says, when all doctors treated genetic illness, though they
didn't yet think of themselves as geneticists. ''We've been treating genetic
disorders ever since the onset of the practice of medicine,'' he says. ''If your
dad went deaf young and your granddad went deaf young, then odds were that you
would go deaf young, and that was genetic, but we couldn't find the gene or see
the gene or know about the gene, so it was simply called medicine.''

     The modern era, he says, has brought knowledge, yes, but also a separation
between those who study genetic roots of disease and those who treat that
disease. ''We've trained a whole generation of people who, because they are in
the lab, don't get very close to patients,'' he says. ''Funding has gone to
lab-based research that doesn't require the individuals doing the research to
know, meet or shake hands with the people who have the disease.''

     In part that is because most geneticists study rare disorders, and the few
patients who suffer from those disorders are scattered far from the research
lab. So the researcher sees them only as bits of DNA collected on a field visit
or sent by another doctor through the mail. On the flip side, the actual
treating physician might see only one or two cases of a rare disorder in a
career and will have to refer care to the experts in far-off research centers.
Morton, in contrast, has a large percentage of existing GA1 cases in the country
living right outside his clinic door, so he can research and treat at the same
time. If an era of genomic medicine is to take root, he says, more doctors are
going to have to learn how to combine the two. Separation of research and
treatment might have worked during the intense discovery period of the last two
decades, he says, but it will not work as genetic knowledge is more regularly
integrated with patient care.

     Which is not to say that he does not understand the value of traditional
distance -- of keeping some analytical breathing space between doctor and
patient. He has not, for instance, ''gone Amish.'' He lives in Strasburg, about
a mile away from the clinic, in a house with electricity within and two cars
outside. He and Caroline have three college-age children, who went to nearby
public schools. True, they spent more time than the average child playing in
barns with Amish friends. And there was the year they surprised their parents by
bidding on and winning a pony and cart at one of the clinic fund-raising
auctions. Soon after, the children could be seen riding the back roads between
the clinic and their home in their own version of a horse and buggy.

     But while Morton is not of the community he treats, he is immersed in it,
and he says that the proximity has taught him volumes. ''We have struggled to
take care of them over the years,'' he says, thinking of those he has lost, like
Danny Lapp, who died a couple of years after the clinic opened. ''We've learned
a lot.''

     It is a process he compares to playing the cello. He took up the instrument
five years ago, when he was 50. He was a lover of classical string music and
often listened to J.S. Bach's Suites for Cello, which in their entirety take
more than two hours to play. The Suite V in C minor Sarabande contains 107
notes, and he set out to master those. He has played them every day for the past
five years and still finds them difficult, still finds the unexpected. That, he
says, is the way to study disease as well. ''Over 15 years, I have spent more
than 10,000 hours learning about GA,'' he says. ''Many days, I have worked 18
hours or more trying to keep a child alive and limit the injury the disease
causes the brain. I study the cello just as I study medicine. I am not looking
for skills and information. I want insight, understanding.''

     Through immersion he has come to understand that the devastation of
metabolic disorders like GA1 is not inevitable, as had once been thought. If you
can keep the child healthy for the first 24 months of life, the time of the
greatest brain development, Morton has learned, you can probably keep him
healthy for life. Strict monitoring from birth of the ingestion of protein can
keep glutaric acid from accumulating and becoming toxic. But even if the child
does go ''into crisis,'' does get a cold or flu, etc., Morton has also learned
to take immediate action to limit the transformation from healthy to helpless.
''We've developed strategies for rescuing children when they get sick,'' he
says, including immediate infusions of sugar to keep patients from losing
oxygen, and an amino-acid derivative, carnitine, that helps the brain reverse
the buildup of excess glutaric acid. The clinic has taken to giving parties for
2-year-old GA1 patients because ''it truly is a new birth day,'' Morton says. He
does not get every patient past the danger zone, but he certainly saves more
lives than before. When he first arrived in Lancaster, 95 percent of the GA1
children he treated were physically and cognitively devastated. Now only 25
percent are.

     While he was fine-tuning clinical treatment, Morton was also filling in
genetic informational gaps. During the 1990's, scientists throughout the world
identified a variety of different mutations, or genetic glitches, that can cause
GA1. In 1996, by comparing the DNA of his affected patients with the range of
possible mutations found to cause the disease, Morton determined which mutation
all his patients shared. Now known as ''the Amish mutation,'' it is also found
in patients in areas of Europe where the ancestors of his patients once lived.
Morton has come to know the genes that cause other Plain People diseases too.
Some he discovered himself -- like the gene for one cause of sudden infant death
syndrome common in the Amish. Others he did not discover but narrowed down --
like the gene for maple syrup urine disease, which got its name because sugars
thrown off by the body give patients' urine a distinctly sweet smell. M.S.U.D.
is effectively the Mennonite version of GA1 -- similar symptoms, similar
inability to digest certain proteins, but found among Mennonites rather than the
Amish. It can be caused by a variety of genes and mutations, and in 1994 Morton
determined which of these specifically afflicted his Mennonite patients.

     Such knowledge fortified his treatment arsenal. All of Morton's Mennonite
M.S.U.D. patients have the same mutation for the disease, and theirs is the most
lethal version possible; their bodies do not produce any of the enzyme required
to break down proteins properly. But not all his M.S.U.D. patients are
Mennonite. About 15 percent of his practice consists of non-Plain families who
have traveled to Lancaster from 27 states and more than a dozen countries,
learning of his work through the word-of-mouth and Web-based communities that
grow up around any disease. These patients often have less-lethal versions of
the mutation, a fact that is verifiable only once you can read their genes.
Morton recently began treating a 14-year-old girl whose family is not Mennonite
but was originally from Puerto Rico and who has a milder form of M.S.U.D. in
that her body produces some of the critical enzyme. The girl can eat three times
as much protein as the Mennonite children, which makes a world of difference to
her every day.

     For a brief moment, Morton thought he could cure at least some of his
patients. The year was 1999, and the disease was Crigler-Najjar syndrome, a
liver-enzyme deficiency that allows a lethal buildup of bilirubin in the blood.
It was first discovered in 1952 by Dr. Victor Najjar and Dr. John Crigler, who
was a professor of Morton's at Harvard Medical School. Crigler-Najjar children
become severely jaundiced and must sleep under hot, bright, blue-toned lights to
break down the bilirubin. Eventually, though, even the lights don't work, and
the condition causes brain damage or death. There are about 90 known cases in
the country, and 25 of those are Amish or Mennonite. Nearly all of those are
Morton's patients.

     The field of gene therapy had existed for only a decade when, in June 1999,
Morton invited many of those patients to a conference at a local inn. There the
families learned of a new delivery system for genetic repair. Until that point,
scientists had been experimenting with a method using viruses to transport DNA
into the body, hoping that the viruses would insert themselves into cell
structure and that the replacement DNA would correct the gene mutation. The new
theory introduced at the 1999 meeting was called chimeraplasty, and rather than
relying on viruses, it used a molecule called a chimeraplast -- a manufactured
mix of DNA and RNA -- to trigger the system's cells to repair themselves.

     The most notable moment came when Morton announced that the first human
trials of the new approach would be on three of his Crigler-Najjar patients. The
company that had developed the chimera technology would ask the F.D.A. for
permission to test it on humans in the fall. ''I really thought we would start
treatment in six months,'' he says now. ''I believed it would happen.''

     What happened instead was that two months after the conference, in
September 1999, an 18-year-old Arizonan named Jesse Gelsinger died during a
gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Gelsinger was not a
Crigler-Najjar patient, and the trial in question used viruses, not
chimeraplasts, but the field came to a complete halt for several years and has
still not recovered. The company that was to conduct the Crigler-Najjar trials
was sold to a French firm, and the scientists who had brought hope to Morton's
patients moved on to other things.

     The disappointment changed the lens on Morton's view of medicine. It made
him look not at what science might someday be but rather at what was already
possible. It solidified his conviction that genetics is not a separate realm but
a part of everyday care. He had been waiting for the start of genomic medicine.
When his gene-therapy trials fell through, he realized that genomic medicine was
what he was already practicing. +

     Crigler-Najjar patients, he knew, would benefit from liver transplants, but
transplants are invasive and expensive, and he had been delaying the procedure
for a number of children, hoping to stall until gene therapy was available. He
stopped stalling, and four of his patients have had those transplants since
then. Similarly, he concluded that the best available hope for GA1 patients was
diagnosing their disease at birth, before they are nursed or given protein-rich
formula. So he turned new attention to the subject of newborn testing.

     To that end, he hired Erik Puffenberger, who has a Ph.D. in human genetics.
Puffenberger now oversees the hundreds of thousands of dollars of
instrumentation at the clinic -- a single room that is as well equipped as most
university labs. There is the mass spectrometer that Morton started with 17
years ago. (Although the original has been replaced with a newer model.) There
is also a gene sequencer, an amino-acid analyzer and a gas chromatograph, which
allows scientists to separate and identify organic acids in a sample of blood or
urine.

     Morton began screening newborns before he even opened the clinic, starting
by collecting urine-soaked diapers from local midwives and testing them for GA1
and M.S.U.D. Now, under Puffenberger, the clinic does onsite tests for about 40
disorders, and while some of those tests can be done during pregnancy, they
rarely are, because for the Amish and Mennonites terminating a pregnancy is not
an option. Testing immediately before birth, however, raises no such ethical
issues, and patients have come to expect that when labor begins and water
breaks, a midwife will send a sample of amniotic fluid to the clinic via
courier, and the analysis will be done within hours, sometimes even before the
baby is born. Some are biochemical tests -- looking for chemicals in blood or
urine that are the warning signs of a disease. Some are genetic tests --
actually looking into a patient's DNA to either confirm a preliminary biological
test or find evidence of a disorder that cannot be confirmed by other means. But
whichever the mechanism, the disorders found are all caused by defective genes.

     The clinic tests vigorously because all the rest of the doctors' knowledge
-- how to manage patients, and adjust their protein intake, and recognize their
early danger signs -- is worthless if they don't know which patients to treat.
''It makes no sense to identify a child with a genetic disease only after that
child has been injured,'' Puffenberger says. ''The only way you can even think
of treating that child is to identify them before they get sick and then
figuring out how to keep them healthy.''

     For more than a decade, Morton has been part of a rising chorus of voices
around the country arguing that every state should test for a wide array of
genetic disorders from birth -- including GA1. That, Morton says, is the best
current use of genetic knowledge. It is an idea that is slowly gaining traction.
Just this year, the March of Dimes recommended that babies should be screened
for 29 disorders, including GA1. But at the moment, the country is still a
procedural patchwork. The tests a newborn receives depend on where a mother
gives birth. According to the National Newborn Screening and Genetics Resource
Center, Mississippi tests for 51 disorders, while miles away in Louisiana
newborns are tested for only 9. Massachusetts tests for 16, Texas for 8. New
York began testing for 50 over the past year, but before that tested for only
11.

     Each added test has the potential to save lives, Morton preaches. Donna
Upchurch, who has never met Morton, is not of Amish descent but is a believer.
When her daughter Alli was born three years ago in a very modern suburb of
Atlanta, Donna and her husband decided to bank her cord blood as a potential
treatment for her mother-in-law, who had leukemia. In the package that came with
the collection vial was an expanded newborn screening kit, one that looked for
25 disorders that Georgia does not routinely screen for. Donna took that kit to
her daughter's one-week checkup. The test came back positive for GA1, the first
known case in the state.

     And yet GA1 is still not included in Georgia's mandated screening panel,
and the standard argument against adding any difficult and rare disease goes
something like this: ''They say, 'We're not sure we want to screen for it
because we don't know how to treat it,''' Caroline Morton says. ''Well, it's not
like the disease goes away if you don't screen it. At best you learn more with
each diagnosis until you can treat it, and at worst you give the families some
early idea of what their future might hold.''

     A related mission of the clinic, therefore, is improving methods of
treatment for rare syndromes as a way of breaking the cycle of objections to
screening. If a disorder can be treated, then testing for it becomes less
controversial. To this end, Morton invited Kevin Strauss, a young
Harvard-trained pediatrician, to join the clinic, the first time a second doctor
has taken full responsibility for patients. In part, Morton brought Strauss
aboard because he wanted someone in the clinic whose training is more up-to-date
than his own. And in part he is there to give Morton time to share the clinic's
knowledge with the rest of the medical world. Until Strauss arrived, Morton had
written very little of what he knew about GA1 treatment for publication in
scientific journals. And that has caused some in medical circles to think of him
as a maverick and an outsider, because serious scientists validate what they
know through publication and peer review.

     Morton agrees that he does not publish enough, and that talking to doctors
who track him down when they are confronted with a case of GA1 is not the best
way to disseminate medical information. ''In 15 minutes over the telephone, we
can't tell them what it took 15 years to learn,'' he says. In the four years
since Strauss joined the practice, Morton has published two articles in the
respected American Journal of Medical Genetics, summarizing the accumulated
knowledge of years of GA1 and maple syrup urine disease treatments. ''We want to
publish, we intend to publish,'' he says, ''but we also have patients to
treat.''

     Every year, Morton travels back to West Virginia to talk at the National
Youth Science Camp, which invites outstanding students to come explore nature
and science for several weeks. He does this in part to remind himself of where
he expected life would take him and where he is now. He begins by playing the
Suite V Sarabande, and then he tells the high schoolers, among other things,
that ''the course of my life, my current work as a doctor, the questions that I
have asked and answered were unimaginable when'' he was their age. ''Technology
and information, upon which I depend every day, has changed in remarkable and
unpredictable ways over the past 40 years. The very language of questions and
answers that are fundamental to my current professional life didn't exist'' when
he was in high school.

     What is true of Morton's life is true of medicine in general. It is not
what scientists expected it to be, and the road it has taken was not even
constructed when most of today's physicians and geneticists began their
training. It is also true of individual research journeys. Morton has begun with
many a routine assumption and wound up with an unusual, unforeseen conclusion.

     Such was the case with Shawn Weaver, a Mennonite boy Morton examined at a
few weeks of age in 1998. Shawn's mother, Dorothy, described a difficult
pregnancy, with far too much amniotic fluid and a premature birth. From the
beginning, Shawn had difficulty breathing and nursing and growing. Years ago a
baby this sick would probably not have survived, which may be why the Weavers
had no known history of any genetic disorders in their families.

     Dorothy and her husband, Mark, had taken their eldest son to the clinic
because the boy would not stop screaming. Morton saw the problem for himself
when Shawn cried for three hours. ''We put him in the hospital for a few days
just to give his family a break and so I could have a chance to figure out what
was wrong with him,'' Morton says. He first suspected reflux, but treatment
didn't keep the boy from crying.

     When Shawn was 5 months old, he had his first seizure. Dorothy was nursing
him when he became rigid and his eyes rolled up in his head. A few hours later
he had another one. Morton prescribed anticonvulsant medication, which seemed to
reduce the severity but not the number of seizures; soon the boy was suffering
through as many as 20 episodes a day. Despite every test Morton and Puffenberger
could think of, they had no idea what disease Shawn had.

     ''The only thing I knew is that I didn't know what it was,'' Morton says.
''That's an important kind of knowledge. You keep looking.'' As all the tests
continued to come back negative, Dorothy remembers thinking, ''Well, at least
it's not something genetic, because we wanted to have more children.'' When
Shawn turned 5, the tests stopped. ''We gave up on having a diagnosis,'' Dorothy
says. ''We assumed we would never know.''

     Shawn's little sister was born, healthy, in 2001 and his baby brother,
healthy too, arrived in 2004. Shawn, in the meantime, repeatedly missed
developmental milestones. Though he could understand what was said to him, he
could not form words. Nor could he walk or control his hands. What he could do
was rest the soles of his feet up against his ears.

     Shawn was hospitalized at Lancaster General 15 times during the first five
years of his life. It was during one of those visits, in spring 2004, that
Morton asked Dorothy the same question he asked the Lapps 16 years before: Do
you know any other children like your son? By that time the genome had been
mapped, and there were new genetic techniques that made it simpler to find gene
mutations working with a small sample size of affected patients, he told her.
Whereas just a few years earlier it took hundreds of samples to screen for one
mutant gene, new methods, more precise and quicker, made it possible to use as
few as two or three. If they found a few more children, Morton said, the clinic
could try to find the underlying genetic cause.

     As it happened, Dorothy did know, indirectly, of two other Mennonite
children. The first was a boy born five months before Shawn who lived in
Illinois. Shawn's great-aunt knew this boy's family through her church
conference and said she thought that the two children resembled each other, so
Dorothy wrote to the family a few years earlier, describing Shawn, and struck up
a long-distance friendship. The second child used to come with his mother into
the grocery store that Dorothy's parents own nearby. Dorothy's mother often
talked about the boy who looked just like Shawn. Both of the other boys had died
by the time Morton asked his pivotal question. But their families, who each had
another affected child, agreed to participate in research. Deciding, as Morton
had years earlier, that where there were two there must be more, Dorothy set out
to find them, searching the interwoven Mennonite pockets spread across the
country.

     The culture of Plain People is a patchwork of practice and belief. Among
the Mennonites there are those, like the Weavers, who are strict
constructionists, though even they bend the rules to adapt to the times. A phone
in the house is prohibited, for instance, but they can keep one out in a shack
in the field for urgent matters and farm business. Some of the families Dorothy
called from her shack phone spoke to her from their own shacks, others from
within their homes, a few on their cellphones. Some ban radio and television
from their lives, a few have computers, but just for business use, others
searched the Web regularly. But despite these differences, the stories they told
were almost identical, hinting at their shared roots. All their children had
been born early, all their pregnancies involved extra amniotic fluid, all had
seizures and hyperelastic limbs. And none of their doctors could figure out what
was wrong.

     In summer 2004, four of these families met at the clinic so Erik
Puffenberger could take blood from the parents and children; three other
families sent samples by air courier. Analyzing the DNA would require a
cutting-edge Affymetrix GeneChip scanner, which Puffenberger did not have.
Instead, he sent the collected blood off to the Translational Genomics Research
Institute, a biotech company based in Phoenix. It owned the $250,000 machine and
offered to run the samples free of charge, for the sake of research. (A few
months later, Affymetrix donated a new scanner to the clinic and trained
Puffenberger to use it.)

     The data the machine generated was a computerized array of letters and
numbers that represent clusters of genes. He ran programs that analyzed the
data, as he had done in the past with samples of as few as two or three. But
this time nothing jumped out of the computer. Then Puffenberger began scrolling
through the 84,000 genetic markers (12,000 from each patient), trying to find
the mutation -- the piece of DNA that had been scrambled -- that all seven
children had in common.

     Puffenberger spent hours, days, weeks staring at the screen, waking up in
the middle of the night, pacing the clinic hallways. At one point, he began to
doubt the accuracy of his samples, thinking that maybe all seven children didn't
have the same syndrome after all. ''Are you sure all these kids have pretzel
syndrome?'' he asked Morton, using the nickname the staff had given the disease.
Assured that they all had the same symptoms and appeared to have the same
disorder, Puffenberger came back at the data from another direction. It was then
that he noticed not the presence of something but the absence. All seven
children showed a ''no call'' for the same marker on Chromosome 17. A piece of
DNA was missing from each, resulting in a partial deletion of a gene. After that
it was a simple step to develop an in-house test to identify the mutation in
patients who might have it and parents who might carry it. A few weeks later
they used that test for the first time to diagnose pretzel syndrome in a new
patient.

     Morton, Puffenberger and Strauss are now creating a portrait of the disease
-- information they say they eventually hope to publish in a medical journal,
along with the exact location of the gene, so that other scientists can critique
their work. For the moment, their rough sketch of the disorder shows patients
with fewer nerve cells in their brains, which probably leads to their seizures
and might explain why known seizure medications don't really help them. They
have an increased likelihood of heart problems, in the form of a ''hole in the
heart,'' and also of kidney problems, resulting in constant thirst and
urination, known as diabetes insipidus. (It is this constant thirst that Morton
hypothesizes might have caused Shawn to cry nonstop as a baby.) Their skeletons
are abnormally shaped, their mental development is significantly slowed, the
connective tissue of their joints is malformed and at least one of the children
developed leukemia. They will probably die young. As far as Morton and his
colleagues know, there is no available cure.

     It was early spring of this year when Morton told Dorothy and Mark Weaver
that he thought his team had found the pretzel syndrome gene. A week later their
son died. ''It didn't come in time to help Shawn, but it did help us,'' Dorothy
says. She and the other mothers had started a ''circle letter,'' in which the
first in the chain writes a page and mails it to the second, who adds her own
page and sends it farther down the line. That's what she uses to spread medical
news from Morton.

     When genomic medicine is at its best, it works as it does for GA1. A look
into a patient's genes gives doctors something specific and practical to use to
protect the patient. Diseases like GA1 are the easiest to do this with because
they are not only single-gene disorders -- disorders that are caused by a
mutation of just one gene -- but they are also metabolic, meaning that the
cascade of damage can be prevented with early intervention. That they are simple
in their genetics and straightforward in their mechanics makes these disorders
easier to find and to mitigate.

     More difficult are complex traits, caused by the interaction of several
genes at once -- things like high blood pressure or arthritis or osteoporosis.
These are harder to find and more complicated to mitigate, though the chances
brightened recently with the announcement that a follow-up of the Human Genome
Project is now complete. It is effectively a ''map'' that identifies
''neighborhoods,'' in which genes likely to cause related diseases tend to
cluster, perhaps making it easier to find the source of common conditions. Odds
are that even after doctors learn to read the genetic roots of these disorders,
and tell us that we are at risk, it will be a long while before they can tell us
exactly how to fix things.

     Pretzel syndrome is a single-gene disorder, but it is complex in its
mechanics, and in that way it is the more telling example of the implications of
genomic medicine for most of us. All Morton can offer the pretzel syndrome
patients at the moment is information. Which leads to the question, What is the
value of knowing if that knowledge does not come with a cure? It's a question
the families in the study wrestled with last July when the Weavers invited them
all to their farm for barbecued chicken and an update from Morton.

     Mary Lou Martin, whose teenage daughter, Jennifer, is afflicted with the
disorder, spent a long time that day talking with Kendra Zimmerman, who was
there with 7-year-old Alana. Mary Lou had been hearing about Alana for years, as
mutual friends would regularly tell her about the little girl whose behavior and
movements were just like her own daughter's. Long before Dorothy Weaver called
to invite her into the study, Mary Lou suspected that Jennifer and Alana had the
same disease, but she was unsure about approaching the younger mother to tell
her. To do so, she knew, would be to rob Kendra of denial and possibility.
''Alana was still young,'' she says. ''I don't know how I would have felt back
when Jennifer was little if somebody who had a child eight years older had come
and said their child, who had so many problems, seemed just like mine. When they
are still a baby, you are still thinking it might get better.''

     But at the picnic, Kendra told Mary Lou that she had been wanting to talk
over the years, too. Sitting together, Mary Lou says, the harsh truths she had
been trying to spare a stranger walloped both of them full force. Seeing other
children with the same disorder meant facing the reality that the damage was
lasting. ''You see all these children in one place and you realize, This is the
way it's going to be,'' she says. ''They will always be in diapers, in
wheelchairs. We got some knowledge, but at the same time we gave up some hope.''

     Alana died last month. And still, both women say that they would rather
have answers than uncertainty. That is Morton's conclusion too. His entire
career was changed the day he told Danny Lapp's family that he knew what was
wrong with their son. Then he set about learning how to cure it. He says he
hopes, one day, to be able to soften the blows that pretzel syndrome deals his
patients too. But even if that isn't possible, he says, ''at least they have a
name for what's wrong. We can tell them it's not their fault, it's nothing they
did wrong. It's in their genes. That gives us a place to start.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Total Immersion: For Morton, the way to study disease is day
in, day out. ''I want insight, understanding,'' he says.
 Crunching Numbers: Erik Puffenberger spends hours at the clinic analyzing
genetic data. (Photographs by Eugene Richards for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2006


                              41 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 31, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: DNA may provide quicker vaccines;
Companies hope to overhaul the outdated 9-month production process

SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BYLINE: PAUL ELIAS

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO - The flu vaccine-making system that serves as the best
available protection against a pandemic relies on millions of chicken eggs,
takes nine months to produce each year's flu shots and has changed little since
the 18th century.

   This creaky system poses a big problem if a new, deadly strain emerges once
the annual and inflexible production process begins.

   Several biotechnology companies are at work on a quicker way of making a flu
vaccine that they hope can replace one that requires people to be inoculated
with the entire influenza virus. Their technique: extract just a few genes from
the virus and inject it into people.

   The nascent technology, called DNA vaccines, is a form of gene therapy that
proponents argue is the best way to overhaul a 50-year-old vaccine manufacturing
system.

   In the meantime, most government and big pharmaceutical research funds are
pouring resources into the egg-based process.

   The U.S. government awarded Chiron Corp. $ 62.5 million last week to produce
shots that protect against the bird flu strain. Last month, Sanofi-Pasteur
received $ 100 million for a similar government project.

   Both of the companies still use eggs to manufacture vaccines.

   Chiron, the nation's second-largest vaccine supplier, also plans to spend
more than $ 100 million updating its egg-based factory in Liverpool, England.

   Most influenza vaccine efforts are doing one thing differently: They're
seeking to shave a few weeks off the process by trading the chicken eggs for
mammal cells, the standard brewing technique used to make biotechnology drugs.

   Under the current system, the three flu bug versions that are predicted to be
the coming season's most prevalent strains are injected in chicken eggs to
multiply before they undergo a long process of inactivation, sterilization and
packaging.

   Flu also is the only vaccine made fresh every year because the virus mutates
so rapidly.

   Those touting DNA vaccines say they soon will be able to produce flu vaccines
in less than three months that would allow for injecting people with key bits of
a flu's DNA.

   "We are badly in need of flexible vaccines programs," said Erik Henchal, a
former commander of the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious
Diseases.

   Henchal said the current production system requires researchers to handle
live influenza viruses, a dangerous procedure that DNA vaccines promise to
eliminate if successful.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2005


                              42 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 31, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: News in 90 seconds

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   NATION & WORLD

    Rosa Parks honored in Capitol Hill tribute

    President Bush, members of Congress and ordinary Americans paid tribute to
Rosa Parks under the soaring dome of the Capitol Rotunda on Sunday. Inspiring
the civil rights movement: They honored the woman whose defiant act on a city
bus challenged segregation in the South and inspired the civil rights movement.
PAGE A1

    New Supreme Court nominee could be announced today: Seeking to recapture
political momentum, President Bush appeared poised to announce a new Supreme
Court nomination today. Predictions: Judges Samuel A. Alito Jr., J. Michael
Luttig and Alice M. Batchelder were the names the White House floated by
political allies over the weekend. PAGE A1

    License to kill alligators worth less: About 2,000 people are licensed to
kill alligators in Louisiana. The skins and meat bring in a good profit. A lost
industry: Some experts say hurricanes Katrina and Rita may have ruined hunters'
livelihoods and destroyed alligator habitat, perhaps temporarily crippling the
state's $ 30-million-a-year alligator hunting and farming industry. PAGE A1

    Government misses dozens of security deadlines: The Bush administration has
missed dozens of deadlines set by Congress after the Sept. 11 attacks for
developing ways to protect airplanes, ships and railways from terrorists.
Impact: A multitude of deadlines, sometimes for minor projects, distract the
Department of Homeland Security from putting in place the most important
security measures. PAGE A3

    DNA vaccines may offer faster defense against flu pandemic: Biotechnology
companies are working on a new and quicker way of making flu vaccines. Impact:
DNA vaccines are a form of gene therapy that proponents argue is the best way to
overhaul a 50-year-old vaccine manufacturing system. PAGE A3

    . . .

    CITY & STATE

    Cancer patient's parents await custody ruling

    The parents of Katie Wernecke, a 13-year-old cancer patient whose parents
have refused to let her get further conventional treatment at a Houston
hospital, are expected to learn today whether they will regain custody of the
girl. A judge in Corpus Christi is expected to make a ruling in the case. At
issue: Whether to treat the girl at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center or by the parents' preferred alternative plan that consists of Vitamin C
therapy. PAGE A1

    AstroWorld closed: After 37 years of operating, AstroWorld shut its doors to
the public on Sunday. Last ride: Thousands of area residents have visited the
theme park over the past few weeks since Six Flags Inc. announced the park's
closure. PAGE A1

    . . .

    BUSINESS

    Accounting career defies stereotype

    The stereotype about accountants being boring numbers crunchers may be a
difficult one to erase in some people's minds, but no one can doubt they are hot
right now. Demand: Most college accounting graduates will find jobs and those
with internships are even more likely to land good positions in the major
accounting firms.  PAGE D1

    . . .

    SPORTS

    Texans win first game of season

    It won't be an 0-16 year for the Texans. The first win of the season comes
at the expense of the Cleveland Browns, who lose 19-16 in a game decided mainly
by the kickers. Key moment: Kris Brown gives the Texans the win at Reliant
Stadium with a 38-yard field goal not long after missing a 40-yarder. PAGE H1

    Cowboys improve: The Cowboys improve to 5-3 and keep up in the increasingly
competitive NFC East division with a 34-13 home win over the Arizona Cardinals.
Super sub: Marion Barber gained 127 yards on the ground and scored twice. PAGE
H2

    . . .

    STAR

    The more disgusting the treats, the better

    What do trick-or-treaters want dropped into their Halloween bags tonight?
Not raisins, according to the students in Linda Pierce's fourth-grade physical
education class at Wharton Elementary. They share what they like, what they hate
and what they'll require for a trade. Says Tino Ramirez, co-owner of
Candylicious: "The kids (like it), if it's bright colored, gross, sour, gooey.
The more disgusting the better." PAGE E1


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2005


                              43 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                     October 31, 2005 Monday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: DNA vaccines may aid flu war

BYLINE: By PAUL ELIAS; Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   The flu- vaccine-making system that is the best available protection against
a pandemic relies on millions of chicken eggs, takes nine months to produce each
year's flu shots and has changed little since the 18th century.

   This creaky system poses a big problem if a new, deadly strain emerges once
the annual and inflexible production process begins.

   Several biotechnology companies are at work on a new and quicker way of
making a flu vaccine that they hope can replace one that requires people to be
inoculated with the entire influenza virus. Their technique: Extract just a few
genes from the virus and inject it into people.

   The nascent technology, called DNA vaccines, is a form of gene therapy that
proponents argue is the best way to overhaul a 50-year-old vaccine-manufacturing
system.

   In the meantime, most government and big pharmaceutical-research funds are
still pouring resources into the egg-based process.

   The U.S. government awarded Chiron Corp. $62.5 million last week to produce
shots that protect against the bird-flu strain. Last month, Sanofi-Pasteur
received $100 million for a similar government project. Both companies still use
eggs to manufacture vaccines.

   Chiron, the nation's second-largest vaccine supplier, also plans to spend
more than $100 million updating its beleaguered egg-based factory in Liverpool,
England.

   Most government and big pharma efforts on the influenza vaccine front are
doing one thing new: They're seeking to shave a few weeks off the process by
trading in the chicken eggs for mammal cells, the standard brewing technique
used to make biotechnology drugs.

   The old and new vaccine-making techniques all rely, of course, on the same
principle: tricking the body to create natural defenses against disease.

   Under the current system, the three flu-bug versions that are expected to be
the coming season's most prevalent strains are injected in chicken eggs to
multiply before undergoing a long process of inactivation, sterilization and
packaging.

   Flu vaccine also is the only vaccine made fresh every year, because the virus
mutates so rapidly. Because vaccines are biological products, not chemicals,
they can't be cranked out quickly in times of need.

   The gene jockeys touting DNA vaccines say they are getting close to making
vaccines with less effort. They claim they can soon produce flu vaccines in less
than three months, which would allow for injecting people with key bits of a
flu's DNA.

   If a flu were to mutate into something unexpected, researchers say they can
simply grab a gene from the new strain and gin up more vaccine. Best of all,
they argue, their technology knocks drug-makers out of the chicken- wrangling
business, the biggest limitation of the current system.

   DNA vaccines were first introduced about 10 years ago as a possible treatment
for a variety of diseases, from AIDS to cancer. They worked great in mice, but
largely failed to work in humans because the injected genes did not find their
way into the cells.

   Vijay Samant, chief executive of Vical Inc. in San Diego, said that those
initial problems have been overcome and that his company was testing DNA
vaccines in cancer and AIDS patients to battle those diseases.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2005


                              44 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2005 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 30, 2005, SUNDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: INSIGHT; Pg. E2; TWO CENTS

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: TWO CENTS;

Is human cloning OK by you?

BODY:
Cheryl Davis, Palo Alto Although I strongly support the use of stem cells for
genetic therapeutics, I am opposed to cloning human beings. The latter leads to
eugenics on the one hand, and the possibility of genetic enslavement on the
other. As a person born with a severe disability, I worry about the dark side of
eugenics in recent human history. .

    Erik Wilson, San Francisco I work at Genentech, but I'm generally in favor
of cloning anyway. For better or for worse, human cloning is bound to happen
whether it's sanctioned or not. Better to have it well-regulated and under the
auspices of ethical, qualified people than done clandestinely in some shadowy
lab with no oversight or accountability. .

    Rebecca Woo, San Francisco No. It's a little too reminiscent of Hitler's
attempt to create the perfect Aryan race. Who would regulate it, and who would
get to decide who regulates it? .

    Bruce Adams, Benicia No. The natural selection process works and should not
be manipulated. I am also opposed to fertility procedures. I am pro choice and
freedom loving, but we should not try to fool Mother Nature. .

    Glen Hauer, Berkeley Once we humans have ended racism and all the other
excuses for treating some of us better than others, cloning will be fine by me.
Until then, our society is not ready to decide which humans to clone, or whether
cloning makes sense at all. .

    Amy Altschul, Oakland If for no other reason than that human reproduction by
natural -- and artificial -- means is already out of control, I am against
cloning. The last thing we need is yet more artificial ways to propagate.
------------------

    Two Cents is a pool of Bay Area residents we tap for comments and anecdotes.
Columns are a representative sampling of responses to questions we pose via
e-mail. To join the pool, e-mail us at twocents@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (6)

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2005


                              45 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           October 27, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: METRO - EDITORIAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 283 words

HEADLINE: Maybe medical schools should become one

BODY:

   Re: "LSU Health Sciences Center stays on the job," Your Opinions, Oct. 24.

   It was interesting to read Chancellor John Rock's letter concerning LSU
Health Sciences Center's plans to return "fully back home as soon as possible"
to New Orleans  --  especially juxtaposed with the front-page article in the
same newspaper regarding the state Charity and University hospitals, which are
LSU's main source of patients for its graduate medical programs.

   The state of Louisiana wastes millions of dollars a year maintaining
duplicate and/or overlapping contracts with both schools through the Department
of Health and Hospitals and other sources. Arguments over how many residency
slots will be allocated to each school have been going on for years.
Notwithstanding the recent successful joint Tulane/LSU research programs in gene
therapy and cancer, this intense rivalry has been deleterious to medical
education and research in New Orleans.

   Post-Katrina, both schools, most particularly LSUHSC, will be looking to the
state and federal governments for major cash investments to get back up and
running. We've already seen LSUHSC's desires made public in the form of a new
Charity/University Hospital. Why not think outside the box? Why not merge the
medical schools? Why not have the state buy Tulane Hospital and expand it?

   In the long run, medical education and research will be much better off with
one larger institution than two smaller ones constantly fighting over every
dollar, residency slot and patient.

   Let's think outside the box; let's finally bury Huey Long. Let's think what's
good for all, not just for some  --  let's think the Paul Tulane School of
Medicine at LSUHSC.

   Stewart Clark

   New Orleans

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2005


                              46 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           October 27, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A09

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:

   Scientists have mapped patterns of tiny DNA differences that distinguish one
person from another, an achievement that will help researchers find genes that
promote common illnesses such as heart disease and diabetes.

     The map represents "a real sea change in how we study the genetics of
disease," said David Altshuler, a leader of the project, which included more
than 200 researchers from six nations.

     Scientists want to find disease-related genes as a means for diagnosis,
prediction and developing treatments. Such genes give clues to the biological
underpinnings of disease, and so suggest strategies for developing therapies.

     Genes that predispose people to common disorders  --  heart disease,
cancer, diabetes, asthma and others  --  are  hard to find. But the new "HapMap"
--  taken from the genetics term "haplotype"  --  opens the door to launching
comprehensive searches through the human DNA for those genes, said Altshuler,
who works at the Broad Institute of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and Harvard.

   Routine screening mammograms contribute just as much as hormone therapy and
chemotherapy in slowing the rate of death from breast cancer, a study shows.

     The study, based on seven statistical analyses by 43 researchers, found
that screening as practiced in the United States reduced the rate of death from
breast cancer by 7 percent to 23 percent, depending on the analysis. The study
is published today in the New England Journal of Medicine.

     Chemotherapy and hormone therapy such as tamoxifen reduced the death rate
by 12 percent to 21 percent, according to the study led by Donald Berry of the
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. A combination of
screening and other therapy reduced the death rate by an estimated 25 percent to
38 percent.

   Doctors from the world's poorest countries are leaving  to pursue jobs in
richer nations, draining much of the developing world of critical medical care,
a study says.

     Sixty percent of  international medical graduates in the United States come
from poorer countries, researchers at George Washington University found. The
rate was 75 percent in Britain, 43 percent in Canada and 40 percent in
Australia, the study published in the New England Journal of Medicine said.

      "Nine of the 20 countries with the highest emigration factors are in
sub-Saharan Africa or the Caribbean," said lead researcher Fitzhugh Mullan.

   Almost 21 million Americans have diabetes, a 14 percent jump from two years
ago, according to a report by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.

     Seven percent of the U.S. population has diabetes, and as many as a third
have not  yet been diagnosed, the Atlanta-based health agency said. An increase
in Type 2 diabetes drove the number of people with the disease up from 18.2
million, or 6.3 percent of the population, in 2003, the CDC said.

     Diabetes is the sixth-leading cause of death in the United States, the CDC
said.

       --  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2005


                              47 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   October 26, 2005 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE MEDICINE and TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROMISING FOR TREATING MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, HEART FAILURE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   In animal experiments, local researchers have for the first time used gene
therapy to reverse cardiac damage caused by muscular dystrophy, indicating that
a similar technique might work as a treatment for heart failure patients.

    Hamsters with the disease that got the gene therapy had stronger hearts and
lived as long as healthy animals, said study leader Dr. Xiao Xiao, of the
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

    "This gene delivery method could be used to deliver other therapeutic genes
into the heart to treat general heart failure," he said. The findings were
published yesterday in the journal Circulation.

    "This is a milestone, really," said Dr. Johnny Huard, a muscular dystrophy
researcher and director of the growth and development laboratory at Children's
Hospital.

    "If it pans out, I think it's extremely exciting," said Dr. Robert Kloner, a
cardiac gene and cell therapy expert at the University of Southern California's
Keck School of Medicine. Neither he nor Dr. Huard were members of the research
team.

    Dr. Kloner added, "The results are so amazingly positive, it's the kind of
thing you want to see reproduced by several different labs."

    In the experiments, the hamsters had a mutation in a gene that makes a
muscle protein called sarcoglycan. Their limb muscles are weak, and their
enlarged, thin-walled hearts cannot pump blood efficiently. Heart failure cuts
their two-year life span to about eight months, Dr. Xiao said.

    In the study, a normal sarcoglycan gene was joined to a harmless virus,
called adeno-associated virus or AAV, so that it could get inside muscle cells,
and then injected into the animals.

    The normal gene was incorporated into the muscles of the limbs, diaphragm
and heart, and made sarcoglycan protein. Treated hamsters developed stronger
hearts, ran easily on treadmills and lived longer, the researchers said.

    "If you do a pathology examination, you cannot tell the difference between
the normal muscle and the gene therapy-treated muscle," Dr. Xiao said.

    Humans have a similar disease, called limb girdle muscular dystrophy.
Clinical trials would have to be conducted to see whether gene therapy could
treat them, he said.

    But before that, other labs should conduct similar animal studies to make
sure the results are reproducible, Dr. Kloner cautioned.

    The heart specialist said the technique might also be used to treat patients
with heart failure, which is a far more common problem than muscular dystrophy.

    Different genes would have to be joined with AAV, but other experimental
models have shown that gene therapy can improve function, Dr. Kloner said.

    "There are quite a few genes that can improve the heart function, but the
question is, how do you deliver that gene into the heart?" Dr. Xiao said. "This
gene delivery method could be used to deliver other therapeutic genes into the
heart to treat general heart failure."

    Several heart failure research teams have approached him about the
possibility of collaboration, he added.

    For the gene therapy to work well in patients, though, much more of the
gene-virus combination will be required because humans are bigger than lab
animals.

    Dr. Huard said that being able to get the treatment gene to all affected
muscles through a simple intravenous injection makes the therapy more feasible
for muscular dystrophy patients.

    "This is very promising," he said. "If we can produce enough virus for human
patients ... the door is open."

NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2005


                              48 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 24, 2005 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 986 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell work proceeds with caution

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A single gene mutation causes Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. That one error can wreak
havoc on children born with it, triggering mental retardation, muscle stiffness,
uncontrollable writhing, kidney failure and a compulsion to violently gnaw on
the lips, tongue and fingertips.

   The disease may be a perfect candidate for stem cell research.

   If scientists can engineer stem cells in the lab so they have the single gene
defect, and then coax those stem cells into becoming brain cells, they might
learn how this mutation causes the syndrome -- and how to stop it.

   "If we can understand what goes on in Lesch-Nyhan disease, we may be able to
understand what goes on in Parkinson's disease," said Theodore Friedmann, a gene
therapy expert at the University of California San Diego who has studied
Lesch-Nyhan for years. The cause of Parkinson's is complex, but it leads to
similar abnormalities in body movement.

   Friedmann and other local researchers are part of the highly dynamic field of
stem cell research. They and their colleagues worldwide have generated headlines
in recent weeks.

   Some are developing ways to take stem cells out of embryos without harming
them, and one biologist announced some success this month. On Wednesday, South
Korean scientists said they hope to form a partnership with U.S. and British
counterparts -- including Friedmann -- to create new supplies of stem cells.

   Despite the bold efforts, biologists acknowledge that stem cell work remains
in its infancy.

   "Stem cells are not pixie dust," said Evan Snyder, who directs the stem cell
research division at the Burnham Institute in La Jolla. "You can't just sprinkle
them into an area and think they know what to do."

   To make long-term progress, Snyder said, scientists must learn not only how
stem cells work, but also about the diseases modern medicine hopes to cure.

   Contrary to how many people view stem cell research, the field involves much
more than looking for ways to grow replacement cells for the brain, liver,
spinal cord and so on. Just studying stem cells in the lab could reveal a lot
about basic biology, such as how defective genes lead to disease.

   Stem cell scientists must exercise caution as they move toward new clinical
trials, Snyder said. The field cannot afford the harsh criticism that gene
therapy has experienced since Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died six years ago during an
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   In 2003, the Food and Drug Administration temporarily banned certain types of
gene therapy trials, and the agency has not approved any gene therapy product
for sale.

   "We . . . don't want to fail and we can't afford to fail. Otherwise we'll end
up like the gene therapy field, which has been in the scientific doghouse for a
decade," Snyder said. "Stem cell work is too much a fundamental part of human
biology to be relegated to sham science."

   Technical aspects aside, the field has spawned many ethical and religious
questions. One area of study, human embryonic stem cell research, is
controversial because so far it requires destroying embryos.

   President Bush, who perceives embryos as potential human lives, has shown no
signs he will reverse his 2001 ban on federal funding for experiments that
require destroying new embryos.

   The U.S. Senate decided Friday to postpone, until next year, a debate about
loosening Bush's restrictions. Meanwhile, lawsuits have tied up a California
initiative to jump-start human embryonic stem cell research with $3 billion in
state tax dollars.

   In La Jolla, Evan Snyder said the field is consumed with two broad areas of
inquiry:

   1. What makes a stem cell a stem cell? What genes inside a stem cell's DNA
give it the potential to become every tissue in the body? In addition, how can
scientists maintain stem cells so they don't spontaneously develop into some
type of tissue? And how can researchers prompt a stem cell to become a specific
type of tissue?

   2. What type of stem cell is best for treating a particular disease? "There's
a whole smorgasbord of stem cells people can now use," including those in the
brain, blood and pancreas, Snyder said.

   "What cell is really best for what disease? That's a huge debate," Snyder
said.

   Each disease presents vastly different challenges, said Fred Levine, who
studies the biology of diabetes at the Burnham Institute.

   Researchers have become fairly adept at coaxing stem cells to become brain
cells. But where do you put them in the brain to treat Alzheimer's, a
degenerative condition that robs people of their memory?

   "Unless you put it back into the brain in the precise location, and with
hundreds or thousands of connections that an individual neuron can make, it's
not going to function properly," Levine said.

   For contrast, consider the treatment of diabetes. Biologists know they can
put beta cells, which produce insulin, just about anywhere in the body, Levine
said. These cells automatically sense blood glucose levels and secrete insulin
as needed.

   Engineering stem cells to become beta cells is a formidable job.

   "It's turned out to be a real bear," Snyder said.

   The Burnham Institute hopes to learn more about these and other challenges
through a $3 million federal grant it received in August. The National
Institutes of Health named Burnham an "Exploratory Center for Human Embryonic
Stem Cell Research." The institute was one of three sites chosen nationwide.

   The money will help scientists explore the most basic questions about stem
cells, such as how genes control a stem cell and how molecules in a stem cell
move around and change the cell's function.

   Human embryonic stem cells offer biologists a direct view into human biology.
That might sound obvious, scientists say, but much of basic medical research has
been conducted on animals.

   "We use animals to test ideas and develop ideas, but animals aren't people.
There are many differences," said Larry Goldstein, a stem cell biologist at UCSD
who studies Alzheimer's disease.

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. UCSD graduate student Andrew Crain looked at
embryonic stem cells in a lab at the Burnham Institute in La Jolla on Friday. 2.
Evan Snyder (right), who directs the stem cell research division at the Burnham
Institute, talked about research with Andrew Crain (left) and Ilyas Singec on
Friday.; PHOTOBY: 1,2. K.C. Alfred / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2005


                              49 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 21, 2005 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: San Diego's Cardium raises about $30 million;
Biotech aims for stock market listing

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Biotechnology startup Cardium Therapeutics said yesterday that it raised
about $30 million in a private financing and merged into a publicly traded shell
company to gain a stock market listing.

   The San Diego company said proceeds from the financing will be used to
acquire a portfolio of experimental drugs to treat heart disease, including a
gene therapy called Generx, from Germany's Schering AG.

   The biotech plans to apply for its stock to be listed on the Nasdaq stock
market or the American Stock Exchange. It now trades over the counter under the
symbol ARVT, which is held by the shell company, Aries Ventures.

   "This is a substantial milestone for our stockholders, and sets the stage for
us to pursue our business plan aggressively with substantial capital resources,"
chief executive Christopher Reinhard said in a written statement.

   Reinhard did not return telephone calls.

   Cardium's proposed lead experimental product, Generx, comes with a
problematic past. Generx was developed by former San Diego gene therapy company
Collateral Therapeutics, which was acquired by Schering in a $140 million stock
deal in 2002.

   Generx is designed to treat patients suffering from angina, a painful
disorder that occurs when the heart doesn't get enough oxygen, usually because
arteries that feed blood to the heart are clogged.

   The Schering product consists of a disabled virus that delivers a human
growth-factor gene to the heart. The gene is supposed to trigger heart cells to
produce a growth hormone that stimulates the growth of new blood vessels.

   Though the therapy showed promise in early clinical trials, Schering AG last
year halted a late-stage Phase 3 human study of Generx after an interim analysis
found "insufficient evidence" that it benefited patients.

   Schering terminated its cardiovascular research program, including its work
with Generx.

   Cardium was formed to acquire Schering's portfolio of discarded
cardiovascular growth factor drug candidates. A later, subgroup analysis of the
data from the failed Schering clinical trial yielded "positive efficacy
insights," according to Cardium.

   Data from retrospective subgroup analyses often come under fire from
scientists because it is subject to cherry-picking -- taking a nugget of
positive results from overwhelmingly negative or neutral data and hypothesizing
about it.

   Following the merger with an Aries Ventures' subsidiary and the private
financing, Cardium will have 29.2 million shares of common stock outstanding.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2005


                              50 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2005 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 21, 2005, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: Trials for stem-cell treatment of brain disease;

Clinical testing set to begin on kids with fatal affliction

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writers

BYLINE: Cornelia Stolze, Carl T. Hall

BODY:
Researchers in California are about to start the first FDA-sanctioned clinical
trial of a stem cell treatment for a brain disease.

    The trial will offer regulators one of their first opportunities to reveal
what standards should apply for novel "regenerative medicine" experiments in
human subjects. Special safety concerns include the long-term cancer-causing
potential of stem cells and the risk that they may wire into the brain's
circuitry improperly.

    "A great deal of attention will be paid to the outcome of this trial," said
Dr. Arnold Kriegstein, a neurologist and head of a stem cell program at UCSF,
who is not involved in the new study. "It really represents the first trial of
its kind. Regardless of the outcome, all of us interested in cell-based
therapies will be watching what happens."

    The study is sponsored by a small Palo Alto biotech company, Stem Cells
Inc., to test the safety of injecting fetal-derived neural stem cells into the
brains of children suffering from a rare and always fatal disorder known as
Batten disease.

    The condition afflicts about 2 to 4 of every 100,000 children born in the
United States. Babies may appear normal at first, only to begin losing
coordination and suffering seizures several months after birth. Eventually,
children become blind, bedridden and unable to communicate before they die at an
early age. No therapy is available to stop or even slow down the symptoms.

    The problems are caused by a gene mutation, which leads to a lack of an
enzyme needed for proper recycling of certain substances that otherwise can
build up in the brain. The stem cells are intended to serve as delivery vehicles
to get the missing enzyme where it's needed.

    Two Stanford physicians -- Dr. Gregory Enns, an assistant professor of
pediatrics and director of the biochemical genetics program at Stanford, and Dr.
Stephen Huhn, chief of pediatric neurosurgery at Packard Children's Hospital --
helped design the trial protocol. They intend to begin the first procedures
sometime next year, if an internal review board at Stanford gives its consent.

    Enns said families with Batten disease have little choice but to try a novel
approach.

    "This is an unremitting disease that is particularly tragic," he said.
"Right now there is nothing we can do to stop the progression of this terrible
disorder."

    The stem cells are derived from donated brain-tissue from aborted fetuses,
which is considered a tissue donation because the embryos are not destroyed.
These cells are different from the much more controversial human embryonic stem
cells, which typically are derived from embryos that are destroyed in the
process. Unlike the embryonic cells, the stem cells in the clinical trial are
thought to be biologically committed to forming only brain cells of various
types.

    Officials at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said they couldn't
comment on any pending clinical investigation. The company announced Thursday
that it had received the go-ahead following months of negotiations. Stem Cells
Inc. stock gained 11 cents on the news, or 2.27 percent, to close at $4.96 a
share.

    Fewer than 12 children suffering from either of two subtypes of the disorder
will be selected for the trial. All the children will be in an advanced state of
brain degeneration and will be followed for up to five years.

    Other clinical investigators have tested different kinds of cell therapies
in brain diseases, including Parkinson's, and various stem cell experiments have
been reported around the world. A gene therapy trial for Batten disease also is
under way.

    The newly approved trial is the first to get FDA sanction for a human test
of the flexible neural stem cells. Surgeons plan to drill eight holes in the
skull, through which they will inject cells into the cortex, which forms part of
the brain's outer surface. Some cells also will be planted deep inside the
brain, in the fluid-filled spaces known as the ventricles.

    Although the trial is designed only to assess safety, sponsors hope to find
at least some hint of a beneficial effect. But Huhn said it is important not to
let hopes get too high for any small study of this type, known formally as a
Phase I "safety and preliminary efficacy" trial.

    "Our first goal is to do no harm and to learn a little bit more about the
cells and how patients do when they receive this kind of transplant," Huhn said.

    Other kinds of stem cell treatments have been used for years. The best-known
example is bone marrow transplantation to treat leukemia and other blood
disorders.

    All such treatments are fashioned from so-called "adult" stem cells that
have already matured beyond the primitive embryonic stage. Most scientists
working with the more flexible embryonic stem cells say they are at least five
or 10 years away from clinical trials.

    To many experts, the Batten disease trial is an important early test case.

    "All of us in this field are certainly very excited about this approach, and
we all want very much to see this approach work," Kriegstein said.

    He noted that a disaster could set back the entire stem cell field.

    Missteps in early gene therapy trials, another promising field, led to the
death of one young patient from an unexpected immune reaction, while another
trial participant developed deadly leukemia. After these events, the FDA closed
many gene-therapy trials around the country.E-mail Carl T. Hall at
chall@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2005


                              51 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2005 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           October 20, 2005 Thursday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Metro Southwest Neighbors: Tigard; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 1067 words

HEADLINE: Jake's still smiling

BYLINE: CATHERINE RYAN, The Oregonian

DATELINE: TUALATIN

BODY:

   SUMMARY -  The Dering family of Tualatin celebrates Jake's first birthday and
his progress after 16 hospital stays and four surgeries to treat a rare genetic
disorder

   TUALATIN --  J ake lay on his back in the living room, playing peekaboo with
his homemade baby blanket.

   "Mama, mama, mama, mama," he gurgled through labored breathing, the vestiges
of a lingering cold. He waved his legs in the air, pumping them up and down, and
giggled.

   "See him working his legs around?" said his mother, Chellie Dering. "He's so
good!"

   Now she has even more reason for enthusiasm: On Tuesday, Jake celebrated his
first birthday. It was a milestone that family members and his doctors sometimes
feared he would never reach.

   Jake has otopalatodigital syndrome type II, a rare genetic disorder diagnosed
in only about 30 cases worldwide. The condition often causes skeletal
abnormalities, cleft palate, joined toes and fingers, club feet and hearing
loss. Most OPD patients die as infants, usually from breathing problems.

   Jake was born with club feet; dislocated knees, elbows and hips; some webbed
toes and fingers; shortened arm and leg bones; mild scoliosis; a cleft in the
soft palate; and a vertebra fused to the base of his skull. He also has tracheal
malaysia, which impairs his breathing and can lead to a collapsed windpipe,
especially when he's ill.

   For the first 10 months of life, his legs splayed sideways at 90-degree
angles. Two weeks ago, doctors took off Jake's hip-high casts after his recovery
from open-reduction surgery, during which they removed a 1-inch section from
each femur and created new knee joints for him.

   When he sat in his high chair Tuesday to blow out his one birthday candle,
his legs dangled like any other child's. Despite 16 hospitalizations for
respiratory distress or failure, Jake continues to breathe, grow and smile.

   Chellie Dering and her husband, Steve, marvel daily at their son's progress.
Sixteen hospitalizations and four planned surgeries -- with more to come -- have
not soured his disposition.

   "Jake, you can't stop him from smiling," his mother said.

   Jake's mojo

   Strangers don't always realize that Jake has complicated medical problems,
though he still has bad days. A common cold can devastate him, and he can end up
in the emergency room at any time.

   The Derings appreciate each time they can use their favorite phrase to
describe his improvement: "Jake's got his mojo back." They talk of Jake's
ability to walk in terms of "when," not "if." Still, they try not to get ahead
of themselves. They push away visions of track shoes and instead focus on the
present and near future.

   For Halloween, Jake will be a caterpillar. He will soon undergo surgery to
separate his fingers. And he will eat cake for the first time at his birthday
celebration this weekend, when they have a party to celebrate Jake's
achievements. They've invited the people who have baby-sat their 2-year-old
daughter, Sidney, run errands and cooked dinner to support the family.

   "People really have a special connection with Jake," Chellie Dering said. "I
think the reason why we had him is to touch people's lives. They don't do things
for him; he does things for them."

   Jake also has become a familiar face to many local health care professionals.
The family's Web site, www.jakesake.com, names 33 nurses, doctors and therapists
and 10 medical sites.

   His doctors are most encouraged by his growing resistance to colds. He also
is able to concentrate better on improving his motor skills because his windpipe
has continued to develop.

   Since January, Lesley Freeling, a physical therapist at Therapy Solutions for
Kids, has seen Jake once a week. Now that he has functional knees, Freeling will
work to develop his muscles and skills for standing. His dislocated hips won't
prevent his progress, she said, and the Derings hope he will catch up to other
children his age.

   Sister learns compassion

   The words "special" and "different" have no place in the Derings' tidy home,
where they incorporate physical therapy into their son's daily routine.

   And having Jake as a brother has taught sister Sidney compassion and
understanding beyond her years, Chellie Dering said. She recalled one day when
Sidney was playing with Jake, who was still wearing the dark blue leg casts. The
girl was tugging on his arm, which is bent because of his dislocated elbows.

   Their mother stepped in to stop the rough play. "Honey, Jake's arm doesn't
work that way. His arm is different than yours," Dering told her daughter.

   "Mom, he's not different!" Sidney answered.

   Although she occasionally clamors for attention, Sidney rarely resents the
care Jake receives, her parents said. She hugs and kisses him, and always wants
to play.

   "She really embraced her little brother," Steve Dering said. "She's never
said, 'Please send him back.' "

   Different milestones

   The Derings probably will remember different milestones than most parents.

   Though Jake's first haircut may not stand out, Chellie Dering said she'll
never forget the first time she held him to her chest. For most of his first
year, Jake's dislocated knees and leg casts prevented his mother from
comfortably cuddling him. Now that his legs hang normally, she can hold him face
to face.

   Because the Derings both have backgrounds in exercise and movement science,
they paid special attention to signs that Jake was developing normally. They
rejoiced when they saw that his eyes tracked movement and that he was able to
sit up -- progressions many parents take for granted.

   Doctors say such signs of development show that the boy probably was born
without the neurological and hearing problems some other OPD patients have. Yet
Jake has developed more slowly than other 1-year-olds because of his frequent
hospitalizations, Chellie Dering said.

   The family tries to live as normally as possible, but sacrifice and change
now form part of their routine.

   "We've tried to embrace that new normal," Steve Dering said. "Jake makes it
very worthwhile, though, because of who he is."

   Like any baby, he cries for milk, gums teething rings and laughs at his
father's silly faces. His singularity stems not from his rare condition but from
his remarkable ability to be a normal 1-year-old boy despite those hardships.

   "He's always shown perseverance and done it with a smile," his father said.
"There's something to be learned from that."

   Catherine Ryan: 503-294-5947; catherineryan@news.oregonian.com

   2 photos

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2005


                              52 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 19, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1005 words

HEADLINE: S. Korea to aid U.S. stem cell work;
New research consortium also will include Britain

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER, The Associated Press contributed to this
report.

BODY:

   Scientists in South Korea announced today that they'll help American
biologists create new stem cell lines and accelerate research -- an
unprecedented partnership that sidesteps federal restrictions in the United
States.

   The resulting World Stem Cell Foundation, which includes Britain, will be led
by South Korean researchers who have developed highly efficient ways to clone
human embryos. The consortium's backers hope to rapidly expand the supply of
embryonic stem cells that scientists can use to study cancer, Alzheimer's
disease, Parkinson's disease, Lou Gehrig's disease and other illnesses.

   Some of that work is expected to take place in San Diego, including projects
at the University of California San Diego and The Burnham Institute.

   "By overcoming a lot of the technical hurdles, (the Koreans) really have
something to offer the international community," said Evan Snyder, a stem cell
biologist at Burnham.

   The collaboration brings together South Korea's government, South Korean stem
cell pioneer Hwang Woo-suk and Pittsburgh biologist Gerald Schatten, the lead
U.S. contact. It marks a bold and ambitious venture in a fledgling field. The
funding would come from South Korea, private donations and possibly other
sources.

   The consortium plans to set up labs in the San Francisco Bay Area and
England, where South Korean technicians would produce a total of about 100 stem
cell lines per year. The lines each would be engineered to carry various genetic
defects that trigger diseases. Participants in the United States and Britain
would buy these stem cells to study the illnesses.

   "When the use of these stem cells is limited to a particular country, it
takes much too long to create technologies usable for the whole humanity," Hwang
said before the announcement. "By creating a global network, we plan to share
stem cells created in each country and share information on those stem cells."

   Many details need to be worked out, including how much the consortium will
charge scientists for the new stem cell lines, whether South Korean expertise
will be shared with American and British scientists, and how the World Stem Cell
Foundation will confront ethical issues related to creating embryos for
research.

   "I think it's generally a good idea," said Fred Gage, a stem cell researcher
at the Salk Institute in La Jolla. "In the end, California and other countries
will want to incorporate the (South Korean) technology within their own centers
rather than have all the core work done somewhere else."

   Scientists are eager to experiment with new human embryonic stem cells, which
grow in an embryo to become every other cell in the body. Examining how stem
cells develop could reveal much about basic biology and the genetics of disease.

   To obtain stem cells for the lab, researchers must extract them from an
embryo -- typically one donated by a couple with embryos stored at a fertility
clinic. The process destroys the embryo, so the field is controversial among
people who regard an embryo as a human being. In 2001, President Bush halted
federal funding for research that destroys human embryos for new stem cell
lines.

   In California, lawsuits have stalled a $3 billion initiative that voters
passed last year to use state tax dollars for creating new stem cell lines and
advancing the field.

   Scientists continue to conduct stem cell research on animals and with stem
cells taken from adult organs.

   Many biologists insist there is no substitute for studying human embryonic
stem cells. Batches of the cells already in labs when Bush issued his 2001 order
have limited value -- partly because they are contaminated -- and new ones are
needed, they said.

   "The cells available are not up to the job, so many people are interested in
developing new cells that will more accurately reflect the diseases they
(study)," said Theodore Friedmann of UCSD, a gene therapy specialist who wants
to participate in the new consortium to explore a rare childhood disease called
Lesch-Nyhan. The genetic disorder causes mental retardation and a host of other
medical problems.

   While embryonic stem cell research is restricted in the United States, such
studies in South Korea have progressed without government opposition. Hwang and
his colleagues have generated batches of stem cells with unrivaled success rates
by refining a technique called somatic cell nuclear transfer. In the procedure,
scientists clone a person's DNA by placing it inside a fertilized egg taken from
a different individual. That egg had its own DNA removed earlier.

   By joining the egg and the donated DNA, biologists are able to create an
embryo that quickly produces stem cells. Those cells have the same genetic code
as the person who donated the DNA.

   Somatic cell nuclear transfer has two main advantages, scientists say. First,
researchers can generate stem cells that are compatible with the people who
donated their DNA. Theoretically, such cells could be used as replacement tissue
for the donors if, for example, they suffer a spinal cord injury or degenerative
disease.

   Second, scientists hope to generate human embryonic stem cells with specific
genetic defects. If people who donate their DNA have Parkinson's disease, for
instance, the resulting stem cells will show Parkinson's. Through lab work,
biologists then would chart how the disease progresses as the stem cells develop
into brain cells.

   The same approach could apply for the Lesch-Nyhan condition studied by UCSD's
Friedmann.

   "What we need to do now is to look and see what goes on early on -- when a
stem cell decides to become a brain cell -- and what goes on when this genetic
defect prevents it from doing it faithfully," Friedmann said.

   The overall desire for stem cell scientists to advance their work despite
government restrictions is great, said Schatten, the Pittsburgh researcher.

   "In order to move forward, we scientists need some kind of safe haven," he
said in a commentary released today in the New England Journal of Medicine.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Gene therapy specialist Theodore Friedmann of UCSD.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2005


                              53 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 17, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 01 MetFront

LENGTH: 1068 words

HEADLINE: No guarantee for Baylor, Methodist;
Legal experts say trust issues may remain, despite contract

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN

BODY:

   Legal experts are split on a much-ballyhooed agreement resolving a 1 1/2
-year-old battle between Baylor College of Medicine and The Methodist Hospital,
but most agreed on one thing: Don't expect it to change a bad relationship.

   Health law professors and lawyers interviewed by the Chronicle warned the
contract brokered last month by Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott can't rebuild
the trust that's been absent while the two institutions have warred.

   "A legal agreement won't solve underlying relationship problems," said Bill
Knowlton, a specialist in health-care law and partner at Ropes & Gray in Boston.
"The relationship's future will depend on how the two parties work together, not
what's in the agreement."

   The experts said that will take years to play out.

   The fighting started two years ago over a Baylor plan to build an outpatient
clinic that Methodist saw as competition. It caused the two institutions to end
a half century-old marriage in which Methodist served as a real-life classroom
for Baylor students.

   The agreement was hailed at a news conference Sept. 30. Abbott proclaimed
Baylor and Methodist are "reuniting" and will once again work collaboratively
and cooperatively for the betterment of patients. He called it "a day of
celebration."

   Abbott and institution leaders didn't release the agreement and wouldn't
discuss it in any detail at the news conference. The Chronicle obtained it after
filing a Texas Public Information Act request and sent it to a dozen legal
experts for comment.

   Their opinions ran the gamut: that it should be very effective because of the
attorney general's involvement; that it's a good first step; that it gives the
appearance of doing more than it actually does; that it comes too late.

   The heart of the agreement is its attempt to restrict recruiting between the
institutions. Since they parted ways in April 2004, they've vied for staff
employed by the college but with practices based at the hospital.

   Baylor has been victim of that custody dispute, losing 80 of its nearly 350
clinical faculty who regularly admitted patients at Methodist (another 1,500
Baylor clinical faculty practice at either public hospitals or Texas
Children's). In a complaint filed this summer with the corporation that manages
the Texas Medical Center, Baylor accused Methodist of using its $ 2.3 billion
endowment to poach staff and "destroy" the college.


   Forbidden 'soliciting'


   The agreement seeks to restrict such recruiting by forbidding either
institution from hiring away key administrators, faculty with big research
grants, and any doctor or scientist working in any of four joint
Baylor-Methodist programs (urology; ear, nose and throat; cardiovascular disease
prevention; and cell and gene therapy).

   It also forbids either institution from "soliciting" a doctor involved in
teaching residents at Methodist or any scientist acting as an investigator of a
research project sponsored by or administered at the other institution.

   It does not prohibit Baylor or Methodist from hiring such doctors or
scientists who seek a job on their own, but requires that individuals submit a
written statement that they weren't solicited.  The hiring institution's CEO is
responsible for confirming the statement through "reasonable" internal
investigation.

   The agreement also requires an institution interested in a doctor or
scientist from the other to first receive a written opinion from a national
accounting company that the proposed compensation and benefits are commercially
reasonable and consistent with fair market value.

   Some experts praised those provisions as rigorously laid out, but others said
they could either raise concerns about restraint of trade or be circumvented.


   Walking a 'fine line'


   "It's a fine line they're straddling," said Mark Rothstein, director of the
University of Louisville School of Medicine's Institute for Bioethics, Health
Policy and Law. "If you go too far curtailing movement, you encounter legal
problems; if you don't go very far, you leave ways for employees to get around
them.  Ultimately, it comes down to whether the institutions trust each other
not to push the envelope."

   Abbott told the Chronicle the agreement involved "a tremendous amount of
research" and that he's confident it will withstand any legal challenge.

   The agreement holds interest not just to the squabbling ex-partners, but also
to Baylor's new partner, St. Luke's Episcopal Hospital. Its officials, banking
on Baylor doctors to fuel their expansion plans, worry the agreement could limit
the partnership's full potential.

   To some observers, the negotiations and settlement were really a political
calculation by Abbott, whose office represents the public interest in matters
involving charitable trusts. They noted that Abbott's pre-negotiation goals
included a Baylor-Methodist press release about the talks' successful outcome
and that Abbott's post-negotiation press release credits him with brokering
renewed collaboration and cooperation at the medical center.

   Abbott denied the charge, saying he was advised it would be politically
disadvantageous to intervene because the fight was such a quagmire. He said he
got involved, at the request of civic leaders, doctors and Baylor and Methodist
board members, because the fight was hurting the Texas Medical Center.


   Both sides win, some say


   For that reason, many in the Medical Center were thankful for Abbott's
intervention, whatever the motivation. They said it gives both institutions
victories: Baylor is happy to stem staff defections and Methodist is happy
Baylor will now acknowledge the legitimacy of its new research institute and
Cornell affiliation.

   Some of the legal experts weren't convinced. They said they'll be watching to
see what happens in the future - whether the institutions are able to implement
the agreement and how well it anticipates future problems.

   "It's a step in the right direction, but I don't see it as a panacea to the
Pandora's box opened by this conflict," said Dr.  William Winslade, a longtime
observer of the medical center who teaches law at the University of Houston and
medicine at the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. "It's not easy
to effect cooperation and collaboration by contract."



















NOTES: todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2005


                              54 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            October 17, 2005 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: 2 studies may offer hope in debate over stem cells New methods seek to
obtain cells without destroying embryos.

BYLINE: By Malcolm Ritter THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Two new mouse experiments may show how to obtain human embryonic stem cells
with fewer ethical hurdles, a step that could allow federal funding for such
research, scientists reported Sunday.

   Currently, scientists must sacrifice human embryos to harvest such cells,
which can form into any kind of human tissue. These are seen as valuable for
studying and treating illnesses such as diabetes and Parkinson's disease.

   Objections to the embryo destruction have led to a ban on federal funding for
such work. Scientists say that hampers research.

   The new methods, detailed Sunday in the online edition of the journal Nature,
seek to obtain the cells without destroying embryos.

   The Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research cautioned that despite
the goal of avoiding ethical quandaries, the new approaches "will not sit well
with many who oppose embryonic stem cell research." The group favors federal
funding of stem cell research.

   An official with the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops said the two
reported techniques still raise ethical objections, although a spokesman for a
group of Roman Catholic bioethicists called one of them a step in the right
direction.

   In the standard method of harvesting stem cells, researchers wait five days
or so after fertilization until the embryo has become a ball of up to 150 cells.
They get stem cells from the interior of the ball, which destroys the embryo.

   One of the new mouse studies borrowed a lab technique already used in
fertility clinics, called pre-implantation genetic diagnosis or PGD. It is used
to screen embryos for genetic disorders.

   In this study, researchers plucked a single cell from eight-cell mouse
embryos, which were about 2 days old. While fertility clinics use such a cell
for genetic testing, the researchers cultured the plucked cells and found that
they behaved like embryonic stem cells. The embryos, meanwhile, went on to
produce mice.

   The result suggests that when clinics do PGD, they could let the cell they
remove divide into two, and use one resulting cell for genetic testing and the
other to establish a stem cell line, said Robert Lanza of Advanced Cell
Technology in Worcester, Mass., an author of the study.

   But Richard Doerflinger, deputy director of pro-life activities for the
Catholic bishops conference, said the church considers PGD unethical. The
technique poses a risk of harm and is mostly an effort "to select out
genetically imperfect embryos," he said.

   The second mouse study used a modified form of therapeutic cloning, a
technique that aims to generate stem cells that genetically match a patient, for
either treatment or research.

   Results were reported by Dr. Rudolf Jaenisch and Alexander Meissner of the
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, both in Cambridge, Mass.

   As with normal therapeutic cloning, they took eggs whose DNA-containing
nuclei had been removed.

   They chemically blocked the action of a key gene in the nuclei, to ensure the
eggs could not produce an embryo that can implant in a uterus. They then
inserted into each one a nucleus from a body cell of a mouse.

   Yet, the eggs divided and grew enough to yield stem cells.

   This modified technique, called altered nuclear transfer, has been championed
by Dr. William Hurlbut of Stanford University, a member of the President's
Council on Bioethics. He said the abstract cluster of cells the egg produces is
not an embryo but a "nonembryonic entity" that lacks an embryo's developmental
potential.

   "You don't create a living being," he said.

   Doerflinger also disagreed with this method, saying the technique appears to
create and then destroy an embryo, which would make it unethical.

   But the Rev. Tad Pacholczyk, director of education for the National Catholic
Bioethics Center in Philadelphia, called the approach a step in the right
direction. Scientists are already discussing a modified version in which adding
the nucleus to the egg would result in a single stem cell, not an embryo, he
said.

   Seen in that light, he said, the mouse study "is very encouraging. It reminds
us that we have certain tools at our disposal in the scientific armamentarium
that can be used in the direction of seeking an answer to the ethical impasse."

   The bioethics center had its start in St. Louis in 1972, as the Pope John
XXIII Medical-Moral Research and Education Center. The not-for-profit
corporation was formed with the assistance of The Catholic Health Association
(then known as the Catholic Hospital Association) and Cardinal John Carberry,
the group's Web site says.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC
 GRAPHIC by AP - Stem-cell isolation SOURCE: Journal Nature

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2005


                              55 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            October 16, 2005 Sunday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 032

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: THE CORPORATE SHUFFLE

BODY:

   Thomas C. Santarelli is making his own code at DaVinci Capital Management
Inc.

   Santarelli of Longmeadow is the new managing director for group retirement
programs at the Cambridge-based brokerage company. Santarelli previously worked
for Commonwealth Financial Group and John Hancock Funds.

   Christoph M. Adams has the prescription for success.

   Adams took a spot as chief business officer at FoldRX Pharmaceuticals Inc. He
was brought into the fold after 15-plus years experience in the industry at
ViaCell, Transkaryotic Therapies and Ciba-Geigy.

   Elizabeth Campbell has real access to the Quincy community.

   The executive director of Quincy Access Television was elected to The Quincy
Business Associations' board of directors.

   Joining Campbell was Bradley Fredericks, owner of Fajitas & 'Ritas.

   Eric Stoeckel of Burgin, Platner & Hurley was re-elected as president. 3
Phase Elevator Co. owner Jeff Hannon and Robert Bosworth, editor of The Quincy
Sun, were both re-elected for another year on the board.

   It's a small world. And all the landscapers have to share it.

   PLANET, also known as the Professional Landcare Network, just added five new
members.

   Richard Hester with Hester Landscape & Tree Inc., Chris Kelsey of CK
Landscaping, Joseph Daley with Daley Outdoor Services, Jonathan MacLean with
Family Tree Landscaping and Nina McGinnis with The Plant Lady added their names
to PLANET's roster.

   There's no place like home.

   MassHousing grabbed Sonia N. Colon and Heather Putnam-Graham for its home
ownership business development group.

   A former assistant vice president at Chicopee Savings Bank, Colon joins as
relationship manager for Western Mass. Putnam-Graham, a former Flagship Bank and
Trust Co. assistant vice president, joined as regional business development
officer for Central Mass.

   Michael McGuirk is in the iKnow when it comes to consumer behavior.

   Marketing consultant firm iKnowtion tapped McGuirk as vice president of
behavioral sciences. He comes to iKnowtion from Elm Square Interactive.

   Compiled by Jesse Noyes. Send personnel news to The Corporate Shuffle:
business@bostonherald.com

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2005


                              56 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 16, 2005, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. T21

LENGTH: 1142 words

HEADLINE: ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE

BODY:

   Most engineering graduates are getting multiple job offers and higher
salaries. "Over the past year, the information is looking even stronger,
particularly in New England," says Al Gray, executive director of the National
Society of Professional Engineers. The only concern "is the continuing issue of
offshoring work to India and Southeast Asia," Gray says, particularly for
entry-level positions. Civil, electrical, and mechanical engineers are among the
most in-demand for design and construction of power, water, and sanitary
systems, as well as bridges and highways. Estimates show engineering needs for
rebuilding hurricane-devastated areas of the Gulf Coast will continue for about
10 years, Gray says.

   For professional and career connections, check www.nspe.org and
www.sciencecareers.org.




   BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS

   Average salary: $65,750

   Demand: Average. Scientists face stiff competition for research grant money,
but windows are opening for studies of gene therapies, AIDS, cancer, and
Alzheimer's disease. Sales and marketing provide good jobs for those with
bachelor's and master's.

   Qualifications: A doctorate for independent research; a master's is good for
sales, marketing, and applied research.


      CHEMISTS

   Average salary: $69,620

   Demand: Fairly good. Pharmaceuticals, medical research, cleaners, and
environmental research provide a variety of job opportunities, but competition
is keen.

   Qualifications: Doctorate required for independent research; chemists with a
master's can do applied research.


   CHEMICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $80,620

   Demand: Mostly strong. While some routine work is going offshore, most
chemical engineers are seeing a strong demand in pollution control and energy.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree.


      CIVIL ENGINEERS

      Average salary: $69,680

      Demand: Strong. Engineers are needed for design and rebuilding of
infrastructure, power, water, and sanitary systems. Project managers are in
demand.

      Qualifications: Bachelor's plus license. Experience matters; keeping up
with new technologies is crucial.


      ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS

      ENGINEERS

      Average salary: $81,310 (electrical); $84,670 (electronics        Demand:
Mixed. Electrical engineers are in demand for energy, defense, and
communications, and for rebuilding in the Gulf Coast; electronic engineering is
being pressured by offshore work.

   Qualifications:  Bachelor's and continuing education in new technologies;
plus creativity and analytical abilities.


      ENGINEERING AND NATURAL SCIENCE MANAGERS

      Average salary: $111,930 (engineering); $124,810 (natural science
Demand: Good. Overall, the management picture looks strong. Civil, chemical, and
mechanical fields are in demand for power and infrastructure projects.
Experience and management skills improve chances.

      Qualifications: Bachelor's degree in engineering, field experience, and
strong technical and communications skills. Additional degrees in engineering
management or business improve salaries and opportunities.


      MECHANICAL ENGINEERS

      Average salary: $77,770

      Demand: Good. Though jobs are down in many manufacturing fields,
opportunities are strong in other areas where mechanical engineers are needed,
including power and sanitation system designs and operations.

      Qualifications:  Bachelor's in mechanical engineering; continuing
education.


      GEOLOGISTS, GEOPHYSICISTS, AND OCEANOGRAPHERS

      Average salary: $65,410 (geoscientists); $83,480 (oceanographers).

      Demand: Steady. Environmental concerns and searches for more sources of
oil and gas, often in remote locations, fuel job opportunities.

      Qualifications:  Bachelor's in geology or geophysics can qualify for some
entry level work, but advanced degrees, a second language, and ability to
relocate abroad improve opportunities.


      PHYSICISTS AND ASTRONOMERS

      Average salary: $107,740 (physicists); $114,250 (astronomers
Demand: Fair. Limited research funds in these fields has created a tight,
highly-competitive market, particularly for those with doctoral degrees. Defense
and energy still offer opportunities; applied research and technology are good
for those with masters' degrees.

      Qualifications: Postdoctoral training required for most research and
university teaching positions; applied research and product development require
a master's; a bachelor's is good for some engineering or computer work.

SIDEBAR:

   Kerry Culm-Merdek

      Staff scientist

      Age: 29

      Lives in:  Natick

      Employer:  Genzyme Corp., pharmacology and toxicology group

      How long in field:  11 years

      How long in current job:  9 months

      Previous job:  Postdoctoral fellow, Tufts University

      Educational background:  BS, University of Buffalo, biochemical
pharmacology (1998); PhD Tufts, pharmacology and experimental therapeutics (2003

        Salary:  $80,000 - $85,000

      What does a pharmacology and toxicology specialist do?

      Basically, we characterize drug metabolisms. Specifically we look at
absorption, distribution, and elimination of specific drugs. We try to
understand the mechanism of action of the drugs and their toxicity. We look at
the historical literature, and we design studies.

      When did you decide to become a scientist?

      I was on a track to be a pharmacist, and I realized that I had a passion
for asking questions and trying to figure out what specifically was going on
when it came to drug efficacy. So I volunteered in a lab as a work-study
student. I was fascinated by the fact that what I was learning in my classes
could be directly applied to what was going on in the lab. We were trying to
figure out why certain bacteria were resistant to antibiotics.

      What did you like about it?

      I liked the group interaction. I liked working as part of a team. I liked
asking questions. I also had mentors, people who advised me and helped me think
about things from a scientific point of view. They challenged me to think with a
very steep learning curve.

      How did you get this job?

      I saw that Genzyme had a position available on their website. By means of
networking, I got to know someone who worked here, and that assisted with my
getting an interview.

      How does one prepare for such an interview?

      Find out as much as you can about the company and the position prior to
interviewing. I had many conversations with colleagues and advises about the
type of position I wanted. Not only was Genzyme interviewing me, but I was also
interviewing Genzyme.


NOTES:
YOUR CAREER

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2005


                              57 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                     October 16, 2005 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2717 words

HEADLINE: A SECOND CHANCE AT SURVIVAL

BYLINE: By Susan FitzGerald; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Harvey Harris settled into the bed at the Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, ready to endure yet another round of tests to check the aggressive
cancer growing in his chest.

   He wasn't feeling optimistic.

   By most counts, Harris should have been dead by now. He had mesothelioma,
caused by a lifetime spent working around asbestos.

   Six months earlier, after conventional chemotherapy had failed him, Harris
decided to try an experimental treatment. He was infused with hundreds of
billions of viral particles genetically engineered to rev up his body to attack
the cancer.

   Then, in July, he ventured even farther into unproven territory. He became
the first patient in the clinical trial at Penn to get a second dose of the gene
drug.

   Soon he would have an answer. Had the gene therapy stopped the cancer? Or was
the tumor, which enveloped his right lung like a rind, now advancing, steadily
robbing his energy and breath?

   Harris braced for the worst. The day before, he'd had a CAT scan near his
Gibbsboro, N.J., home and then held up the film to a skylight in his family
room. To his eye, the cancer looked worse.

   Sick as he felt, Harris, a slight, balding man, was full of plans. He was
only 61.

   Jeanette, his wife, was throwing him a birthday party in a few days. After
more than a decade, his three grown children would finally all be together. He
still needed to clean the porch and pick the music. There were ribs and chicken
to cook.

   And after that, well, for the first time in his life, he had plenty of money.

   Cancer or no cancer, he and Jeanette were heading to their new home in
Florida as soon as the temperature dropped. He was imagining a life of warm
days, lots of fishing, and time for his pottery.

   When he'd first signed on to the experimental gene therapy, Harris hadn't
been banking on a cure. Squeeze out one more year - that's what he wanted. One
more good year, maybe two. Then he'd see what happened.

   He was close to dozing off when the nurse for the gene-therapy trial appeared
at his bedside.

   She was holding Harris' CAT scan report, which had just been faxed.

   Harris had not expected to know a thing until he met later in the week with
Dr. Daniel Sterman, who led the clinical trial.

   Now, out of the blue, his fate was right in front of him.

   A merciless disease

   Of all the cancers, mesothelioma is among the most merciless. Current
treatments are limited, and so Penn researchers are turning to one of the newest
medical technologies to fight the disease.

   The cancer, which attacks the linings of the chest and abdomen, can be hard
to detect and often advances rapidly. Patients usually die within eight to 14
months of diagnosis.

   The cancer is primarily caused by exposure to asbestos, fibrous minerals once
common in heating insulation, vinyl flooring, roof shingles, and other
industrial products.

   Asbestos fibers can penetrate the lungs and lodge in the chest lining,
causing damage that does not become apparent for decades. Generations of
shipyard workers and factory and construction workers have breathed in asbestos
particles. The material was phased out starting in the 1970s, but it's still
present in many buildings. An estimated 2,500 to 3,000 people will be diagnosed
this year with mesothelioma in the United States.

   Harvey Pass, a thoracic surgeon and mesothelioma expert at New York
University, said an even bigger epidemic of disease is brewing in
lesser-developed countries where asbestos-containing products continue to be
used.

   The disease has long been a focus for Sterman and his team, including
thoracic surgeon Larry Kaiser and pulmonologist Steven Albelda. They began
testing gene therapy on the disease 10 years ago with a different drug. The
first of 34 patients from that trial is still alive, as are two others.

   Back then, the field of gene therapy was hot. It seemed to offer hope for
curing a list of ills - cancer, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and more.

   But in 1999, the field nearly imploded when a teenager died in a gene-therapy
trial at Penn, then a national leader in the field. Federal investigators
ordered a halt to the university's eight trials, including the one for
mesothelioma, after the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger. They said patient
safety could not be guaranteed.

   Gene-therapy trials did not resume at Penn for more than three years.
Currently, the university has three trials, including the one for mesothelioma.

   There are now 45 gene-therapy trials registered with the National Institutes
of Health, down from a peak of 91 in 1999.

   "Ten years ago, there was a lot of hype, and things probably were
overpromised. It's kind of where stem cells are today," said Mark Kay, a
Stanford University researcher and president of the American Society of Gene
Therapy.

   "I think people in the field feel there's a sense of progress, but it's taken
longer than people expected."

   A baffling diagnosis

   One February morning in 2004, Harris was dressing for work when he became so
short of breath he could barely walk.

   He made it downstairs to the sofa and collapsed.

   For months he had been feeling winded and tired, but checkups found nothing.

   On that day, the pressure in his chest was unbearable. His doctor sent him to
the hospital.

   X-rays revealed that Harris' right lung was partially collapsed, compressed
by a sea of fluid in his chest. Doctors suctioned off three liters and cut
through his rib cage to get tissue samples.

   The diagnosis of mesothelioma baffled him.

   "What the hell is that?" he asked.

   As it was, Harris had a classic history for the cancer. In the Navy, he had
chipped asbestos off pipes. Then, he'd worked for nearly 13 years at the
Owens-Corning Fiberglas plant in Barrington, N.J., where he routinely handled
asbestos.

   "You inhaled the dust constantly," Harris testified for a lawsuit he brought
against asbestos manufacturers.

   His longest stretch of employment, about 17 years at the Naval Air Station in
Pensacola, Fla., also involved asbestos.

   Harris' doctor told him that removing the tumor wasn't an option. He began
chemotherapy, which made him vomit. His pain was so bad he couldn't sleep. So he
cruised the Internet, looking up mesothelioma.

   From what he read, he figured he'd be in the ground in six months.

   Then he discovered that at a medical center just across the river, something
new was being tried.

   Ten days before Christmas, he went to see Sterman.

   The doctor and his treatment

   Harris felt an instant connection with the young doctor. He liked the way
Sterman listened to his story, not cutting him off as other doctors had. He also
sensed Sterman's passion as he talked about his team's work.

   Sterman is one of a growing number of researchers pursuing an approach called
"immunotherapy," which tries to activate a patient's immune system to fight
disease.

   Penn is testing a gene drug, made by Biogen Idec, on mesothelioma and other
chest tumors. The company said it is also testing the drug on colorectal cancer
that has spread to the liver.

   The drug ran into difficulty at another medical center in 2003, when a trial
involving brain tumors was stopped after a patient experienced a serious
complication, a Biogen Idec spokesman said. The firm declined to say more.

   Penn's study was temporarily put on hold. The incident involved where the
drug was injected, not its safety profile, said Joseph Sherwin, Penn's director
of regulatory affairs. Penn was cleared to resume six weeks later, he said.

   The drug consists of a cold virus genetically altered to carry the gene for
interferon beta, a natural human protein that helps fight disease. The treatment
involves infusing 900 billion viral particles into a small space at the bottom
of the chest cavity. If all went as planned, the gene-carrying viruses would be
taken up by the tumor cells, and production of interferon beta would begin. The
interferon beta, in turn, would marshal immune cells into action.

   Harris appreciated the doctor's candor in saying his chances for a recovery
were remote. The gene drug was being tested in a "Phase I" clinical trial,
designed to study safety, not effectiveness. Many promising drugs at that stage
never make it much further.

   On March 7 of this year, after his cancer doctor said more chemo was
pointless, Harris became the 10th patient to get the gene drug at Penn.

   Harris knew there were risks in taking an unproved drug. But he had to try
something; he couldn't just sit back and die.

   He had his family and a new wife.

   Over the next few months, he stood to become a well-off man, from settling
his lawsuit with 13 companies that made asbestos-containing products.

   He planned to build two houses in Jacksonville, Fla. - one to rent - and he
had a myriad of interests. A high school dropout, he had collected enough
college credits to jokingly declare himself a senior in five disciplines.

   He really wanted to get back to his pottery and sculpture. He used to sell
his artwork and had virtually abandoned the craft when he got sick.

   Harris loved to work a chunk of clay, leaning forward to put his whole body
into it.

   "I let the clay dictate to me what it wants to do," was how he described his
method. "Then at a certain point I have to take back over."

   Maybe he could do the same with his cancer.

   A second dose?

   In late May, Sterman sat before a bank of computers, studying the before and
after images of Harris' lungs.

   Now that Harris had received one dose of the drug, Sterman wondered, could he
get a second?

   Sterman - whose research team has received nearly $10 million from the
National Cancer Institute - had never given a repeat dose to anyone in the
experiment, though he had certainly thought about it.

   In mouse studies, the difference between one dose and two was dramatic. With
one dose, up to 30 percent of mice with large mesothelioma tumors had been
cured; with two doses, close to 70 percent had.

   Sterman knew that what worked in mice often didn't work in people. But the
mouse results offered a rationale for allowing a second dose.

   When Harris asked if he could get one, Sterman amended the experiment to
allow any patient in the trial to get it, but only if strict criteria could be
met.

   For Harris to qualify, his cancer would have to be considered "stable."

   Sterman and his nurse coordinator, Adri Recio, took careful measurements on
the screen of Harris' tumor from pre-therapy and post-therapy CT scans.

   They found only a slight progression; his disease was stable.

   Now Sterman would have to get the second dose approved by the hospital's
institutional review board and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   Sterman went off to see Harris, who was waiting with his wife in an exam room
down the hall. Harvey and Jeanette, a former social worker, had been married not
even two years when he got sick.

   "The measurements we took are almost identical, which by our criteria means
you have stable disease," Sterman explained. He could get a second dose.

   Harris, sitting on the exam table, clapped at the news, but Sterman added a
caveat.

   "You'll be another level of experiment," he warned. "It's always possible
that they'll come back to us and say no."

   Sterman drew a diagram to show what might be happening.

   "We haven't stopped the tumor from growing, but we may have slowed its rate
of growth."

   Harris let out a relieved "thank you," but then, almost as an afterthought,
asked what stage his cancer was in.

   He was still stage 3, answered Sterman, on a 1 to 4 scale.

   "I didn't realize I was so advanced," Harris said, looking dejected.

   But just as quickly he was back to the positive - another precious dose might
soon be his.

   "I'm going to go home and kick up my heels," he said.

   A critical point

   On July 18, inside Penn's special unit for clinical trials, Sterman examined
Harris one last time before administering the coveted second dose.

   "Do you feel like a pioneer?" Sterman asked, checking Harris over.

   "I feel like a pilot, ready to take off," Harris said.

   Sterman picked up a thick syringe of solution containing the viral particles.
Slowly, he injected it into a catheter leading to Harris' chest cavity. It took
about two minutes.

   Afterward, Sterman sat on Harris' bed and watched the monitors tracking his
patient's blood pressure, heart rate and breathing.

   The next hour would be critical.

   Sterman believed in the treatment, but still, he was on guard. Every time you
took an experimental therapy to a new level, there was risk.

   The death of Jesse Gelsinger was not far from his mind.

   It would be 60 days until follow-up PET and CAT scans would show whether
Harris' cancer had responded. But there were more immediate concerns.

   It was possible he could have an acute immune reaction right after the
injection.

   At first, the time passed uneventfully, and Harris was soon enjoying a ham
sandwich for lunch.

   By late afternoon, the chills and fever hit.

   Harris began to shiver and called for a nurse to bring blankets. His
temperature rose above 103. He ached. The nurse summoned Sterman.

   The doctor reassured Harris that flulike symptoms were to be expected after
the gene infusion. It meant that the viral particles were active.

   All through the night, the fever and chills continued.

   He tried to sleep but was too scared. Crazy as it sounded, he was afraid that
Sterman would come back and suck the gene drug out of him. And that would mean
losing his second chance.

   Sometime before dawn, Harris fell asleep. When he woke, it felt like a new
day.

   He wondered what there was to eat.

   A second diagnosis

   Harris was running late. It was Sept. 15, the day he would learn if his
second dose had done any good.

   He had forgotten to set his alarm.

   Two days earlier, the nurse had given him a preview of what the doctor's
verdict might be. The way Harris figured it, no matter what his prognosis was,
19 months had passed since he was diagnosed with mesothelioma, and he was still
alive. Even if he didn't benefit from the gene therapy, his participation could
help people down the line.

   "Uh-oh, got bad news," Harris said, taking a read of Sterman's face as he sat
down in the exam room.

   "No, I don't. No, I don't. In fact, I've got good news," Sterman said.

   The doctor explained that the CAT scan showed no signs that the cancer had
progressed. Even better, the PET scan, which measures the level of cancer
activity, showed some improvement since the second dose. At the base of his
lung, some cancer might have cleared.

   "Hot dog!" Harris yelped.

   The second dose could already have made a difference, Sterman said, and the
immune response triggered by the drug might continue.

   The cancer wasn't gone, but it wasn't any worse.

   "It's a good birthday present for you," Sterman said.

   "Thank you," said Harris.

   Something to celebrate

   Sterman and his team have much work left to do. Their study is way too small
and too preliminary to draw broad conclusions.

   They have not published findings but have talked about their experience at
medical meetings.

   Of the 10 patients treated with the gene drug since August 2003, seven are
still alive. Three died from their advanced cancers, Sterman said, with no
evidence that the gene drug shortened their survival.

   Side effects included fever, headaches, and a temporary rise in liver
enzymes, an indicator of potential toxicity, Penn's Sherwin said. He said none
were unexpected.

   The team is encouraged enough by the drug's performance to plan another Phase
I trial, using two doses of the gene drug. Sterman and his colleagues also want
to test the treatment in combination with chemotherapy and surgery.

   As for Harris, there's no way to predict how long he has to live. Sterman
will follow him closely in the coming months. Harris is already interested in
other experimental treatments.

   Two days after getting his results at Penn, Harris celebrated his 62d
birthday. He set up a big party tent in the backyard and was finishing a batch
of potato salad as his guests arrived.

   His children and three grandchildren came, all six of his living siblings,
friends from the old neighborhood, and a Navy buddy from way back.

   "It's nice," Harris told his friends, "to squeeze in a birthday before winter
settles in."

   Contact staff writer Susan FitzGerald at 215-854-2780 or
sfitzgerald@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2005


                              58 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 16, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: BOOK REVIEWS: POP FICTION

BYLINE: FRAN WOOD, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Cold Hit   Stephen J. Cannell   St. Martin's, 369 pp., $24.95   REVIEWS BY
FRAN WOOD  In his newest Shane Scully novel, the writer Stephen J. Cannell
examines how the Patriot and Homeland Security acts can compromise ordinary
police work, and how checks and balances can virtually disappear under this new
legal regime.

   Scully, an L.A. detective, experiences the phenomenon first-hand as he copes
with what appears to be a serial killing and tries to keep his partner's
alcoholism from getting him fired. His suspicion that the slaying is connected
to an old, unsolved murder puts him up against an overly authoritative FBI - and
puts his own job in jeopardy. Fans will also enjoy this latest chapter in
Scully's interesting relationship with his wife, to whom he reports in her
capacity as chief of detectives.

    Cannell's long career writing TV series and 10 prior novels have finely
honed both his storytelling and his ability to build suspense. This is his best
effort yet.

    Life Sentences

    Alice Blanchard

    Warner, 432 pp., $24.95

    Alice Blanchard delivers a compelling if complicated mystery involving a
search for Anna Hubbard, a young schizophrenic woman who, having left her New
England home for Los Angeles, has dropped out of sight.

   Her sister Daisy, summoned by their mother, leaves her Boston research post
to help LAPD Detective Jack Makowski search for Anna, whom he believes may have
been the victim of a serial killer. Makowski thinks there may be a connection
between Anna's disappearance and Daisy's work - evaluating the effectiveness of
gene therapy on Stier-Zellar's, a brain disease that years earlier took the life
of their younger half-brother.

   After one victim's remains are found, an arrest is made and the presumed
killer - in one of this page-turner's several surprising twists and turns -
agrees to lead police to Anna's remains, provided Daisy comes along.

    Sacred Cows

    Karen E. Olson

     Mysterious Press, 304 pp., $21.95

    In this debut novel, Karen E. Olson introduces Anne Seymour, a 40-something
crime reporter for a New Haven newspaper whose editor summons her in the middle
of the night to cover the death of a female Yale student in front of a luxury
condo building.

   Contrary to initial assumptions, it turns out the student was murdered and
then dropped from an upper floor. A little sleuthing - aided by information from
Anne's detective-boyfriend - reveals the victim and a couple of her Yale friends
were employed by an escort service. Anne's publisher orders her to stop covering
the story and her lawyer-mother proves reluctant to divulge privileged
information, delaying Anne's discovery of a connection between the murder and a
fraudulent investment scheme perpetrated by one of the college town's most
influential officials. By then, Anne's life is in danger.

    Dancing in the Dark

    Mary Jane Clark

    St. Martin's, 339 pp., $21.95

   As a CBS news producer, the daughter-in-law of author Mary Higgins Clark
brings special expertise to her novels.

   In Mary Jane Clark's latest KEY News mystery, the Grand Canyon vacation plans
of correspondent Diane Mayfield and her children are aborted when her boss
orders her to go to a New Jersey Shore town to report on a young woman who has
been missing for three days. Mayfield takes along her disappointed kids, who'd
had their hearts set on their planned trip. By the time Mayfield arrives, Leslie
Patterson has surfaced unharmed, but police believe the troubled young woman,
who has a long history of anorexia, staged her own kidnapping. That theory
dissolves when, a day later, a second young woman disappears - and turns up
dead.

   With a fairly lengthy list of potential culprits, most readers won't easily
unravel this mystery.

     Fran Wood is a Star-Ledger col umnist.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              59 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           October 15, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 660  words

HEADLINE: Europe moves to keep bird flu out: Officials say poultry safe to eat
because cooking kills virus

BYLINE: Emma Ross, Associated Press

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON -- Senior veterinary officials from around the European Union agreed
Friday on new measures aimed at preventing a lethal strain of bird flu from
entering the bloc, a day after it was confirmed on the continent's doorstep in
Turkey.

   The officials also moved to calm fears on a continent with vivid memories of
mad cow disease, saying there was no reason to avoid cooked chicken because bird
flu is killed in seconds when the meat is cooked.

   The new measures, agreed upon after two days of emergency talks, focus on
infection-control measures on farms and expanding early-detection systems to
high-risk areas, such as wetlands frequented by wild birds, said a statement
issued late Friday by the EU.

   The EU has banned poultry imports from Turkey and Romania, where bird flu was
possibly detected this week. Officials in the two countries destroyed more fowl
Friday.

   IMPACT ON CONSUMPTION UNKNOWN

   Turkish veterinary officials in protective plastic suits, masks and goggles
were trying to catch the remaining birds in the village of Kiziksa, where the
virus was detected, and to persuade villagers hiding their chickens to surrender
them.

   Officials tested nine people in a neighborhood where 40 pigeons reportedly
died, but released them from medical observation Friday after determining they
did not likely have bird flu.

   EU health officials assured Europeans it was safe to eat poultry and that
human infection with bird flu was rare. It was too early to determine whether
there had been an effect on poultry consumption across the continent.

   Preliminary tests found bird flu in a duck and a chicken from Romania, but
definitive test results on whether it is the virulent H5N1 strain are not
expected until today. The lethal strain, blamed for the deaths of 60 people in
Asia, was confirmed in Turkey on Thursday.

   Bird flu virus found in a Vietnamese girl was resistant to the main drug
that's being stockpiled in case of a pandemic, a sign that it's important to
keep a second drug on hand as well, a researcher said Friday. He said the
finding was no reason to panic.

   The drug in question, Tamiflu, still attacks ''the vast majority of the
viruses out there,'' said Yoshihiro Kawaoka of the University of Tokyo and the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. The drug, produced by Swiss-based Roche Holding
AG, is in short supply as nations around the world try to stock up on it in case
of a global flu pandemic.

   Kawaoka said the girl's case of resistant virus is ''only one case, and
whether that condition was something unique we don't know.''

   STOCKPILING OF 2 DRUGS URGED

   He also said it's not surprising to see some resistance to Tamiflu because
resistance has also been seen with human flu.

   In lab tests, the girl's Tamiflu-resistant virus was susceptible to another
drug, Relenza, which is made by GlaxoSmithKline.

   Kawaoka and colleagues report the case in the Oct. 20 issue of the journal
Nature, which released the study Friday. The researchers conclude it might be
useful to stockpile Relenza as well as Tamiflu.

   There's no evidence that so-called H5N1 viruses -- like the one recovered
from the girl -- are becoming generally resistant to the class of drugs that
includes Tamiflu, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said
Friday.

   Both Tamiflu and Relenza are being stockpiled by the U.S. government. Doctors
have good reason to think Tamiflu would be effective at combatting a pandemic
strain of bird flu, although it's not clear how long people would have to be
treated or what doses they'd need, said Dr. John Treanor of the University of
Rochester.

   In adults with mild cases of ordinary flu, Tamiflu speeds up recovery by a
day or two, he said. Its effect on severe flu like bird flu isn't clear, he
said.

   The girl, who had been caring for an older brother with the disease, had been
taking low doses of Tamiflu as a preventive measure in late February. She later
got sick and was given higher doses. She recovered and left the hospital in
March.

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Jeff Haynes, AFP, Getty Images; Purdue University gene therapy
researcher Suresh Mittal examines a dish containing adenovirus carrying a bird
flu gene, as work continues to develop a more flexible bird flu vaccine. ;

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2007


                              60 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           October 15, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 660  words

HEADLINE: Europe moves to keep bird flu out: Officials say poultry safe to eat
because cooking kills virus

BYLINE: Emma Ross, Associated Press

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   LONDON -- Senior veterinary officials from around the European Union agreed
Friday on new measures aimed at preventing a lethal strain of bird flu from
entering the bloc, a day after it was confirmed on the continent's doorstep in
Turkey.

   The officials also moved to calm fears on a continent with vivid memories of
mad cow disease, saying there was no reason to avoid cooked chicken because bird
flu is killed in seconds when the meat is cooked.

   The new measures, agreed upon after two days of emergency talks, focus on
infection-control measures on farms and expanding early-detection systems to
high-risk areas, such as wetlands frequented by wild birds, said a statement
issued late Friday by the EU.

   The EU has banned poultry imports from Turkey and Romania, where bird flu was
possibly detected this week. Officials in the two countries destroyed more fowl
Friday.

   IMPACT ON CONSUMPTION UNKNOWN

   Turkish veterinary officials in protective plastic suits, masks and goggles
were trying to catch the remaining birds in the village of Kiziksa, where the
virus was detected, and to persuade villagers hiding their chickens to surrender
them.

   Officials tested nine people in a neighborhood where 40 pigeons reportedly
died, but released them from medical observation Friday after determining they
did not likely have bird flu.

   EU health officials assured Europeans it was safe to eat poultry and that
human infection with bird flu was rare. It was too early to determine whether
there had been an effect on poultry consumption across the continent.

   Preliminary tests found bird flu in a duck and a chicken from Romania, but
definitive test results on whether it is the virulent H5N1 strain are not
expected until today. The lethal strain, blamed for the deaths of 60 people in
Asia, was confirmed in Turkey on Thursday.

   Bird flu virus found in a Vietnamese girl was resistant to the main drug
that's being stockpiled in case of a pandemic, a sign that it's important to
keep a second drug on hand as well, a researcher said Friday. He said the
finding was no reason to panic.

   The drug in question, Tamiflu, still attacks ''the vast majority of the
viruses out there,'' said Yoshihiro Kawaoka of the University of Tokyo and the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. The drug, produced by Swiss-based Roche Holding
AG, is in short supply as nations around the world try to stock up on it in case
of a global flu pandemic.

   Kawaoka said the girl's case of resistant virus is ''only one case, and
whether that condition was something unique we don't know.''

   STOCKPILING OF 2 DRUGS URGED

   He also said it's not surprising to see some resistance to Tamiflu because
resistance has also been seen with human flu.

   In lab tests, the girl's Tamiflu-resistant virus was susceptible to another
drug, Relenza, which is made by GlaxoSmithKline.

   Kawaoka and colleagues report the case in the Oct. 20 issue of the journal
Nature, which released the study Friday. The researchers conclude it might be
useful to stockpile Relenza as well as Tamiflu.

   There's no evidence that so-called H5N1 viruses -- like the one recovered
from the girl -- are becoming generally resistant to the class of drugs that
includes Tamiflu, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said
Friday.

   Both Tamiflu and Relenza are being stockpiled by the U.S. government. Doctors
have good reason to think Tamiflu would be effective at combatting a pandemic
strain of bird flu, although it's not clear how long people would have to be
treated or what doses they'd need, said Dr. John Treanor of the University of
Rochester.

   In adults with mild cases of ordinary flu, Tamiflu speeds up recovery by a
day or two, he said. Its effect on severe flu like bird flu isn't clear, he
said.

   The girl, who had been caring for an older brother with the disease, had been
taking low doses of Tamiflu as a preventive measure in late February. She later
got sick and was given higher doses. She recovered and left the hospital in
March.

GRAPHIC:
Colour Photo: Jeff Haynes, AFP, Getty Images; Purdue University gene therapy
researcher Suresh Mittal examines a dish containing adenovirus carrying a bird
flu gene, as work continues to develop a more flexible bird flu vaccine.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2011


                              61 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2005 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           October 12, 2005 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Science; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: OHSU looks at virus's effect on elderly

BYLINE: Patrick O'Neill, The Oregonian

BODY:

   Oregon researchers are studying why the elderly are most at risk of serious
illness and death from West Nile virus.

   The Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute at Oregon Health & Science University
has received a $12.6 million federal grant to find ways to better protect the
elderly against mosquito-borne virus.

   The disease, which has caused only a handful of illnesses in Oregon, has
swept across the country since it entered the United States in 1999. This year
the national Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 2,015 cases
nationwide, with 55 deaths.

   The virus causes no apparent symptoms in most people who are infected. About
20 percent of those infected have minor illness including fever, fatigue and
headaches. In one case in 150, the virus causes inflammation of the brain or
spinal cord -- mostly in those older than 50.

   Dr. Janko Nikolich-Zugich, senior scientist at the OHSU vaccine research
center and lead researcher on the five-year study, said he hopes to learn why
the virus takes such a heavy toll on the elderly.

   Researchers will study the virus' effect on two immune system elements --
innate immunity, which includes macrophages and which acts immediately to ward
off infection, and adaptive immunity, which involves cells that manufacture
antibodies.

   The study will examine why older people are more susceptible to meningitis --
inflammation of the lining of the brain. Nikolich-Zugich said researchers will
examine the possibility that the blood-brain barrier in older people has defects
that make it easier for the virus to infect the lining of the brain.

   The aim is to eventually find treatments and vaccines to prevent West Nile
infection and to develop vaccines for other diseases.

   The study will use human subjects and animals. The researcher plans to
recruit healthy older people from the Portland area.

   Researchers at OHSU also will collaborate with scientists at Tulane
University, the University of Pittsburgh and the University of Texas at
Galveston and at Houston.

   The grant is administered by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease.

   Patrick O'Neill; 503-221-8233; poneill@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2005


                              62 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 12, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 484 words

HEADLINE: Vical shares climb on HIV vaccine news;
Federal researchers set to use firm's technology

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shares of gene therapy company Vical rose as much as 22 percent yesterday
after federal researchers said they will advance development of a potential
"global" HIV vaccine that uses the San Diego company's technology.

   The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases' Vaccine Research
Center, or NIAID, plans to enroll about 500 volunteers in several countries to
test whether a novel, two-pronged vaccine strategy can halt the spread of the
deadly virus that causes AIDS.

   Federal researchers said the midstage, Phase 2 study marks an important step
in the advancement toward an AIDS vaccine.

   "This is the first Phase 2 study of a vaccine candidate that is broadly
relevant to the global AIDS pandemic because it combines components of HIV
strains found throughout the world," said VRC Director Dr. Gary Nabel.

   While Vical enjoyed a run-up in its share price yesterday, the stock settled
at the close of trading at $6.05, up 68 cents, or 12 percent. The NIAID vaccine
approach will take years to develop, and no HIV vaccine has yet been proven to
be effective.

   There are dozens of other HIV vaccine trials involving other drugs that are
being conducted worldwide.

   The latest study will test a strategy that combines two separate vaccine
technologies that are designed to teach the immune system to recognize and kill
the invading HIV virus.

   Both technologies, developed separately by San Diego's Vical and
Gaithersburg, Md.-based GenVec, combine modified elements of four HIV genes
found in subtypes of the virus.

   Those subtypes are found commonly in Africa, the Americas, Europe and parts
of Asia, and account for about 85 percent of the HIV infections worldwide,
according to federal researchers.

   The two vaccines will be given in a one-two punch: Vical's vaccine, which
contains "naked" HIV gene fragments, will first "prime" the immune system to
recognize the virus.

   Then a second vaccine that incorporates GenVec's technology, which uses a
weakened type of respiratory virus to carry non-infectious HIV gene fragments
into the body, provides an additional virus-recognizing boost.

   Half of the participants in the Phase 2 study will receive three injections
of Vical's DNA vaccine, followed by one injection of the GenVec booster vaccine.
The other half will receive a placebo vaccine of sterile saltwater.

   In animal studies and a small safety study in humans, the prime-boost
strategy stimulated a strong, broad immune response, according to federal
researchers.

   Both Vical and GenVec referred questions to NIAID. NIAID did not return
telephone calls.

   Vical and GenVec both have HIV vaccine development contracts with NIAID, and
the biotechs retain certain commercial rights to the use of their technologies
if the combination vaccine proves effective.

   Vical has already received about $12 million in orders from NIAID to produce
its HIV vaccine.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2005


                              63 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            October 11, 2005 Tuesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 826 words

HEADLINE: The rise and rise of 'orphan drugs';
Rare-disease treatments affect few, earn billions

BYLINE: Roger Mezger, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   In the biopharmaceutical world, orphans are hardly objects of pity.

   Government incentives have made therapies for rare diseases, called orphan
drugs, a lucrative business.

   The Orphan Drug Act provides a tax credit, fast-track regulatory review,
exclusive marketing rights and other perks to encourage companies to develop
drugs for conditions that afflict fewer than 200,000 Americans.

   And yet, since the law took effect in 1983, only three products developed in
Northeast Ohio have won Food and Drug Administration designation as orphan
drugs. The latest, chosen earlier this year, is a gene therapy that Copernicus
Therapeutics Inc. of Cleveland is developing for cystic fibrosis, a hereditary,
life-shortening lung disorder.

   The privately held company with nine employees hopes that the orphan drug
program will propel it toward a goal of entering the cystic fibrosis market
around 2009.

   Small biotech companies have learned that targeting rare diseases can pay off
big, says Lou Lemos, a stock analyst for Variant Research in Louisville, Ky.
While the number of patients with rare diseases may be small, the price they pay
for hope is not.

   Assuming federal regulators eventually approve Copernicus' product, which
employees informally call CFx, prescriptions will probably cost around $100,000
a year, says Robert Moen, president and chief executive. If one-third of the
30,000 cystic fibrosis sufferers in the United States use CFx, that's $1 billion
in sales. Insurance companies often pay for orphan drugs, regardless of cost.

   Achieving orphan drug status "could make or break a company," Lemos said.

   "This could truly bring them from basically a development company to a full
commercial operation," said Lemos.

   A discovery at Case Western Reserve University led to the founding of
Copernicus in 1997. Biochemist Richard Hanson devised a way to shrink DNA, the
twisted chemical strands where genes live inside our cells.

   Cystic fibrosis patients have a bad gene that causes the lungs and airways to
develop a thick mucus coating. The mucus makes breathing difficult and attracts
infection-causing bacteria.

   The discovery made it possible to take a good copy of that gene, compress it
- just as one would "zip" a large computer file for e-mailing - and slip the
gene into malfunctioning cells while fooling the defense mechanisms that
normally would destroy it.

   This DNA nanoparticle technology makes Copernicus a company with more than a
promising cystic fibrosis treatment. "The strength of our system is how this one
platform can be used for multiple different things," Moen says.

   A University of Oklahoma researcher already is testing the technology's
potential for treating retinitis pigmentosa, a hereditary eye disease that
causes loss of vision. Moen sees the same system someday being used against
influenza and more exotic respiratory infections like bird flu and severe acute
respiratory syndrome.

   But the company's main focus remains on getting CFx to market. A preliminary
clinical trial, in which a nasal drip delivered the compacted DNA to cells
lining the nasal cavity, showed encouraging results. Next year Copernicus hopes
to start clinical trials of an aerosol that will carry the gene to the lungs.

   Expensive clinical trials account for much of the cost of developing drugs.
However, the FDA generally lets orphan drug trials enroll fewer patients than
other trials, saving companies time and money, says Henry Grabowski, an
economics professor who heads Duke University's pharmaceuticals and health
economics program.

   Companies typically spend about $8 million to develop orphan drugs and get
them through FDA review, according to Business Communications Co., an industry
research firm. The cost is much higher - around $800 million - for other drugs,
the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development says.

   Since 1983, 268 orphan drugs have made it to market. Their sales are expected
to jump from $28 billion worldwide in 2003 to about $44 billion in 2008,
Business Communications says - a growth rate that outpaces sales for the entire
drug industry.

   One reason for the impressive growth is that after reaching the market, some
orphan drugs are cleared to treat common diseases, as well. That broadens their
appeal and significantly boosts revenue.

   Another is that with small patient populations to target, orphan drug
developers tend to recoup their investment by charging sky-high prices. A year's
supply can cost anywhere from tens of thousands of dollars to hundreds of
thousands, depending on the drug.

   Regardless of cost, orphan drugs have meant better, longer lives for many.

   Moen of Copernicus remembers watching children with cystic fibrosis die when
he trained as a pediatrician in California years ago. Today, life expectancy for
the disease is about 35. And CFx one day might dramatically improve on that.

   "How much is it worth," Moen asks, "for somebody to have a quality of life
that's good?"

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: rmezger@plaind.com, 216-999-4446

GRAPHIC: ROADELL HICKMAN THE PLAIN DEALER Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. hopes to
start a clinical trial next year on its aerosol gene therapy for cystic
fibrosis, a hereditary lung disease. Research assistant Darren Lucas does an
analytical test at the Cleveland company's laboratory in the BioEnterprise
building.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2005


                              64 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 09, 2005, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Experimental gene therapy keeps Parkinson's at bay;
Researchers find technique has eased symptoms for some patients

SOURCE: Newsday

BYLINE: JAMIE TALAN

BODY:

   A novel gene therapy technique is safe and effective at staving off worsening
symptoms of Parkinson's disease, according to the first scientific review of a
dozen patients who have received the treatment over the past two years.

   The patients are in advanced stages of the illness and were no longer
responding to medicines when they signed on for the experimental therapy.

   One of the study investigators, Dr. Andrew Feigin of North Shore University
Hospital in Manhasset, N.Y., told colleagues at a recent meeting on movement
disorders in San Diego that there have been no problems with the technique, and
that patients had a 27 percent improvement in symptoms.

   Brain scans also revealed that the treatment was working.

   A normal brain scan shows overactivity in areas hit hard by the disease. The
patients' scans showed a quieting of these areas, on the side of the brain where
the genes were infused.

   The novel strategy included packing genes that make an inhibitory chemical
called GABA into noninfectious viruses and then delivering it to a specific
brain region that regulates dopamine.

   Parkinson's patients have depleted stores of dopamine, a chemical that
regulates movement. The idea behind gene therapy is to bypass the dying
dopamine-containing neurons and use the GABA-containing cells.

   "This seems to control the flow of information to the rest of the brain,"
said Dr. Michael Kaplitt, director of the movement-disorders surgery program at
New York Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan and the
study's lead surgeon.

   Patients have been undergoing surgery to deliver the genes since 2003.

   "I am not suggesting everyone is dramatically better. But there is no
question that some patients have improved," Kaplitt said.

   This is the first time that genes have been placed in a virus and delivered
into the brains of Parkinson's patients.

   They only received gene therapy to one side of their brains.  Parkinson's
starts out affecting only one side. In many cases, symptoms unilaterally
improved, Kaplitt said.

   The scientists hope to extend the study next year, inserting genes to both
sides of the brain.


LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2005


                              65 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2005 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                             October 3, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: FAST FORWARD

BYLINE: Kurt Loft

BODY:

   Diluting A 'Toxic Stew'

   What's the best thing for water-logged Louisiana and Mississippi? More rain.

   "People might think I'm kidding, but I'm not," says Seth R. Reice, an
ecologist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "The floodwater
still covering much of New Orleans and elsewhere is full of everything people
store under their sinks, in their kitchens and bathrooms. It's also full of
coliform bacteria from backed-up human waste, plus gasoline, oil and countless
other pollutants. It is a really toxic stew."

   Intense rains would dilute water that in some parts of New Orleans is 10
times the maximum safe level of fecal coliform bacteria, experts say. Reice
likened those streets to open sewers. Author of "The Silver Lining: The Benefits
of Natural Disasters," Reice says authorities in New Orleans are making a
mistake by pumping floodwater into Lake Pontchartrain.

   "It's going to cause tremendous pollution," he says. "Instead, they should
have pumped it as far out to sea as they could ... or they could have treated it
in wastewater treatment plants."

   Keeping Eye On Genetics

   Rapid genetic testing for eye disease is becoming a reality, say researchers
at the University of Michigan Kellogg Eye Center in Ann Arbor. Scientists have
created a test on a microchip array that will help hone diagnoses for patients
with the blinding disease known as retinitis pigmentosa. The screening technique
has proved to be reliable and cost-effective, says John R. Heckenlively, a
specialist in inherited eye disease who participated in the study.

   "Identifying the precise genetic mutation responsible for an individual's
disease will allow us to provide a precise diagnosis," he says, "and this
knowledge will also allow us to apply genetic therapies as they are developed."

   Get Birding, Online

   A new Web tool allows bird lovers to contribute important conservation data
from their areas of the country. The Cornell Lab of Ornithology and Audubon have
created eBird 2.0 at www.ebird.org, an updated version of the powerful
Internet-based program used by thousands of birders.

   EBird is a free, user-friendly way for birders across North America to
record, archive and share their observations at any hour of the day. It also
provides researchers with a comprehensive picture of the abundance and
distribution of birds.

   Arctic Meltdown

   In another hundred years, the Arctic Ocean could be "ice free." So say
scientists reporting on advanced melting of ice, which would cause global sea
levels to rise.

   "What really makes the Arctic different from the rest of the nonpolar world
is the permanent ice in the ground, in the ocean and on land," says University
of Arizona geoscientist Jonathan T. Overpeck. "We see all of that ice melting
already, and we envision that it will melt back much more dramatically in the
future as we move toward this more permanent ice-free state."

   Science Stumper

   No one offered the correct answer to answer our last trivia question:
Approximately how many hewn blocks make up the Great Pyramid of Giza? Answer:
1.2 million, according to the Supreme Council of Antiquities in Egypt.

   Now for today's stumper: How efficient is a typical 60-watt incandescent
light bulb? (In other words, how much energy actually is used for light?) Send
your answers to kloft@tampatrib.com. No phone calls, please.

   Kurt Loft

   Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: SCIENCE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
(light bulb)

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2005


                              66 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             October 2, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Column 4; Society Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 172 words

HEADLINE: Mary Trent, Jonty Kelt

BODY:

   Mary Helen Trent, the daughter of May Wong Trent of East Hampton, N.Y., and
Peter C. Trent of New York, was married last evening to Jonty Kelt, a son of
Susie and John Kelt of Auckland, New Zealand. The Rev.

   Darwin L. Price, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Maidstone Club in
East Hampton.

     Mrs. Kelt, 29, received in July a diploma in food and wine from Leiths
School of Food and Wine in London. She graduated from Princeton.

   Her father retired as a manager of the municipal bond department of
Shearson/American Express in New York. He is a member of two boards, that of
Foreign Parishes of the Episcopal Church in New York, and the Alliance for
Cancer Gene Therapy in Stamford, Conn.

     Mr. Kelt, 33, works in London as the managing director of Performics
International, an online marketing company. He graduated from the University of
Otago, in Dunedin, New Zealand.

     His mother is an importer of fashion goods and his father is a commercial
property broker with Colliers International, a real estate firm, both in
Auckland.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2005


                              67 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 01, 2005, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1 MetFront

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: Baylor, Methodist end their dispute;
Joint childhood immunization, ER work part of deal to resolve discord

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN

BODY:

   In what they say symbolizes the end of their nasty divorce war, Baylor
College of Medicine and The Methodist Hospital are joining forces to improve
Houston's childhood-immunization and emergency-room problems.

   The institutions announced the $ 16 million initiative Friday as part of an
agreement brokered by Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott.

   "I have great respect for these institutions and am grateful we were all able
to sit at the table to transform some serious differences into a cooperative
environment of good will," said Abbott. "The ultimate goal is to ensure the
highest level of care to the community, as well as to the neediest among us,
especially the children of Houston."

   Officials gave few details about the program to "reach underserved
communities in Houston" beyond that it will focus primarily on childhood
immunizations and emergency care. Houston has the second-lowest childhood
immunization rate in the nation and a shortage of emergency rooms that studies
have found is resulting in lost lives.

   The agreement also calls for Baylor and Methodist to renew a spirit of
collaboration by agreeing to share teaching, research and clinical programs and
to limit the recruitment of staff from one institution to another.

   The institutions, partners for more than a half century, have been at odds
since April 2004, when they parted ways, unable to agree on a strategic vision.
Since then, they have fought over shared staff, with many doctors resigning from
one to join the other, and Baylor accusing Methodist of using its wealth to
"destroy" the college.

   During the negotiations, chaired by former Harris County Commissioner and
current Texas Medical Center board member Elizabeth Ghrist and attended by three
members from both insitutions' boards, Abbott barred negative communication and
recruiting of staff by either institution. He extended the negotiations,
originally scheduled to finish at the end of August, through September, when he
promised to make a pronouncement.

   Friday, Abbott made that pronouncement. Joined by top officials of Baylor,
Methodist and the Texas Medical Center, he said the new agreement ends the
protracted dispute and marks "a new era.".

   But most of the talk at the news conference concerned the program to improve
Houston's childhood immunization rate, which, at 65.5 percent, ranks only above
El Paso County among the nation's urban areas. The national average is 81
percent.

   The program is expected to focus on two fronts: renewing pressure on
pediatricians to aggressively promote shots and encouraging participation in a
vaccine registry. (It likely will not provide vaccines themselves because those
are already free through public health programs.)

   Unlike dentists and veterinarians, most pediatricians don't send out
reminders when vaccinations are due - a practice vaccine advocates want to
reverse. Online registeries enable pediatricians to print a list of patients due
for shots.

   Less than 200 of the 450 to 500 local pediatrician offices use the online,
password-protected Houston-Harris County Immunization Registry. As more and more
doctors sign on, shot records will remain up to date even if a child changes
doctors or gets vaccinated in different locations.

   The agreement between the institutions calls for 90 to 130 Baylor residents
to rotate through Methodist for at least the next five years; for the two to
share urology; ear, nose and throat; cardiovascular disease prevention; and cell
and gene therapy programs; and for scientists at Baylor and at Methodist's new
research institute to collaborate.

   It calls for both institutions to attract new doctors and scientists to the
Texas Medical Center rather than recruit from each other.


NOTES: todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2005


                              68 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2005 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 26, 2005, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 1337 words

HEADLINE: For stem cell experts, hopes are longterm;

Human trials still years away in effort to cure paralysis

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Writer

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall

BODY:
New evidence from mouse studies suggests that stem cells may help cure paralysis
in cases of spinal cord injury. So that raises an obvious question: When can
they be tried in humans?

    The answer: No time soon.

    That may be disappointing to paralyzed individuals with untreatable spinal
cord damage, as well as champions of California's Proposition 71 stem cell
research program, all anxious to see real treatments develop from the hype of
regenerative medicine.

    But experts warn it would be a big mistake to rush into clinical trials
before settling the many scientific and ethical issues clouding the future of
stem cell biology.

    "I fully understand the impatience of patients, spinal cord injury patients
in particular, who are desperate for some form of treatment. But there is risk
proceeding too quickly here," said Dr. Arnold Kriegstein, a neurologist who
serves as director of a stem cell and tissue biology program at UCSF.

    "The whole field could be damaged by the outcome of one failed early trial,"
he said. "I am not saying (a human trial) shouldn't be done, but we should
really be cautious about it."

    Haste has laid waste in biomedicine before, most notably in the field known
as human gene therapy. Trials were commenced in a flurry of early excitement but
on shaky scientific ground. That led to shortcuts, serious ethical lapses and at
least one widely reported death of a clinical trial participant.

    Stem cell biologists are keenly aware of the gene therapy story -- and hope
to avoid a sequel without being accused of dawdling too long in the face of
unmet medical needs.

    The question came to the fore last week after UC Irvine researchers Aileen
Anderson and Brian Cummings and colleagues documented improved coordination and
mobility in spinal cord-injured mice after they were injected with some
specialized stem cells of the nervous system.

    The transplanted neural stem cells, produced by the Palo Alto company Stem
Cells Inc., appeared to help re-establish the insulating myelin coating on
damaged nerve fibers. Some of the cells also became fresh neurons, which could
prove to be helpful in restoring spinal cords.

    It's unclear whether those factors accounted for the rodents' functional
improvement, said neuroscientist Fred Gage of UC San Diego, a Stem Cells
co-founder and study co-author, explaining that growth factors and other
cellular secretions also could be involved.

    The study did show that when the stem cells were eliminated, the functional
gains disappeared. That's perhaps the most compelling evidence to date that stem
cells, by whatever mechanism, may help patch up a damaged spinal cord well
enough to make a noticeable difference on functional scores.

    But it takes more than a single positive result in a study of mice to merit
clinical trials in people. As is always the case in basic research, a novel
study has to be replicated by independent researchers before the results are
considered truly convincing.

    It's also unclear just what the stem cells really are capable of doing in
the nervous system -- for good or ill.

    Once implanted, the cells and their products will live on indefinitely,
unlike standard drugs that clear out within hours or days. Regulators at the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which would have to approve any stem cell
clinical studies, are sure to focus much of their attention on the danger of
side effects.

    "The FDA is going to be (demanding) safety, safety and more safety," said W.
Dalton Dietrich, director of the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, a research and
treatment center for spinal cord injury at the University of Miami School of
Medicine.

    That means some safety and efficacy studies will certainly be needed in
larger animals with nervous systems more similar to the human. Such studies are
time-consuming and difficult to do, and generate their own set of controversies,
particularly if nonhuman primates have to be experimentally paralyzed and then
monitored for many weeks or months.

    A detailed plan has to yet to be worked out. All agree it won't be easy --
or quick.

    "The safety issues involved in transplantation studies are really going to
require a significant amount of effort," Gage said.

    A better understanding of what the transplanted cells are capable of doing
is a major focus of ongoing research. Although many drugs work in mysterious
ways, it may be particularly important to understand how stem cell therapy
actually works, both in order to reduce the chance of side effects and to
enhance the potency of a novel treatment.

    "Mechanism is always important, because without understanding it, it's
difficult to predict how animal data would translate to people," Anderson said
in an e-mail exchange while attending a scientific meeting last week in Italy.

    This will take some time, she said, noting that the experiments reported
last week in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences were begun
three years ago.

    The lab mice were all given a specific type of crushing injury for purposes
of the research, but it's unclear whether that's the most appropriate injury
model for human paralysis, researchers said.

    If a different type of injury turns out to be a better model, scientists may
have to conduct a whole new round of experiments.

    Another potential hurdle is that the functional gains reported in the mouse
experiments were statistically significant, but not terribly robust by some
measures. On a 16-point score of locomotor performance, for instance, the
rodents went from about 11 to about 13.

    The numbers may understate the significance of the improvement if something
similar could be achieved in human patients. In any case, the corporate backers
of the work said it was enough to keep the project on track, although they are
the first to point out that much laboratory work remains.

    "The body of knowledge is growing, and the results of the study just
reported very definitely add to this body of knowledge," said Stem Cells Inc.
CEO Martin McGlynn. "As a company, it has certainly convinced us that we need to
take this scientifically as a legitimate and serious target for further
investigation."

    Even if all the preclinical work goes well, there's still a high chance of
failure in the first human trials of any novel therapy, especially for a
condition as variable and intractable as spinal cord injury. Nor is there any
guarantee that stem cell therapy will prove better than several other
experimental approaches, some of which are further along in development.

    Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a neurologist and spinal cord-injury researcher at UC
San Diego, has been investigating the use of gene therapy to deliver therapeutic
agents to the site of damage. That's not ready for human trials, either, he said
in an interview last week, emphasizing the need to balance hopes against the
very real chance of failure.

    "There are many approaches out there, and stem cells are certainly one of
them," Tuszynski said. "My thought is that the magnitude of the benefit is
relatively modest. Although at some point, one can say it's worthwhile to make
the transition to clinical trials, people's expectations need to be modest also.
When you don't have a whopping effect in the animal study to begin with, trying
to detect it in humans becomes very difficult."

    The late actor Christopher Reeve, paralyzed in a horse-riding accident, once
said he sometimes wished he were a rodent, so that he could have a chance to try
experimental therapies sooner.

    Despite the frustration among patients, however, no one will hazard even a
guess as to when the first stem cell therapies will be ready for a trial run.

    "We haven't even engaged in a conversation with the FDA to know what their
needs might be, or how high the bar might have to be," McGlynn, the Stem Cells
chief executive, said. "It's very tempting to try to get ahead of ourselves
here. But these are early days."E-mail Carl Hall at chall@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2005


                              69 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 25, 2005, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: IDEAS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 2409 words

HEADLINE: THE AGE OF RAY KURZWEIL WHAT WILL HAPPEN WHEN TECHNOLOGY OUTSTRIPS
HUMAN INTELLIGENCE?
RENOWNED - AND CONTROVERSIAL - TECHNO-VISIONARY RAY KURZWEIL SAYS WE WON'T HAVE
TO WAIT LONG TO FIND OUT.
AND HE, FOR ONE, IS LOOKING FORWARD TO IT.

BYLINE: By Drake Bennett

BODY:

   KURZWEIL TECHNOLOGIES takes up two floors of a low office building in
Wellesley Hills, near where the Charles River crosses and then recrosses Route
128. In the reception area are a vintage Thomas Edison dictation machine and a
large flat-screen monitor on which a computer program draws angular,
cartoon-like portraits. Across from the entrance sits an alarmingly lifelike man
made of wax, bearded and brandishing a pipe as if in conversation.

   Ray Kurzweil, the company's founder, is an inventor, and has been one for as
long as he can remember. "When I was 7 or 8 my inventions actually began to
work," Kurzweil told me recently in his large, cluttered office. "I'd build
these robotic devices, like a theater that would move scenery and props and
characters in and out of view by elaborate mechanical linkages."


   He was still a high school student when, in 1964, he created a computer that
composed music in the style of Chopin, Mozart, and other great composers. In the
early 1970s he invented the first flatbed scanner and the first practical
character-recognition software, paving the way for everything from digital
photography and graphic design to online newspaper archiving. Combining those
two technologies with a text-to-speech synthesizer (another of his inventions),
he made the Kurzweil Reading Machine. He sold the very first one to Stevie
Wonder-for whom he then developed the first music synthesizer able to fool
professional musicians into thinking they were listening to real instruments. In
1987 his company Kurzweil Applied Intelligence was the first to market
large-vocabulary speech-recognition software.   By any measure, Kurzweil has had
an exceptional career. Now, however, he has a new project: to be a god. And not
just because he thinks he can live forever. Within decades, he predicts, he will
be billions of times more intelligent than he is today, able to read minds,
assume different forms, and reshape his physical environment at will. So will
everyone. Today's human beings, mere quintessences of dust, will be as outmoded
as Homo Erectus.

   All this, Kurzweil believes, will come about through something called The
Singularity. Popularized more than a decade ago by the mathematician, computer
scientist, and science fiction novelist Vernor Vinge, who borrowed the term from
mathematics and astrophysics, it refers to the future point at which
technological change, propelled by the explosive growth of artificial
intelligence, will accelerate past the point of current human comprehension. In
Vinge's prevision, once artificial intelligence surpasses human intelligence
there will be no turning back, as ever more intelligent computers create ever
more superintelligent offspring.

   Among the programmers, scientists, and philosophers concerned with the larger
contours of technological evolution, the term quickly caught on. The Singularity
became an axis around which debates on technology, human nature, genetic
enhancement, and the future of consciousness all turned. Figures like Marvin
Minsky and Hans Moravec, the artificial intelligence pioneers, and K. Eric
Drexler, the father of nanotechnology, took it up.

   Today Ray Kurzweil is the most radical and most visible prophet of The
Singularity. In talks, public debates, articles, postings on his website, and in
a series of increasingly provocative books-"The Age of Intelligent Machines"
(1990), "The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human
Intelligence" (1999), "Fantastic Voyage: Live Long Enough to Live Forever"
(2005)-he has done more than any other thinker to make the case for both the
desirability and the imminence of The Singularity. According to Doug Lenat, a
leading expert on artificial intelligence, "Ray is one of the few people who can
step back and see the big picture for what it means for our species and for the
planet."

   This week Kurzweil has a new book out, with the self-consciously millennial
title "The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology" (Viking). It is
the most detailed brief he has yet written for the nearness of the unimaginably
strange future, and it arrives with approving blurbs from Minsky and Bill Gates
("Ray Kurzweil is the best person I know at predicting the future of artificial
intelligence," writes the Microsoft founder.) At a time when political debates
over the ethics of stem cell research, genetic modification, cloning and even
nanotechnology are growing at once more fervent and more complicated, Kurzweil
offers a vision of technology as destiny, of transformative change that has
slipped the bonds of politics, culture, and-for many-credulity.

   That his predictions make moot most of the cultural norms and physical limits
of today's world is, he believes, only a testament to the power of the forces he
describes. To his many critics, however, Kurzweil is simply spinning fairy
tales, preaching transcendence but propagating ignorance.


   Arrayed around Kurzweil's office and in the hallways outside are a few of his
inventions. When I asked, he readily showed them off. He had an old Kurzweil
Reading Machine flatly declaim the opening of the Gettysburg Address. He played
the first few measures of a Beethoven piano sonata on an early-model Kurzweil
synthesizer, stumbled, started over, stumbled again, then switched to Gershwin.
He arranged a demonstration of a pocket reading machine for the blind that he
plans to roll out in January. He told me about FatKat, his
artificial-intelligence investment program: Over the past two years, he claims,
it has brought in stock market returns of 80 to 100 percent.

   Kurzweil is compact and trim, with full cheeks, a small smile, and a
knot-like nose drooping toward a broad chin. The tone of his voice, deep and
deliberate, is somewhat at odds with his eyes, which narrow and furiously blink
as he talks. He is 57 years old, nearly the age at which his father died of a
heart attack. According to a battery of controversial tests administered by
Terry Grossman, the anti-aging expert who co-wrote "Fantastic Voyage," Kurzweil
has not aged appreciably in the past 17 years.

   Every day, Kurzweil takes hundreds of nutritional supplement pills, and once
a week he takes several others intravenously. He is, as he puts it,
"reprogramming my biochemistry" and claims in so doing to have conquered his
Type 2 diabetes. More importantly, he insists, he is stretching his natural
lifespan until either genetic therapies, microscopic "nanobots" (hypothetical
robots on the scale of single atoms and molecules that Kurzweil believes will be
able, among many other things, to take over some of the vital functions of the
human body), or simply the ability to download one's mind onto a computer make
immortality a reality.

   What links all of Kurzweil's creations is the concept of pattern recognition:
recreating the human ability to distinguish signal from noise. As he sees it,
the predictions he's making are simply pattern recognition applied to history.

   The pattern he sees is a simple one: He calls it the law of accelerating
returns. To explain, Kurzweil uses the example of Moore's Law, the storied 1965
prediction by Intel cofounder Gordon Moore that the power of computer chips
would double roughly every two years. In 1972 there were 2500 transistors in an
Intel chip, in 1974, 4500, and by 2004 there were 592 million.

   For Kurzweil, however, the explosive power of exponential growth goes far
beyond transistors: Human technological advancement, the billions of years of
terrestrial evolution, the entire history of the universe, all, he argues,
follow the law of accelerating returns. He has put a team of researchers to work
gathering technological, economic, historical, and paleontological data. All of
it, he claims, graphs neatly onto an exponential plot, starting out slowly, then
nosing sharply upward through the "knee of the curve" into higher order and
greater complexity, arcing toward infinity.

   "Ultimately," he promises in "The Singularity Is Near," "the entire universe
will become saturated with our intelligence. This is the destiny of the
universe. We will determine our own fate rather than have it determined by the
current 'dumb,' simple machinelike forces that rule celestial mechanics." How he
is not sure, but he trusts his math.

   At such moments, Kurzweil's predictions have the ring of eschatology, of
half-cocked end-times rapture. For him, though, it's surreal to hear people talk
about the size of the Social Security shortfall in 2042-by then, he believes,
advances in nanotechnology will allow us to ward off disease and senescence and
to manufacture all the goods we want for a pittance. By then, in other words,
aging and poverty may hardly exist and people may not retire or even work in a
way that's recognizable to us.

   For Kurzweil, stubbornly linear habits of mind explain why, for example, so
few neuroscientists share his conviction that we will soon be able to
reverse-engineer the brain. "A lot of scientists," he told me, "Nobel
Prize-winners included, take a linear perspective. They just intuitively do the
mental experiment of what will it take to achieve certain goals at today's rate
of progress, with today's tools." Kurzweil points to the skepticism that greeted
his forecast, in 1990, that in as few as nine years a computer would beat the
world chess champion. He was too conservative, as it turned out: Deep Blue beat
Garry Kasparov in 1997.


   Yet even among those like Vinge, Minsky, Drexler, and Lenat, for whom The
Singularity is less a matter of if than when, Kurzweil is a figure of rare
certainty. Nick Bostrom, a philosopher and the director of the Future of
Humanity Institute at Oxford University, isn't so sure the timing of The
Singularity can be pinpointed. "We should be thinking about it more as a
probability distribution smeared out over a long period," he says.

   Then there are the many thinkers who find Kurzweil's case less than
compelling. Since his theories take in the whole history of the universe, there
is no shortage of points at which to contest them. Some skeptics dispute
Kurzweil's computer science. They argue that even computers billions of times
more powerful than today's wouldn't necessarily be meaningfully intelligent,
much less spiritual. Any one of a number of hurdles-from the complexity of
neural networks to the difficulty of recreating the brain's analog processing
with a computer's digital circuitry to our continued inability to begin to
articulate the essence of consciousness-might stand immovably in the way of
human-level artificial intelligence.

   As John Searle, a philosopher of mind and language at the University of
California, Berkeley, wrote in a public exchange of letters with Kurzweil, "the
existing technological advances that are supposed to provide evidence in support
of these predictions, wonderful though they are, offer no support whatever for
these spectacular conclusions."

   Others, like the Harvard cognitive scientist Steven Pinker, take issue with
Kurzweil's teleological view of evolution. "It's the old idea that the process
of evolution is some push in the direction of greater complexity-in particular
greater intellectual complexity," Pinker says. "In one twig of the tree of life,
namely ours, having a big brain happened to have advantages. But that's just
what worked for a particular species of primate 5 to 7 million years ago."

   Still others see something darker in Kurzweil's visions of transformation.
Bill Joy, the founder of Sun Microsystems, was so horrified by a conversation
with Kurzweil that he wrote a now-famous Wired magazine cover story in 2000
entitled "The Future Doesn't Need Us," describing a technological apocalypse,
the earth chewed to pieces by out-of-control nanobots. Thinkers like the
political scientist Francis Fukuyama of Johns Hopkins University foresee a
subtler corrosion: The pursuit of biological perfection, Fukuyama warns,
deprives us of qualities like compassion and courage that spring from an
awareness of our vulnerability.

   Jaron Lanier, a pioneer of virtual reality computing, and like Kurzweil and
Joy somewhat of a tech-world guru, manages to combine the technological and the
moral critiques of Kurzweil's thought. In a 2000 essay entitled "One Half of a
Manifesto," he argued that our ever-more-powerful computers were likely to be
limited, for the foreseeable future, by the software running them. Lampooning
Joy's nightmare scenario, he wrote, "Just as some newborn race of
superintelligent robots are about to consume all humanity, our dear old species
will likely be saved by a Windows crash."

   Still, Lanier finds Kurzweil's ideas unsettling. "Ray has incorporated in his
little system of thought all of the elements of a religion that are selfish but
none of the ones that are generous," Lanier told me. "His thing is purely,
'Here's how to live forever, here's how to be uploaded into the machine.'
There's no concern for other people since it's assumed that everyone will be
infinitely rich and happy in his future." It's a philosophy based on narcissism,
Lanier charges, a dream of ultimate individual fulfillment.

   The last chapter of Kurzweil's new book is entitled "Response to Critics,"
and it is nearly 60 pages long. Kurzweil's rejoinders are detailed and
exhaustive, ranging across topics from software development and neural networks
into quantum mechanics and the philosophy of consciousness. Nowhere, however,
does he offer any apology for his promise of eternity or his focus on individual
enhancement.

   This individualistic, mechanistic ethos, his critics argue, also blurs
Kurzweil's predictive power, because it ignores all the ways in which
technologies are bounded by social forces. As Harvard's Pinker points out, "the
track record of technological predictions is laughable. I remember a prediction
in my childhood that by now we'd be living in domed cities and commuting by jet
pack and eating protein pills instead of meals. On the other hand a lot of
revolutions are predicted by no one. My favorite is that in the movie '2001,'
you had space travel and human-level artificial intelligence, but people were
still writing on clipboards. Arthur C. Clarke hadn't predicted the laptop."

SIDEBAR:
TO INFINITY - AND BEYOND?
PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.


   Drake Bennett is the staff writer for Ideas. E-mail drbennett@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO , Ray Kurzwell takes hundreds of nutritional supplement pills
every day. As he puts it, he is "reprogramming my biochemistry." (Photo by Rick
Friedman for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2005


                              70 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 23, 2005 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1027 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gets a second chance;
San Diego company's clinical trials bring hope for a field once plagued by
setbacks

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The science behind Ceregene's experimental gene therapy to treat Alzheimer's
disease is indisputably nifty: billions of viruses injected through two
dime-size holes drilled in the skull, each carrying a payload of DNA designed to
revive fading neurons.

   But for Bob Keller, the real wonder is in the affectionate gaze of his wife,
Pat.

   Before Alzheimer's patient Pat Keller volunteered to test the treatment in
January in a small, early-stage clinical trial, her memory and personality were
deteriorating at an unrelenting pace. She didn't recognize her husband of 43
years about two-thirds of the time.

   "When she didn't recognize me she always appeared to be sad, like she was
looking for someone," said Bob Keller, 72, of Amboy, Ill. "But since the surgery
she recognizes me almost all of the time. It's like heaven."

   It's too early to tell whether the gene therapy developed by San Diego's
Ceregene is working; Pat Keller's anecdotal improvement could prove to be a
placebo fluke or an anomaly once the data from the study begin to come in next
year. But the biotechnology company's work, as well as that of a small but
persistent cadre of gene-therapy companies, is helping to revive cautious
interest in a field that appeared moribund five years ago.

   The well-publicized death in 1999 of Jesse Gelsinger, a teenager who died
during a gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, was a huge
setback for gene therapy and for a time halted progress in several clinical
trials.

   Funding for the field dried up, and many gene-therapy companies fell by the
wayside or were absorbed by other companies, including San Diego's Canji,
Collaterial Therapeutics, GenStar Therapeutics and Selective Genetics.

   Even the gene-therapy field's one notable success has been overshadowed by
pain. Ten children suffering from a rare genetic disease that leaves them
without an immune system were basically cured in a French gene-therapy clinical
trial that began in 1999. But three of the children later developed leukemia as
a result of the therapy, and one of them died last year.

   Despite that tragedy, the French study and a similar English clinical trial
have proved that gene therapy can work. Despite its complexities, gene therapy
remains too intriguing an idea to discard, many medical experts agree.

   As a scientific premise, gene therapy is simple enough: Use DNA like a drug
to replace missing or defective genes with healthy ones that can correct rare
genetic conditions or treat mainstream diseases.

   But the engineering behind the premise is tricky. After almost 20 years of
research, scientists are still working on figuring out how to deliver the
genetic material to the right place, keeping it there long enough to be taken up
by the body and making sure it doesn't activate things it shouldn't.

   Yet academic scientists and their counterparts in industry are making strides
in solving key problems that have plagued the gene-therapy field. One area that
has seen improvement is in vectors, the vehicles -- usually a deactivated virus
-- that deliver the therapeutic DNA to cells.

   Researchers are also homing in on delivering genes to as specific a target as
possible, safely away from other genes that could be activated and result in
catastrophic side effects, such as cancer.

   Jeffrey Ostrove, president and chief operating officer of Ceregene, said his
company has taken the lessons learned in the past decade to heart.

   "The field has been tainted by hype, by overpromising and underdelivering.
But absolutely, we've learned a lot from so many of these experiments," Ostrove
said. "Part of science is the learning process, and we are taking the time now
to study what we've learned in the past and use that knowledge to generate the
vectors and the systems of today."

   Ceregene's gene-therapy agent, dubbed CERE-110, carries a nerve growth factor
gene encased in a harmless virus that is directed to the basal forebrain, an
area almost universally affected by Alzheimer's disease, according to the
company.

   Once inside key brain cells, the NGF gene activates the production of the NGF
protein, a natural substance that helps restore damaged neurons.

   In early gene-therapy trials conducted by others, the indiscriminate delivery
of nerve growth factor to the brain caused serious side effects, such as weight
loss and pain.

   But in Ceregene's Phase 1 study, volunteer patients received small amounts of
genetic material in a very specific area, using a viral vector that can't
replicate on its own.

   In primate studies, NGF gene delivery to the basal forebrain prevented the
death of the same group of neurons that degenerate and die in Alzheimer's
disease patients, according to the company.

   Another San Diego gene-therapy startup, Celladon Corp., is developing a novel
gene therapy to treat congestive heart failure. And like Ceregene's treatment,
Celladon's is narrowly targeted -- in this case, to regulating calcium cycling
in congestive heart patients.

   Celladon's gene therapy signals heart-muscle cells to produce a protein that
helps lower calcium levels, allowing the heart to beat more forcefully and blood
to circulate more efficiently.

   The company, along with collaborator V-Kardia, is also developing a device
that delivers the gene therapy to the heart in a closed-loop system that
includes special catheters. The idea is to keep the gene therapy in the heart
long enough -- about 10 minutes -- for it to be taken up by the heart cells,
while keeping it from circulating throughout the body.

   Stephen Grant, Celladon's chief medical officer, said the therapy, if
successful, will still take years to develop. But he and other researchers in
the field have learned patience and gained a more realistic attitude.

   "Early on, everyone was enthusiastic about gene therapy -- if we thought
about it today, it would be available tomorrow," Grant said. "But that never
turns out to be true.

   "Gene therapy has had a lot of growing pains in the past, in between, and
there will be more. But you have to have a workmanlike attitude -- you roll up
your sleeves, tinker around, see what comes out, and just keep moving on."

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Pat Keller, 64, an Alzheimer's disease patient who
volunteered to test Ceregene's experimental gene therapy, talked with Dr. David
Bennett of Rush University Hospital, a surgeon. 2. Ceregene president Jeffrey
Ostrove leads the company in its gene-therapy quest. 3. Ariadne Balton, a
researcher at Ceregene, worked with samples of brain tissue.; PHOTOBY: 1.
Chicago Tribune 2,3 Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2005


                              71 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           September 18, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 1638 words

HEADLINE: Medical trial oversight in poor shape

BYLINE: Julie Bell, SUN STAFF

BODY:

   DESPITE widespread recognition of the need to do a better job protecting
millions of Americans enrolled in medical experiments, the government has made
few changes in the system that oversees their care.

   Now, it appears some of the first changes to be recommended by a government
advisory panel will involve loosening the rules, not tightening them.

   To be sure, many academic research institutions and private research
companies have made their own changes, some extensive. The moves came after the
deaths of research subjects such as Johns Hopkins University's Ellen Roche in
2001.

   But even many charged with overseeing clinical trials agree that, years after
the deaths sparked a national outcry, the system of oversight contains holes and
major flaws.

   Some research on people continues to go totally unregulated, including many
studies initiated by physicians to look at how diseases work. And when the
government does require oversight - in cases where the research is federally
funded or involves a drug or medical device in the running for Food and Drug
Administration approval - it relies on ethics panels that studies have shown are
often overworked.

   While highly publicized deaths caused by clinical trials have been few, some
argue that the scope of the problem is far greater than meets the eye.

   Adil Shamoo, editor of Accountability in Research and co-founder of the
advocacy group Citizens for Responsible Care and Research, found in a 2001 study
that just eight deaths had been reported to the federal Office of Human Research
Protection from 1990 to 2000 for research involving 70 million people.

   Shamoo continues to argue that the number of deaths is underreported, saying
the anticipated number of suicides and suicide attempts alone in a population
that large could be anticipated to be 5,000, while the overall deaths in a
general population of 70 million would be about 51,000.

   "My guess is it's going to take another tragedy" to galvanize support for
more oversight and training money, said Dr. Greg Koski, who previously headed
the federal Office of Human Research Protections.

   System failed

   Paul Gelsinger is among those who thought it wasn't supposed to turn out this
way.

   Gelsinger, 53, has been seeking reforms since his son Jesse died in a
gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in September 1999. Six
years later, the father gives the impression of a weary salesman as he continues
to seek reform in the system that failed his son.

   Last month, the retired Tucson, Ariz., handyman dropped his two travel bags
at the rear of a drab meeting room in Alexandria, Va., greeted familiar members
of a government advisory committee and launched into a story they already knew.
Jesse, he said, died at 18 of an immune-system reaction because doctors enrolled
him in the experiment without fully explaining the risks.

   "My real feeling is that I should be done with this by now," Gelsinger said
after the meeting. But "I'm finding this process is just beginning."

   Now, as the Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections readies
recommendations, critics such as Gelsinger are disappointed again. They say most
proposals they have seen would make life easier for the ethics panels that
oversee research, instead of beefing up protection for volunteers.

   The committee is discussing the following changes for ethics panels:

   Telling the panels they don't have to thoroughly review previous published
studies before approving a new experiment. The practice began voluntarily after
the government faulted a Hopkins panel for failing to discover the known dangers
of a chemical that Roche inhaled in the lung function experiment that led to her
death.

   The literature reviews should be the responsibility of physicians overseeing
the research trials, committee members said.

   Elimination of yearly reviews for every research project, as is now required.
Some studies, panel members reason, aren't risky enough to warrant such
attention.

   More reviews with only one or two panel members, instead of the whole group.
Ethics panels can already do this when the study poses little risk to volunteers
(involving, for example, only the drawing of blood) or when minor changes are
made in approved research.

   Separately, the government is considering how to reduce the number of problem
reports that ethics panels receive from clinical trial sites around the world.

   The current oversight system dates to the 1970s, when panels largely oversaw
trials held only at their local institution. But many trials now take place at
dozens of sites or more, and the volume of injury reports can overwhelm local
panels, which often don't have enough information to interpret them, said Ernest
D. Prentice, a University of Nebraska associate vice chancellor and the advisory
committee's chairman.

   The proposed changes are preliminary, and it's too early to tell what the
government will do. But proponents say regulatory relief will be a good thing
for both volunteers and science.

   "If you have too much regulation, it puts such a burden on the conduct of
research that it prevents research from being done," said Bernard A. Schwetz,
the director of the Office of Human Research Protections.

   The changes in protection for volunteers at many academic institutions came
after a handful of research programs were temporarily shut down. Since then,
universities and hospitals have expanded research oversight budgets, hired extra
staff and sought accreditation.

   The University of Maryland conducts spot audits of its own research for
ethical compliance. Hopkins - the country's largest recipient of federal
research grants - increased the number of panels overseeing human research from
two to six. The panels are known as institutional review boards, or IRBs.

   Giving less work to the panels was one of the recommendations in a 1998
report from the Inspector General's office at the Department of Health and Human
Services, which found that "the effectiveness of IRBs is in jeopardy."

   Still, most of the report's recommendations have never been mandated. Among
the holes remaining: No one has a complete roster of the panels, many of which
are run by private, for-profit companies. Also unknown on a national basis is
exactly how many research volunteers are involved and what is being studied.

   CenterWatch, a Boston-based unit of the Thomson Corp., estimates that up to
3.5 million people are enrolled in current U.S. trials, but that number includes
only people in clinical trials of drugs aiming for FDA approval. The total
number is far higher.

   Shamoo estimated in 2001 that it is closer to 19 million.

   The government splits the responsibility for overseeing the trials between
the Office of Human Research Protections, which oversees federally funded
research, and the FDA, which handles all trials that might lead to marketing of
a new drug or medical device. They have different rules and approaches. What's
more, an unknown number of trials don't fall under government jurisdiction.

   The gap, and the lax oversight even in some trials that do fall under federal
rules, have inspired a steady trickle of legal claims by people who allege that
they have been hurt or that their loved ones have been killed in sloppy
research.

   Gelsinger sued and later settled for an undisclosed amount after his son
died. Roche's family entered into an undisclosed settlement with Hopkins.

   Clinical trial injuries, even when they're not deadly, can affect lives. In
North Carolina, William C. Hamlet and his attorney say they recently agreed to
settle a 2003 suit alleging Hamlet was injured in a test of Raptiva, a psoriasis
drug.

   Hamlet contended that his longtime physician, who was overseeing the trial,
shouldn't have enrolled him. Doing so meant taking him off a drug that had been
keeping his psoriasis and underlying arthritis under control, he said. His
condition worsened as he took a placebo followed by the drug, and he said he
ended up with disabling inflammation that kept him from his carpentry job for
months.

   "We had no idea getting a placebo could do a double whammy, where you get so
sick you couldn't bounce back," said Hamlet's wife, Jennifer Nygard.

   Dr. Angela Bowen, president of the Olympia, Wash.-based ethics panel company
that oversaw the test, said she couldn't comment on the suit, which named her
Western Institutional Review Board among the defendants. In general, she said,
such suits haven't been successful in winning big awards.

   Still, the suits are a bellwether, suggested Jim Sheehan, a federal
prosecutor in Philadelphia. At a spring gathering of clinical research
professionals, he said civil and criminal cases will become more common because
researchers, universities and companies can make money based on the outcome of
clinical trials, and ethics panels don't have the resources to properly oversee
them.

   "What I want to tell you about is the coming storm in this area," he warned.
"The one I believe will be the biggest area in the next five years is the
failure to comply with [human] subject disclosure and protections."

   Violations called rare

   Those who make a living overseeing clinical trials say violations are rare,
given the tens of thousands of U.S. trials happening at any moment.

   "We believe in preventive medicine here," said Dr. Robert Edelman, an ethics
panel chairman at the University of Maryland Medical School, about ensuring that
research is properly reviewed and the physicians overseeing it - known as
investigators - are properly trained. "What protects volunteers is well-trained
investigators."

   But that's little solace to Gelsinger.

   "Where once I completely trusted the system of clinical research before
Jesse's death, I now find myself unable to trust that system," Gelsinger, now
vice president of the nonprofit Citizens for Responsible Care and Research, told
the advisory committee. "And I'm a trusting man."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1. Paul Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz., has lobbied for medical trial reform since
his son died in a gene- therapy experiment in 1999. 2. Ellen Roche died in 2001
from respiratory failure after inhaling a chemical in a Hopkins study of lung
function. 3. In July 2001, Drs. Chi Van Dang (from left), Edward D. Miller and
Lewis C. Becker of Hopkins held a news conference at which Miller said the
institution accepted responsibility for Ellen Roche's death.
 1. JOHN MILLER : ASSOCIATED PRESS 3. JOHN MAKELY : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2005


                              72 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                   September 17, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1096 words

HEADLINE: Sending genes to save a child;
Pa. parents gamble on an unproven therapy to give their infant daughter a normal
life.

BYLINE: By Rory Sweeney; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   On Wednesday, little Ariel Coover lay with her chin tucked to her chest in a
bright, white operating room at Cooper University Hospital in Camden. The only
visible part of the 31/2-month-old was the top of her bald head, where six
catheters protruded like shiny strands of hair.

   Through those tubes flowed her only chance for a normal life: 900 billion
viral particles carrying the one gene that could keep her brain from slowly
eroding into a spongy mass.

   Ariel is the latest and youngest patient in the first clinical gene-transfer
study of its kind to receive funding from the National Institutes of Health.

   Combining computer-assisted imagery, an ultra-pure viral delivery system, and
an extremely young patient, researchers hope to have found a way to combat
Canavan disease, a degenerative genetic disorder that leads to seizures,
paralysis and death.

   Since 2001, only 10 other patients have participated in the study, which is
still in Phase One safety trials. The results have been promising. Researchers
found that all of the patients' brains have stopped atrophying. None of the
patients have died, and at least one has lived past the average life expectancy
of 10 years.

   But the treatment doesn't reverse the disease; it only stops it. None of the
patients are able to walk unassisted or talk.

   What makes Ariel special is that she is too young to have been affected. Well
before she was born, parents Walter and Peggy Coover knew what they were in for.
Through genetic testing during pregnancy, doctors confirmed Ariel had Canavan.

   This wasn't new ground for the family from Shippensburg, Pa. Their daughter
Amber would have turned 13 in August, but in 2000, she died from the disease.

   "We were a lot younger then," said Peggy, who gave birth to Amber at 19. "We
grew up because of her. We learned to ask more questions and not listen to
everything they say."

   What they said was that Canavan has no cure, that parents are doomed to watch
their thriving children devolve to where communication consists of faint smiles
and eye blinks. Eventually, they said, the children die.

   But Amber taught the Coovers to "take more chances because it's final,"
Walter said. "When it's done, it's done."

   That's what sent the Coovers to Cooper. Since 1995, neuroscientist Paola
Leone, director of the Cell and Gene Therapy Center there, has been developing a
gene-therapy treatment for Canavan.

   Gene therapy, once a wide-open medical frontier, hit a major setback in 1999
when teenager Jesse Gelsinger died while participating in a gene-transfer study
at the University of Pennsylvania. Since then, advances have been cautious, but
recent successes have revived the field.

   Canavan is one of 40 to 60 disorders caused by a defect in a single gene,
according to Dan Tagle, program director for neurogenetics at the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, which is part of the NIH and
provided $2.3 million for Leone's research.

   This defect prevents the production of aspartoacyclase, a brain enzyme that
breaks down N-acetylaspartate acid, or NAA, into some of the elements needed to
create myelin. Myelin is a fatty covering that protects nerve cells in the brain
and spinal cord. Without aspartoacyclase, NAA builds up and causes the
destruction of the myelin, which, in turn, causes the spongy atrophy of the
brain.

   Leone's treatment pumps in billions of correct copies of the gene, each
housed in an adeno-associated virus approved by the Food and Drug
Administration. The viruses diffuse in the brain and insert the gene into the
DNA of every cell they contact.

   However, the viruses have an affinity for neurons and, because the gene
requires a specific cellular promoter, it will only turn on in neurons, Leone
said.

   By last night, all the viral vectors had inserted the new gene, Leone said,
and it would take two or three weeks for the cells to produce a stable amount of
aspartoacyclase. The production will decrease slightly after 12 to 24 months but
will continue for the life of the cell. Because brain cells don't split, there
is no chance of the gene's being replicated. The success of the procedure will
not be known for one to three months, but the doctors involved are optimistic.

   "Ariel is an amazing miracle," Leone said. "She was diagnosed in utero.
That's not usually the case. Usually, when they call me, they're 10 months old.
She's so young and unaffected."

   The procedure shows promise for other single-gene disorders but remains
unproven, Tagle said.

   "We don't know what to expect," he said. "Is the vector system the right
delivery system to use? Will the brain tolerate the virus? It's still research
in some ways, because we're still trying to figure it out."

   The study is not designed to test effectiveness, he said. The treatment's
safety is the main question, and the surgery includes serious risks. But, for
the Coovers, the potential benefit was too great to pass up.

   "The biggest risk is she could die," Walter said. "And she was going to die
anyway."

   The Coovers say Ariel acts differently from Amber. Ariel is a cooperative
eater, while Amber was not, and Ariel tries to hold her head up. They hope she
is the little sister their 5-year-old son, Dylan, has been asking for.

   Dylan, who was just 7 months old when Amber died, did not inherit Canavan. It
is an autosomal recessive disease, meaning it is not sex-linked, both parents
must be carriers and, even then, there is only a 25 percent chance of
inheritance.

   Before having Dylan, the Coovers decided to terminate the pregnancy if
Canavan was detected, but it was not.

   And after birth, Dylan showed the normal signs of development, such as
rolling over and holding his head, well before expected.

   Ariel's conception came as a surprise and, after testing, the Coovers had
four days to make a decision. They had an appointment at an abortion clinic
scheduled for the final day.

   "We wrestled with it. We cried a lot," Peggy said.

   They canceled the appointment the night before. Not until after Ariel was
born did they learn of Leone's research.

   Now Peggy wears a bracelet inscribed with "Miracles," a reference to the
Coovers' new foundation, Ariel's Miracle. They are preparing a fund-raiser in
Shippensburg for next Saturday, and plan to donate the proceeds to Leone for
research. They already have raised about $4,000.

   "I want to be able to say when this is over there's a cure for Canavan,"
Walter said. "I want my daughter to be a shining example."

   Contact staff writer Rory Sweeney at 215-854-2625 or rsweeney@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2005


                              73 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 10, 2005, Saturday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 1058 words

HEADLINE: EXILED FROM THEIR LA. LABS, SCIENTISTS ASSESS THEIR LOSSES

BYLINE: By Stephen Smith GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   NEW ORLEANS   - Hurricane Katrina devastated scientific research in this
city, claiming thousands of laboratory animals, ruining valuable caches of
tissue, and interrupting clinical experiments as patients scattered across the
nation.

      Research into treatments for epilepsy, hypertension, and obesity, as well
as the development of vaccines, has been severely impeded by the storm.
Restoring what has been lost could easily take years, researchers said.

           Tulane University and the New Orleans medical campus of Louisiana
State University are the engines that power research in the city, together
garnering $132 million in ongoing federal grants. Researchers on the two
campuses are recognized for their work in kidney disease, heart disease, cancer,
and alcohol-related ailments.


      The storm has made scientists such as Kyriakos Papadopoulos of Tulane
exiles from their labs. He was among a large cadre of collaborators working on
vaccines against possible bioterror agents.

      Refrigerated compounds that Papadopoulos had are now useless. And, for
some of his colleagues on the vaccine project, the loss will be even more
profound.

      "Can you imagine if you have human tissue or any kind of bacteria or
fungi?" said Papadopoulos, a professor of chemical and biomolecular engineering.
"It's going to be a total loss, with years of work destroyed and years of work
replacing it ahead."

      Scientists in Boston and other research hubs have opened their labs, and
their homes, to displaced professors so they can attempt to restore their work
on drugs and vaccines work that represents years of painstaking experimentation.


      "The loss to the knowledge base is just huge," said Norka Ruiz Bravo,
deputy director for extramural research at the National Institutes of Health.
"There are a lot of unique resources that will not be reproduced, that have been
lost forever."

      The relief and rescue efforts for scientific enterprises are unfolding
beyond the spotlight cast on campaigns to save human life and to secure a city
in distress. But they involve a similar melding of governmental and private aid,
extending from the NIH to individual researchers such as Tim Mitchison, a
Harvard cell biologist offering to shelter two scientists in his Brookline home.


      "This is a pretty profound disaster for these people, professionally and
personally," said Mitchison, vice chairman of the Department of Systems Biology
at Harvard Medical School.

      Scientific endeavors rely on electricity, water, and constant attention,
much of which vanished with Katrina's arrival and the subsequent levee breaches.
This week, science labs on the adjacent campuses of Tulane and Loyola in New
Orleans's Uptown neighborhood sat dark, dank, and deserted.

      In terms of total NIH grants, metro New Orleans research institutions rank
49th.

      "Obviously, our research community has taken a major hit," said Bill
Arceneaux, president of the Louisiana Association of Independent Colleges and
Universities. "We're going to do everything we can to maintain research data and
equipment, but the challenges ahead are significant."

      Papadopoulos camped out in his lab for four days, from the day before the
storm began its assault until the day after the levees were breeched. He's bound
for Columbia University in New York, where he has received an appointment as a
visiting professor. It's not feasible, the professor said, to remove research
materials every time a hurricane roars into the Gulf of Mexico.

      "It takes a very long time to set up and take the chemicals out,"
Papadopoulos said. "They're not going to do that for every scare. But this time
was real."

      Papadopoulos said that during his stay at Columbia, his research
activities will be significantly truncated, largely limited to writing and
reviewing scientific papers. His colleague Yunfeng Lu has already decamped to
the University of New Mexico, where he completed his doctoral research.

      Lu, who specializes in nanotechnology research, has taken with him a dozen
postdoctoral fellows. But he was unable to recover material critical to his
research: tiny particles 10,000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair.


      "Here we have to do everything from the beginning," Lu said Thursday in a
telephone interview from Albuquerque. "We have to remake a lot of material."

      That will be true, too, in the 11 buildings on LSU's medical campus, where
water stood 18 inches to 6 feet deep, said Joseph Moerschbaecher, vice
chancellor for academic affairs at the health sciences center.

      "Unfortunately, we lost all of our research animals," he said. "And that
has an enormous impact."

      Some drowned, others were euthanized because they could not be removed.
The casualties included mice, rabbits, dogs, and primates. Thousands of animals
perished.

      Researchers also lost troves of tissue samples kept in freezers at minus
70 degrees Celsius as the electricity and then generators stopped working. The
loss of power also affected incubators used in other experiments.

      "It's devastating," Moerschbaecher said.

      On Wednesday, LSU scientists enlisted the aid of state troopers and
National Guard forces to rescue time-sensitive scientific material from
freezers, refrigerators, and incubators that lost power.

      A team of three Louisiana State University scientists plunged into the
flooded health sciences campus near the Superdome to retrieve cell culture lines
swaddled in liquid nitrogen and just days away from worthlessness. Those cells
were being used in experiments related to cancer, gene therapy, and heart
disease.

      "I'm waiting for those boys to come home," Moerschbaecher said.

      LSU researchers from New Orleans have established bases on the
university's main campus in Baton Rouge, as well as the University of Texas in
San Antonio, the University of Iowa, and the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota.

      Those scientists as well as others in New Orleans who receive federal
grants are being offered NIH assistance. Existing research projects will
continue to be funded, and universities and hospitals may be eligible for
supplemental aid to replace equipment and rebuild labs, Ruiz Bravo said.


NOTES:
KATRINA'S AFTERMATH / LOST WORK, NEW PLANS
RESEARCH DERAILED

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2005


                              74 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2005 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                            September 9, 2005 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-01

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Boulder research firm clears hepatitis hurdle RNA right on target

BYLINE: Katy Human Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   It's not easy to give a mouse hepatitis. Scientists must modify the
creature's liver and coax a virus to infect it.

   It's even harder to rid a mouse of hepatitis - a crucial step before curing
people.

   Scientists at Sirna Therapeutics in Boulder, however, have done both.

   In July, Sirna published a paper that rocked the biotechnology world. Company
researchers conquered a major problem in using RNA interference, one of the most
promising new drug-discovery techniques: how to deliver RNA drugs to the right
place in nontoxic doses.

   "This is going to change medicine," said John Rossi, a researcher with the
Beckman Research Institute, a biomedical research center in Duarte, Calif. "What
they did was innovative."

   RNA, a genetic material similar to DNA, helps regulate a cell's activities.

   Since July 22, the last trading day before Sirna's announcement, the stock
price has climbed about 66 percent to $4.36 Thursday. The shares, which traded
at $8.28 in June 2002, had dropped to $1.67 at the beginning of July.

   "This is important. For RNAi (interference) to be successful as a technology,
it's all about delivery," said biotechnology analyst Michael King with Rodman
and Renshaw Inc. in New York City.

   Sirna researchers crafted snippets of RNA that can switch genes on and off,
or thwart nasty viruses by slicing up their genes, company officials said.

   They've also figured out how to "decorate" their RNA drugs with fat-like
molecules, to keep them stable and nontoxic in the body - a breakthrough.

   The work was published in Nature Biotechnology July 24.

   The technique has worked now in petri dishes, mice and monkeys, which have
been cured of hepatitis with no side effects, Sirna officials said.

   "To be able to do selective gene silencing, that's the Holy Grail of
medicine," said Howard Robin, Sirna's chief executive.

   Such claims for new techniques have been made before, said Barron Lerner, a
medical historian and internist at Columbia University in New York.

   Gene therapy, for example, has not delivered on its clinical promise, Lerner
said, while bone marrow transplants for leukemia have been successful.

   "History is full of examples in both directions," Lerner said.

   Still, in 2002, Science magazine called a string of RNA interference
discoveries the No. 1 breakthrough of the year.

   Since then, biotechnology companies have sprung up or changed tack to
capitalize on the technique. Sirna, once the struggling company Ribozyme, is
among the leaders, Rossi said.

   Nevertheless, Sirna has posted five years of net losses and seen revenues
dwindle to $1.5 million a year from $15 million, according to company filings.

   During RNA interference, "silencing" RNA attacks messenger RNA, slicing up
the messages and preventing certain proteins from forming. It can also target
the genetic material in a virus.

   Researchers can design bits of RNA to attack only one target - a viral gene
or a messenger RNA carrying bad directions from a mutated gene.

   "We're tapping into a natural mechanism that's inside the cell," said David
Morrissey, a biologist with Sirna.

   Sirna's big advance this summer was packaging the RNA drugs so they were
delivered to the right organ - the liver, in the case of hepatitis - in
nontoxic, low doses, Morrissey said.

   Human clinical trials with a hepatitis B drug begin in a few months,
Morrissey said.

   Sirna is already midway through trials of an RNA-based treatment for macular
degeneration, a form of blindness.

   Staff writer Katy Human can be reached at 303-820-1910 or
khuman@denverpost.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2005


                              75 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            September 9, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 116 words

HEADLINE: National Briefing  Mid-Atlantic: Maryland: Geneticist Won't Face Abuse
Charges

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   A geneticist accused of molesting a teenage girl at his house in San Marino,
Calif., will not face a trial on charges that he also abused a boy at his former
house in Bethesda 20 years ago.

   Prosecutors said Wednesday that they dismissed the case against the
geneticist, William F. Anderson, 68, because important evidence against him -- a
recorded telephone call in which he discussed the Los Angeles County case with
his Maryland accuser -- was inadmissible under Maryland law, which does not
allow evidence of similar accusations to be presented in sex cases. Dr.
Anderson, who led a team that performed the first approved human gene therapy
trial in 1990, had pleaded not guilty to all charges.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2005


                              76 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           September 8, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Susanna's Night Out; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 437  words

HEADLINE: 2 out of 3 Tate brothers ain't bad

BYLINE: Susanna Homan, Special to The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   More than 200 guests swarmed a four-story house in Hyde Park Saturday night
for the fourth annual Tate Bros. Foundation fund-raiser, part of a "celebrity
weekend of fun" benefitting victims with sickle cell anemia, an inherited blood
disease.

   Hosted by brothers Larenz, Lahmard and Larron Tate, the weekend's activities
included a skate jam, a bowling party and a VIP event called, "What's- Your
Genes?" held at the luxurious private home of real estate developer Melvin Hayes
at 6018 S. Rhodes.

   A last-minute callback to the set of "Waist Deep" with co-star Tyrese Gibson
kept Larenz Tate from attending the bash. "They called and said he had to come
in," explains Larron. "He signed up, they cut the check and he's got to work."

   Celebrity guests included Jill Marie Jones ("Girlfriends"), Wesley Jonathan
("What I Like About You") and Tatyana Ali ("The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air").

   Ali says she signed on for the event because she wanted to come to Chicago.
"I love it here," she says. "When you go by Lake Shore Drive, it looks like a
Caribbean beach."

   She also has a much more personal reason for participating. "A little girl
that I adore has sickle cell," says Ali. "She goes through seizures. I think
pretty soon with gene therapy we shouldn't have it anymore."

   - - -

   In the Gold Coast the same night, Chicago Bears cornerback Jerry Azumah was
commended for his philanthropic work for ASAP, Azumah Student Assistance
Program. The foundation provides scholarships to students attending private
schools (a similar scholarship allowed Azumah to attend a private high school
outside Boston). So far this year he has raised more than $100,000.

   "I don't do this for publicity," says Azumah. "I just call it passing the
torch."

   White Sox General Manager Ken Williams attended the party with his arm in a
sling. When I asked what happened, he said, "You know the Chicago Scene boat
party?" (It's an all-day bash held Aug. 6 for about 3,000 people in "the
playpen" on North Avenue beach.) "I was on this boat," he says. "I was getting
ready to get on a jet ski and I slipped."

   His torn bicep tendon required surgery. "I was trying to come up with a good
lie but too many people saw it happen," he says.

   Now everybody knows.

   PARTY WATCHING:

   The Green Tie Ball is Sept. 17, but you can gear up at a bartender
competition for the event's signature drink Friday night at Hard Drive, 151 E.
Wacker. Join a local celebrity panel and sample free finalist cocktails from 8
to 11 p.m.

   Mix, a new video lounge at 2843 N. Halsted offering a nightly blend of
musical genres, opens Saturday. Enjoy complimentary cocktails and hors d'oeuvres
from 8 to 10 p.m.

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; TIGHT COVERAGE: Jerry Azumah and
Robin Robinson.;
Color Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; GOT THE LOOK: Itika Oldwine.;
Color
Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; OUCH: Ken Williams.;
Color Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; GOOD FRIENDS: Larron Tate and
Jill Marie Jones.;
Color Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; FRESH PRINCESS: Tatyana Ali.;
Color Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; YELLOW FELLOW: Wesley Jonathan.;

Color Photo: Eric Sawitoski, For the Sun-Times; THE HOT BOYZ: Shag (left) and
Tone of WPWX-FM (92.3).

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2006


                              77 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           September 8, 2005 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: 1 Case Against Gene Expert Tossed;
Maryland prosecutors say they couldn't introduce key evidence in the molestation
trial. Scientist still faces charges in L.A. County.

BYLINE: Richard Winton, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A renowned San Marino geneticist charged with molesting the daughter of a
colleague at USC won't have to defend allegations that he abused a boy in
Maryland, a prosecutor said Wednesday.

   The Maryland case against William French Anderson was dismissed because under
that state's law, prosecutors were not permitted to introduce a recorded phone
call between the scientist and the boy, said Douglas F. Gansler, state's
attorney for Montgomery County, Md.

   Unlike California, which allows prosecutors to bolster sex-crime cases with
lurid stories from a defendant's past, Maryland does not allow evidence of
similar allegations to be presented in sex cases. Gansler said Anderson
discussed both the Maryland case and the Los Angeles County case during the
phone call.

   "Unfortunately, the incriminating statements of the defendant are intertwined
with references to the California case," wrote Gansler in court papers.

   "We'd likely have to redact those portions and it would be nonsensical, " he
said in an interview.

   Anderson, 68, a world-class martial arts expert, is accused of molesting a
girl between 1997 and 2001 during karate lessons at his San Marino home. The
girl was 10 in 1997. The Maryland accuser said Anderson molested him, starting
when he was 12, during martial arts lessons from 1983 to 1985.

   Anderson's attorney, Paul Kemp, accused Maryland prosecutors of filing a sham
case in order to smear his client's reputation, then abandoning it less than a
week before trial.

   "They never had enough evidence to proceed here. The tapes didn't show he did
anything. There was no admission," he said. "Where does [Anderson] go to get his
reputation back?.... He is one of the most reputable scientists."

   Gansler, however, said "Maryland law is absurd when it comes to these cases.
California law is far more favorable and allows prosecutors to bring in multiple
victims so a victim doesn't have to testify alone." The California law was
enacted in the late 1990s, in part because of abuse allegations against pop star
Michael Jackson, who was acquitted earlier this year of molesting a boy. Gansler
said the Maryland accuser and the alleged victim in another uncharged case could
testify in the California case.

   In Los Angeles County, Anderson was indicted in January on one count of
continuous sexual abuse of a child under 14 and five counts of a lewd act upon a
child. Two of those counts have been dismissed. Anderson has pleaded not guilty.

   After the indictment, Anderson e-mailed friends at USC, saying, "I have not
done the things I am charged with."

   In the California case, sheriff's detectives also directed the accuser to
conduct a taped conversation with Anderson.

   Deputy Dist. Atty. Cathryn Brougham said she expects the California case to
begin no earlier than January. The next scheduled court date is Oct. 12.

   Anderson was dubbed the father of gene therapy after a team he led in 1990
cured a hereditary disease of the immune system in a 4-year-old girl. The child
was infused with a missing gene and with white cells that had been removed from
her blood. It was the first time that gene therapy was successful in a human
being.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: William French Anderson

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2005


                              78 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 7, 2005 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH WEDNESDAY, Pg.D-4 HEALTH CALENDAR

LENGTH: 1595 words

BODY:

   Special Events

    * "Three Rivers, One Rhythm," an interactive hand drumming cruise sponsored
by Epiphany Works will sail from the Gateway Clipper Fleet dock, Station Square
at noon, Sept. 18 on the Clipper's Party Liner. The $25 fee per person includes
drum rental. Limited number of children's tickets available for $18. Tickets can
be purchased by calling Epiphany Works at 724-452-1131 or visiting
www.epiphanyworks.org.

    Charity Events

    * The St. Margaret Foundation and Cold Stone Creamery are teaming to raise
funds for the foundation's Automated External Defibrillator program, Sept. 10.
Coldstone Creamery is opening a new location at the Waterworks Mall and half of
the proceeds from grand opening day sales will be donated to the AED program.

    * A Community-Wide Flea Market will be held from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., Sept. 10
at the Christ United Methodist Church, 44 Highland Road, Bethel Park. Benefits
PRIME TIME Adult Care, a non-profit organization that offers physical and mental
stimulation and medical supervision for the elderly or those with Alzheimer's
disease. For details, 412-835-6661.

    * The Pittsburgh United Mitrochondrial Disease Foundation is hosting "You Go
Girl" Golf Outing, at 1 p.m. Sept. 10 at the Murrysville Golf Club, 3804 Sardis
Road. $60 per person. Dinner party begins at 6:30 p.m. and is $20 per person.
Benefits the UMDF. For details, call 412-793-8077.

    * The Epilepsy Foundation Western/Central Pennsylvania will host its
Froggy's Golf Classic at 11:30 a.m., Sept. 12 at South Hills Country Club. The
event includes lunch, cocktails, dinner and an auction.  Proceeds benefit the
Epilepsy Foundation. For details, 412-261-5880 or visit www.efwp.org.

    * Zach Attack is the charity partner for the 84 Lumber Classic held Sept. 12
through 18 at Nemacolin Woodlands Resort, Farmington, Fayette County. Proceeds
benefit the Zach Attack and Nathan's Battle Foundation to fund upcoming gene
therapy clinical trials for Batten Disease. Tickets purchased from Zach Attack
are $10 and good for one day of tournament play. For details, visit
www.nathansbattle.com.

    * The Walk for PKD (Polycystic Kidney Disease) will be held at 10 a.m.,
Sept. 17 at the Harmony Shelter, North Park. Registration begins at 9 a.m.
Proceeds benefit the PKD Foundation. For details, 412-388-0875 or visit
www.pkdcure.org.

    * Walk to Cure Diabetes, will be held at 10 a.m., Sept. 17 at Schenley Park,
Flagstaff Hill. Registration begins at 8:30 a.m. Benefits the Juvenile Diabetes
Research Foundation. For details, 412-471-1414 or visit www.walk.jdrf.org.

    * The National Kidney Foundation of Western Pennsylvania will hold its
Kidney Walk at 9 a.m., Sept. 24 at the Schenley Park Oval. Registration begins
at 8 a.m         . Proceeds benefit the NKFWP. For details, 412-261-4115, ext.
16 or visit www.kidneywp.org.

    / Screenings

    * Free blood pressure screenings from 8:45 to 10:15 a.m. Sept. 12 at the
Peters Township Community Center, 631 East McMurray Road. Sponsored by
Canonsburg Hospital. To register, 724-873-5835.

    * The UPMC Cancer Center at UPMC Passavant Hospital will offer free prostate
screenings from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Sept. 14 at the hospital, 9100 Babcock Blvd.
Register by Sept. 9 by calling 1-800-533-8762.

    * Total Learning Centers is offering free Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
Disorder screenings for adults and children from noon to 7 p.m. Sept. 14 at the
Total Learning Centers office, 12045 Perry Highway, Pine. To register, call
724-940-1090.

    * Healthcheck Health Screening at Ohio Valley Hospital by appointment Sept.
15 at the W. Laird Davis Center of Learning Auditorium.  From a single blood
sample, 32 tests will be performed. A 14-hour fast is required, but water is
allowed. $25. Call 412-777-6173 for an appointment.

    / Seminars/Lectures

    * UPMC St. Margaret will host a free educational seminar, "Knowing When to
Quit," for those who are contemplating quitting smoking, from 7 to 9 p.m., Sept.
8 in the hospital's conference center. Seven-week stop smoking series, "Let's
Clear the Air," starts Sept. 12. The cost for the series is $25. For details,
1-800-533-8762.

    * Living Well with Liver Disease from 8:30 a.m. to 1 p.m., Sept. 10 at the
Greentree Radisson Hotel. Sponsored by the Western Pennsylvania Chapter of the
American Liver Foundation. $5, includes breakfast and lunch. For details,
1-866-434-7044 or visit www.liverfoundation.org/westernpa.

    * Mercy Hospital's Diabetes Program is sponsoring "Are You at Risk for
Kidney Disease?" from 9:30 to 10:30 a.m., Sept. 13 at the 1st floor Conference
Room. For details, call MercyLink at 1-800-232-5660.

    * The Burger King Cancer Caring Center sponsors "Finding Your Comfort Zone,"
from 7 to 8:30 p.m., Sept. 13 at the center's headquarters, 4117 Liberty Ave.,
Bloomfield.  Introduces individuals to reflexology therapy to reduce pain,
improve circulation and bolster immunity.  For details, call 412-622-1212.

    * OASIS, at Kaufmann's Downtown store, 400 Fifth Ave., is sponsoring the
following lecture for older adults. "Pressure Points: Putting the Squeeze on
High Blood Pressure," from 1 to 3 p.m., Sept. 14 and 21. $9. Call 412-232-9583.

    * Jefferson Regional Medical Center's free "Health for Her" series continues
with Cardiologist Saul Silver speaking on "Reclaiming Sexuality after Heart
Disease," Sept. 15 from 5 to 7 p.m. in the Jefferson Room. For details,
412-469-7100.

    * St. Clair Hospital and Hope Bariatrics will host a free laparoscopic
weight loss surgery seminar from 6 to 8 p.m. Sept. 19 in the hospital's fourth
floor meeting room. For registration, call 1-866-248-4500 ext. 1025.

    / Classes/Workshops

    * The Plum Borough Community Library, 445 Center New Texas Road, Plum, will
offer "Preparing for the Unexpected," Sept. 8 at 7 p.m. a presentation to
provide families with disaster preparedness information. For details,
412-798-7323.

    * The St. Margaret Foundation is sponsoring 55 Alive safe driving classes
for seniors, from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., Sept. 12 and 13 at the O'Hara Township
Municipal Building, 325 Fox Chapel Road. $10. To register, call 412-784-4144.

    * OASIS, at Kaufmann's Downtown store, 400 Fifth Ave., is sponsoring the
following class for older adults. "People with Arthritis CAN Exercise," from
12:45 to 1:45 p.m., Sept. 12. $9. Call 412-232-9583.

    * UPMC Passavant will offer a 9-week weight management course, "Create Your
Weight," starting Sept. 12. For details, 412-367-6468.

    * ParentWISE will offer Basic Parenting classes, from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m.,
starting Sept. 12 and meeting every Monday through Nov. 14 at the Trinity
Lutheran Church, 331 Weldon St., Latrobe. To register, 1-800-544-0227.

    * UPMC Passavant will offer smoking cessation class, from 7:30 to 9 p.m.,
Sept. 12 at the hospital's lower level Dining Room 2, 9100 Babcock Blvd. To
register, 412-367-6329.

    * The Midwife Center is offering a New Parents Support and Play Group that
meets every other Tuesday, from 1:30 to 2:30 p.m. The topic of the Sept. 13
session is Infant Language Learning at the center, 2825 Penn Ave.  Free. To
register, 412-321-6880, ext. 208.

    * The American Heart Association is holding the following classes at the
Downtown YMCA of Greater Pittsburgh, 330 Blvd of the Allies. To register,
412-227-6432.

    -- BLS CPR Certification, 5 to 9 p.m., Sept. 14. $30.

    -- Heartsaver First Aid Certification, 5 to 8 p.m., Sept. 14. $20.

    * Ohio Valley Hospital is offering Living Well With Diabetes classes from
5:30 to 8:30 p.m. Sept. 14 at the hospital's first floor conference room. To
register, 412-777-6205.

    * Headache prevention and treatment, 6:15 p.m. Sept. 14 at the Chiropractic
Health Center, Finleyville. Call 724-348-6446.

    * St. Clair Hospital sponsors KidShape pediatric weight management for
children age 6 to 14 and their families, 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Thursdays, 9 weeks,
starting Sept. 15 at Christ United Methodist Church, 44 Highland Road, Bethel
Park. $100. To register, 1-866-248-4500, ext. 2150.

    * "Healthy Eating Habits," 1 to 2 p.m. and 2:30 to 3:30 p.m. Sept. 16 at the
Shop 'n Save pharmacy, 2362 Golden Mile Highway, Plum. Free. Sponsored by
Hometown Pharmacy and Joslin Diabetes Center. For details, call 724-387-2260.

    * The University of Pittsburgh's Department of Urology will hold a free
program about the bladder and sexual health for women with physical or
neurological disabilities from 12 to 3 p.m. Sept. 17 at the Sokol Club, 2912
East Carson St., South Side. Lunch included. For details, call 412-692-4091.

    * Ohio Valley Hospital is offering a Heartsaver CPR/AED class from 1 to 4:30
p.m. Sept. 19 in the W. Laird Davis Center of Learning, Room 402. $50. To
register, 412-777-6271.

    / Research

    * The University of Pittsburgh Department of Medicine is sponsoring a
research study on biofeedback treatment for urinary incontinence involving a
bladder evaluation and pelvic floor muscle training. If you are a woman 60 or
older and have difficulty controlling your bladder you may be eligible.
Participants receive a stipend. For details, call 412-647-1271.

    * Allegheny General Hospital is in search of women who are in the early
stages of breast cancer and who have not had a lumpectomy to undergo either
partial or whole breast irradiation for a study. For details, call 412-359-6464.

    / Support Groups

    * "When Mourning Dawns" six-part bereavement series, from 1 to 2:30 p.m.
starting Sept. 14, Canonsburg General Hospital. Free. To register: 724-745-6100,
ext. 4118.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2005


                              79 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            September 5, 2005 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-5

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: Silvio S. Varon, 81; Alzheimer's trailblazer at UCSD

BYLINE: Jack Williams, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Silvio S. Varon's crowning achievement in medical science -- opening the door
for potential therapies in Alzheimer's disease -- reflected a much broader
passion.

   "He was always interested in how the nervous system works and repairs itself
-- whether it helped advance a cure for Alzehimer's or helped people with spinal
cord injuries," said his son, Alexander.

   In 1986, Dr. Varon and Fred Gage demonstrated in a University of California
San Diego research project the potential of proteins called nerve growth factor
in promoting cell growth and survival. With two other groups of scientists, they
showed that pumping nerve growth factor into the brains of adult rats could
prevent injury-induced cell death.

   Their findings laid the groundwork for UCSD medical researchers to develop
the first gene therapy in 2001 to prevent cell loss in a patient with
Alzheimer's disease.

   "Silvio Varon was one of the pioneers of neuroscience in the La Jolla
community," said Eduardo Macagno, dean of the UCSD Division of Biological
Sciences. "His imaginative work with growth factors set the stage for major
advances in therapy."

   Dr. Varon, who retired from the UCSD faculty in 1994 as an emeritus professor
of biology and medicine, died Aug. 28 at Thornton Hospital in La Jolla. He was
81.

   The cause of death was complications from kidney failure and heart-related
problems, his son said.

   Nerve growth factor, the key component in Dr. Varon's Alzheimer's research,
is a naturally occurring protein that prevents cell death and stimulates cell
function. It is found in the brains of all vertebrate animals.

   Dr. Varon and Gage based their research on their assumption that the massive
death of brain cells seen in Alzheimer's patients could be traced to the loss of
certain growth factors needed to sustain the lives of nerve cells.

   Subsequent studies showed that nerve growth factor could best be delivered by
gene therapy, which proved successful with primates until the April 2001
breakthrough with a 60-year-old Alzheimer's patient in an 11-hour procedure at
Thornton Hospital.

   Silvio S. Varon was born July 25, 1924, in Milan, Italy. He studied at the
Gymnase Scientifique of Lausanne, Switzerland. He earned a doctorate in chemical
engineering from the Federal Polytechnic School of Lausanne.

   He went on to earn a second bachelor's in humanities at the Classical Lyceum
in Milan. In 1959, he earned his medical degree at the University of Milan,
where he specialized in neuropsychiatry and pharmacology.

   "As a young man of military age, he saw what was happening in fascist Italy,
which formed his political views," his son said. "He was a liberal thinker but
always open-minded and willing to listen to arguments."

   In 1962, Dr. Varon left the University of Milan, where he began his academic
career in the psychiatry department, and moved to the United States.

   He served as a research assistant in the biochemistry department of the City
of Hope Medical Center before venturing into academia. In 1967, he left the
genetics department at the Stanford University School of Medicine to become an
associate professor in biology and medicine at UCSD.

   Dr. Varon became a naturalized United States citizen in September 1967 and
had a consuming interest in political developments and elections. When he wasn't
poring over a medical journal, he was reading up on politics and civic affairs
-- with the aid of an electronic magnifying device after he developed macular
degeneration about six years ago.

   "Even though he was legally blind, he would read every edition of The
Economist (a weekly news and business publication) from front to back," his son
said.

   In the UCSD classroom, Dr. Varon taught graduates and undergraduates, always
demanding the best from his students. "He would come in early to write on a
chalk board, and some of his students would be there already, waiting to copy
everything down," his son said. "He was amazed at the way they responded."

   In 1999, Dr. Varon endowed a professorship in neuroregeneration in UCSD's
Division of Biological Sciences. It is designed to support research in
neurobiology that promotes the understanding of the regeneration of the central
nervous system.

   The five-year chair originally was held by Marla Feller, an assistant
professor of biology. The current holder is Lisa Boulanger, also an assistant
professor of biology.

   Survivors include a daughter, Gaia Varon of Milan; a son, Alexander Varon of
La Jolla; three grandchildren; and his former wife and enduring companion,
Ingrid Varon of La Jolla.

   No services are scheduled. Donations are suggested to The Bishop's School
Science Center in honor of Silvio Varon at 7607 La Jolla Blvd., La Jolla, CA
92037.

   Jack Williams: (619) 542-4587; jack.williams@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Silvio S. Varon

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2005


                              80 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            September 2, 2005 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: EX-TKT BOSS IN JAM;
 SEC: Statements were fraudulent

BYLINE: By DONNA GOODISON

BODY:

   The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday charged the former
chief executive of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. with securities fraud for
allegedly making misleading statements about the company's Replagal drug.

   The statements by Richard B. Selden kept the Cambridge company's stock
artificially high and allowed the Wellesley resident to avoid a $1.64 million
loss when he sold 90,000 shares between May 2001 and February 2002, the SEC
charged in a civil complaint filed in federal court.

   Replagal was designed to treat those who suffer from Fabry's disease, a rare
genetic disorder.

   According to the civil complaint, Selden and Transkaryotic made positive
statements between October 2000 and October 2002 about the drug's clinical
benefits and its chances of receiving Food and Drug Administration approval.
Meanwhile, Selden knew, but did not disclose, negative information about the
clinical trial, including that the FDA considered it a failed study and
recommended additional trials, the SEC alleges.

   When Transkaryotic finally disclosed negative information about the FDA
application on Oct. 2, 2002, the company's stock dropped more than $20 a share
to $12.75 the next day. The SEC is seeking Selden's alleged ill-gotten gains
plus interest, civil penalties, and an order barring him from serving as an
officer or a director of a public company.

   Selden left Transkaryotic in 2003. Transkaryotic shareholders approved its
acquisition by Shire Pharmaceuticals Group of England for $1.6 billion in July.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2005


                              81 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            September 2, 2005 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: California And The West ;
Novartis Bids $4.5 Billion for Rest of Chiron;
The Swiss drug maker's offer boosts the shares of the California firm, which is
trying to restart its flu shot business.

BYLINE: Denise Gellene, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   The consolidation of the drug industry continued Thursday as Swiss drug maker
Novartis bid $4.5 billion for the shares of Chiron Corp. that it doesn't already
own.

   Novartis offered $40 a share for 58% of Emeryville, Calif.-based Chiron,
which is struggling to relaunch its U.S. flu vaccine business. Investors drove
Chiron's shares up nearly 18% to $42.93, signaling that Novartis might have to
sweeten its bid.

   Chiron said its board would evaluate the offer.

   The proposed deal comes two months after British drug giant GlaxoSmithKline
acquired Corixa Corp., a Seattle biotechnology company, and Shire
Pharmaceuticals Group, another British company, purchased Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, Mass.

   Analysts expect more acquisitions as companies face slowing sales growth on
existing drugs and high-cost research and development. Successful drugs carry
impressive profit margins, but development costs run into the hundreds of
millions and the failure rate is high.

   Novartis rapidly is becoming one of the most acquisitive companies in the
sector. This year, the company bolstered its position in generic drugs by
purchasing Hexal of Germany and its U.S. affiliate, Eon Labs Inc. Novartis,
whose leading product is the heart drug Diovan, closed its acquisition of
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.'s over-the-counter drug business this week.

   Novartis, formed by the 1996 combination of Swiss drug companies Ciba-Geigy
and Sandoz, said it wanted Chiron to diversify into the global vaccine business.
Besides flu vaccine, Chiron produces shots for childhood diseases, meningitis,
rabies and other diseases.

   Novartis said the acquisition would also benefit Chiron, whose flu vaccine
problems last year triggered investigations by the Justice Department and the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Bacterial contamination at Chiron's plant in
Liverpool, England, forced the company to scrap its entire production slated for
the U.S., prompting authorities to ration shots. The factory passed a Food and
Drug Administration inspection this week, clearing the way for it to reenter the
U.S. market this year.

   "We believe Chiron, as a wholly owned subsidiary of Novartis, would be better
positioned to deal with the legal, regulatory and business issues that it is
facing," Novartis Chairman and Chief Executive Daniel Vasella said in a letter
to Chiron.

   Chiron said its board, excluding three representatives of Novartis, would
review the offer with advice from Morgan Stanley and Credit Suisse First Boston.

   Novartis spokesman John Gilardi said the offer came after Chiron's board
asked the Swiss company about its plans for its investment in Chiron. The
question prompted Novartis to conduct a close examination of Chiron's books.
Founded in 1981, Chiron ranks as one of the nation's oldest biotechnology
companies. Known as a research powerhouse -- it discovered the gene for
hepatitis C -- Chiron has struggled with little success to turn its discoveries
into strong-selling drugs. But analysts said Chiron had some cancer drugs in the
early stages of development that could be attractive to Novartis.

   Chiron had sales of $1.7 billion last year. It has 5,300 employees.

   The jewel of Chiron's operations is its blood-testing business. Revenue could
swell to $500 million by 2009 from $280 million last year with the introduction
of three blood-testing products. Geoffrey Porges, an analyst with Sanford C.
Bernstein & Co., said the blood-testing unit could be worth $3 billion to $4
billion -- almost equal to Novartis' bid for all of Chiron.

   Novartis could sell the blood-testing unit, a highly specialized area that
does not complement its other businesses, he said.

   Porges said a fair price for Chiron was in $43 to $45 a share.

   Novartis cautioned that it might not complete a deal for Chiron. Novartis
fell $5 to $880.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2005


                              82 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           September 1, 2005 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: KATRINA'S RISING TOLL;
Michael Hiltzik / GOLDEN STATE;
Stem Cell Hype Is Hard to Combat

BYLINE: Michael Hiltzik, Golden State appears every Monday and Thursday. You can
reach Michael Hiltzik at golden.state@latimes.com.

BODY:

   The California Council on Science and Technology, a group of highly
experienced and well-informed professionals, has discovered a painful fact of
life: Nobody likes a spoilsport.

   Last week, the council issued a report explaining why the state shouldn't
count on a quick shower of wealth from the $6-billion Proposition 71 investment
in embryonic stem cell research. The report observed that an attempt by the
Legislature to mandate a specific financial return from all commercial stem cell
treatments derived from state grants would, in fact, discourage the
commercialization of such treatments. It observed that useful research in
biotech and other fields developed at a snail's pace until the federal
government abandoned a similar mandate in 1980.

   The report further noted that Californians have "unrealistically optimistic
expectations" about financial gains from the stem cell program. Its authors
blamed these expectations partially on an economic impact analysis, paid for by
the Proposition 71 promoters, that had all but advised voters to start counting
the money now.

   Despite its effort to deliver practical advice about what to expect from a
research effort that is in its earliest stages, the council was ridiculed and
insulted.

   State Sen. Deborah Ortiz (D-Sacramento), who is a critic of the stem cell
program now but was on board when Proposition 71 got marketed to voters as a
shower of gold, dismissed the council members as "biotech and university
representatives." Marcy Darnovsky associate executive director of the Center for
Genetics and Society called the authors a "stacked committee" that was
"dominated by private industry."

   Sorry, but this won't do. The council's study group comprised 17 members, of
whom seven represent (arguably) private industry. An additional seven came from
academia, including four from the University of California or its constituent
campuses; two from federally funded research institutions (Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory and NASA's Ames Research Center); and one from state
government.

   What these people have in common, says Susan Hackwood, executive director of
the nonpartisan and nonprofit science and technology council, is their
experience in handling intellectual property.

   They're also knowledgeable about what's required to move basic research into
the commercial world: patience and lots more money, most of which will have to
come from industry.

   Although the state's commitment of $300 million a year for 10 years looks big
-- and is big in terms of the state budget -- it's dwarfed by the $45 billion
spent annually by industry on research and development and the $14 billion in
federal grants made annually to California research institutions.

   Therefore, the council report argues, nothing can be gained from insisting on
a specific return for the state from stem cell discoveries. Any such requirement
would risk driving other investors away. Moreover, if the state insisted on
owning the fruits of research it funded, it would have to create a bureaucracy
to manage its intellectual property. Neither the state nor the stem cell agency,
the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine, is currently competent to do
so.

   As the council reports, the federal government faced similar intellectual
property issues in the 1970s and 1980s, including who should own the fruits of
grant-financed research, and what should be reasonably expected from royalties
and license fees.

   Until 1980, the report states, federal grantees had to negotiate intellectual
property agreements individually with each grant-making agency. This hindered
the commercialization of valuable discoveries because no one knew who could
claim the profits. Of the 28,000 patents owned by the federal government, only
about 5% were licensed for commercial development.

   The solution was the Bayh-Dole Act, which gave grant recipients the right to
patent inventions paid for by federal grants and license them to other firms.
This has led directly to a 25-year boom in commercial development of university
research, much of it federally funded. Cancer treatments, genetic therapies and
computer and networking advances are among the resulting achievements.

   The idea that intellectual property should be owned by the grantee, not the
grantor, thus isn't new. But this history was willfully ignored by the
politicians who jumped on the Proposition 71 bandwagon and by the promoters who
drove it. They promised that billions would flow into the state treasury from
patent royalties and overstated the prospects for any patentable discoveries at
all. And now that experts in transferring research from the lab into the
marketplace have called them on it, they curse them as mere industry shills.

   The council's report simply exposes the contradictions inherent in the stem
cell program. It was established to advance the cause of embryonic stem cell
research and to fill the state treasury, but if the state insists on the second
outcome it may well fail to achieve the first.

   This suggests a couple of lessons. One is that state governments, which tend
to be preoccupied with economic development above most other concerns, are
perhaps the wrong entities to fund basic research programs whose fruits may not
mature for decades, as is the case with stem cell science. (Although the White
House is a major roadblock to embryonic stem cell research, even Republicans are
beginning to question its policy, and in any case Bush won't be in office
forever.)

   Another is that initiative campaigns, with their wild promises and
unverifiable assertions, have become poor tools for making policy. We voters
would be wise to remember that, as more lies and misrepresentations fill our TVs
in the run-up to the November election.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2005


                              83 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 28, 2005, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: Enzyme may hold key to a form of blindness

SOURCE: Bloomberg News

BYLINE: JEFFREY TANNENBAUM

BODY:

   The discovery that a gene called Rpe65 is a key enzyme in the so-called
visual cycle, the chemistry needed for eyesight, may aid scientists' efforts to
cure one form of blindness, according to research published in the journal Cell.

   Researchers led by Gabriel Travis, a University of California at Los Angeles
biochemist, said scientists previously were unable to explain the chemistry
behind the known link between Rpe65 and the blindness called Leber congenital
amaurosis.

   The new finding may reinforce the belief of some scientists that so-called
gene therapy may be able to cure the Leber form of blindness.

   "This suggests that replacement of Rpe65 by gene therapy should correct the
blindness in these children, as was observed in mice and dogs with Rpe65
mutations," said Travis.

   Trials of the cure in humans may start before the end of next year, under the
supervision of Samuel Jacobson, a University of Pennsylvania ophthalmologist,
said Gregory Acland, a Cornell researcher who was the lead author of the 2001
report, in a telephone interview. Jacobson wasn't available for comment.

   An estimated 10,000 to 15,000 people in the U.S. have Leber congenital
amaurosis, said Allie Laban-Baker, a spokeswoman for the Foundation Fighting
Blindness in Owings Mills, Md.


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2005


                              84 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 28, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 7538 words

HEADLINE: Roberts V. The Future

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Rosen.

   Jeffrey Rosen, a law professor at George Washington University, is a frequent
contributor to the magazine. His new book, ''The Most Democratic Branch: How the
Courts Serve America,'' will be published next year by Oxford University Press.

BODY:


   I. The Future Is Not the Present

    Three years ago, in a small conference room at the offices of the law firm
Hogan & Hartson in Washington, I had the chance to talk with John G. Roberts Jr.
At the time, Roberts was a lawyer in private practice, unsure whether Senate
Democrats would hold a hearing on his nomination to be a federal appellate
judge. (After being nominated three times, in 1992, 2001 and 2003, he would
finally be given a hearing and confirmed in May 2003 after Republicans took
control of the Senate.) In a conversation over cookies and coffee, Roberts spoke
candidly about a wide range of topics, and I was impressed by his modesty,
intelligence and sense of humor.

     Now that Roberts has been nominated to the Supreme Court, something else
about our conversation strikes me: he was acutely sensitive to the
unpredictability of history and the surprises that the future tends to bring. At
one point, the conversation turned to the thesis he wrote in 1976 as an
undergraduate at Harvard, in which he analyzed the fate, decades earlier, of the
British Liberal Party. After winning one of the biggest landslides in British
history, in 1906, the Liberals appeared to be destined for a long period of
dominance. But in fact the party never won another election because of a series
of political miscalculations. The lesson of this particular episode of history,
Roberts seemed to suggest, was that politicians -- and judges, for that matter
-- should be wary of the assumption that the future will be little more than an
extension of things as they are.

    Roberts's point might be useful for senators to keep in mind as they prepare
to question him at his Supreme Court confirmation hearings, which are scheduled
to begin on Tuesday, Sept. 6. Since Roberts's nomination to replace Sandra Day
O'Connor was announced in July, Senate staff members have been combing through
legal memos that Roberts wrote, many while he was still in his 20's, hoping to
find hints of his views about the most controversial issues of the past
generation -- from civil rights to affirmative action to abortion. It's not
surprising that lawyers, who are trained to look backward, instinctively
deferring to precedent and tradition, would parse memos from two decades ago as
clues to how Roberts would perform on the court.

    But in the case of Supreme Court nominees, looking backward may not be the
most reliable way to predict the future. During William Rehnquist's confirmation
hearings, first as a nominee for associate justice in 1971 and then for chief
justice in 1986, the discussion focused heavily on a memo he wrote as a law
clerk that seemed to question the soundness of Brown v. Board of Education. By
expending so much of their energy on the issue of segregation, the senators
asked little, in the end, about the issue that would come to define the
Rehnquist court -- the relationship between the federal and state governments.

    To judge from comments in the press from Senate Judiciary Committee members,
the same sort of myopia may characterize the Roberts hearings. That would
represent a missed opportunity: in the next 10 or 15 years, as technology and
science continue to advance and America's demographic profile continues to
change, the Supreme Court will, in all likelihood, be asked to decide a
fascinating array of divisive issues that are now only dimly on the horizon. To
try to identify more concretely what those issues might be, I recently canvassed
a number of technology experts, bioethicists and legal scholars.

    The topics that they discussed amount to a Brave New World of constitutional
disputes. As Congress and the states pass legislation to address a host of
futuristic issues, from the genetic enhancement of children to the use of brain
scanning to identify criminal suspects, the laws will inevitably be challenged
in court, raising novel and surprising questions about how to interpret our
constitutional rights to privacy, equality and free expression. Rather than
focusing on Roberts's past, the senators questioning him might get a better
sense of his future on the Supreme Court by imagining the issues of the next
generation. The court's response to those issues, far more than its resolution
of cases that will be decided next year, will define the role it will play in
the first decades of the 21st century.

II. Brain Fingerprinting and the Future of Privacy Rights

    In the wake of the recent London bombings, the New York subway system
implemented random bag searches, and the London Underground announced plans to
introduce high-tech body scanners that peer through clothing. In the coming
years, if technology advances as expected and the threat of terror fails to
subside, Western democracies will develop ever more sophisticated and intrusive
forms of surveillance, many of which will be challenged in court as a violation
of rights to privacy and equality. Not long ago, I visited Marc Rotenberg, the
head of the Electronic Privacy Information Center, a civil-liberties group, at
his office in Washington and asked him what form he thought the new legal
battles over surveillance technology might take.

    Sketching out a hypothetical situation, Rotenberg imagined, in the near
future, a young man walking around the Washington Monument for 30 minutes while
waiting for a friend. Meanwhile, sophisticated biometric camera systems (which
can register the details of someone's face), connected to data-mining computer
programs (which link the face to a database of personal information), monitor
the young man. The cameras might also detect, say, a copy of the Koran he is
carrying under his arm. Taken together, this information is used to generate a
''threat index'' based on how suspicious the high-tech profiling makes him out
to be. ''According to the computer algorithm, pacing around a national monument
might be a suspicious activity characteristic of someone intending to commit a
terrorist attack,'' Rotenberg said. ''The link between his face and his travel
records and magazine subscriptions, maintained by a big commercial database,
might generate a citizenship trustworthiness score that suggests further
investigation.''

    Based on a low trustworthiness score, the young man might be stopped by the
police, who might open his backpack and find a bag of marijuana. Would the
examination of the backpack amount to an unconstitutional search or seizure?

    On the current Supreme Court, Rotenberg noted, a challenge on constitutional
grounds to this kind of search might face an uphill battle. In January, in a 6-2
decision written by the court's most liberal justice, John Paul Stevens, the
court upheld as constitutional a dog sniff of a driver who had been stopped for
speeding. (When the dog barked, the cops opened the trunk and found marijuana.)
The dissenting justices, David Souter and Ruth Bader Ginsburg, expressed concern
that the majority opinion cleared the way for the police to turn drug-sniffing
dogs on large groups of innocent citizens without cause to suspect illegal
activity. But even Ginsburg and Souter said there might be nothing wrong with
the use of bomb-detection dogs if they were effective in identifying potential
terrorists.

    According to the court's logic, whether a threat-index system that places
citizens in different categories of suspicion violates the Constitution might
depend on how accurate the threat indexes turn out to be. But even if the
indexes turned out to not be very accurate, Rotenberg suggested, a justice like
John Roberts, should he be sitting on the court, might not be inclined to
question their use. In two recent cases as an appellate judge, Roberts was very
deferential to searches and seizures by the police. In one case, he reluctantly
upheld a Washington policy requiring the arrest of a 12-year-old girl who ate a
French fry in a Washington Metro station, and in the other, he argued in dissent
that the police should have been allowed to search the trunk of a car after
stopping the driver for having a broken light. (The officers found a loaded gun
in the trunk, a discovery that Roberts's colleagues in the majority contended
had to be suppressed because there had been no probable cause to search the
trunk in the first place.) ''Roberts seems untroubled by what people would think
of as pretextual searches,'' Rotenberg said.

   If polls about the U.S.A. Patriot Act are correct (only 22 percent of
Americans say it goes too far in restricting people's civil liberties to fight
terrorism, while 69 percent are content with it or say it doesn't go far
enough), many people may not object to data-mining technology that promises to
identify potential terrorists. But if the war against terror escalates further,
the government may deploy even more controversial forms of electronic
surveillance.

    To explore the promises and dangers of these technologies, I phoned O.
Carter Snead, a bioethicist at the University of Notre Dame who is studying
neuro-imaging techniques that can detect the presence of electrochemical signals
in the brain. Promoters of this so-called brain fingerprinting, which uses
functional magnetic resonance imaging, or f.M.R.I., say that it can detect brain
activity that is associated with particular kinds of recollection. (In an appeal
of a murder conviction in Iowa, for example, a brain scan was introduced that
suggested that the murderer's brain did not contain information about the murder
but did contain information consistent with his alibi.) Snead imagined that
these scans might be used in the future to interrogate, for example, suspected
terrorists accused of having trained in Afghanistan. ''Officials who are
examining the suspects could hook them up to an f.M.R.I. device, show them
pictures of the battlefield in Afghanistan, and if they've been in that
particular place before,'' the device would detect the corresponding brain
activity, he said.

    It's an open question, under the Supreme Court's current doctrine, whether
f.M.R.I. scans, used as a sort of high-tech lie detector, would be considered a
form of compulsory self-incrimination that violates the Fifth Amendment. If the
justices viewed an involuntary brain scan as no more intrusive than a blood or
urine sample or an ordinary fingerprint, there wouldn't be any Fifth Amendment
problem. But if the court were to decide that f.M.R.I. scans are not only
searching for physical evidence but also encroaching on a suspect's private
memories and consciousness, the justices might conclude that the suspect's
mental privacy is invaded and that he has been forced to testify against his
will.

    There is also the possibility that police officers or counterterror experts
may eventually search suspects for brain waves that suggest a propensity toward
violence -- a sort of cognitive profiling. ''You can do an f.M.R.I. scan showing
that the structures in the brain responsible for impulse control and empathy are
underactive and the parts of the brain responsible for aggression and more
animalistic, violent activities are overactive,'' Snead explained. ''Maybe with
these nascent technologies, we'll be able to develop some kind of profile for a
terrorist.'' Suspects who show a propensity for violence might be detained
indefinitely as enemy combatants even though they committed no crimes.

    When I asked William Stuntz, a scholar of criminal procedure at Harvard Law
School, about the legal ramifications of these technologies, he argued that
brain scanning will put tremendous pressure on the court's understanding of
privacy. The traditional definition of privacy protects the sanctity of
information that people go out of their way to conceal from the world. But
brain-scan technology can access personal information that is neither actively
hidden from view nor meant to be exposed to the public. ''There's a whole
category of information about our bodies and our brains that we don't keep
secret from the world in the way that I keep secret my sex life or my
finances,'' Stuntz said. ''It's not that they're invading my space or my bedroom
or my car. It's that they're invading me.''

III. Genetic Screening and the Future of Personal Autonomy

    Every Supreme Court confirmation hearing since the election of Ronald Reagan
has been marked by efforts -- nearly always unsuccessful -- to predict the
nominee's views on Roe v. Wade. The Roberts hearings are unlikely to prove an
exception. If Roberts is confirmed, he will have two opportunities in the next
Supreme Court term to reveal some of his views about the potential implications
of Roe -- in one case involving a teen-health exception in parental-notification
laws and in another concerning the federal power to prosecute protesters at
abortion clinics. Regardless of whether Roe v. Wade remains on the books in 10
or 20 years, however, America's political and legal disputes about reproduction
may well have moved far beyond efforts to balance the interests of a fetus
against the interests of a pregnant mother. Instead, the country will most
likely be debating the use of sophisticated technologies involving genetic
manipulation and reproductive cloning outside the womb -- controversial
procedures that may prompt restrictions or bans by state legislatures or
Congress. In order to get a better sense of these coming debates, I turned again
to O. Carter Snead, who recently served as general consul to President Bush's
Council on Bioethics, to describe the kinds of developments that might give rise
to Roe v. Wade-like controversies.

    The first issue he mentioned was genetic selection. In the future, he noted,
scientists may have analyzed much more of the genetic makeup of embryos created
through in vitro fertilization. They might then be able to use that information
to help aspiring parents implant in the woman's womb only those embryos that
display a specified range of desired characteristics -- including those having
to do not only with sex but also, perhaps someday, traits like intelligence, eye
color and height. Not all the traits that parents demand will be conventionally
desirable: a few years ago in the United States, a deaf lesbian couple attracted
attention (and criticism) by deliberately choosing a deaf man as a sperm donor
in order to increase their chances of having a deaf child. And if scientists
ever learn to identify a genetic predisposition to homosexuality with a high
degree of certainty, genetic screening might be used to ''weed out these
embryos,'' as Snead put it, ''or to select for them.''

    The political response to so-called designer babies might create strange
bedfellows. ''Feminists are rightly concerned that male embryos will be
routinely selected over female embryos,'' Snead noted, which is why many
feminists say they would oppose the practice. (''As we increasingly come to see
our children as commodities to be chosen, like consumer products, they will be
devalued in ways that we will come as a society to regret,'' the feminist Judy
Norsigian, co-author of ''Our Bodies, Ourselves,'' told me. ''This kind of sex
selection would create a sex imbalance, and it would reinforce preferential
attitudes toward male children.'') Social conservatives would also oppose these
efforts, but out of concern for the right to life of fertilized embryos. Earlier
this year, in fact, a Republican state legislator in Maine introduced a bill to
ban abortions based on the sexual orientation of the unborn child. Snead
imagined that a conservative state might pass a law banning genetic screening
''for elective sex selection or sexual-orientation selection not linked to a
therapeutic concern.''

    How would the Supreme Court view the constitutionality of a state law
banning sex selection? In 1992, when it reaffirmed Roe in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey, the court held that the Constitution protects a right of personal
autonomy. The scope of this right would be at the heart of disputes over genetic
technologies in the future. If the Supreme Court agreed to hear a constitutional
challenge to a law banning sex selection, for example, the conservative justices
might find themselves divided. Justices like Antonin Scalia, a states-rights
conservative who advocates deference to local legislatures, might vote to uphold
the law, while a libertarian conservative like Anthony Kennedy, who argues that
the Constitution protects a broad sphere of autonomy over intimate and personal
decisions, might vote to overturn it.

    At the moment, the Kennedy-style vision of personal autonomy is most
vigorously defended among legal scholars by a law professor at the University of
Texas at Austin named John Robertson. He argues that the right to have offspring
or not, recognized in Roe v. Wade, necessarily entails some right to select the
characteristics of the offspring. ''The liberal notion of autonomy over
reproduction includes some right of selectivity that logically could extend to
nonmedical traits,'' Robertson told me, ''but how far has to be sorted out by
the Supreme Court and the country.''

    Should the Supreme Court try to draw the line between those traits that
parents can select for and those traits they can't? If so, where should the
justices of the future draw that line? It seems quite unlikely that John
Roberts, for one, shares Robertson's broad view of the right to autonomy and
privacy: in a 1981 memorandum to Attorney General William French Smith, Roberts
referred to ''the so-called 'right to privacy' '' and suggested that ''such an
amorphous right is not to be found in the Constitution.'' Even those justices
who do not share Roberts's apparent skepticism about the right to privacy might
share a reluctance to decide, by judicial fiat, the mysterious point at which
screening for genetic disabilities becomes screening for genetic enhancement.

    When I spoke recently with George Annas, a professor of bioethics at Boston
University, he pointed out that genetic screening by prospective parents for
Down syndrome is already widely accepted. Couples in the future, he said, may
naturally insist that if they are permitted to screen for genes associated with
a low IQ, they should also be allowed to screen for those associated with a high
IQ. Judicial decrees about the scope of privacy rights will not settle this
debate. Rather than presuming to define the boundary between therapy and
enhancement on the basis of its understanding of privacy doctrine, the court
might serve the country better by leaving that agonizing decision -- which has
confounded our leading scientists and philosophers -- to democratically
accountable legislatures.

   Another area of potential controversy is reproductive cloning. At the moment,
there is no widespread clamor for the practice. But it's not hard to imagine,
for instance, a growing demand in the near future among parents who might want
to clone a terminally ill child or, according to Snead, among same-sex couples
looking for a way to produce children that are genetically related to both
parents -- something that reproductive cloning may be able to offer.

    To consider the second situation, here is how two men could possibly have a
child of their own: scientists would create a cloned embryo from one man, derive
stem cells from the embryo and then coax the stem cells (which can be used to
create any tissue in the body) into a human ovum. The ovum would then be
fertilized by the sperm of the other man, conceiving an embryo that would be
implanted in a surrogate's womb. ''The baby would be genetically related to both
men,'' Snead told me, ''much like a baby conceived through sexual
reproduction.'' It's certainly possible that Congress would be moved to ban this
kind of noncoital reproduction. ''You could imagine a bill,'' Snead went on to
say, ''that says that children shall be conceived only through the union of egg
and sperm taken from an adult human.''

    A bill along these lines would clash with the broad vision of personal
autonomy endorsed by Kennedy on the current Supreme Court. In the future,
however, supporters of laws banning reproductive cloning might be able to call
on conservative judges and legal scholars to make arguments for upholding the
legislation. Just as some liberals insist that the constitutional right of
personal autonomy guarantees a right of genetic selection, some social
conservatives are increasingly countering that the constitutional guarantee of
equal protection of the laws should be interpreted to protect embryos from the
moment of conception -- including those that are destroyed in the process of
generating stem cells.

    I spoke recently with Robert P. George, an influential conservative legal
philosopher at Princeton, about the possibility that this view might persuade a
future court. ''If, in fact, the embryo is, as I think the science shows it is,
a full living member of the species homo sapiens,'' he said, ''and if by the
word 'persons' the framers of the 14th Amendment meant to protect full living
members of the species homo sapiens, then plainly, the creation of embryos for
destruction would be a violation of their equal protection. That would be
straightforward, and I would see no room around it.''

    Although George's legal argument represents a minority view at the moment,
there may be some political momentum gathering for his way of thinking.
Illinois, for example, has defined human life as beginning from the moment of
conception, and earlier this year, an Illinois judge invoked this declaration to
hold that a frozen embryo accidentally discarded in a fertility clinic was a
human being whose parents were entitled to file a wrongful-death suit. If the
Supreme Court were to hold that all embryos in America are full human beings
entitled to equal protection under the Constitution, researchers engaged in
stem-cell research across the country might be similarly liable for homicide.

    If a future and more conservative court accepted George's argument, even an
attempt by Congress to authorize carefully regulated stem-cell research and
therapeutic cloning could be deemed an unconstitutional attempt to deny embryos
the equal protection of the laws. Of course, it's hardly obvious that the
Supreme Court in 2015 or 2025 would recognize embryos as constitutional persons
-- certainly no member of the current court has yet endorsed this bold argument.
And any effort by an activist conservative Supreme Court to stop Congress from
authorizing stem-cell research would be a serious affront to the wishes of a
majority of Americans. Some scholarly advocates on both sides of the political
spectrum have acknowledged that the justices might do better to allow the future
of reproduction to be settled by Congress and the state legislatures, a view
that George endorses. ''I hope we won't be thinking in 2025 with a narrow
court-focused view,'' he said. ''I like the trend toward respecting the
authority of other branches of government to deliberate about constitutional
questions.''

IV. D.N.A. and the Future of Affirmative Action

    If current demographic trends continue, over the next few decades the United
States will become more diverse. The Census Bureau estimates that the number of
non-Hispanic whites may shrink to less than half of the population before 2060
and that Hispanics will soon outnumber blacks. As intermarriage rates continue
to rise, more and more Americans will consider themselves multiracial. This is a
recipe for conflicts over affirmative action and public entitlements.

    To better understand these coming battles, I phoned Peter H. Schuck, a
professor at Yale Law School and the author of ''Diversity in America: Keeping
Government at a Safe Distance.'' Schuck emphasized what he called ''the growing
and palpable absurdity of color-coding and racial preferences in a population as
hybridized, individualistic and immigration-driven as ours.'' He predicted a
rise in the number of state limitations or bans on affirmative action, as well
as the increasing fragility of Grutter v. Bollinger, the 5-4 Supreme Court
decision in 2003 that upheld affirmative action in higher education.

    In her opinion for the court in Grutter, Sandra Day O'Connor noted that ''it
has been 25 years'' since the court first approved the use of racial preferences
in higher education, and she added that ''since that time, the number of
minority applicants with high grades and test scores has indeed increased.''
O'Connor concluded hopefully, ''We expect that 25 years from now, the use of
racial preferences will no longer be necessary.''

    What to make of O'Connor's prediction? There's no guarantee, first of all,
that in 25 years O'Connor's opinion will still be the law of the land. In
Grutter, she cast the swing vote on a divided court, and if Roberts succeeds
her, he may view affirmative-action programs less indulgently. (As a young
Justice Department official in 1981, he wrote a biting criticism of a defense of
a federal affirmative-action program by the outgoing head of the United States
Commission on Civil Rights.) Even if the Supreme Court continues to approve of
affirmative action in higher education in 25 years, it's possible to imagine a
challenge to the policy from a rejected white applicant, arguing, in effect,
that O'Connor had promised that affirmative action would no longer be necessary
by 2028. In response, defenders of affirmative action might argue that O'Connor
was too optimistic, and that racial preferences were still necessary to maintain
educational diversity in the face of continuing gaps in grades and test scores.

    But would this reply persuade the court to preserve affirmative action
beyond its expiration date? Schuck pointed to a recent paper from the National
Bureau of Economic Research expressing skepticism about O'Connor's prediction.
The study notes that the gap between white and black test scores, which narrowed
in the 80's, actually widened in the 90's. And the authors of the study conclude
that black economic gains over the next 25 years are likely to lead to less than
20 percent of the level of black representation at universities that affirmative
action currently guarantees. How a justice like Roberts, presumably an
affirmative-action skeptic, would respond if this pessimistic situation came to
pass is hard to predict, but he might be reluctant to extend the term for
another 25 years with no end in sight.

    Affirmative-action programs may also be challenged by people other than
disappointed white applicants. As America becomes increasingly multiracial,
there may be debates over who, precisely, gets to qualify for racial
preferences. Akhil Reed Amar, a colleague of Schuck's at Yale Law School, told
me that people might eventually resort to genetic tests to prove their racial
heritage. ''I can imagine a predominantly white person who has been rejected
because of an affirmative-action program saying, 'I should benefit from it
because I am of mixed race, and I can prove it with sophisticated DNA analysis
showing the percentage of my genes that came from Africa,' '' he said. ''The
university might respond: 'It's not a genetic test but a social understanding
test, and since people don't perceive you as black, you haven't been subject to
discrimination.' ''

    In response to disputes like this, Amar suggested, state legislatures might
conclude that ''the social-understanding test is unacceptably fuzzy, and at
least science can give us some rules. So the government might require a genetic
test because it's easy to administer.'' If, however, a state legislature were to
declare that anyone with a drop of African-American blood is entitled to be
considered black, the policy might provoke a bitter Supreme Court challenge.
''It would recall the shameful history in times of slavery and Jim Crow,''
Schuck told me, ''in which one drop of blood was sufficient to render an
individual black for the laws of slavery. And it would be extremely distasteful
for blacks and whites.'' Still, Schuck acknowledged, the problem of deciding who
is eligible for affirmative action will grow only more urgent in an era of
shrinking public resources. ''I think as pressure on affirmative-action programs
increases,'' he said, ''affirmative-action programs will have to make refined
judgments about eligibility.''

V. Old Age and Drug Legalization

    If birth rates continue to fall and life expectancy continues to rise, a
population made up increasingly of older Americans may bring about a host of
constitutional issues of its own -- issues ranging from government financing of
gene therapies to the legalization of painkilling drugs. Francis S. Collins,
director of the National Human Genome Research Institute, has written that
within five years, ''it is likely that predictive genetic tests will be
available for as many as a dozen common conditions, enabling individuals to take
preventive steps to reduce their risks of developing such disorders.'' The
medical profession may respond by customizing drugs and other treatments to suit
an individual's distinctive genetic profile, possibly tailoring them not only to
prevent disease but also to enhance a patient's cognitive and physical
capacities. ''By 2020,'' Collins predicted, ''the impact is likely to be far
more sweeping than any of us can envision today.''

    Who will pay for these gene therapies? Samuel Gorovitz, a bioethicist and
philosopher at Syracuse University, told me recently that in the future, states
may well prohibit health care organizations that receive state financing from
providing access to these therapies -- at least those that border on
enhancement. ''A state legislature might decide that any kind of enhancement is
unconscionable,'' he said. Prohibitions like this might provoke court battles
over whether states and the federal government have an obligation to finance
genetic therapies that can cure identifiable diseases. In the past, the Supreme
Court has been reluctant to require the states to finance medical care for the
poor. In 1977, for example, the court upheld a Connecticut law that prohibited
the use of public money for abortions, except those that were ''medically
necessary.'' But identifying which genetic therapies are medically necessary to
cure disease and which are merely elective enhancements may prove just as
agonizing in cases involving public money for the old as in cases involving
reproduction for the young.

    The Supreme Court may also face increasing pressure from an aging population
to remove federal barriers on controversial drugs. William Stuntz, the Harvard
professor I spoke with about brain scanning, is 47 and suffers from chronic back
pain. He suggested that his common disability will afflict many more Americans
as baby boomers age over the next 20 years. ''My generation will include lots of
very old people, who have more chronic pain than middle-aged people and also get
cancer at higher rates, and both of these trends will massively change the way
the baby-boom generation thinks about drug policy,'' he said. ''I'd never had
any prescription pain medications until I spent the last five years on them for
back pain, and anyone who has that experience will think very differently about
what drugs should be on the prohibited list.''

    Last June, by a 6-3 vote, the Supreme Court upheld Congress's authority to
dictate national drug policies, even in the face of a California voter
initiative that authorized the use of medical marijuana. ''I bet a case like
that would come out very differently in 20 years,'' Stuntz said. He suggested
that political demands may lead states to enact more lax laws authorizing the
use various variants of morphine, which are federally prohibited but useful in
treating a variety of pain. ''Only those laws won't be coming from California
but from Florida and Arizona,'' he said. ''Old people are traditionally statist
on these issues, but aging baby boomers may well become more libertarian because
they want to be able to design everything from the way they die to personalized
medical treatments.'' At the beginning of the new Supreme Court term in October,
in fact, John Roberts would most likely have an opportunity to explore whether
the federal government has the power to ban the use of drugs for assisted
suicide, despite an Oregon voter initiative to the contrary.

VI. Property, Free Expression and the Right to Tinker

    At Roberts's confirmation hearings, a central focus will be the nominee's
views about the scope of Congress's power to regulate the economy and the
environment. As a federal appellate judge, Roberts once questioned the
constitutionality of some applications of the Endangered Species Act, and Arlen
Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican and chairman of the Senate Judiciary
Committee, has told Roberts that he intends to ask him about recent Supreme
Court decisions narrowing Congress's power to regulate interstate commerce. As
important as these issues are, during the next decade or two there may be other,
less familiar legal debates over the scope of rights involving private property
-- in particular, the ability of corporations and entrepreneurs, through the use
of copyright and patent law, to control a broad spectrum of intellectual
property, from digital entertainment to genetic sequences.

    As books, music and movies are increasingly distributed by large
corporations in digital form, entertainment and publishing corporations are
clamping down on the ability to access copyrighted material -- sometimes by
persuading Congress to extend copyright protections and sometimes by devising
ingenious technological ways to block users from making copies of the product.
Many digital activists fear that free expression won't be able to thrive if
people are deprived of the right to sample, remix and tinker in a world where
every copyright infringement can be recorded, punished or technologically
impeded.

    The guru of digital activism is the Stanford law professor and cyberspace
visionary Lawrence Lessig, whom I recently reached by telephone in Spain. ''As
life moves increasingly onto the Net and the capacity to control every aspect of
our cultural capital increases almost to perfection, the question will be
whether there is an affirmative right of access, to use and remix,'' Lessig
said. Three years ago, as the lawyer for an Internet publisher of works in the
public domain, Lessig failed to convince the Supreme Court that the purpose of
copyright law -- to promote creativity -- was undermined by the automatic
copyrighting of all creative works for the life of the author plus 70 years (as
it is after the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension law added 20 years to
existing copyright protections.) Lessig argued unsuccessfully that the First
Amendment is threatened in a world where artists, for example, must solicit
permission from lawyers at major movie studios before using 10-second clips in
their video art -- virtually a requirement in the current scheme. In 10 or 20
years, Lessig told me, the problem for digital activists will be copyright
restrictions that are enforced not by lawyers but by computer code and
digital-rights-management technology. These technologies can ensure that
everyone who buys an electronic book or tune can copy it as many as five times,
for example, but no more.

    At the moment, copyright law contains an exception for ''fair use'' -- an
artist or biographer, for instance, can quote briefly from copyrighted books or
songs. But as movies, books, songs, games and the computers that transmit them
are increasingly controlled by digital-rights-management technology, they might
be made impervious to copying or sampling, even for the brief quotations that
fair use now protects. Bloggers, for example, might find themselves
technologically unable to cut and paste from future books.

    ''Imagine a world where 90 percent of the stuff you read and watch and
listen to is on very high-definition screens,'' Lessig said. At that point, our
ability to access books and movies and music online will determine the degree to
which we can put them to other creative uses. ''When libraries loan books,''
Lessig continued, ''they don't make a copy, so it's not regulated by copyright,
but when all content is in digital form and every use produces a copy and is
subject to copyright law, there's an affirmative right that has to be asserted
-- a right to access.'' Lessig told me that Congress might try to extend the
terms of copyright yet again when the Sonny Bono Copyright Extension expires in
2019. He said that the only way to persuade a Roberts-era Supreme Court to
strike down further extensions is to mobilize a political coalition in the
country around the importance of digital free expression. ''You speak to
conservatives by pointing to this extraordinary loss of resources caused by
overregulation,'' he said, ''and you speak to liberals by pointing to the lost
opportunities for creativity and free speech.''

    Edward Felten, a professor of computer science at Princeton University, told
me that he hopes in 20 years that Americans might be able to assert a newly
recognized constitutional right -- rooted in the First Amendment -- to
circumvent the obstacles posed by digital-rights-management technology. He calls
it ''the constitutional right to tinker.'' Felten began thinking about the right
to tinker several years ago, when he became aware of the legal complications
that were increasingly cropping up in his own discipline of computer science.
''Researchers were worried about the possibility of legal threats from companies
whose interests were affected by their research,'' he recounted in a recent
phone conversation. In fact, Felten has firsthand knowledge of how the threat of
lawsuits can inhibit creativity: a few years ago, he and his colleagues were
about to publish an academic paper about a set of anticopying technologies being
considered by the record industry. When a consortium of companies that had
developed the technology threatened to sue the scholars for violating federal
copyright law, Felten and his co-authors had to withdraw the paper (although
they eventually won the right to publish it).

    Chastened by the experience, Felten decided to articulate what, exactly, is
threatened when researchers aren't permitted to experiment without first
consulting their lawyers; he hit upon the concept of tinkering. ''The process of
experimentation, not always with a direct goal, is captured by the term
tinkering,'' he said. Whether the Supreme Court ever recognizes tinkering as a
constitutional right, the ability to tinker may be threatened not only in
computer science but also in the life sciences as well. Genetic material is
increasingly being patented, Felten noted, and many biologists worry that the
tools they need in the lab to carry out research on genetic diseases -- like
individual gene sequences in genetically engineered animals -- may become
entangled in patent disputes.

    Efforts to patent the building blocks of life may not only raise hard issues
about scientific freedom. They may also ultimately force American society, and
perhaps the Supreme Court, to debate the moral and constitutional issues raised
by efforts to patent human life itself. To explore those issues, some of which
seem more like science fiction than others, I phoned James Boyle, a professor at
Duke Law School, who wrote about the topic nearly a decade ago in his prescient
book ''Shamans, Software and Spleens.'' Boyle, imagining a coming constitutional
battle over patents and human life, told me that ''we already allow patents on
genetically modified organisms -- mice who have a predisposition to various
forms of cancer suffered by humans, for example. What about a patent on a chimp
with genetically enhanced intelligence? Or a 'meat puppet' -- not sapient but
looking like a human being, intended for use as a sex toy, say?''

    Even if the market for humanoid sex puppets were to take off unexpectedly,
the United States Patent and Trademark Office has announced that it won't issue
patents on human beings -- that would violate the constitutional prohibition on
slavery and involuntary servitude. But identifying what counts as a human being
may be an increasingly challenging task. For example, Boyle explained, patenting
chimp gene sequences is now legal. ''If someone created a chimp with an IQ of 75
and limited vocabulary,'' he said, ''I hope the Patent and Trademark office and
the Supreme Court would draw the line and say no, no, no.''

    Confronted with patents on sapient life forms that resemble human beings,
legislatures will face tremendous pressure to intervene. Still, the task of
defining human life might be so politically explosive and embarrassing that
Congress might ultimately prefer to punt the controversy to the Supreme Court.
''Congress might well say you can't patent human life, but the question is,
What's that?'' said Boyle, who imagines a future constitutional case being
brought on behalf of ''a high-IQ genetically engineered dolphin'' or, perhaps
more plausibly, a computer program for artificial intelligence that seems to
perform human functions. Either the dolphin or the machine might assert a right
''not just to be free of patent rights, but to be free of any ownership rights
at all,'' as Boyle put it. And there is precious little in the existing
categories of constitutional discourse that would prepare the justices to
identify the point at which an organism with a genetic sequence or artificial
brain similar to a human deserves constitutional rights. ''This is kind of 'woo
woo' stuff,'' Boyle said. ''But I could see an interesting jurisprudential train
wreck coming up.''

VII. What the Hearings Should Accomplish

    It seems unlikely that John Roberts's confirmation hearings will result in
the nominee speaking unguardedly and at length on abortion and other
controversies of the moment, or in the Democrats thwarting his confirmation.
(Roberts is a conservative; he is also intelligent, able and possesses, by all
accounts, a judicious temperament.) What, then, would be the most productive use
of his confirmation hearings? It would be illuminating for the senators to ask
the man who will be, if confirmed, the first new justice of the 21st century
some probing questions about the Supreme Court of the future -- including how,
in the broadest sense, it should prepare to handle cases arising from the
technological and social changes of the coming decades.

    In particular, the senators might ask Roberts to reflect on the following
historical paradox: Why has the Supreme Court, often considered the least
democratic branch of government, traditionally been most effective when it has
reflected the constitutional views of the country as a whole? The Supreme Court
decisions that have tended to maintain their legitimacy over time -- like the
decisions in the 1960's protecting free speech and racial equality -- are those
that deferred to values that had already been debated and accepted by a majority
of the American people. By contrast, the least effective Supreme Court decisions
-- the decisions most likely to be attacked and resisted -- have been those in
which the court unilaterally imposes constitutional principles that are actively
and intensely contested by a majority of the country.

    Is this historical lesson one that the 21st-century court should heed? Like
the rest of us, of course, senators can't confidently predict the particular
controversies that the future will bring. As Roberts understood as a college
student, history is full of surprises, and in 10 or 20 years, many of today's
efforts to speculate about the constitutional future may look shortsighted and
naive. But precisely because constitutional futurology is not an exact science,
Roberts suggested in his conversation with me three years ago, judges should be
reluctant to second-guess the decisions of elected legislators.

    ''Do I think it's a good thing that at least once every 30 years, the
Supreme Court says something that motivates Congress to focus a little more
closely on why it's regulating in a particular area?'' he asked. ''Yes, I do
think that's good.'' But he stressed that ''there has to be a lot of legal room
in the joints, and the Supreme Court has to remind itself on a daily basis that
it occupies tenuous ground.''

    Roberts's point about the importance of judicial deference will be all the
more important in an age when activists on the left and the right contend that
only judges and other professionals will have the expertise to resolve the
complex technological and bioethical disputes of the future. For the truth is
that the issues most likely to divide the country in coming years will remain,
at heart, more political and moral than technological. If the court tries to
impose the views of political minorities, whether liberal or conservative, in
the face of public resistance, it risks provoking social turmoil. Whether
Roberts will be a deferential conservative, as he appears to be, or a
unilateralist conservative, as his opponents fear, will be a central question
for the Senate to explore. But his repeated paeans to the importance of modesty,
stability and deference to democratic outcomes should be heard and embraced by
all who will eventually sit on the court in the 21st century.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Opposite and following pages: The Supreme Court, inside and
out. (Photographs by Richard Barnes for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2005


                              85 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            August 23, 2005 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 816 words

HEADLINE: Fusion might end need for embryo cells;
1st step reported; decade of development forecast

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor and Dennis O'Brien, SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A Harvard scientist who led experiments that transformed skin cells into stem
cells said yesterday that the technique could lead to ways to dispense
altogether with the use of human embryos - but it could take a decade to
accomplish.

   When embryonic stem cells were fused with adult skin cells, the stem cells,
in effect, taught the more mature cells to act just like them.

   "This set back the clock of these cells to their embryonic state," said Dr.
Kevin Eggan, lead author of the study scheduled to appear Thursday in the online
journal Science.

   The goal, said Eggan, is to decipher the mechanism used by the embryonic stem
cells - gathered from laboratory cultures - in reprogramming the skin cells.
Such know-how might give scientists the ability to transform the adult cells
directly, without relying on cells taken from human embryos.

   "For those who have fundamental objections to the destruction of embryos,
this experiment still carries the same moral burden," Eggan said of the fusion
approach.

   Embryonic stem cells are the master cells that produce every tissue type in
the human body, including bone, skin, muscle and brain. Since scientists in 1998
found ways to isolate them and culture them in the lab, they have became a
fertile but controversial tool for research into treatments and cures.

   While scientists are searching for a path that does not require embryos, they
could employ the fusion method to produce large colonies of stem cells to
replace the abnormal cells of patients suffering from Parkinson's, diabetes and
other ailments.

   That faces technical hurdles, too.

   Foremost is that the fusion of two cells results in a hybrid carrying twice
the DNA of a normal cell. To avoid safety problems before use in human
therapies, scientists must find a way to remove unwanted DNA before or after the
fusion occurs.

   Ultimately, the technique could provide an alternative to therapeutic
cloning, a method tried successfully by Korean scientists. In that method,
scientists rid a human egg of its genetic material and replace it with DNA
plucked from an adult cell. This turns the egg into an embryo that produces a
pocket of stem cells that can be extracted and multiplied in lab dishes.

   For both techniques, a patient requiring treatment would supply tissue used
to generate the replacement cells. Consequently, the resulting stem cells would
stand little chance of being rejected once transplanted into the patient,
scientists say.

   The fusion technique does not create a new embryo that would soon be
destroyed. That could help surmount objections of those who argue that stem cell
research involves the destruction of potential life, but only if scientists can
avoid using embryos to start with.

   Richard Doerflinger, deputy director of pro-life activities for the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops, said he considers the findings a positive step
because they might lead to scientific advances that could end the practice of
using embryos.

   But he said other approaches such as research using umbilical cord blood
should also be pursued. "In science, there's always more than one way to skin a
cat. We want those ways found without skinning human embryos," he said.

   Doerflinger said the findings undercut support for therapeutic cloning
because they show the potential for creating healthy cells tailored to
individual patients without cloning.

   "The idea that we need to do cloning to come up with cells that are an
identical match for a patient seeking treatment may be superseded by this," he
said. However, he added that therapeutic cloning remains an important avenue for
research.

   The findings, Eggan said, do nothing to reduce the need for new stem cell
lines beyond the limited number that President Bush made available for federal
funding in a policy announced in August 2001. The rule has frustrated scientists
and advocates for research into Alzheimer's, cancer and other diseases.

   A bill to ease those restrictions passed the House in May, and Senate
approval is expected after Labor Day. Bush is expected to veto the measure.

   Daniel Perry, president of an advocacy group that has lobbied for the bill's
approval, said the Harvard experiments do not diminish the need for easing
restrictions on federal funding.

   "This is a time for making regulations and guidelines less restrictive, more
flexible and to be supporting science," said Perry, who leads the Coalition for
the Advancement of Medical Research. "This is not the whole game. It's very
preliminary."

   Dr. Judith Swain, dean of translational medicine at University of California
San Diego medical school and an expert on stem cell research, said the Harvard
team's work could eventually help avoid the emotionally charged issue of embryo
destruction.

   She warned against being overly optimistic, however, noting that some
once-promising discoveries relating to bone marrow cells and gene therapies have
yet to translate into therapies.

CORRECTION:

   An Aug. 23 article mischaracterized Richard Doerflinger's position on the
importance of therapeutic cloning. Doerflinger, deputy director of the
Secretariat for Pro-Life Activities for the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops,
said he considers cloning immoral and unlikely to produce health benefits and
believes money should not be spent on it.

   The Sun regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 Harvard researcher Kevin Eggan and his team announced success in fusing adult
skin cells with embryonic stem cells.
 ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2005


                              86 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2005 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    AUGUST 20, 2005, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 508 words

HEADLINE: Science tweaks nature's toolbox;

Latest genetic engineering uses living organisms

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey

BODY:
A salmonella germ may be part of a bacterial species responsible for thousands
of deadly infections every year, but it can also be seen as a chassis loaded
with useful gears and motors.

    Tweak a genetic switch here, strip off a part there, and that germ might
someday be converted into a powerful tool for doctors.

    Like a cure for cancer, said Yale University scientist John Pawelek at the
Life Engineering Symposium at UC San Francisco's Mission Bay campus Friday.

    The next generation of genetic engineers is treating living things similar
to the transformer toys they might have played with as kids. Viruses can become
vehicles to deliver healthy genes into afflicted bodies, or the tools to
construct computer components to exquisitely exact specifications.

    So much more is now known about nature's toolbox -- genes and proteins --
that biologists can revamp existing organisms and even build new ones from
scratch, said Christopher Voigt of UCSF. Voigt, an assistant professor of
pharmaceutical chemistry, was the co-organizer of the two-day symposium on
"synthetic biology" at Genentech Hall.

    Genetic engineering began in the 1970s with the first efforts to splice just
a few genes from a human or an animal into bacterial cells. Those cells could
then produce useful proteins like insulin. Now scientists are taking that
modular approach to life even further, combining genes from a range of varied
microorganisms, plants and animals for a host of purposes. Such combinations
might be used to boost production of a drug, create a means to deliver it to the
right place in the body or make sure the drug will be active only when it will
help, and not hurt.

    Researchers like Voigt can now draw on a Massachusetts Institute of
Technology "Registry of Standardized Biological Parts" and other lists to find
the genetic sequences they need. And they're viewing those parts a lot like
computer designers do. A genetic switch that makes a fish glow in the dark can
also be used to release a therapeutic molecule.

    But the manipulation of life forms also raises safety concerns and ethical
questions.

    The lab of UC Berkeley chemical engineering Professor David Schaffer is
modifying a common virus as a potential vehicle for gene therapy. But Roger
Brent, director of the Molecular Sciences Institute in Berkeley, noted that the
same steps might be used to boost a virus' ability to cause disease.

    Schaffer pointed out that the lab chose to experiment on a virus that is "a
lousy pathogen" rather than something like the HIV virus. "We're very aware of
the potential biosafety concerns," he said.

    Voigt said improved methods to produce DNA sequences rapidly through
chemical reactions have contributed greatly to the revolution in synthetic
biology. Soon, researchers will no longer need to use gene-splicing methods to
induce microorganisms to crank out DNA, he said.

    "My students are going to learn a completely different type of biology than
I learned," said Voigt, 28.E-mail Bernadette Tansey at btansey@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2005


                              87 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             August 19, 2005 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1210 words

HEADLINE: Battling the politics of cancer;
Research

BYLINE: Jonathan D. Rockoff, Sun National Staff

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Even before the death of ABC anchorman Peter Jennings,
advocates and scientists were organizing to combat lung cancer's image as a
smoker's comeuppance and increase government research funding to match other
equally deadly forms of cancer.

   But they were perfectly willing to capitalize on the flurry of attention from
Jennings' death from lung cancer Aug. 7 and the news a day later that Dana
Reeve, widow of the late Superman star Christopher Reeve, also has the disease.
There's a general recognition in Washington that funding for medical research is
not driven by science alone.

   "It's a story about disease politics in this country," said Cheryl Healton,
president and CEO of the American Legacy Foundation, a lobbying and education
group established from the proceeds of a government settlement with the tobacco
industry.

   While it's still too early to say whether the latest attention will have a
long-lasting impact on lung cancer research, advocates see a small but welcome
sign in the government's decision last week to increase funding by $80 million
over several years.

   The main source of federal dollars, the National Cancer Institute, said it
would support more research into smoking cessation, early detection of lung
cancer and possible drugs and treatments. The announcement was part of an
initiative to prevent disease or develop treatments for various forms of cancer
by 2015.

   "Reducing the burden of lung cancer is absolutely essential to achieving our
overall 2015 goal," NCI Director Andrew von Eschenbach said in a statement.

   The agency, which is working out the details, says the increase had long been
in the works and wasn't driven by recent events or lobbying.

   But researchers and advocates blame public attitudes for the fact that lung
cancer research doesn't get as much federal funding as studies involving breast
and prostate cancer, even though lung cancer kills far more Americans.

   "We just haven't had the same level of patient, doctor and family advocacy,"
said Walter J. Curran Jr., clinical director of the Kimmel Cancer Center at
Philadelphia's Thomas Jefferson University and co-chair of a new association of
scientists established to coordinate research and lobby for more money.

   Advocates and researchers hope the recent attention surrounding Jennings'
death and the diagnosis of Reeve -- a nonsmoker -- will help change that.

   "As we're starting to see the face of lung cancer change -- women,
celebrities, higher socioeconomic folks -- I think we're going to start to see
changes in perception and awareness," said Joan H. Schiller, a medical
oncologist at the University of Wisconsin in Madison who established an advocacy
group two years ago.

   Each year, 160,000 Americans die from lung cancer, more than from any other
form of the disease. But funding for lung cancer research, $276.5 million last
year, was less than half of that for breast cancer. Prostate cancer research got
$32 million more than lung cancer.

   Lung cancer research advocates cite several forces at work: First, the public
has long viewed lung cancer is the result of a lifestyle choice by smokers. So
the focus of funding has been on preventing smoking, instead of treating those
who have it. Also, because lung cancer is a killer, there are relatively few
survivors who -- radicalized and energized by their battle with the illness --
can organize to speak out.

   To change this public mindset, Curran and lung cancer research colleagues
have formed the National Cancer Leadership Council. They've had two planning
sessions and expect to hold the first official meeting in November.

   Women Against Lung Cancer, the group that Wisconsin's Schiller established,
was created to focus on the risks that lung cancer poses for women and promote
research into prevention and treatment.

   Another research support group, now called the Lung Cancer Alliance, changed
its name, shifted its focus to advocacy and relocated from Vancouver, Wash., to
the nation's capital this year. "To truly launch the movement for greater lung
cancer awareness and funding, the headquarters had to be moved," said Laurie
Fenton, president.

   The message has also changed. Advocates and researchers emphasize that 13
percent of the Americans who die from lung cancer -- and 22 percent of the women
-- are not smokers. Besides pointing out that lung cancer afflicts the
"innocent," they marshal statistics to show that funding for research into
prevention and treatment pales in comparison with cancers that cause fewer
deaths.

   They also speak optimistically about prospects for breakthroughs dealing with
a disease that is notoriously difficult to detect early enough for treatment,
and very hard to treat once it's found.

   "We've focused our efforts in lung cancer on the message of 'don't smoke.'
That's not very sexy," said Georges C. Benjamin, executive director of the
American Public Health Association. He focuses on the benefits of finding a
method for diagnosing lung cancer in its early stages.

   Though research into lung cancer may lag behind others, there has been
progress, scientists say.

   Some are experimenting to see whether combinations of drugs and radiation
therapy provide the most effective treatment. Others are studying the genetic
foundations of lung cancer so doctors can tailor treatment to individual genetic
profiles.

   But scientists say that current funding levels keep promising lines of
inquiry from being examined and turn talented young scientists away to more
lucrative fields. That leads to what scientists see as a vicious cycle, with the
lack of progress feeding perceptions that additional spending won't make a
difference.

   For example, Daniel Sterman, who directs a gene therapy program at the
University of Pennsylvania Health System, applied last May for funding to
continue 10 years of research into using the body's own immune system to counter
lung cancer, but was rejected.

   "It's novel, it's interesting. It should be the kind of program that NCI
should be funding, yet we're having struggles," he said.

   Sterman blames politics for the difficulty scientists face. "What is the
politics on the side of lung cancer victims? There is none. There is no lobby,"
he said.

   Researchers also put some blame on themselves for failing to develop a tool
that can detect lung cancer early. That would give doctors a better shot at
saving victims' lives. But lung cancer has no early warning system comparable to
breast cancer's mammogram or prostate cancer's blood test.

   That may change, however. Some scientists believe three-dimensional CT scans
could detect lung cancer earlier than standard X-rays; others disagree. In 2002,
the NCI began a $200 million study to compare the two methods, which is expected
to be finished in 2009.

   "There was a lot of excitement with breast cancer research in the '70s, '80s
and '90s because a lot was happening. There wasn't a lot happening with lung
cancer research until the late '90s. Now there is this technological opportunity
emerging," said James L. Mulshine, a former NCI official who is now vice
president for research at Rush University in Chicago.

   Advocate groups for more government dollars for research emphasize that 13
percent of the Americans who die from lung cancer -- and 22 percent of the women
-- are not smokers.

GRAPHIC: GRAPH(S)
 Cancer funding
 Sun Staff

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2005


                              88 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            August 18, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; D01

LENGTH: 1214 words

HEADLINE: A Summer Surge For Volatile Biotech;
But Subsequent Dip Reveals Market Doubts

BYLINE: Justin Gillis, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Investors in the nation's biotechnology sector are riding a roller coaster
this summer, seeing indexes that track these companies reach their highest
levels in years  --  then retreat amid doubts about whether the rally can be
sustained.

    The bumpy ride is a reminder that biotech investing is not for the timid.
The industry is a source of continual fascination for investors who believe
modern science can deliver cures, and make a lot of money in the process. But it
also can be hazardous to people's financial health, so much so that many
analysts warn small investors to approach the sector with caution, if at all.

    Biotechnology companies consume investors' cash voraciously to develop new
products. The industry has never been profitable overall  --  U.S. companies
lost $6.4 billion in 2004, according to a report by Ernst & Young, a
consultancy.

    But the investment is slowly paying off: The industry has delivered a slew
of new products in recent years, and its revenue is growing rapidly, hitting $46
billion in the United States in 2004, up 17 percent in one year. The industry
could reach profitability as early as 2008, Ernst & Young predicted.

    The world's biggest and most visible biotech companies, Amgen Inc. and
Genentech Inc., both of California, are profitable. And they have turned in
sterling performances this year, particularly on sales of drugs used in cancer
treatment.

    "The earnings tell you this isn't just an industry that's built on promise
any more," said John T. McCamant, editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter
in Berkeley, Calif. "The companies are showing: We can deliver the numbers."

    The Amgen and Genentech performances exceeded Wall Street's expectations and
helped fuel a midsummer rally in the shares of smaller companies, analysts said.

    "You have had some very good performance by the two marquee names in the
sector," said Alexander A. Hittle, a stock analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc.
of St. Louis. His company earns fees from biotech companies for
investment-banking work. "When investors see the success of the bellwethers,
they imagine that all their smaller hopes-and-dreams stocks will one day rise to
similar greatness."

    Also fueling investor interest have been recent buyouts of a handful of
smaller biotech companies. Such acquisitions can put a premium in the pockets of
investors regardless of whether a company has reached profitability, so they
tend to spark hope of more buyouts.

    Buoyed by those factors, the Amex Biotechnology Index, which tracks the
performance of 17 larger biotech companies, jumped nearly 20 percent from early
June to early August, hitting a four-year high on Aug. 3. The Nasdaq
Biotechnology Index, which tracks the shares of 157 companies  --  mostly
smaller, more speculative ones  --  rose 21 percent in the same period to hit a
15-month high on Aug. 3.

    Share prices of biotech companies often diverge from the broader market,
particularly on important news, good or bad, about drug approvals by the Food
and Drug Administration. But sometimes, in the absence of news directly
affecting the sector, the shares track the broad market, as both biotech indexes
have been doing since hitting their highs early this month. The indexes have
bounced around, mostly drifting downward, amid widespread investor worries about
the price of energy, the risk of inflation and other economic fundamentals.

    Overall, the Amex index is still up 11 percent for 2005, reflecting Wall
Street's enthusiasm for bigger biotech companies with profit to report, but the
Nasdaq index has given up all its midsummer gains and is down 2 percent for the
year.

    The biotechnology industry is similar in some ways to its older cousin, the
pharmaceutical industry  --  both try to earn big profit with treatments
developed by investing in complex medical research over many years.

    But the pharmaceutical industry, based mostly in New Jersey, is a
conservative business that has traditionally used chemistry to create treatments
people can take orally  --  pills, that is. For decades, its treatments were
developed through a process of trial and error that sometimes involved knowing
little about the underlying causes of disease.

    The biotech industry, by contrast, is an entrepreneurial business born in
California in the 1970s. It is based on detailed medical knowledge, and its
treatments are created by slicing and dicing genetic material. The treatments
are often not pills, but injectable proteins.

    Pharmaceutical companies have been profitable for decades, so their shares
usually trade on the basis of actual financial results. Because most biotech
companies don't have products on the market, their stocks rise and fall on
investor sentiment about particular drugs undergoing tests.

    Much of the action these days is in cancer. Big pharmaceutical companies
sell useful but highly toxic chemotherapy drugs that are the mainstay of cancer
treatment. Biotech companies are gradually augmenting that approach with less
toxic injections that use genetic strategies to target tumors.

    Success with cancer treatment has fueled the earnings of Genentech in
particular. Rituxan, a drug that it co-developed with Biogen Idec Inc. of
Cambridge, Mass., has become one of the world's biggest cancer treatments, and a
Genentech drug called Avastin that reduces blood flow to tumors is gaining
rapidly.

    Genentech, based in South San Francisco, Calif., was the first biotech
company, founded in 1976. California is still the leading biotech state, with
Massachusetts at No. 2. Maryland runs neck-and-neck with North Carolina for the
No. 3 position, with scores of biotech companies clustering along the Interstate
270 corridor in Montgomery County.

    The Maryland companies tend to be smaller than the California leaders, but
many of them also are targeting cancer as their most important commercial
opportunity. A good example is GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg, which is working on
a treatment that uses a type of gene therapy to shrink tumors. The company is in
the midst of expensive clinical tests of the drug, known as TNFerade.

    GenVec's shares plunged 47 percent in a day last fall when the FDA suspended
the company's tests in three types of cancer. The agency was concerned TNFerade
might cause blood clots, which are potentially fatal. But after the company
allayed the agency's concerns, the FDA allowed tests to resume, and GenVec's
shares closed yesterday at $2.26, up 88 percent from their Oct. 7 low.

    McCamant, the Berkeley newsletter editor, is recommending GenVec shares, one
of his few positive recommendations in years on a Washington area biotech
company. He said the treatment seems to shrink some inoperable tumors enough
that surgeons can remove them, which might help cancer patients live longer.

    If the approach holds up in further tests, TNFerade could easily become a
standard cancer treatment and a gold mine for investors. GenVec management's
"ability to work smoothly with the FDA and get TNFerade out of 'clinical hold'
status bodes well for future interactions with the agency," McCamant wrote in
his newsletter.

    Conversely, history suggests that more blood clots  --  or suspension of the
company's tests for any reason, however temporary  --  would send GenVec's
shares tumbling again.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2005


                              89 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           August 17, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 886 words

HEADLINE: Science of tiny generates big developments;
Researchers meet in city, discuss nanotechnology

BYLINE: Dennis O'Brien, SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Kathleen Pirollo talked nonstop yesterday, excitedly telling fellow
researchers all about the cancer-fighting nanoparticle that she and some
colleagues had created.

   A millionth of an inch across and known as a liposome, the tiny particle is
designed to find a tumor, attach itself and open a pathway for chemicals and
radiation. Injected by the millions, liposomes don't cure the cancer on their
own, but they make chemotherapy and radiation more effective.

   "It works for head and neck cancers, for pancreatic and prostate cancer,
wherever it hides in the body," Pirollo said of tests in mice.

   Pirollo, a microbiologist at Georgetown University Medical Center, was among
170 researchers at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine for the initial
conference of the fledgling American Academy of Nanoscience, a clearinghouse for
cutting-edge medical research that harnesses the power of nanotechnology.

   The term "nanotechnology" comes from the word nanometer, which means a
billionth of a meter, or about one 25-millionth of an inch. Researchers working
on the nanoscale use the world's most powerful microscopes to create and measure
the tiniest of objects: molecules, viruses and strands of DNA inside cells.

   "Right now, nobody can imagine where all this will lead, but doctors can't do
it alone. They're clinicians. We need people with engineering backgrounds,
material sciences, mathematics. We want to open up the channels of
communications between the doctors and these other scientists," said Dr. Chiming
Wei, the academy's president and the director of Hopkins' cardiothoracic-renal
molecular program.

   For the past decade, nanotechnology has been a key to developing super-strong
materials, such as carbon tubes, that are expected to lead to high-performance
clothing, microchips and satellites.

   But at the two-day conference that ended yesterday, scientists from around
the world praised nanoparticles as important tools for delivering drugs to
diseased tissues and creating imaging techniques that make it easier to detect
cancer and other ailments.

   While therapies using nanoparticles are still years from approval, a number
are being tested in clinical trials. "As a field, nanotechnology is the best
hope we've got," Pirollo said.

   Some medical researchers work with the same fullerene-based carbon nanotubes
being studied by structural engineers. Others work with liposomes and a class of
nanoparticles called adenoviruses, which together are used in a gene therapy
trials, to enhance imaging technologies used to detect cancer and to deliver
drugs to injured tissues and organs.

   Pirollo said it took her and Georgetown colleague Ester Chang two years to
create their liposome nanoparticle in a project funded by the National
Institutes of Health and SynerGene Therapeutics, a small Washington-based
research firm.

   The liposomes are in preliminary human clinical trials at the Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Georgetown University Medical Center. "It's not a
magic bullet, but it's the bullet that makes everything else work," Pirollo
said. "It's like little smart bombs."

   Pirollo said that treatments are at least five years off.

   Other researchers predicted that nanoparticles might one day be used to
repair damaged lung tissue, build stents for heart patients inside the body and
enable better hip replacements. They also think nanoparticles will treat both
genetically inherited diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, and neurological
disorders, such as Parkinson's disease.

   But at yesterday's conference, scientists concentrated mainly on one disease.
"Most of the possibilities right now are with cancer," Wei said.

   A major obstacle in most of today's treatments is that radiation and
chemotherapy kill healthy cells along with the cancer. Many cancers also are
resistant to drug therapies.

   "There are gatekeepers that effectively keep the drugs out of the cancerous
cell," said Dr. Alexander Kabanov, a researcher at the University of Nebraska
Medical Center.

   Dr. Steven Rosenfeld, director of the brain tumor center at Columbia
University Hospital, said nanoparticles could be the best hope to defeat the
gatekeepers.

   He also noted that patients diagnosed with brain tumors have an average
survival of less than two years, and treatments are now limited to surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy. "It sucks, to put it bluntly," Rosenfeld told 20
colleagues at one of dozens of conference sessions.

   When cancer spreads from one cell to another it uses numerous pathways, so
blocking just one pathway won't work, he said. He is working on targeting
molecular motors that drive cancer cell growth, trying to stop the cancer before
it can reach the pathways that send it from one cell to another.

   Another problem is that, rather than going directly to infected cells, cancer
drugs injected into the blood stream spread throughout the body, an inefficient
delivery system.

   David Neeham, a researcher at Duke University, said a liposome he discovered
in 1996 can be triggered for release when it reaches cancerous tissue cells by
applying heat to the damaged tissue.

   "With this technique, you have a more site-specific therapy," he said.

   His research is funded by Celsion Corp., a Columbia-based firm that supports
research into ways of using heat to kill cancer. Clinical trials are planned for
the next few months at Duke, he said.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 Kathleen Pirollo, a research associate professor in oncology at Georgetown
University Medical Center, talks with Hong Song (right), of the radiology
department at Johns Hopkins Medical Center, during the first meeting of the
American Academy of Nanoscience.
 LLOYD FOX : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2005


                              90 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2005 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                      August 17, 2005 Wednesday 1 EDITION

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Adding genes might help to fix the brain;
Alzheimer's experiment under way

BYLINE: BY RONALD KOTULAK; CHICAGO TRIBUNE

DATELINE: CHICAGO

BODY:

   Up to 40 billion viruses will be injected into their brains, they are told,
through two holes drilled in the skull.

   If all goes according to plan, the viral invaders will deliver copies of a
repair gene to a small clump of neurons that desperately need help in building
new memories.

   The experiment at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago is a bold attempt
to slow or halt the volunteers' progressing Alzheimer's disease.

   If the gene works as designed, it could fix the brain flaws that are robbing
the patients of the things that make them who they are -- their intellect and
personality.

   The gene also could do nothing to help. Or, if it escapes to other parts of
the brain, it could cause nasty side effects.

   Whether the experiment works won't be known for another year. If it does,
advocates say it could become a common therapy for Alzheimer's patients.

   An estimated 4 million Americans have the disease, and 360,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year.

   Yet even after being told of the potential downside -- and that a primary
goal of the study is to determine the safety of genetically reengineering the
brain -- several hundred Alzheimer's patients eagerly sought to volunteer for
only six slots.

   This is the way science advances: daring and potentially dangerous
experimental therapies tested in patients willing to step into the unknown and
take the risks.

   "They told us it was experimental," said Bob Keller, 72, of Amboy, Ill.,
whose wife, Pat, 64, has Alzheimer's disease. "They were very careful about not
saying it's going to help us. Pat said, 'Well, it could help our children or
other people.' So she decided she'd like to do it."

   None of the patients has experienced any adverse effects from the three-hour
surgery or from the billions of new genes in their brains, said Dr. Roy A.E.
Bakay, a Rush neurosurgeon, who performed the procedure.

   Patients were in a mild or moderate stage of Alzheimer's and deemed competent
to understand the risks.

   The study also is a crucial test for the sputtering science of gene therapy,
which after 20 years has yet to live up to its promise of providing sweeping
cures for many diseases.

   Keller said he thinks the surgery performed six months ago may have pulled
his wife of 43 years back from the abyss of Alzheimer's.

   "I noticed a difference almost immediately," he said. "Before the surgery,
more than half of the time she didn't know who I was. She wouldn't remember.
Since the surgery, she's almost always remembered. Two weeks ago she did
something she hasn't done in years: She made a cake. It was a mix, but she did
it herself."

   Dr. David Bennett, director of the Alzheimer's disease center at Rush,
cautions that Pat Keller's response could be a placebo effect, a psychological
boost brought on by the surgery itself.

   "These patients are heroes," Bakay said. "They're going out of their way to
do something that hopefully will help them, but more likely will help somebody
down the line."

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2005


                              91 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                           August 17, 2005 Wednesday
                              METRO FINAL Edition

SECTION: NWS; NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: ADDING GENES MIGHT HELP TO FIX THE BRAIN;
ALZHEIMER'S EXPERIMENT UNDER WAY

BYLINE: RONALD KOTULAK , CHICAGO TRIBUNE

BODY:

   CHICAGO - Up to 40 billion viruses will be injected into their brains, they
are told, through two holes drilled in the skull.

   If all goes according to plan, the viral invaders will deliver copies of a
repair gene to a small clump of neurons that desperately need help in building
new memories.

   The experiment at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago is a bold attempt
to slow or halt the volunteers' progressing Alzheimer's disease.

   If the gene works as designed, it could fix the brain flaws that are robbing
the patients of the things that make them who they are - their intellect and
personality.

   The gene also could do nothing to help. Or, if it escapes to other parts of
the brain, it could cause nasty side effects.

   Whether the experiment works won't be known for another year. If it does,
advocates say it could become a common therapy for Alzheimer's patients.

   An estimated 4 million Americans have the disease, and 360,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year.

   Yet even after being told of the potential downside - and that a primary goal
of the study is to determine the safety of genetically reengineering the brain -
several hundred Alzheimer's patients eagerly sought to volunteer for only six
slots.

   This is the way science advances: daring and potentially dangerous
experimental therapies tested in patients willing to step into the unknown and
take the risks.

   "They told us it was experimental," said Bob Keller, 72, of Amboy, Ill.,
whose wife, Pat, 64, has Alzheimer's disease. "They were very careful about not
saying it's going to help us. Pat said, 'Well, it could help our children or
other people.' So she decided she'd like to do it."

   None of the patients has experienced any adverse effects from the three-hour
surgery or from the billions of new genes in their brains, said Dr. Roy A.E.
Bakay, a Rush neurosurgeon, who performed the procedure.

   Patients were in a mild or moderate stage of Alzheimer's and deemed competent
to understand the risks.

   The study also is a crucial test for the sputtering science of gene therapy,
which after 20 years has yet to live up to its promise of providing sweeping
cures for many diseases.

   Keller said he thinks the surgery performed six months ago may have pulled
his wife of 43 years back from the abyss of Alzheimer's.

   "I noticed a difference almost immediately," he said. "Before the surgery,
more than half of the time she didn't know who I was. She wouldn't remember.
Since the surgery, she's almost always remembered. Two weeks ago she did
something she hasn't done in years: She made a cake. It was a mix, but she did
it herself."

   Dr. David Bennett, director of the Alzheimer's disease center at Rush,
cautions that Pat Keller's response could be a placebo effect, a psychological
boost brought on by the surgery itself.

   "These patients are heroes," Bakay said. "They're going out of their way to
do something that hopefully will help them, but more likely will help somebody
down the line."

   SIDEBAR:

   GENE EXPERIMENT

   The gene used in the Chicago study generates a chemical called nerve growth
factor, or NGF, which is important for brain cells because it helps them survive
and grow. Alzheimer's destroys neurons in all parts of the brain that are
responsible for higher functions, as well as the cells that make the growth
factor, diminishing their power to save other cells in the brain.

   Adding NGF genes to a brain with Alzheimer's provides a fresh source of
growth factor. The idea is that the relentless weakening and killing of neurons
by Alzheimer's disease will be offset by NGF's ability to strengthen the cells
and help them survive.

   Chicago Tribune

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo MILBERT O. BROWN/Knight Ridder-Tribune

   CAPTION: Patient Pat Keller, 64, talks with Dr. David Bennett of the
Alzheimer's center at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago on Tuesday.

   DISCLAIMER: THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION MAY DIFFER SLIGHTLY FROM THE PRINTED
ARTICLE

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2009


                              92 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     August 16, 2005 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE MEDICINE and TECHNOLOGY, Pg.B-3

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: STUDY: GENE THERAPY MAY AID MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY PATIENTS

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Gene therapy can strengthen the muscles and lengthen the lives of mice that
have a rare form of muscular dystrophy, a new study shows, suggesting that the
technique could help human patients the same way.

    Mice and humans are the only creatures that get congenital muscular
dystrophy, so named because the condition is evident soon after birth, said lead
investigator Xiao Xiao, a molecular biologist at the University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine.

    Patients with the most severe forms of the disease die in early childhood.
When mice have it, their two-year lifespan is shortened to a few months, Xiao
said.

    In the experiments, sick mice became bigger, were more physically active and
lived four times longer when they were infused with a virus carrying a treatment
gene.

    The findings were published yesterday in the online version of the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

    "I view it as a significant step forward toward developing therapies for
this type of disease," said Paul Robbins, co-director of the university's
muscular dystrophy cooperative research center.

    The type of congenital muscular dystrophy Xiao's team studied occurs because
of mutations in a gene that makes a protein called laminin-alpha2, which is
needed to maintain the structural integrity of muscle tissue.

    Swiss scientists previously had engineered a gene that makes a miniaturized
version of another protein that could substitute for laminin-alpha2. In the new
experiment, Xiao's team attached that gene for the substitute protein, called
miniagrin, to a harmless virus. The combination was infused into the abdomens of
the sick mice when they were a few days old.

    The virus, called adeno-associated virus or AAV, infected muscle cells
throughout the body, and the gene made the replacement protein.

    "One of the advantages of this protein is that it is secreted outside the
cells," Xiao said. "That means you don't have to make the gene transfer into
every muscle cell."

    Treating a common human form of the disease, Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
will require a different gene but might also use AAV to transport the gene into
cells.

    Getting treatment genes into a sufficiently large number of cells has been a
stumbling block to developing effective gene therapies for muscular dystrophies
and other systemic diseases.

    "There's been some concern that it's not going to work because you have to
infect so many cells in order to see a correction," said Robbins, who was not on
the research team.

    Xiao's ability to deliver the gene to a substantial portion of muscle is
impressive, he said.

    "This really not only shows the efficiency, but also shows you can also
treat a severe pathology with the gene transfer method," Robbins said. "It
really opens up a new area for gene therapy."

    Xiao said human studies might be the next step because there are no existing
large animal models for congenital muscular dystrophy.

    "We still have a ways to go before we can move this into the clinic for
treating human disease, but at least there's proof of principle in mice,"
Robbins said.

NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2005


                              93 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            August 16, 2005 Tuesday
                               FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: Muscular dystrophy research reports advancement in gene therapy
experiments on mice

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have taken a new step in the quest for gene therapy for muscular
dystrophy.

   Three years after researchers experimenting with mice discovered that gene
therapy might one day work, another team has found a way to deliver such therapy
throughout the body.

   University of Pittsburgh researchers report they were able to deliver a
miniature gene, similar to the defective gene involved in muscular dystrophy,
throughout the bodies of mice, showing that systemic therapy is possible.

   Their findings are reported in the online edition of Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science.

   In 2002, researchers at the University of Washington reported successful
treatment of muscular dystrophy by a virus containing a gene that produces a
protein lacking in people with the disease. However, they found, that virus had
to be injected directly into each muscle.

   While the new study by the Pittsburgh team shows that systemwide gene
treatment can be done, the scientists weren't able simply to replace the
defective gene with a good version because the gene itself is so large it
couldn't fit inside the disabled virus used to deliver it.

   Instead, the researchers used a miniature gene, similar in function to the
defective one, and showed it could be delivered to muscles throughout the mouse,
and the mice exhibited some improvement.

   "While we have much farther to go until we can say gene therapy will work in
children, we have shown here a glimmer of hope by presenting the first evidence
of a successful gene therapy approach that improved both the general health and
longevity in mice with congenital muscular dystrophy," said Dr. Xiao Xiao,
associate professor of molecular genetics and biochemistry.

   Co-author Dr. Chungping Qiao said in a statement that it was probably
unrealistic to expect complete success using the miniature gene, even though it
is similar to the defective one.

   Future research will seek a way to deliver correct versions of the defective
gene throughout the body.

   The National Institutes of Health describes muscular dystrophy as a group of
genetic diseases characterized by progressive weakness and degeneration of
muscles that control movement.

   The Mayo Clinic reports that the most common muscular dystrophies appear to
be caused by a genetic deficiency of the muscle protein dystrophin. The various
types of the disease affect more than 50,000 Americans. There is no cure, but
medication and therapy can slow the disease.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2005


                              94 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            August 16, 2005 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 826 words

HEADLINE: Misplaced faith in human ingenuity

BYLINE: DANIEL SAREWITZ, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   The flip side of the steroid scandal in baseball is the announcement of the
first cloned dog. Ballplayers are punished for using pharmaceutical technologies
to improve their physical abilities, while scientists are rewarded for pushing
toward a similar goal - in the words of artificial intelligence techno-visionary
Ray Kurzweil, "reverse engineering our biology and then reprogramming it."

   Biological engineering is not just about curing disease anymore. The
incentives and profits are moving toward drugs, gene therapies and other
technologies to improve human performance - memory, creativity, concentration,
strength, endurance, longevity. Asking athletes not to partake of these advances
is not just hypocritical but is likely to be increasingly futile.

   In a television interview earlier this month, Kurzweil defined humanity as
"the species that goes beyond our limitations." Of course, in that quest we are
also the species that has come close to immolating the planet (during the Cold
War), destroying our environment and ruining baseball.

    But if we are to believe scientists and technologists, nothing but good can
come from human performance enhancement. As a 2002 report of the normally staid
National Science Foundation proclaimed, the 21st century "could end in world
peace, universal prosperity and evolution to a higher level of compassion and
accomplishment," all through research on human performance enhancement.

   I participated in some of the meetings that led to that report. Most of the
attendees were highly intelligent white males who worked in the semiconductor
industry, at national weapons laboratories or major research universities. At
one point, the group got to talking about how we might soon achieve
brain-to-brain interfaces that would eliminate misunderstandings among humans.
Instead of having to rely on imperfect words, we would be able to directly
signal our thoughts with perfect precision.

   I asked how such improved abilities would get around differing values and
interests. For instance, how would more direct communication of thought help
Israelis and Palestinians better understand one another? Without the use of the
ambiguities and subtleties of language to soften the impact of one's raw
convictions, might conflict actually be amplified?

   A person at one of the meetings acknowledged he "hadn't thought about
values," while another suggested that I was being overly negative. What seemed
clear was that the group's homogeneity made it impossible for it to scrutinize
the assumptions beneath its rosy vision of "performance enhancement."

   This sort of contextual cluelessness is rampant in the world of
techno-optimism. Software designer Ramez Naam has suggested that "the debate
over human enhancement is at heart a debate over human freedom. Should
individuals and families have the right to alter their own minds and bodies, or
should that power be held by the state? In a democratic society, it's every man
and woman who should determine such things and not the state."

   But who, after all, is making the key decisions determining how research on
human enhancement should be supported, advanced and applied? It's people such as
those at the meetings I just described.

   I suspect the last thing on Earth that Naam would want is for "individuals
and families" - most of whom know little about the relevant science and
technology - to be involved in making these choices. What he really means, I
suppose, is that "individuals and families," playing their roles as consumers,
will get to exercise some modest amount of choice in the matter, after products
are developed and marketed and perhaps in response to the ways that the Joneses
next door are enhancing their children. Yet if this is Naam's idea of freedom,
it is a disturbingly shriveled version of the real thing.

   Science and technology have immeasurably improved the human capacity to work
and think through the development of tools ranging from eyeglasses to bulldozers
to computers. But what's being promised now is radically different - the
potential to modify humanity itself, to change the essential attributes of
humanness, the same attributes that underlie and inspire all of our social
institutions from democratic politics to the economic marketplace to our system
of laws and justice. Even the game of baseball.

   Why do we trust our long-term well-being to the irrational faith that the
good consequences of our ingenuity will outweigh the bad? The time to openly
consider which directions we want to push the technology, and which we want to
avoid, is now. In this regard, baseball's expanding steroid scandal, as trivial
as it may be, is a warning: Once new technologies make it into the marketplace,
our ability and our willingness to make meaningful choices all but disappear.

     Daniel Sarewitz is a professor at Arizona State University and director of
its Consortium for Science, Policy and Outcomes. This essay first appeared in
the Los Angeles Times.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              95 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 14, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Column 2; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1497 words

HEADLINE: Sometimes Investors Should Just Say No

BYLINE: By GRETCHEN MORGENSON

BODY:

   AT last, investors seem to be awakening to the idea that not all mergers are
in their best interests. Given that the current merger mania shows no sign of
abating, this epiphany is a mighty good thing.

     While most investors greet takeovers with open arms, the fact is that few
can be sure that the deals are being struck at the best possible price. Given
that the only assessment of a deal's fairness is given by investment banks that
are paid when the deal is done, investors are right to wonder whether they could
have benefited if their company's negotiators had been tougher.

   Now, some investors are doing more than just wondering whether these deals
are fair -- they are concluding that they are not, and are voting against them.
Last month, for example, almost 30 percent of the shareholders in Transkaryotic
Therapies, a biotech company, voted against its proposed acquisition by Shire
Pharmaceuticals, a British drug company. Only 52.6 percent of the eligible
shares were voted in favor of the merger, an unusually small majority.

     Investors objected to that acquisition because of its price. After the deal
was struck in April, Transkaryotic reported promising data from an important
drug trial. This drove up the company's stock, making the acquisition price seem
unreasonably low.

     And at least one large shareholder of the Providian Financial Corporation
has said that he will oppose that company's acquisition by Washington Mutual of
Seattle. In the deal, announced in June, WaMu, as it is known, has agreed to pay
Providian holders about $6.4 billion, or approximately $19 a share.

     The price is only 8 percent above the level at which Providian, the big
credit-card concern, was trading when the deal was announced. That is far below
the 28 percent premium that Bank of America said it would pay for MBNA, another
credit-card issuer.

     Shareholders will vote on the Providian merger on Aug. 31. David L. King, a
portfolio manager at Putnam Investments, which holds 7.5 percent of Providian's
shares, says the price agreed to by the company is far too low. ''We have very
strong and well-considered opinions about what this company is worth, and $19 is
not the answer,'' said Mr. King, who oversees the Putnam New Value fund. ''There
are scores of banks domestically and overseas who could buy Providian at a
higher price. Let's find out who might be interested rather than selling the
company at a price that is inadequate.''

     Providian's business is turning around, Mr. King asserted. ''If you look at
the latest quarter,'' he said, ''its default rates have come down to single
digits, which is normal, and credit quality is clearly on an uptick.'' He
reckoned that the company was set to earn roughly $2 a share this year. ''It
baffles me why we should sell out at a price that is less than 10 times that,''
he added.

     MAYBE not so baffling. After all, the interests of executives in most
mergers are not necessarily aligned with those of their company's shareholders.
Executives of the companies being acquired hit the jackpot in these deals
because their stock option grants, restricted shares and retirement plans turn
into instant cash. If their companies remained independent, this largess would
be accessible only over longer periods.

     Consider what Joseph W. Saunders, Providian's chief executive, who joined
the company in late 2001, stands to receive if the deal with WaMu goes through.

     Let's begin with his options. In 2004, he received 350,000 options
exercisable at $13.29 each; that's 16.5 percent of all the options granted by
Providian last year. In 2003, he received 1.25 million options with a strike of
$7.33; that grant was 16.7 percent of all the options dispensed that year. And
in 2002, his first full year on the job, he received 1.1 million options priced
at $7.155. That award was 13.7 percent of the total given out by the company
during the year.

     These are, by any measure, exceedingly generous grants. The median option
grant made to chief executives at 409 large companies last year was 5.67 percent
of the awards made companywide, according to Equilar, a compensation analysis
firm. Mr. Saunders's grants average about three times the median chief
executive's.

     Isn't it nice that these grants -- 1.1 million shares in Mr. Saunders's
pocket at last count -- can now be cashed in, without delay? All told, the top
Providian executives can cash in 3.5 million options and restricted shares if
the takeover goes through.

     Mr. Saunders will also receive the usual merger payments equal to three
times his Providian salary and bonus. And his new employment agreement with WaMu
-- he will become president and chief executive of its credit card division --
entitles him to restricted shares in that company worth $2 million when the
merger is completed. He will also get options equal to three times the amount of
restricted shares he receives.

     Given the increasingly enormous paydays that takeovers can represent for
executives, it's a good thing that directors, who owe fiduciary duties to the
shareholders they represent, are there to make sure that any deal produces the
highest possible price to the owners.

     Or are they? After all, when directors have received restricted shares and
options for their board service, they stand to receive payouts, albeit smaller
ones, in a takeover as well. If they say no to the deals, those payouts are no
longer immediate.

     Providian's outside directors receive annual retainers of $60,000 for their
service. But if they choose to take their compensation in Providian stock, they
can receive an additional award of restricted shares equal to 25 percent of the
pay they take in stock. Half of the restricted shares can be cashed in after
three years and the rest after six years. If the merger goes through, however,
these shares can be cashed in at once.

     And last year, Providian began adding stock awards worth $100,000 to the
annual retainers it pays its directors. Outside directors received 6,582 stock
options exercisable at $12 each and 4,166 restricted shares.

     Providian's eight outside directors are James P. Holdcroft Jr., a private
investor who hails from Wall Street; Ruth M. Owades, president of Owades
Enterprises, a consumer marketing enterprise; Jane A. Truelove, a private
investor who was a senior vice president at Fidelity Investments; Richard D.
Field, a private investor and former executive at Bank of New York; F. Warren
McFarlan, a Harvard Business School professor; John L. Douglas, a partner at
Alston & Bird, a law firm that has provided services to Providian in the past;
Robert J. Higgins, a private investor who was a director at Rhode Island's
Department of Administration; and Francesca Ruiz de Luzuriaga, an independent
business development consultant who had been an executive at Mattel Inc.

     Alan Elias, a Providian spokesman, said that none of the company's outside
directors would discuss the deliberations they made to conclude that the deal
was fair. ''We fully expect the deal to conclude in the beginning of the fourth
quarter and we continue to believe that the proposed merger is fair and
equitable,'' Mr. Elias said. He declined to comment further.

     Gary Lutin, an investment banker at Lutin & Company in New York, who runs
shareholder forums on corporate control matters, says the proposal to buy
Providian is a transaction that cries out for an independent, third-party
appraisal.

     ''The investment bankers have significant interests in fees that are purely
contingent on the transaction as well as continuing relationships with
managements,'' Mr. Lutin said. ''And management and directors of Providian are
similarly biased by an option incentive plan that is based on now-discredited
concepts of alignment with shareholder interests.''

     Mr. Lutin has written to Mr. Saunders, asking Providian to cooperate with
an objective analyst who will be hired to make an independent assessment of the
deal. Mr. Elias said the company would probably not do so. Mr. King, of Putnam
Investments, said he favored such an analysis, especially because it would help
small investors who don't have the resources to scrutinize a deal.

     Taking a vocal stance against a merger is unusual for Putnam, but Mr. King
says it will probably take similar actions whenever its analysts conclude that
prices proposed in takeovers are too low. ''This is an extension of a direction
we've been going in for some time,'' he said.

     LET'S hope that other investors, large and small, join in to reject the
deal. After all, because the premium in the takeover is so small, Providian
shareholders have little downside if it fails. The upsides, meanwhile, are
evident: a possibly higher price for the company from another bidder or a rising
stock price based on the company's improving fundamentals.

     ''If investors want to get their fair share of capitalism's benefits,'' Mr.
Lutin said, ''they need to make better use of their rights.''

     In other words, just say no


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2005


                              96 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 14, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Studying the tech evolution

BYLINE: CECIL JOHNSON, KRT NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   Five Regions of the Future:    Preparing Your Business for   Tomorrow's
Technology Revolution,    Joel Barker and Scott Erickson; Portfolio,    240
pages, $24.95   If you think the way to traverse the terrain of the evolving
technology-based future is just to take the high road, you're going to get lost,
because that landscape is too complex and shifting, futurists Joel Barker and
Scott Erickson write.

   Ditto for the low road.

   Barker and Erickson write in their thought-provoking new book, "Five Regions
of the Future," that high-tech and low-tech have ceased to be adequate ways of
mapping this scientific, economic, political and cultural realm.

    Nevertheless, "most global corporations, in terms of growth orientation and
product development, are much more in line with super tech values. The reason is
simple: It is the safest place to develop technology because it has such a long
history. Ironically, it is the conservative nature of the global corporations
that has kept them from investing in the other regions," Barker and Erickson
write.

   They use the term "regions" for the five ecologies of today's and tomorrow's
technology:

    The Super TechnEcology region, whose operating assumptions are more and
bigger are better, nature has advanced us as far as it can and applied science
can solve all problems. Some examples from this region are robots, fusion power,
extraction of oil from tar sands, fiber optics, megacities and space
colonization.

    The Limits TechnEcology region, whose operating assumption is the world has
physical limits and disasters could result from trying to move beyond them.
Efficiency is the watchword for limits techies. Some limits tech examples are
negawatt devices; superconducting cable; picosatellites; and food irradiation.

    The Local TechnEcology region, which emphasizes appropriate technology and
takes the view that "small is beautiful." From this perspective, using local
resources for local needs is the most sensible way of economic life. Local tech
examples are windmills; wave power; solar chimneys; and fog nets to extract
water from thick, foggy air.

    The Nature TechnEcology Region focuses on working with nature. Examples
include stimulating certain green algae to produce hydrogen for fuel, microbial
fuel, flowering plants that heat homes, natural plastics from plants, biorock to
rejuvenate reefs, microlenses from sponges and brittle stars and biological or
DNA computers.

   The Human Technology Region is the most complex. The authors say we are only
beginning to explore this region, which they describe as "the ocean from which
the other four, like inter-linked islands, arise." Among the aspects of this
region examined by the authors are bilateral symmetry, mother's milk, stem
cells, gene therapy, chronobiology, placebo effects, yoga, organizational
management, teamwork and leadership.

   The authors also discuss a Universal Region, where the other five often
interact, complementing or interfering with one another.

   Therein lies the real value of this fascinating book to businesses, academia
and general readers.

   Barker and Erickson have provided a road map for navigating the intermingling
of technological worlds.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              97 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 11, 2005, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: GLOBE SOUTH; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 771 words

HEADLINE: LIFESAVING WORK

BYLINE: BY PAUL E. KANDARIAN

BODY:

   Margie Heger of Westwood knows her son Zack will never get out of his
wheelchair. She just wants him to live.

      Heger and her ex-husband, Rodney , have created fund-raiser to help
finance research into Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which struck Zack 10 years
ago. It is a debilitating neuromuscular disease that causes progressive muscle
wasting, and it has left Zack, now 13, confined to a wheelchair.


           The Black & Blue Ball is scheduled for Saturday night at the Dedham
Health & Athletic Complex, where Margie Heger is director of physical therapy.
The fund-raiser is scheduled to feature the musical stylings of Patriots
quarterback Doug Flutie and his Flutie Brothers Band. Margie Heger said Flutie
told her he is "70 percent" sure he'll be at the event, and Flutie knows good
causes: He's behind the Doug Flutie Jr. Foundation for Autism Inc., in honor of
his son, who has autism.

   Proceeds from The Black & Blue Ball named for its required attire, a black
top and blue jeans will benefit the nonprofit Parent Project for Muscular
Dystrophy.

      "They're making strides in research with gene therapy, but money is needed
for that," Margie Heger said. "Zack, his dad and I work hard to do something, if
not to help him, then future children [with the disease]. Zack won't get out of
the chair, we know that, but hopefully we can stop the disease in its tracks."

      The disease affects one in every 3,500 newborn males, she said, and no
family is immune. It is caused by a random genetic mutation, and the progressive
muscle-wasting disease is usually fatal by age 20, Heger said.

   To fund research, Zack's parents have also started a golf tournament, now in
its seventh year, scheduled for Sept. 22 at the Norton Country Club.

      The golf tournament last year raised $68,000, and all together has raised
around $300,000. The Hegers got the idea for an evening party as a way to raise
more money and utilize much of the leftover auction items they'd accumulated
from a half-dozen golf fund-raisers.

      Knowing their child will remain in a wheelchair is tough, she said.
Knowing he could die by age 20 is much tougher.

      "If they come up with a cure now, it could prolong his life," she said.

   For information on the ball, call Heger at 617-529-9612. To find out more
about the golf tournament visit www.hacksforezack.org. For more on the
organization receiving the money, visit www.parentprojectmd.org.


      HELMETS DONATED The Youth Services Department of the Plymouth Public
Library has received a donation of bicycle helmets from the Manomet Cedarville
Kiwanis. As children read and participate in programs at the library this
summer, they are eligible to enter their names in a weekly prize drawing to win
the helmets. This is the third year the Kiwanis have donated to the department,
officials said. The reading program, "Going Places @ Your Library," is sponsored
by the Plymouth Public Library, the Massachusetts Regional Library Systems and
the Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners.


      BUSINESS BRIEFS Quincy resident Gregg Manning has joined the staff of
Conway Financial Services in Norwell as a mortgage specialist. Manning had
worked as a manager of fund reporting for State Street Bank and Trust Co.

   Amanda Boehmer of Randolph has been named executive director of the Plymouth
Philharmonic Orchestra. Prior to her appointment, she was assistant to the
operations manager at the Meadows Music Centre of Hartford. She is a graduate of
the Hartt School of the University of Hartford, earning a bachelor's degree in
performing arts management and a bachelor of music degree in clarinet
performance.

   Frank Briel has been named manager for a new IKEA furniture store scheduled
to open this fall in Stoughton. The store will be the Swedish company's first in
Massachusetts, preceding the opening of a Somerville store being planned,
company officials said.


   Kristin Kelley of Easton has completed her eight-week internship at the
United Way of Greater Plymouth County as part of her applied studies program at
Arizona State University.

   The Entergy Charitable Foundation has given $5,000 to the literacy program at
Plymouth Public Library, which will enable the program to continue funding staff
at the Literacy Technology Learning Center, officials said. The literacy program
holds a six-week tutor-training session twice a year for those interested in
volunteering. For information, call 508-830-4260.


      E-mail your news to kandarian@globe.com, or fax it to 508-386-1824.


NOTES:
GLOBE SOUTH 1 / PEOPLE / SOUTH

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2005


                              98 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 9, 2005 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Editorial Pages Desk; Part B; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: Will human enhancement make us better?

BYLINE: Daniel Sarewitz, DANIEL SAREWITZ is a professor of science and society
at Arizona State University and director of its Consortium for Science, Policy
and Outcomes.

BODY:

   THE FLIP SIDE of the steroid scandal in baseball is last week's announcement
of the first cloned dog. Ballplayers are punished for using pharmaceutical
technologies to improve their physical abilities, while scientists are rewarded
for pushing toward a similar goal -- in the words of artificial intelligence
techno-visionary Ray Kurzweil, "reverse engineering our biology and then
reprogramming it."

   Biological engineering is not just about curing disease anymore. The
incentives and profits are moving toward drugs, gene therapies and other
technologies to enhance human performance -- memory, creativity, concentration,
strength, endurance, longevity. Asking athletes \o7not\f7 to partake of these
advances is not just hypocritical, it's likely to be increasingly futile.

   Speaking last week in a television interview, Kurzweil defined humanity as
"the species that goes beyond our limitations." Of course, in that quest we are
also the species that has come close to immolating the planet (during the Cold
War), destroying our environment and ruining baseball.

   But if we are to believe scientists and technologists, nothing but good can
come from human-performance enhancement. As a 2002 report of the normally staid
National Science Foundation proclaimed, the 21st century "could end in world
peace, universal prosperity, and evolution to a higher level of compassion and
accomplishment," all through research on human-performance enhancement.

   I participated in some of the meetings that led to that report. Most of the
attendees were highly intelligent white males who worked in the semiconductor
industry, at national weapons laboratories or major research universities. At
one point, the group got to talking about how we might soon achieve
brain-to-brain interfaces that would eliminate misunderstandings among humans.
Instead of having to rely on imperfect words, we would be able to directly
signal our thoughts with perfect precision.

   I asked how such enhanced abilities would get around differing values and
interests. For instance, how would more direct communication of thought help
Israelis and Palestinians better understand one another? Unable to use the
ambiguities and subtleties of language to soften the impact of one's raw
convictions, might conflict actually be amplified? A person at one of the
meetings acknowledged he "hadn't thought about values," while another suggested
that I was being overly negative. What seemed clear was that the group's
homogeneity made it impossible for it to scrutinize the assumptions beneath its
rosy vision of "performance enhancement."

   This sort of contextual cluelessness is rampant in the world of
techno-optimism. Software designer Ramez Naam has suggested that "the debate
over human enhancement is at heart a debate over human freedom. Should
individuals and families have the right to alter their own minds and bodies, or
should that power be held by the state? In a democratic society, it's every man
and woman who should determine such things, and not the state."

   But who, after all, is making the key decisions determining how research on
human enhancement should be supported, advanced and applied? It's people such as
those at the meetings I just described.

   I suspect the last thing on Earth that Naam would want is for "individuals
and families" -- most of whom know little about the relevant science and
technology -- to be involved in making these choices. What he really means, I
suppose, is that "individuals and families," playing their roles as consumers,
will get to exercise some modest amount of choice in the matter, after products
are developed and marketed, and perhaps in response to the ways that the Joneses
next door are enhancing their children. Yet if this is Naam's idea of freedom,
it is a disturbingly shriveled version of the real thing.

   Science and technology have immeasurably enhanced the human capacity to work
and think, through the development of tools ranging from eyeglasses to
bulldozers to computers. But what's being promised now is radically different --
the potential to modify humanity itself, to change the essential attributes of
humanness, the same attributes that underlie and inspire all of our social
institutions from democratic politics to the economic marketplace to our system
of laws and justice. Even the game of baseball.

   Why do we trust our long-term well-being to the irrational faith that the
good consequences of our ingenuity will outweigh the bad? The time to openly
consider which directions we want to push the technology, and which we want to
avoid, is now. In this regard, baseball's expanding steroid scandal, as trivial
as it may be, is a warning: Once new technologies make it into the marketplace,
our ability and our willingness to make meaningful choices all but disappear.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2005


                              99 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 08, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1 Metfront

LENGTH: 1049 words

HEADLINE: Beneficiary of state grant has links to Perry;
Firm's investors include donors to the governor

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: R.G. RATCLIFFE, ANNE BELLI

DATELINE: THE WOODLANDS

BODY:

   THE WOODLANDS - Gov. Rick Perry recently made one of his largest
taxpayer-financed economic development grants ever to a biotech venture. The
deal was orchestrated by a congressman who owned stock in the firm, Lexicon
Genetics Inc., a company in The Woodlands whose major investors include some of
Perry's top campaign contributors.

   The $ 50 million grant is for a joint project between Lexicon and Texas A&M
University to expand the genetic research being done by the company. The money
will establish the Texas Institute for Genomic Medicine, with $ 15 million going
to A&M and $ 35 million to Lexicon.

   Perry spokeswoman Kathy Walt said political contributions had nothing to do
with the grant to Lexicon. She said it was about expanding the biotechnology
industry in Texas, increasing gene research and finding possible cures for
diseases.

   The grant, announced July 16, equals the largest ever made by Perry's Texas
Enterprise Fund for economic development. The $ 300 million fund makes grants at
the governor's discretion. Democrats have called it a political "slush fund"
designed to make legal but politically beneficial investments for the governor.

   The Lexicon deal with A&M and the governor's office was put together by a top
aide to U.S. Rep. Kevin Brady, R-The Woodlands.  Brady, a minor shareholder in
Lexicon since 2000, divested his stock in the company in the midst of
negotiations with the governor's office.


   Top financiers


   Some of the major Lexicon investors who have held a controlling interest in
the company are Houston businessmen who have been top financiers of Perry's
political career.

   They are Houston Texans owner Robert C. McNair, businessman William A. McMinn
and the estate of businessman Gordon Cain and his family.  They own 16.5 percent
of the company, according to Securities and Exchange Commission records, making
them the largest group of stockholders.

   McNair has donated $ 175,301 to Perry's political fund since he has been
governor, and McMinn has given $ 100,000. The contributions include $ 25,000
each McNair and McMinn gave Perry in June. Cain contributed $ 50,000 before he
died in 2002.

   McMinn also was one of three businessmen who guaranteed a $ 1.1 million loan
for Perry's campaign when he was elected lieutenant governor in 1998. McMinn and
Cain were business partners in Sterling Chemicals.

   McMinn is a past chairman of the Lexicon board of directors and served on the
board from 1997-2003. McMinn, Cain's widow, Mary, and stepson, James Weaver,
earlier this year held joint control of 7.2 percent of the company's stock,
according to SEC records. In a filing Friday, Mary Cain reported selling almost
half her Lexicon stock on July 26.

   Gordon Cain was the company's founding investor, according to SEC records.


   'Tremendous potential'


   As of March 2005, McNair controlled 9.3 percent of Lexicon's stock.  Dr. C.
Thomas Caskey, the managing director of McNair's Cogene Ventures, was Lexicon's
chairman last year and still serves on the board.

   A call to Caskey was referred to McNair, who did not respond to a request for
an interview. McMinn was unavailable for comment.

   Walt said neither the governor nor anyone in his office had any discussions
with McNair, Caskey or McMinn about Lexicon. Walt said Caskey did not know about
the grant until it was announced.

   "Lexicon is the world leader in mouse genome research, which has tremendous
potential for the development of drugs and genetic therapies" to improve human
health, Walt said.

   "Given that this (state) investment will yield tremendous benefits measured
in new medical treatments, thousands of new jobs and a stronger economy, to pass
on this opportunity would have been a huge disservice to the people of Texas,"
Walt said.

   Walt noted the value of Lexicon's stock has dropped, "so there has been no
benefit to its investors."


   Subject to approval


   The company made its initial public offering in 2000 for $ 22 a share.
Lexicon's stock rose to more than $ 49 a share in 2001 before the biotech
investing bubble burst. Lexicon's stock rose from $ 6.09 a share to $ 6.45 in
the days immediately after the grant announcement, but it closed Friday at $
4.87 a share.

   But Rep. Garnet Coleman, D-Houston, a frequent critic of the Texas Enterprise
Fund, said the deal shows Perry is using "the treasury as a private bank
account."

   "These are folks who are very supportive of him," Coleman said.  "It's a
pretty good trade: I give you hundreds of thousands of dollars and you give me
back millions, millions of the taxpayers' dollars."

   Applications for Texas Enterprise Fund grants are reviewed by the governor's
office and are subject to approval by House Speaker Tom Craddick and Lt. Gov.
David Dewhurst. But Perry promotes the fund and usually announces the grants.

   The Texas Institute for Genomic Medicine will be a private nonprofit
institute jointly founded by Lexicon and A&M. It will be housed in two locations
- at a newly constructed facility on the Texas A&M campus in Bryan and at the
university's Institute of Biosciences in Houston's Texas Medical Center.


   Brady approached


   Lexicon chief executive Arthur Sands said the idea for the institute was
hatched about 18 months ago as he and other company officials were "forming a
strategy as to how could the entire human genome be used for medical
breakthroughs."

   Sands and his colleagues took their idea to their congressman, Brady. At the
time, Brady also was a shareholder in the company, but his chief of staff, Doug
Cintelli, headed the effort to secure funding.

   Statements filed by Brady show the congressman and his wife in 2000 bought
Lexicon stock he valued at $ 1,000 to $ 15,000. In the report Brady filed in
May, he valued his Lexicon stock at the end of 2004 at a maximum of $ 5,000.

   Cintelli said Brady donated his stock to charity earlier this year as the
deal with the governor's office came together to avoid the appearance of a
conflict of interest.

   Cintelli said he suggested that Lexicon seek Texas Enterprise Fund dollars
last year but said the project would have a higher chance of approval if it
included an academic institution.




























GRAPHIC: Mug: Gov. RICK PERRY OK'd $ 50 million grant for joint project of A&M
and Lexicon Genetics.

NOTES: r.g.ratcliffe@chron.com anne.belli@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2005


                             100 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                     August 6, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: Ex-prosecutor to advise health-care firms;
As an assistant U.S. attorney, he dealt with cases of inadequate care.

BYLINE: By Josh Goldstein; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   With no clients and a reputation for prosecuting those he now hopes will hire
him, David R. Hoffman opens the doors to his new Center City health-care
consulting firm on Monday.

   Hoffman, 47, gained national prominence over the last 12 years as an
assistant U.S. attorney in Philadelphia, taking on nursing homes and other
health-care providers for providing inadequate or substandard care.

   Now, David Hoffman & Associates will offer consulting services to providers,
preferably before the government has intervened. He said the goal is to help
providers improve their care, not just to comply with legal and clinical
standards.

   Hoffman said that to avoid potential conflicts of interest, he didn't line up
any business while still on the job at the U.S. Attorney's Office.

   "When I came to the office in 1993, I had an agenda to improve the care being
rendered at long-term care facilities," Hoffman said. As he leaves government
service, he said, "I don't think my agenda has changed."

   As a prosecutor, Hoffman developed a legal theory that enabled the government
to recover millions of dollars from 13 nursing-home operators and other
providers. To settle those cases, the providers agreed to hire consultants to
oversee and guide quality improvements.

   Hoffman's legal theory is now used by federal, state and local prosecutors
across the nation. He asserted that poor care is a fraud perpetrated on the
government by providers. And he sought financial and clinical remedies under a
Civil War-era statute.

   "David was able to identify the underlying opportunities in the False Claims
Act to enable the federal government to recoup money that was wrongly spent, but
also demand improvements in the quality of care," said Patrick L. Meehan,
Hoffman's boss as U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

   Hoffman's cases included some of the most prominent in this region.

   He helped develop a model for research oversight during his examination of
the death of Jesse Gelsinger in a gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania. He won cases for research fraud and pursued black-market
prescription-drug sellers who repackaged expired medicines and sold them to
nursing homes.

   Last week, Hoffman won a settlement with Central Montgomery Medical Center in
a case that allegedly involved the improper use of restraints that led to an
elderly woman's death in 2002.

   The Lansdale, Pa., hospital denied any wrongdoing but agreed to pay the
government $200,000 and to hire a consultant to review its use of restraints.

   Some industry representatives have argued that the cases pursued by Hoffman
are unnecessary because the government could close or sanction nursing homes and
other institutions that provide poor care.

   Still, Hoffman has won praise for a nuanced approach to fixing the problem
without shuttering needed services.

   "Before David came along, we threw our arms up because there was nothing that
could be done," said Diane A. Menio, executive director of Center for Advocacy
for the Rights and Interests of the Elderly in Philadelphia. "He helped find
solutions. David was not just trying to shut them down, he was trying to put
remedies in place that would help improve the quality of care."

   Even some opponents respected his approach.

   "Where it was a nursing home that hadn't been able to manage quality of care
because of financial issues, he has worked with them," said Michael M.
Mustokoff, a partner at Duane Morris in Philadelphia who represents health-care
providers. "On the other hand, where there was an outright disregard for patient
well-being, he has come down hard."

   Contact staff writer Josh Goldstein at 215-854-4733 or
jgoldstein@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2005


                             101 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             August 5, 2005 Friday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: Tulane given grant for stem cell research;
Scientists to develop genetic treatments

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Tulane University's Center for Gene Therapy has received a $9.5 million
federal grant to develop treatments using adult stem cells for emphysema, cystic
fibrosis and asbestos-related lung disease.

   The five-year grant, announced Thursday at a news conference, will focus on
cells that are produced in bone marrow and deployed throughout the body to
develop into bone, cartilage, fat, muscle, nerve and other types of cells. Stem
cells also have a knack for finding damaged cells, including those ravaged by
illness, and repairing them, said Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the Center for
Gene Therapy.

   "We don't fully understand how," said Prockop, at Tulane University Health
Sciences Center. "But there are some very intriguing possibilities."

   Laboratory work already has shown what these cells can do in battling cystic
fibrosis, an incurable hereditary lung disease that afflicts nearly 119,000
Americans. When stem cells containing the corrected gene were put in cell
culture, they produced healthy lung cells, Prockop said.

   "It looks as though it will work," he said, adding that he hopes to start
human testing in two years.

   But before researchers can concentrate on specific illnesses, they first will
have to determine which stem cells will work best against lung ailments.

   "Cells are mysterious in what they do and how they behave," Prockop said,
"and it is still mysterious how they're going to behave in patients."

   The grant for this project was awarded by the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, which is part of the National Institutes of Health. The stem cells
that researchers will use will come from the bone marrow of volunteer adult
donors, not from embryos.

   The ethical propriety of using embryonic stem cells, even those from embryos
harvested in fertility clinics and destined to be discarded, has led to fierce
debate. The Bush administration opposes such research, notwithstanding concern
in scientific circles that the United States will lose its place on medicine's
cutting edge.

   Although Thursday's news conference emphasized lung ailments, Prockop said he
and his colleagues also are working on stem-cell treatments for diseases of the
heart and spinal cord, which he described as "serious diseases that nobody up to
now had any idea how to conquer."

   "There is hope for all these diseases now," he said. "We have to push the
limit. We have to see how far we can go."

   Also Thursday, Dr. Paul Whelton, Tulane's senior vice president for health
sciences, announced that the university will expand its five-year-old gene
therapy center from its present 15,000 square feet to 20,000 square feet, and
hire about 20 more people, bringing its total work force to slightly more than
100.

   Dr. Jay Kolls, who used to lead Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center's gene therapy center before moving to the University of Pittsburgh two
years ago, will return to New Orleans Jan. 1 to be co-director of the Tulane
center.

   Although its headquarters is at Tulane, researchers from the LSU Health
Sciences Center will be involved in the work at research and supervisory levels.

   "This is great," said Alistair Ramsay, director of LSU's gene therapy center.
"The best thing about it is that it brings together people from both
institutions."

   Collaboration is the key to progress, Prockop said.

   "Science cannot be done in a single laboratory with a single-investigator
operation," he said. "This project grant epitomizes that."

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or at (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2005


                             102 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            August 4, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: UAMS scientist: Virus inhibits cancer

BYLINE: ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   A common virus with the ability to inhibit cancer in humans could lead to new
treatments, according to new research at the University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences.

   Paul Hermonat, a scientist at UAMS, has studied the properties of
adeno-associated virus type 2 for more than 20 years to understand and harness
the mechanisms that make the virus effective against cancer. Adenoassociated
virus type 2 harmlessly infects more than 80 percent of the population but has
shown an ability to inhibit cancer development, UAMS said. Other viruses, such
as human papillomavirus, promote the development of certain cancers.

   Adeno-associated virus type 2 "is the only known viral inhibitor of cancer
development - meaning that this may ultimately prove to be a virus that a person
will be glad to be infected with," said Hermonat, a professor of internal
medicine in the UAMS College of Medicine, in a news release. "Continuing
research by our team has shown that the relationships" between adeno-associated
virus type 2 and human papillomavirus in the cell "are complex but show promise
as a cancer treatment."

   Hermonat's group first identified the Rep78 protein produced by
adeno-associated virus type 2 as the anti-cancer component. Production of Rep78
in effective quantities is one obstacle to developing a new treatment, along
with understanding the complex interactions that make the virus inhibit cancer
development, he said.

   The inhibition of cancer development occurs mostly on the level of gene
expression, Hermonat said. Not only does Rep78 inhibit human papillomavirus from
expressing its cancercausing genes, but it also inhibits many cellular genes
known to be involved in cancer, UAMS said.

   Studies dating back to the 1970s suggested that adeno-associated virus type
2, found naturally in the female genital tract, inhibited cancer development.
Later research showed that human papillomavirus, which causes warts, is also a
factor in the development of cervical cancer.

   Hermonat is in the second year of a five-year, $1.2 million grant from the
National Institutes of Health to find the genes present in human papillomavirus
that help replicate adeno-associated virus type 2 and to better understand the
interactions between the two viruses.

   The two viruses are often found together but appear to affect each another in
different ways depending on the volume of each virus present. Low amounts of
adeno-associated virus type 2 actually stimulate higher human papillomavirus
replication, Hermonat said, while high amounts hamper it.

   Among the pending patents based on his adeno-associated virus type 2
research, Hermonat has applied for a patent on the Rep78 protein and its use in
gene therapy and anti-cancer treatments. Hermonat was also a lead scientist in
the first investigation into the use of adeno-associated virus type 2 as a gene
therapy vector, meaning it could be modified to carry genes designed as medical
treatments into the body.

   Adeno-associated virus type 2 has looked to be a top gene therapy vector
since it is harmless to healthy cells - even while it has shown the ability to
limit cancer.

   This article was published 8/4/2005

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2005


                             103 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 1, 2005, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 946 words

HEADLINE: A 'devastating' diagnosis

BYLINE: Suzanne Leigh

BODY:
At the University of California, Berkeley, 18-year-old Vincent Whelan seems like
any other pre-med student. Unlike many, though, Vincent knows exactly what he
wants to do later: He plans to help patients with FOP, or fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva, a rare and incurable disease.

   FOP causes bone to form in muscles, tendons and ligaments, creating a second
skeleton that encases the body in a prison of bone. In a macabre manifestation,
patients may eventually turn into living statues -- standing, arms folded,
sitting or even cruelly twisted.


   FOP is Vincent's disease. The average life span for an FOP patient is 45
years, but Vincent intends to live to old age and aspires to help the world's
estimated 3,200 FOP patients do so, too.

   Vincent first showed signs of the little-known disease in 1995 when he
developed a limp. His mother, Carol Zapata-Whelan, an adjunct instructor at
California State University-Fresno, didn't worry at first. When the limp
persisted, she took him to a specialist, who privately feared cancer but decided
against a biopsy because Vincent looked healthy. The decision later proved to be
a fortunate one.

   The eventual diagnosis was "not a cataclysmic moment," says Zapata-Whelan.
"It was like someone had given me a foreign word." So Vincent's pediatrician
conducted research, and he handed the results to her in a manila envelope. "It
was the most devastating day of my life," she recalls. "I thought, 'My son can't
have this disease.'"

   Vincent's FOP did not progress until after Zapata-Whelan and her husband,
Walter Whelan, an attorney, welcomed a new child, their fifth. By then,
Zapata-Whelan had reached a kind of acceptance, she says, aided by her faith in
God and her husband's steady optimism.

   Vincent flourished at school, but the stiffness in his neck and back spread,
and today he relies on a medical scooter to travel long distances.

   "I don't usually tell people about my FOP," he says. "I want people to ignore
that part of me."Vincent believes in focusing on the positive. "I still have
fun. I've just learned to have a different type of fun."

   Zapata-Whelan channeled her angst into writing a book, Finding Magic
Mountain: A Family's Story of Twists and Turns and Little Miracles, due in the
spring.

   In FOP, new bone growth is heralded by a flare-up of painful fibrous nodules.
Flare-ups can occur spontaneously or following trauma. When Vincent had a
flare-up, Zapata-Whelan reached out to a former classmate at the University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF). Eventually, this led to the establishment of a
consultation service for FOP patients in California that was organized by Joseph
Kitterman, a UCSF neonatologist. It opened in April.

   In Kitterman, the Whelans found a compassionate ear. His daughter, Nina
Horick, is stepmom to Matt Horick, 23, of Petaluma, Calif. At 17, Matt was a
tanned, muscular athlete who stood 6 feet tall and lived for the thrill of
wakeboarding. But he too was diagnosed with FOP, which started with a swelling
under the chin, spread to his back and then "just seemed to go wild all over his
body," recalls Nina Horick.

   Suspecting cancer, his physician ordered biopsies and treated him with
chemotherapy -- interventions that have devastating consequences for FOP
patients because trauma, including the kind triggered by biopsies and
chemotherapy, can promote mobility-restricting bone growth.

   Four years after diagnosis, Matt's back is hunched and he's 11 inches shorter
and 60 pounds lighter. He can walk only short distances and struggles to
straighten his arms and move his head.

   But like Vincent Whelan, now one of Matt's acquaintances, Matt's motto is to
"just keep going." He is planning his future, finishing school, driving his new
Jeep Cherokee and looking forward to his one-year anniversary with girlfriend
Dominique.

   Meanwhile, some 3,000 miles from the Horicks and the Whelans, in a lab at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, an orthopedist-turned-molecular
scientist works to identify the gene that causes overproduction of a
bone-producing protein in FOP.

   Fred Kaplan is the world authority on FOP.  There are 500 known FOP patients
worldwide and Kaplan has met most of them. He considers young patients his
children.

   His worst nightmare, he says, is that he'll die before finding a cure.

   Kaplan and his team are getting closer. They're studying "FOPPY" mice -- mice
engineered to over-express the protein causing extra bone. Breakthroughs have
been made in gene therapy research.

   But finding the cure, he says, is like climbing the highest mountain. "We
realize that the perceived peak was only one of many smaller peaks. The summit
might be still shrouded in clouds, but we're well above base camp."





   What is FOP?

   A genetic disorder that causes bones to form in muscles, tendons and
ligaments.  Movement is hampered as bone develops across joints. Eventually a
second skeleton is created. Death may occur as bone growth progressively
restricts breathing.

   Who gets it?

   1 in 1.6 million, striking both genders and all races equally. Children of an
FOP parent have a 50% chance of inheriting the disorder. It cannot be accurately
detected in utero.

   Diagnosis

   Most cases are misdiagnosed. Diagnosis should be made by noting new bone
growth and a malformed big toe (present in 99% of patients).

   Treatment

   Steroids taken in the early hours of a flare-up may minimize bone growth.

   More information

   The International FOP Association at www.ifopa.org.

   Source: Frederick Kaplan, professor of orthopedic molecular medicine,
University of Pennsylvania




GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, B/W, Eileen Blass, USA TODAY (2); PHOTO, B/W, Martin Klimek for
USA TODAY

LOAD-DATE: August 01, 2005


                             104 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                   July 28, 2005 Thursday CITY-D-EAST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Disputed TKT sale to Shire approved

BYLINE: By Mark Jewell; Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   A narrow majority of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shareholders approved the
biotechnology company's $1.6 billion sale to a British drug company, a deal that
prompted Transkaryotic's top executive to resign and continues to draw
opposition from key investors.

   Transkaryotic, which is known as TKT, said after yesterday's vote that its
sale to Shire Pharmaceuticals Group P.L.C. was expected to close today. Shire,
Britain's third-largest drugmaker, employs more than 450 people at its U.S.
headquarters in Wayne, Pa.

   But dissident TKT investors, including billionaire financier Carl Icahn, are
seeking a court-ordered appraisal that could serve as the basis for a higher
price and a greater return on investors' shares of Cambridge-based TKT.

   Icahn made his fortune acquiring big stakes in companies and forcing changes
to drive up share prices. He said in a regulatory filing last week that he had
acquired a 5.1 percent stake in TKT and planned to seek so-called appraisal
rights, triggering a lengthy process in which a judge could set a different
price than the $37 Shire is paying for each TKT share.

   TKT said yesterday that investors who together control nearly 35 percent of
the company's stock have indicated they plan to assert such rights.

   Ballots in favor of the Shire offer were cast by holders of 52.6 percent of
TKT's more than 35 million outstanding shares, with holders of 27.7 percent
voting against the deal. Many shareholders did not cast ballots or abstained.

   When the deal was announced April 21, TKT chief executive officer Michael J.
Astrue stepped down. Astrue and another board member who voted against Shire's
offer questioned the price, structure and timing of the deal.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2005


                             105 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             July 28, 2005 Thursday
                          FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: MORNING BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from Dow Jones, Associated Press, Bloomberg News and
Post-Dispatch reports.

BODY:

   Savvis shares avoid delisting on Nasdaq

   Savvis Inc. said Wednesday that its shares have traded at more than $1 long
enough to avoid a delisting threatened earlier this year by the Nasdaq stock
market.

   The Internet services, hosting and application services company, which is
based in Town and Country, said its shares will continue to be traded on the
Nasdaq Stock Market so long as it remains in compliance with listing rules.

   Savvis' shares traded below $1 between Feb. 7 and June 20. Since June 21,
they've remained above that threshold for all but three days in early July. The
stock closed Wednesday at $1.14, unchanged from Tuesday's close.

   Icahn, others object to biotech sale price

   A narrow majority of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. shareholders approved the
biotech's $1.6 billion sale to a British drug company, a deal that prompted
TKT's top executive to resign and continues to draw opposition from key
investors.

   TKT, of Cambridge, Mass., said after Wednesday's vote that its sale to Shire
Pharmaceuticals Group PLC is expected to close today. But dissident TKT
investors, including financier Carl Icahn, are seeking a court-ordered appraisal
that could serve as the basis for a higher price for TKT, which is developing
drugs to treat rare diseases.

   Charter, Citigroup unit agree to share-lending

   Charter Communications Inc. says that CitiGroup Global Markets Ltd. will sell
27.2 million Charter shares at $1.25 a share under a share-lending agreement
designed to facilitate transactions related to convertible senior notes Charter
issued in November.

   Charter, based in Town and Country, won't get any of the proceeds from the
shares, but CitiGroup will pay the company one-tenth of a cent per share in loan
fees. Charter could be asked to issue up to 122.8 million shares under the
share-lending agreement.

   McDonald's goes from Disney to DreamWorks

   Ronald McDonald is ditching Mickey Mouse for Shrek. McDonald's Corp. said
Wednesday that it has signed a two-year, non-exclusive deal to promote
DreamWorks Animation SKG films beginning with the release of "Shrek 3" in 2007.

   McDonald's previously said it wanted to try a new approach to marketing
partnerships when its exclusive 10-year deal with Walt Disney Co. expires next
year.

   Whirlpool officials see Maytag's books

   Whirlpool officials began taking a closer look at Maytag books on Wednesday
as the two appliance companies took the initial steps toward a deal that would
combine their businesses.

   Whirlpool Corp. boosted its offer for the appliance maker on Friday by $1, to
$18 a share, or about $1.43 billion. In a statement Wednesday, Whirlpool, based
in Benton Harbor, Mich., said it had entered into a mutual confidentiality
agreement with Maytag Corp., of Newton, Iowa, allowing its accountants to
examine Maytag's financial records in detail.

   Take Two is sued over video game sex play

   Take-Two Interactive Software Inc. and its Rockstar Games subsidiary are
being sued in federal court in Manhattan over hidden sexual content in their
popular "Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas" video game.

   The lawsuit filed in the Southern District of New York on Wednesday is
seeking class-action status for buyers of the games. A Take-Two Interactive
spokesman didn't immediately have a comment on Wednesday.

   The plaintiff, Florence Cohen, claims in her lawsuit that she purchased the
game for her teenage grandson in or about late 2004 when the game was rated "M"
for mature by the Entertainment Software Ratings Board and was damaged when it
came to light that sexually explicit scenes believed to be inaccessible by
players were left in the game by developers.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2005


                             106 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              July 24, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: METAIRIE PICAYUNE; Bucktown, Bonnabel and Beyond; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: Woman fought tumor with courage, resolve

BYLINE: By Hope Mazzeno

BODY:

   Four years ago I did a story on Gayle Johnson. She was not only one of the
most courageous but one of the most remarkable women I have ever interviewed.

   Afflicted with a Stage 4 brain tumor in the occipital lobe of her brain in
1998, Johnson had surgery to remove the tumor and began several rounds of
chemotherapy and radiation treatments.

   In 1999 the tumor returned. It was then that Gayle began an experimental
surgery using gene therapy at M.D. Anderson Hospital in Houston. Gayle told me
at that time that this was a risk, but with the support of her family and her
faith in God, she was "going for it."

   After her surgery, Johnson formed the Metairie Brain Tumor Support Group,
designed to give others with brain tumors hope and support. She continued to be
active at St. Catherine of Siena Church and Ursuline Academy in New Orleans,
where she was named alumna of the year in 2001.

   Gayle lived life to the fullest until her death on July 8. She made a living
by what she received and made a life by what she gave.

   My sympathy goes to her husband, Pat; their sons, Patrick III, Daniel and
Michael; and Gayle's mother, Lorraine Daniel.

   . . . . . . .

   Lakeshore Library, 1000 West Esplanade Ave. in Metairie, is having a special
event called "Books as Sculpture" on Wednesday from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m.

   Back by popular demand after her workshops at Jefferson Parish libraries last
year, assemblage-collage artist Beverly Mangham of Sleeping Dog Studios in San
Marcos, Texas, returns to conduct this workshop at Lakeshore.

   New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival attendees may be familiar with
Mangham's work because she has been an annual favorite at the fest's
contemporary crafts tents for several years. Her works are created by combining,
juxtaposing and redefining ordinary objects and cultural icons with the purpose
of initiating a visual conversation with the viewer. Mangham's passion for
poetry and lyrical messages is apparent in her final assemblage-collage
translation.

   Mangham has been creating her collage-style works since 1992. She develops
her collage from a variety of materials including urban cast-offs and refuse,
everyday items such as kitchen utensils, tin cans or children's doll parts. She
often uses more unusual, eclectic, or even collectible items such as old boxes,
jewelry, old advertising and memorabilia.

   Mangham will share her talents with adults and teens in this creative
hands-on workshop. Participants should bring an old book and an Exacto knife.
Supplies will be provided. Items such as fabrics, broken jewelry, beads,
personal photos and letters are optional, but participants are encouraged to
bring them to the program.

   Registration is required because the class size is limited. To register, call
838-100, ext. 274.

   If you cannot attend this workshop at Lakeshore, Mangham will repeat the
program at the East Bank Regional Library, 4747 West Napoleon Ave., Metairie, on
Thursday, from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m.

   Also, Lakeshore will host two other events this week.

   On Tuesday at 11 a.m., a fire safety demonstration will be presented by
Engine 188 of the Jefferson Parish Fire Department. A story and craft activity
for children ages 3 to 7 is set for Thursday at 2 p.m. Participants will create
a rainbow fish banner that will be on display in the library after it is
completed.

   Registration is required for both programs.

   Call the library at 838-4375.

   . . . . . . .

   In a recent column I wrote about our neighbor Chloe Suazo, who was appearing
in the HBO sitcom "The Comeback" with former "Friends" star Lisa Kudrow. Chloe
plays Kudrow's stepdaughter in the HBO show.

   In the fall Chloe will co-star with Freddie Prinze Jr. in his new sitcom,
"Freddie," which will appear on ABC on Wednesdays at 7:30 p.m.

   In this comedy, Prinze plays a young, successful chef whose swinging-single
days are interrupted when his sister, sister-in-law, grandmother and niece,
played by Chloe, move in with him.

   Congratulations, Chloe.

   . . . . . . .

   If you have information about your club, neighborhood, civic or community
group in Bucktown and Metairie east of Causeway Boulevard and north of Metairie
Road, send e-mail to Hope Mazzeno at mazzeno@aol.com, send a fax to 832-0552 or
call 833-3595.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2005


                             107 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                              Philadelphia Inquirer

                   July 14, 2005 Thursday CITY-D-EAST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; BRIEF; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1321 words

HEADLINE: Former Penn scientist finds... Biotech is in his blood

BYLINE: By Linda Loyd; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Stephen A. Roth, a former University of Pennsylvania biology department
chairman, had been contemplating retirement after leaving the company he'd
started based on his own research.

   Then two guys with a new idea knocked on his door in 2002.

   At first, Roth, 62, could not believe the concept advanced by biochemist Brad
Jameson of the Drexel University College of Medicine: that serotonin, which is a
neurotransmitter in the body's central nervous system, is essential for white
blood cells to multiply.

   "I said it's just not possible. I'm a professor of biology and I taught this
stuff over and over again. I never heard of it," Roth recalled. But he was
intrigued and spent a couple of days in Jameson's lab, where in a series of
experiments he saw molecules known as serotonin antagonists kill white blood
cells in a test tube.

   While studying proteins and molecules to fight AIDS, Jameson had observed
that a molecule that interfered with, or blocked, serotonin - the same type of
molecules present in popular antidepressant drugs such as Prozac - also
prevented lymphocytes, or white blood cells, from dividing. Without serotonin,
the cells died.

   "As a scientific hypothesis, it's elegant. Whether investors can make money
on it, that's what we'll see," said Roth, who signed on in early 2003 as chief
executive officer of Immune Control Inc., founded on the research of Jameson and
molecular biologist Ana Tretiakova at Drexel.

   Jameson and financier Robert Bender of Argil Management L.L.C. in Boston
approached Roth because they wanted a veteran entrepreneur. Roth had taken Penn
discoveries and founded Neose Technologies Inc. in 1990, and he knew well the
expectations of the venture-capital community and Wall Street.

   While the Philadelphia area has seen a number of entrepreneurs start
life-sciences companies recently, the commercialization of academic research
locally has lagged the hotbeds of California and Boston.

   Developing new drugs is far from a sure thing. Fifteen years after it was
started, Neose still has no product sales after clinical trials did not pan out
for two compounds. The Horsham company refocused and recently filed an
investigational new drug application with regulators and hopes to begin another
clinical trial this summer.

   Last month, Immune Control of West Conshohocken closed on a $11.3 million
round of financing from four local venture firms, led by BioAdvance Ventures, a
fund managed by Quaker BioVentures in Philadelphia and Domain Associates of
Princeton. The other investors are NewSpring Capital of King of Prussia and
Anthem Capital Management in Radnor.

   Roth said the money would be used to test serotonin antagonists, including an
existing antipsychotic drug that has been used to treat schizophrenia for 40
years. Immune Control will test it against two diseases: multiple myeloma and
psoriasis.

   The goal is to stop the abnormal growth of white cells responsible for
autoimmune diseases, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, and blood cancers,
such as leukemia and Hodgkin's disease.

   The company plans to test fluphenazine, sold under the brand name Prolixin,
in patients with late-stage multiple myeloma at six medical centers, including
Penn, the University of Pittsburgh, and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute at
Harvard University.

   A second clinical trial for patients with psoriasis is anticipated at the
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J.

   At the same time, Immune Control is looking for other serotonin antagonist
compounds that do not affect the central nervous system because fluphenazine has
a side effect of sedating patients. While sedation may not matter to patients
with advanced multiple myeloma, a terminal blood cancer, patients with other
conditions might find that side effect unacceptable, Roth said.

   To that end, the company has a formal agreement with a large local
pharmaceutical company to test serotonin antagonists that that company shelved
because they did not prove effective as antipsychotic drugs. Under terms of the
agreement, Immune Control cannot name the company. "We are in discussions with
two other large pharmaceutical companies for similar deals," Roth said.

   Immune Control also wants to identify new serotonin antagonist molecules that
do not cause neurological side effects and has contracted with a medicinal
chemistry firm in North Brunswick, N.J., to synthesize such compounds from
scratch.

   Roth said that as a biological concept, "this is beautiful" - but he is not
certain how difficult it will be to turn it into a treatment that either
prolongs lives or reduces pain.

   Scientists have recorded anecdotal evidence for years that some patients
treated for schizophrenia who also had psoriasis found their psoriasis went away
when they took certain antipsychotic drugs.

   "That's why I took the job. It wasn't just watching cells die in Brad's lab,"
Roth said. "But we found anecdotal papers, observations by scientific
researchers, including a Swedish mental hospital where doctors observed lower
rates of blood cancer compared to patients at other regular hospitals."

   Darwin Prockop, director of the Center for Gene Therapy at Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, said Jameson "is a very good scientist." Prockop, a
former Hahnemann University professor who once worked with Jameson, said the
Drexel researcher "has done some very fine work."

   Investors said they were attracted to Immune Control because of Roth's
experience as a seasoned CEO and entrepreneur and because the company is using a
drug that is already on the market and has a known safety record which should
speed the regulatory approval process.

   Sherrill Neff, who is managing partner at Quaker BioVentures and worked with
Roth for seven years at Neose, said investors thought the company would get
clinical data "quickly and inexpensively" compared with start-ups that spend $50
million to get their first clinical trial results.

   "I think we'll have clinical results on two indications for the amount we are
spending now. That's very unusual," Neff said.

   Also unusual is four Philadelphia-area venture firms financing a
life-sciences effort without participation by a large venture firm in Boston or
California. "We are finally getting to the point where we can pull together
sizable financings in the region," Neff said. "That's very exciting to me."

Life-Sciences Firm Builder

   Stephen A. Roth emerged from academia to found one local company and run
another.

   1982-87- Biology professor and department chairman at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   1990- Starts Neose Technologies based on his research at Penn. The company
becomes one of Penn's first company spin-offs, and the university retains an
equity stake.

   1992- Leaves Penn to become Neose's chief scientific officer.

   1994- Promoted to chairman and chief executive officer of Neose.

   1996- Neose raises $29.1 million in initial public offering.

   2002- Neose hires C. Boyd Clarke as president and CEO; Roth remains
nonexecutive chairman.

   2003- Roth becomes president and CEO of Immune Control Inc.

Immune Control Inc. Starts Up

   2001- Company founded on technology developed by Drexel University College of
Medicine professors Brad Jameson and Ana Tretiakova.

   2002- Secures $500,000 from Argil Management L.L.C., of Boston, and files
five patents.

   January 2003- Hires Stephen A. Roth as president and chief executive officer.

   August 2003- Raises $500,000 from Ben Franklin Technology Partners of
Southeastern Pennsylvania.

   October 2003- Raises $325,000 from various angel investors, $100,000 from
Drexel University, and $100,000 from the city-run Innovation Philadelphia.

   June 2005- Raises $11.3 million from four venture-capital firms.

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2005


                             108 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     JULY 14, 2005 Thursday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1315 words

HEADLINE: Former Penn scientist finds . . . Biotech is in his blood;
Stephen A. Roth is establishing a track record for launching new research firms
in the Phila. area.

BYLINE: Linda Loyd INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Stephen A. Roth, a former University of Pennsylvania biology department
chairman, had been contemplating retirement after leaving the company he'd
started based on his own research.

   Then two guys with a new idea knocked on his door in 2002.

   At first, Roth, 62, could not believe the concept advanced by biochemist Brad
Jameson of the Drexel University College of Medicine: that serotonin, which is a
neurotransmitter in the body's central nervous system, is essential for white
blood cells to multiply.

   "I said it's just not possible. I'm a professor of biology and I taught this
stuff over and over again. I never heard of it," Roth recalled. But he was
intrigued and spent a couple of days in Jameson's lab, where in a series of
experiments he saw molecules known as serotonin antagonists kill white blood
cells in a test tube.

   While studying proteins and molecules to fight AIDS, Jameson had observed
that a molecule that interfered with, or blocked, serotonin - the same type of
molecules present in popular antidepressant drugs such as Prozac - also
prevented lymphocytes, or white blood cells, from dividing. Without serotonin,
the cells died.

   "As a scientific hypothesis, it's elegant. Whether investors can make money
on it, that's what we'll see," said Roth, who signed on in early 2003 as chief
executive officer of Immune Control Inc., founded on the research of Jameson and
molecular biologist Ana Tretiakova at Drexel.

   Jameson and financier Robert Bender of Argil Management L.L.C. in Boston
approached Roth because they wanted a veteran entrepreneur. Roth had taken Penn
discoveries and founded Neose Technologies Inc. in 1990, and he knew well the
expectations of the venture-capital community and Wall Street.

   While the Philadelphia area has seen a number of entrepreneurs start
life-sciences companies recently, the commercialization of academic research
locally has lagged the hotbeds of California and Boston.

   Developing new drugs is far from a sure thing. Fifteen years after it was
started, Neose still has no product sales after clinical trials did not pan out
for two compounds. The Horsham company refocused and recently filed an
investigational new drug application with regulators and hopes to begin another
clinical trial this summer.

   Last month, Immune Control of West Conshohocken closed on a $11.3 million
round of financing from four local venture firms, led by BioAdvance Ventures, a
fund managed by Quaker BioVentures in Philadelphia and Domain Associates of
Princeton. The other investors are NewSpring Capital of King of Prussia and
Anthem Capital Management in Radnor.

   Roth said the money would be used to test serotonin antagonists, including an
existing antipsychotic drug that has been used to treat schizophrenia for 40
years. Immune Control will test it against two diseases: multiple myeloma and
psoriasis.

   The goal is to stop the abnormal growth of white cells responsible for
autoimmune diseases, such as lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, and blood cancers,
such as leukemia and Hodgkin's disease.

   The company plans to test fluphenazine, sold under the brand name Prolixin,
in patients with late-stage multiple myeloma at six medical centers, including
Penn, the University of Pittsburgh, and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute at
Harvard University.

   A second clinical trial for patients with psoriasis is anticipated at the
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J.

   At the same time, Immune Control is looking for other serotonin antagonist
compounds that do not affect the central nervous system because fluphenazine has
a side effect of sedating patients. While sedation may not matter to patients
with advanced multiple myeloma, a terminal blood cancer, patients with other
conditions might find that side effect unacceptable, Roth said.

   To that end, the company has a formal agreement with a large local
pharmaceutical company to test serotonin antagonists that that company shelved
because they did not prove effective as antipsychotic drugs. Under terms of the
agreement, Immune Control cannot name the company. "We are in discussions with
two other large pharmaceutical companies for similar deals," Roth said.

   Immune Control also wants to identify new serotonin antagonist molecules that
do not cause neurological side effects and has contracted with a medicinal
chemistry firm in North Brunswick, N.J., to synthesize such compounds from
scratch.

   Roth said that as a biological concept, "this is beautiful" - but he is not
certain how difficult it will be to turn it into a treatment that either
prolongs lives or reduces pain.

   Scientists have recorded anecdotal evidence for years that some patients
treated for schizophrenia who also had psoriasis found their psoriasis went away
when they took certain antipsychotic drugs.

   "That's why I took the job. It wasn't just watching cells die in Brad's lab,"
Roth said. "But we found anecdotal papers, observations by scientific
researchers, including a Swedish mental hospital where doctors observed lower
rates of blood cancer compared to patients at other regular hospitals."

   Darwin Prockop, director of the Center for Gene Therapy at Tulane University
Health Sciences Center, said Jameson "is a very good scientist." Prockop, a
former Hahnemann University professor who once worked with Jameson, said the
Drexel researcher "has done some very fine work."

   Investors said they were attracted to Immune Control because of Roth's
experience as a seasoned CEO and entrepreneur and because the company is using a
drug that is already on the market and has a known safety record which should
speed the regulatory approval process.

   Sherrill Neff, who is managing partner at Quaker BioVentures and worked with
Roth for seven years at Neose, said investors thought the company would get
clinical data "quickly and inexpensively" compared with start-ups that spend $50
million to get their first clinical trial results.

   "I think we'll have clinical results on two indications for the amount we are
spending now. That's very unusual," Neff said.

   Also unusual is four Philadelphia-area venture firms financing a
life-sciences effort without participation by a large venture firm in Boston or
California. "We are finally getting to the point where we can pull together
sizable financings in the region," Neff said. "That's very exciting to me."

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

   Immune Control Inc. Starts Up

   2001 - Company founded on technology developed by Drexel University College
of Medicine professors Brad Jameson and Ana Tretiakova.

   2002 - Secures $500,000 from Argil Management L.L.C., of Boston, and files
five patents.

   January 2003 - Hires Stephen A. Roth as president and chief executive
officer.

   August 2003 - Raises $500,000 from Ben Franklin Technology Partners of
Southeastern Pennsylvania.

   October 2003 - Raises $325,000 from various angel investors, $100,000 from
Drexel University, and $100,000 from the city-run Innovation Philadelphia.

   June 2005 - Raises $11.3 million from four venture-capital firms.

   Life-Sciences Firm Builder

   Stephen A. Roth emerged from academia to found one local company and run
another.

   1982-87 - Biology professor and department chairman at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   1990 - Starts Neose Technologies based on his research at Penn. The company
becomes one of Penn's first company spin-offs, and the university retains an
equity stake.

   1992 - Leaves Penn to become Neose's chief scientific officer.

   1994 - Promoted to chairman and chief executive officer of Neose.

   1996 - Neose raises $29.1 million in initial public offering.

   2002 - Neose hires C. Boyd Clarke as president and CEO; Roth remains
nonexecutive chairman.

   2003 - Roth becomes president and CEO of Immune Control Inc.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
RON TARVER, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Stephen A. Roth founded Neose Technologies based on research he had done as a
biology professor. He went on to help found Immune Control Inc., which is
researching treatments for autoimmune diseases.
DAVID SWANSON, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Brad Jameson, in his laboratory at Drexel University's College of Medicine,
approached Stephen A. Roth with his discovery that drugs that block serotonin
can also inhibit growth of white blood cells, which play a role in autoimmune
diseases.
CHART
Immune Control Inc. Starts Up
Life-Sciences Firm Builder

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2005


                             109 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             July 6, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEW JERSEY; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: Rutgers to lead great protein probe

BYLINE: AMY ELLIS NUTT, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   When the human genome was sequenced in 2001, the intricate engine of life was
at last illuminated. The question then quickly became, "But how does it work?"

   Rutgers University will play a key part in the search for an answer, using
one of the largest federal grants given to the state university. The Protein
Structure Initiative of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences - one
of the National Institutes of Health - has awarded $52.7 million to a consortium
headed by Rutgers professor of molecular biology and biochemistry Gaetano
Montelione.

   Montelione's New Jersey team will receive $20 million of the total fund.

   The aim of the Northeast Structural Genomics Consortium, the lead research
group of 10 centers under the umbrella of the Protein Structure Initiative, is
to understand the function of proteins in life's most fundamental processes.
That knowledge, scientists believe, will lead to the discovery of new
medications and gene therapies in the treatment of human disease.

    "It's a great role for Rutgers to play in the larger national and
international structural genomics initiative," said Montelione.

    "By translating genome sequences into three-dimensional protein structures,
we learn what the proteins are and how they work," he said. "The sequencing of
the human genome provided the blueprint. We're filling out the blueprint with
the actual parts. . . . It's like, we know we need such-and-such a piece here
and it's this big, and what we're creating is a picture of the exact part."

   While genes determine what cells do, proteins carry out the instructions.
There are an estimated 30,000 to 40,000 different proteins (plus perhaps 10,000
variants of those) in the human body, each with its own unique three-dimensional
shape. The various loops and curves in essence identify the protein's job.

   Often called workhorses, proteins are a cell's main building blocks. They are
responsible for both its form and functioning. They are the main ingredients of
hair, muscles, tendons and skin, and yet they also perform such vital processes
as carrying oxygen through the bloodstream.

   One of the projects of Montelione's team is to identify the networks of
proteins involved in human cancers. According to the scientist, some 80 percent
of those proteins are still unknown.

   "I would hope we could have structures for most of them - or at least more
than half of them - at the end of five years," said Montelione.

   And knowledge of protein structures, according to Montelione, will make it
easier to develop new drugs, modeled on those proteins.

   For Wayne Hendrickson, professor of biochemistry and molecular biophysics at
Columbia University Medical Center, the research is all about discovery.

   "What we would like to provide to all researchers is that kind of `Aha!'
experience when the light bulb goes off: `Now I understand what this thing is
doing, and now I know what to do next to solve such-and-such disease.' This is
not hypothesis-driven. We want to generate the hypotheses," said Hendrickson,
leader of the New York Consortium on Membrane Protein Structure,

   While genomic sequencing is now highly automated, the analysis of
three-dimensional protein structures is considerably more complex, according to
Hendrickson,.

    "We don't aspire to a grand scheme. It's a loftier goal - to find
representative structures so we have some insight into all the proteins of all
organisms," he said.

   Scientists believe they can do more than decode individual proteins by
analyzing the structure of "protein families," proteins that share a structural
relatedness.

   "So one protein structure will give us an idea of what they ALL look like,"
said Hendrickson, "and then we can build molecules on the computer."

   Searching for the structures of proteins is not an end in itself, but a
critical pathway.

   "This is filling out the potential of the human genome sequencing - how to
extend human life and to make the quality of life better," said Montelione.
"This will impact people 20 years from now. This is the pipeline. It's like
mining for gold."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             110 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 4, 2005 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Michael Hiltzik / GOLDEN STATE;
A Voice of Balance in Stem Cell Program

BYLINE: Michael Hiltzik

BODY:

   Dr. Zach W. Hall is one of our most distinguished scientists and experienced
research administrators, with posts at USC's medical school, UC San Francisco,
and the National Institutes of Health on his glittering resume.

   He is also interim president of the state's new stem cell agency, the
California Institute for Regenerative Research. So when St. Francis Memorial
Hospital in San Francisco announced that the topic of his speech there last week
would be "Stem Cell Research: Hope or Hype?" no one really expected him to
accentuate the negative.

   But Hall has taken on an indispensable role since assuming his temporary post
in March: the voice of balance. He has been quietly tempering the public's
expectation that the $3-billion bond issue approved under Proposition 71 will
yield instant medical therapies and cures.

   Hall's talk Wednesday evening was a step in that direction. "Based on my
experience as a laboratory scientist," he told me before taking the podium, "I
know that to make an experiment work, we need to have someone in the lab who
really believes in it -- and someone who is a skeptic all the way."

   Skepticism about the potential of stem cell research was wholly absent from
the campaign for Proposition 71. As a scientific undertaking, the stem cell
program is unique in that its sponsors, the state's voters, committed their
money without receiving the slightest bit of professional scientific counsel.
Before making a similar expenditure, any philanthropic foundation or university
board would first seek advice from experts about the potential yield in
knowledge from the effort, the obstacles ahead and the time frame required.

   California voters received, instead, a TV campaign promising cures tomorrow
for a host of diseases, some of which may never respond to stem cell therapy.
The professional cautions are only appearing now, after the money is committed.
The shock of discovery that "tomorrow" may be 20 or 30 years away (or may never
come) could be severe.

   Hall understands that sustaining public support requires, among other things,
dialing back public expectations. The Proposition 71 campaign "tapped into an
amazing reservoir of hope among California voters," he says, "but we need to
make people aware of how difficult it is to bring a new therapy to the market."

   In his speech, Hall described the challenges faced by researchers in this
novel science. Embryonic stem cells are intriguing because they can
differentiate into any of the specialized tissue cells of the body. This may
allow scientists to culture healthy tissue cells in the lab to replace damaged
ones in the human body. It may also give researchers a method of studying
disease processes at the cellular level, yielding insights that could contribute
to the development of other therapies.

   But scientists don't yet fully understand how to control the differentiation
process. Nor are they sure how well a patient's body will accept stem cell
treatments derived from cells donated by a stranger, or whether the growth of
implanted cells can be managed.

   The course of cutting-edge science, moreover, is never smooth. Is the public
prepared for the disappointments, reversals, and dead ends that invariably
accompany the scientific method?

   Hall says he believes that a crucial part of the stem cell agency's mission
is public education, including admonitions that the journey from today's
knowledge to clinically effective treatments is "a long, hard road."

   In addition to listing some of the unknowns, he reminded his audience of the
difficult histories of some other much-heralded and highly advanced medical
technologies.

   Recombinant DNA was the stem cell-style biomedical panacea of the 1960s and
early 1970s. Three decades later, its promise remains uncertain and has been
hampered by unseemly haste: In 1999, an 18-year-old patient with a metabolic
disorder, Jesse Gelsinger, died after undergoing an experimental treatment as a
volunteer. The case arguably set back the cause of gene therapy by years; it
raised questions about the researchers' methodology and financial conflicts of
interest, and drew out of the woodwork reports of hundreds of otherwise
unpublicized adverse experimental events in the field.

   Another eagerly anticipated technology -- the manufacture of monoclonal
antibodies, "magic bullets" that act on specific tumors or antigens -- appeared
in the mid-1970s. The first drugs were not approved for human treatment until 25
years later, and their efficacy is still under study.

   Gene therapy and monoclonal antibodies didn't arrive with even a fraction of
the hype surrounding embryonic stem cell research. Plainly, it will take a
superhuman effort to resist public demands for hasty human experimentation and
clinical trials of stem cell discoveries. The same emotional appeals that stoked
public enthusiasm for Proposition 71 from patients in wheelchairs, parents of
diabetic children, celebrities with Parkinson's -- might be mustered in the
future to get treatments into the marketplace before they're ready.

   Hall's combination of confidence in the ultimate success of stem cell
research and humility about the challenges lying ahead is the most encouraging
sign yet that the stem cell program will be a credit to the state, not a
boondoggle. He has indicated plans to step down from his post as soon as a
permanent president can be appointed; one can only hope that when he departs the
agency, his discretion and good judgment don't leave with him.

   *

   Golden State appears every Monday and Thursday. You can reach Michael Hiltzik
at golden.state@latimes.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: AT THE HELM: Zach Hall of the stem cell agency warns of
difficulties facing the science.  PHOTOGRAPHER: University of San Francisco

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2005


                             111 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 3, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1313 words

HEADLINE: The Incredibles

BYLINE: By Annie Murphy Paul.

   Annie Murphy Paul is the author of ''The Cult of Personality: How Personality
Tests Are Leading Us to Miseducate Our Children, Mismanage Our Companies, and
Misunderstand Ourselves.''

BODY:


   RADICAL EVOLUTION
The Promise and Peril of Enhancing
Our Minds, Our Bodies -- and What
It Means to Be Human.
By Joel Garreau.
384 pp. Doubleday. $26.

MORE THAN HUMAN
Embracing the Promise
of Biological Enhancement.
By Ramez Naam.
276 pp. Broadway Books. $24.95.

      ''This book can't begin with the tale of the telekinetic monkey.'' So
opens Joel Garreau's captivating, occasionally brilliant and often exasperating
''Radical Evolution.'' Garreau, a reporter and editor at The Washington Post and
the author of the influential work of social demography ''Edge City,''
acknowledges his authorial choice is a sacrifice. After all, ''how often does
someone writing nonfiction get to lead with a monkey who can move objects with
her thoughts?'' But to begin his book about the technological enhancement of the
human mind and body with this kind of gee-whiz gimmick would send a misleading
signal. Garreau makes it clear he's more interested in people than in machines.

    Readers will be grateful, since an airless sterility often creeps into books
like ''Radical Evolution,'' which is focused on the near future. In the next
generation or two, Garreau writes, advances in genetics, robotics, information
technology and nanotechnology (the science that permits the construction of
infinitesimally tiny devices) may allow us to raise our intelligence, refine our
bodies and even become immortal -- or they could lead to a ruinous disruption of
our individual identities and shared institutions, and if things go really
wrong, to the total destruction of humanity.

    Unless you've cultivated a taste for the hypothetical, the situations mapped
out here, in which computers take over, can become so much numbing science
fiction. Wisely, Garreau devotes himself to embedding these unfamiliar
technologies in a human context. We meet researchers from the federal
government's mysterious Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, now
engineering soldiers who don't need sleep and who can stop a wound from bleeding
just by thinking about it. We spend time with scientists at a biotechnology firm
called Functional Genetics, engaged in research on ''anti-infectives'' that
could one day make humans invulnerable to AIDS, Alzheimer's and cancer.

    Garreau focuses on three camps of thinkers who have paused to contemplate
the future. The first espouse what Garreau terms the ''Heaven Scenario.'' They
believe enhancement technology will allow us to live forever in perfect
happiness without pain, more or less. The most vigorous advocate of what one
skeptic calls ''techno-exuberance'' is Ray Kurzweil, an inventor and futurist.
''I'm not planning to die,'' Kurzweil announces. Instead, he speculates that
humans will one day upload the contents of their brains to a computer and shed
their physical bodies altogether.

    Set opposite Kurzweil and his buoyancy is Bill Joy, a founder of Sun
Microsystems, whose musings tend toward the apocalyptic. Well known for his dire
warnings about the growing power of technology, the misnamed Joy represents what
Garreau calls the ''Hell Scenario.'' Joy speculates that we may meet an
undignified end in ''gray goo,'' a scenario in which self-replicating devices
designed to improve our bodies and minds instead take on a life of their own,
becoming ''too tough, too small and too rapidly spreading to stop.'' They may,
Joy continues, eventually ''suck everything vital out of all living things,
reducing their husks to ashy mud in a matter of days.''

    Things really get interesting when Garreau meets up with Jaron Lanier, a
computer scientist and originator of the concept of virtual reality. Lanier
foresees neither nirvana nor apocalypse, but a future in which every
technological crisis is met and matched by our own ingenuity and resilience.
Garreau christens this the ''Prevail Scenario,'' and confesses his personal
preference for this vision animated by what he calls his ''faith in human
cussedness.'' Heaven and hell share the same story line, he writes: ''We are in
for revolutionary change; there's not much we can do about it; hang on tight;
the end. The Prevail Scenario, if nothing else, has better literary qualities.''

    Garreau's style often takes the form of a notebook dump, in which he
deposits his assorted jottings directly onto the page. Sometimes the results are
stultifying, but when the subject has a mind as original as Lanier's, they're
enthralling. Lanier's reflections are at once whimsical and serious: What if we
could project our thoughts and feelings so that they were instantly visible to
others? What if our superintelligent machines are felled by a Windows crash,
just as they're about to take over?

    To read Garreau's dazzling, disorderly book is to be thrust into a
bewildering new world, where ambiguity rules and familiar signposts are few. As
he observes, ''by the time the future has all its wires carefully tucked away in
a nice metal box where you can no longer see the gaffer tape, it is no longer
the future.''

    Whereas Garreau's portraits make it clear that ideas about the future are
always idiosyncratic and subjective, rooted as much in emotional need as in
rational analysis, there's no such nuance in Ramez Naam's ''More Than Human.''
Naam, a professional technologist who helped develop Microsoft Outlook and
Microsoft Internet Explorer, is a relentlessly positive pitchman, unburdened by
doubt or complexity. But his conception of our enhanced future looks less like
Kurzweil's sunny utopia and more like a fluorescent-lighted superstore, in which
we roam the aisles selecting from displays of brain implants and anti-aging
pills.

    To Naam, the technological augmentation of our minds and bodies is not an
ethical or philosophical question but just one more consumer choice.
Accordingly, his main concern is with governmental interference in the free
market for such devices. People should be allowed to make up their own minds
about enhancements, Naam argues, since ''millions of individuals weighing costs
and benefits have a greater collective intelligence, better collective judgment,
than a small number of centralized regulators and controllers.'' Never mind that
we don't allow citizens' ''collective judgment'' to decide which drugs are safe;
that's why we have the F.D.A. Expert guidance, based on long-term, large-scale
research, would seem even more essential in the case of activities like germline
genetic engineering, which permanently changes the genetic code of an individual
and all his or her descendants.

    Naam's other targets are those who seek to slow or even arrest research on
biotechnology. Though these objectors span the ideological spectrum -- from Bill
McKibben, the liberal author of ''Enough,'' to Leon R. Kass, the conservative
chairman of the President's Council on Bioethics -- Naam lumps them all together
as curmudgeonly sticks in the mud, ''advocates of the biological status quo.''
Yet just one page earlier Naam talks up the wonders of ''keeping people young
longer'' through science. He seems not to notice that eternal youth -- along
with faultless functioning, perpetual fertility and unfailingly pleasant mood --
is its own kind of frozen status quo.

    In fact, there's something peculiarly adolescent about the blend of
narcissism, self-indulgence and lust for control that appears to motivate this
quest to become ''more than human.'' Naam's book fails to grapple adequately
with the consequences that may follow if, through technology, some of these
limits are lifted. In hailing a drug that makes long-married couples feel like
newlyweds again, or a neural prosthesis that allows you to ''turn down the
volume'' on your brain's ''empathy centers,'' or gene therapy that bulks up your
muscles ''while you're watching television,'' Naam and his fellow enhancement
boosters seem unwilling to reckon with the fact that the same limits that make
life difficult also give it meaning.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by M. K. Perker)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2005


                             112 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                      June 23, 2005 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: ZONE EAST - STAREAST; Pg. 1T

LENGTH: 1153 words

HEADLINE: Battling the disease that has struck two members of the Milto family,
folks pitch in to build and raffle off . . . A house built on hopes

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM J. BOOHER WILLIAM.BOOHER@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   The new two-story brick house along Moonbeam Drive in Franklin Township has
three bedrooms and two-and-a-half baths.

   Valued at $350,000, it also has formal dining and living rooms, a den with a
bay window, a basement and a bonus room over a three-car garage.

   And it can be yours for just $175.

   That's the cost of a ticket in a raffle set up to raise money for the fight
against the rare but debilitating Batten disease. Even if the ticket isn't the
winner, all those who enter can give hope and help to children afflicted with
the disease.

   Two of those children, Nathan Milto, 10, and brother P.J., 7, are blind, and
spend life bedridden or wheelchair-bound because of the rare genetic disorder.
The disease often claims the lives of its victims before they become teenagers.
An even rarer form can strike adults.

   Nathan and P.J.'s parents, Phil and Tricia Milto, both 37, Greenwood, have
strived for five years to change that. They created the nonprofit Nathan's
Battle Foundation in 2000 to fund research and clinical trials of
ground-breaking gene therapy.

   Raffle tickets cost $175 through the end of June. The cost goes up to $200 a
ticket from July 1 through Aug. 26, the sales deadline. The winner may opt for
$200,000 in cash instead of the house.

   Hopes are the raffle will bring in more than $380,000 for the foundation.

   Glenn Brizendine, 51, president of the Greenwood-based G. Brizendine Homes,
and brother Gary Brizendine, 45, vice president of construction, spearheaded the
home-building project.

   "It was something Gary and I would love to do," said Glenn Brizendine.

   Glenn Brizendine said he and partner Michael Yeager in the Michael Glenn
Development Co. in Greenwood agreed to donate the lot. It is at 7536 Moonbeam
Drive in the developing G. Brizendine Homes community of Glen Ridge Estates.

   The large lot now holds the custom home to be raffled. The house is more than
3,000 square feet, not counting the 1,355-square-foot basement. The housing
development is on the south edge of Edgewood Avenue, between Five Points and
Franklin roads.

   The Brizendines obtained most of the materials and labor as donations from
subcontractors and suppliers, so construction cost only about $105,000.

   If the maximum of 3,000 tickets is sold by the end of June, organizers would
bring in $525,000. After subtracting the $105,000, plus another $40,000 for
raffle-operation expenses, a minimum of $380,000 would go to Nathan's Battle
Foundation.

   Emmis Communications has partnered with G. Brizendine Homes to handle the
raffle through its Emmis Community Fund. If the raffle winner chooses the
$200,000 prize instead, Glenn Brizendine said the house would be put up for
sale, with profit from the sale donated to Nathan's Battle Foundation.

   All this hinges on the public purchasing at least 1,850 raffle tickets by
Aug. 26. If that goal isn't reached, the raffle could either be extended or
refunds could be made to raffle ticket purchasers, according to raffle rules.

   In its five years of existence, Nathan's Battle Foundation has raised more
than $4.5 million for a special project it lined up with Cornell University's
Weill Medical College in Manhattan to research, develop and conduct clinic
trials for those with Batten disease. The research also could benefit those
suffering from more than 40 other related diseases, with an estimated 50,000
internationally among the sufferers.

   Phil Milto said he's thankful to the Brizendines, subcontractors, suppliers
and others, plus Emmis Communications, for joining in the raffle effort.

   While various Indianapolis area businesses, organizations and others have
held fundraisers over the years on behalf of the foundation, Milto said the
raffle "is by far the biggest fundraising project we've had."

   The raffle donations may not be tax deductible due to the chance of winning
prizes. But Milto said the money will go a long way toward meeting the $800,000
in immediate foundation expenses to pay for treatment for four more of 10 Batten
disease-afflicted children. The young patients, from the United States and other
nations, including Germany, have been cleared to undergo clinical trials at
Weill Medical College.

   Both Nathan and P.J. already have been participating in the treatments
approved by the Federal Drug Administration, their father said. He added that
the "gene therapy treatment is revolutionary, with cutting-edge treatments."

   Cornell University and its Weill Medical College was selected for Nathan's
Battle Foundation funding for research and therapy for that particular disease,
because of expertise in gene therapy, Milto said.

   Milto said Nathan and P.J. "are doing well for having a disease. They're very
strong and stable," despite their blindness and lack of mobility. "They can hear
and are responsive. They still laugh and giggle."

   The Miltos' other two sons, Nicholas, 9, and Joey, 1, have not been diagnosed
with the disease and are healthy, he said.

   The Brizendines said they didn't know the Miltos personally before deciding
several months ago to spearhead the house-raffle project. Phil Milto and brother
Tony Milto co-own the Milto Cleaners outlets in Greenwood and Indianapolis.

   But they were aware of each other. "We're all basically Southsiders," said
Glenn Brizendine.

   Win a house

   What: Raffle to benefit Nathan's Battle Foundation.

   Prize: Two-story brick home with basement, valued at $350,000, at 7536
Moonbeam Drive in Glen Ridge Estates, on the south side of Edgewood Avenue,
between Five Points and Franklin roads in Franklin Township. The winner can
chose to receive $200,000 in cash instead.

   Tickets: $175 a ticket through June and $200 a ticket through Aug. 26. No
more than 3,000 tickets will be sold.

   To purchase: Ticket order forms may be obtained online at these Web sites:

   * www.hankfm.com

   * www.b1057.com

   * www.radionow931.com

   * www.wibc.com

   Forms also may be obtained at Milto Cleaners locations:

   * 459 Ind. 135, and 57 Smith Valley Road, both in Greenwood.

   * 2340 Stop 11 Road, 7741 S. Meridian St., Lilly Corporate Center on the Near
Southside, 4897 Kentucky Ave. and 6955 S. Emerson Ave., all in Indianapolis.

   Forms also are available at G. Brizendine Homes locations:

   * Corporate office at 698 Oldefield Commons, and model homes at 1758
Woodfield Drive and 4637 Shadow Ridge Boulevard, all in Greenwood.

   * Model homes at 7037 Sunset Point Drive and 7560 Timberfield Lane, both in
Indianapolis.

   Drawing: Drawing of 10 finalists will be held by Emmis Communications Aug.
29. On Sept. 3 at 6 p.m. during the 97.1 HANK FM Meijer SkyConcert in White
River State Park, the winner will be selected, and the other finalists will
receive consolation home accessories.

   Call Star reporter William Booher at (317) 444-2706.

   SAME ARTICLE ALSO APPEARS IN THE JOHNSON COUNTY A.M. EDITION PAGE S01 ON SAME
DAY.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2005


                             113 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 23, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,7; B-2:2,6

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Talk about hits: His homer went all way to L.A.

BYLINE: Diane Bell

BODY:

   George McDonald, the original Padres' first baseman in 1936, will be back
with the team this Saturday. Now 88, McDonald is throwing out the ceremonial
first pitch against the Seattle Mariners. "I have one throw left and my arm
might go with it," jokes McDonald, who now lives in Palm Desert. He recently was
inducted into the Pacific Coast League's Hall of Fame, but he's probably most
notable, during his 10 years with the Padres, for hitting an exceptionally long
home run. The ball sailed over the right fence at Lane Field, hit Pacific
Highway and bounced into a freight car traveling north to Los Angeles, 125 miles
away. The ball's path was witnessed by youths hanging around outside the park.
"The funny thing is," McDonald says, "40 years later a kid who saw it go into
the boxcar was my dentist in Orange County."

   A moving memorial

   Dorothy Hall loved Old Town's Bazaar del Mundo. Whenever the Illinois woman
came to San Diego to visit her daughter and son-in-law, she insisted on
beginning and ending her trip with a Mexican meal at Casa de Pico there. So,
when Hall died last year at age 78, her daughter-in-law, Marianne Albert,
decided to quietly sprinkle a few of her mom's ashes in one of the restaurant's
colorful garden pots. When the state park concession lease changed hands and
Casa de Pico was slated to close, Albert wondered what to do. Not to worry. When
the restaurant's owner, Diane Powers, learned of the situation, she gave the
potted plant to the Alberts. "Now," Marianne reports, "it's thriving on our
patio."

   A new school?

   San Diegan Midge Costanza, who once was an aide to President Carter, says
politics has become a tough, complicated business today. "You don't just
casually decide you're going to run for office anymore," Costanza says. So her
latest venture is a three-day "Candidate School," a sort of primer for politics,
to teach aspiring politicians of any party the basics of campaigning. Among her
32 inaugural "students" were nine who either already have announced or plan to
announce runs for office. She's planning another school for candidates in
October.

   A running commentary

   The July Runner's World (www.runnersworld.com) is arriving in mailboxes with
a cover story on the "25 Best Running Cities in America." San Diego comes in
second, just behind San Francisco and well ahead of the legendary
runner-friendly cities of Boulder, Colo., New York and Boston. In running
subcategories, though, San Diego ranked first in reader preference and third for
both parks and weather. The popular Camp Pendleton "Mud Run" gets a mention as a
favorite local race.

   A capital idea

   Steve Altman of Poway is president-elect of Qualcomm. But it's his son, Andy,
15, who was talking to legislators in Washington, D.C., this week. Andy and
12-year-old Jordan Bagheri of San Marcos helped represent California at the 2005
Children's Congress of the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, which ended
yesterday. They were among 150 students with juvenile diabetes selected for a
delegation led by actress Mary Tyler Moore.

   Eye on San Diego

   While the city of San Diego struggles with its reputation, the county's chief
financial officer, Donald Steuer, appears on the cover of Governing Magazine's
management education supplement, Governing Live! The accompanying article,
"Smart Employees, Smart Government," focuses on the county's employee training
and continuing education, which accounts for about 2 percent of the county's
payroll expense. . . . Salk Institute's Inder Verma is featured in a special
Newsweek summer health edition as one of "four visionary scientists who helped
map the human genome and are now blazing new trails." Verma optimistically
predicts that gene therapy will be available for cancer patients within the next
10 years.

   Diane Bell's column appears Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. Fax items to
(619) 260-5009; call (619) 293-1518; e-mail to diane.bell@uniontrib.com; or mail
to The San Diego Union-Tribune, Box 120191, San Diego 92112-0191.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2005


                             114 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                             June 21, 2005 Tuesday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 031

LENGTH: 241 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER

BODY:

   ** Viacom's MTV Networks said it bought closely held Neopets Inc. for $160
million, adding the youth-oriented Web site to a children's programming lineup
that includes SpongeBob SquarePants and Rugrats.

   ** Morningstar Inc.'s billionaire Chairman Joe Mansueto is reportedly the
winning bidder for Gruner & Jahr's Fast Company and Inc. magazines.

   Mansueto will pay a reported $40 million for the business publications.

   ** JetBlue Airways and American Express will jointly issue a credit card this
year that will let consumers earn frequent-flier benefits on JetBlue.

   ** Ketchup giant H.J. Heinz agreed to buy Lea & Perrins Worcestershire sauce
and other brands from Groupe Danone for $855 million and plans to expand them in
the United States.

   ** Transkaryotic Therapies stock rose after the Cambridge-based company
reported positive preliminary results from the Phase III clinical trial
evaluating its Hunter syndrome treatment. Hunter syndrome is a hereditary enzyme
deficiency affecting males that causes abnormal organ function.

   ** Gillette can't say on razor packaging that its M3Power razor moves hair
``up and away'' from the skin, a federal judge ruled, clarifying an earlier
decision on false-advertising claims. The ruling means Gillette must remove such
language from its packaging.

   - STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

   jobfind.com Listing of the day

   Job: Software developer

   Company: The Judge Rotenberg Center

   Location: Canton

   Type: Full time

   More info: jobfind.com

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                             115 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 21, 2005, Tuesday  THIRD EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1116 words

HEADLINE: FLIPPING THE GENETIC SWITCH
SECRET FOUND IN GENES OF PETUNIAS AND WORMS HAS POTENTIAL TO TURN OFF HUMAN
DISEASE

BYLINE: By Carolyn Y. Johnson, Globe Staff

BODY:
[PUBLISHED CORRECTION - DATE: Tuesday, July 26, 2005

      When the human genome was sequenced two years ago, researchers held the
blueprint of a human being in their hands a nonsensical string of 3 billion DNA
letters. But the project's promise of curing disease and explaining the workings
of the human body would depend in part on a curious phenomenon first observed in
microscopic worms and in petunias cells' natural ability to "turn off" genes.

     Over the past few years, scientists have turned the once-puzzling research
result into a powerful tool now poised to bridge the gap between the genome
project and the medicine cabinet.

           The tool, called RNA interference, or RNAi, is ubiquitous in biology
laboratories, and in the span of just a few years has leapt from the journal
Science's list of top-10 basic science breakthroughs in 2002 and 2003 literally
into the eyes of its first patients.


     "It's a transforming technology. You can't do a [genetic] experiment
without doing RNAi," said Dr. William Hahn, an associate professor at Harvard
Medical School who uses the tool to study the genetics of cancer.

      RNA interference, often called "gene silencing," is like a genetic dimmer
switch, a natural mechanism that allows a cell to regulate its genetic climate,
turning one gene up during a crucial part of development, or turning another
down, as a defense against mutations. Researchers are now harnessing the
mechanism with the hope of crafting drugs that will turn off the genes essential
for diseases like HIV, cancer, or influenza.

     RNA carries instructions for making proteins from the DNA in the nucleus to
the outer reaches of the cell. There the RNA churns out proteins that give rise
to basic traits such as green eyes and blond hair, and lead to disease.

      Scientists once thought if they inserted a gene, for example, for purple,
they could turn a flower more purple. Instead, in 1990, they discovered that
inserting the "purple" gene actually made the flower more white they had
accidentally watched RNAi at work, but didn't yet know what it was. Later that
decade, another group stumbled across the same effect in a microscopic
roundworm.

      "We observed this bizarre silencing effect. It was like the organism was
fighting back and didn't want to express the gene we were putting in," said
Craig Mello, a cell biologist at the University of Massachusetts Medical School
who saw the worms reject the gene. He later found that he could trigger the
effect by adding a special kind of double-stranded RNA to the worms.

      But it was the discovery in 2001 that this RNAi mechanism worked in human
cells, and could be studied in a test tube, that began to transform the
landscape of biology.

     In March, a group of researchers and private companies began collaborating
in the public-private RNAi Consortium, an $18 million joint effort to write an
RNAi recipe book, instructing scientists how to quickly and efficiently turn off
15,000 human genes to speed up drug discovery.

    "We can create a set of tools that allows us to do high-level genetics in
human cells in a way we've never done before," said Hahn, a co-investigator in
the consortium, which includes Harvard, MIT, the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
and international biotechnology companies, among others.

    Using RNAi technology, scientists can do rapid, accurate genome-wide screens
one gene at a time which just wasn't possible a few years ago. In labs,
researchers are now systematically shutting off each gene in humans and other
species, allowing them to zero in on a possible genetic Achilles' heel for HIV,
Alzheimer's, and dozens of other devastating diseases.

   Since RNAi is shared by all flora and fauna, scientists believe that once
they make this work in a petri dish or a mouse, it's only a matter of time until
an RNAi drug will do the same thing in a person.

   The first clinical trials of such drugs are in progress, testing whether RNAi
is safe and could work in humans. Sirna Therapeutics, a pharmaceutical company
based in Boulder, Colo., is testing a drug that uses tiny strands of RNA to shut
down genes that trigger macular degeneration, an age-related disease that causes
blindness. This month, the company presented the interim results of the first
stages of a clinical trial: In the 14 patients tested, the drug appeared
effective and safe after a maximum of 157 days of followup.

   Many more treatments are in the works: Alnylam, a Cambridge-based
pharmaceutical company, is planning to launch a macular degeneration trial by
the end of this year and is also gearing up to fight a respiratory virus by
early 2006. In the next few weeks, Los Angeles-based CytRx plans to begin a
clinical trial of an RNAi drug to treat Lou Gehrig's disease [SEE ATTACHED
CORRECTION], a fatal disease that causes a progressive loss of motor control.
Sirna is partnering with Massachusetts General Hospital to find an RNAi therapy
to combat hearing loss.

   The market for such therapies could grow to nearly $6 billion within the next
decade, according to a study by Research and Markets, an Irish marketing firm.

   "There are so many doors open right now, you can't even begin to do all the
research," said Mello, who, like many leaders in the field, is still fleshing
out exactly how RNAi works, and why.

   The road to RNAi therapies could be long: All gene therapy carries unknown
risks, RNAi is notoriously difficult to package into a safe and effective drug,
and since many of the diseases being targeted are chronic or incurable like
Huntington's or HIV the drugs will need to be proven safe over months, years, or
even a whole lifetime before they reach the market.

   But RNAi is already being used in conventional drug development to locate new
targets for medications.

   Most scientists who work in yeast, bacteria, and fruit flies are used to
waiting decades if not longer for their findings to have an impact on people.
RNAi has given their work new immediacy.

   Before, "we had a bizarre and pretty cool phenomenon" in a worm, Mello said.
Now, scientists have realized it's an essential biological process essential to
all cells. "This is really why RNAi is totally, mind-bogglingly cool: Only a few
years ago, we didn't know it existed."


      Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com.

SIDEBAR1:
WHAT IS RNA INTERFERENCE?

    PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

SIDEBAR2:
HOW RNA MAKES A PETUNIA PURPLE

    PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

SIDEBAR3:
HOW RNA INTERFERENCE MAKE THE FLOWER WHITE

    PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.


CORRECTION:

   Because of a reporting error, a June 21 Health/Science section story on RNA
interference, a mechanism cells use to turn off genes, incorrectly described a
new drug being tested by CytRx, a Los-Angeles-based company. The treatment for
Lou Gehrig's disease is not based on this mechanism.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2005


                             116 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 The Columbus Dispatch

                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                   June 21, 2005 Tuesday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS - SCIENCE; Pg. 06A

LENGTH: 713 words

HEADLINE: CELLULAR SECRETS ;
Researchers are looking at failed MITOCHONDRIA to explain hundreds of diseases

BYLINE: Mike Lafferty, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Biologists think each of us contains little pieces of what were bacteria a
billion years ago -- tiny bits of biology that gave us a huge evolutionary
boost.

   Called mitochondria, they have their own DNA, and hundreds of them populate
each human cell and each cell of nearly every other organism on the planet. They
split and reproduce, and most important they provide much of the energy to run
our bodies.

   And when they go wrong, scientists increasingly are fingering them as the
culprits in a wide variety of human ailments.

   "Whenever you get a rare syndrome, the first place people look now is
mitochondria," said Ohio State University microbiologist Juan Alfonzo.

   Cancer, stroke, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, deafness, impaired
heart function, blindness, migraines and even aging have mitochondrial links,
Alfonzo said.

   He and others say as many as 300 diseases might be linked to bad
mitochondria.

   In the United States alone, more than 50 million people suffer from
conditions that might involve faulty mitochondria, according to the Mitochondria
Research Society at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, N.Y.

   The nonprofit society is made up of scientists and physicians searching for
cures for mitochondrial diseases.

   The supplement industry is catching on. Over-the-counter micronutrient and
enzyme products are being sold with the promise of keeping our cellular
machinery running smoothly.

   "(Mitochondria are) a big source of free radicals if they're not burning at
high efficiency," said Mark Schmitt, a mitochondrial researcher at Stanford
University.

   Alfonzo is studying mitochondria in the hope that they will lead to new drugs
to treat malaria, sleeping sickness and a wide range of other parasitic
diseases.

   Malaria infects more than 300 million people a year worldwide and kills as
many as 1.5 million, according to the World Health Organization.

   Although malaria is not a major health problem in the United States, health
experts warn that U.S. residents need to be prepared for a resurgence of
tropical diseases as climate change warms North America.

   Scientists think mitochondria got into our evolutionary mix about a billion
years ago when a large, single-cell organism ate an aerobic bacterium.

   Rather than becoming a meal, the bacterium took up residence, and predator
and prey developed a symbiotic relationship. Michael Gray, a biochemist at
Dalhousie University in Halifax, Nova Scotia, thinks that mitochondria might
have helped early life cope with an environment excessively rich in oxygen.

   The bacterium provided energy in exchange for shelter and raw materials.

   "There's a constant sense of wonder that this actually happened," Gray said.

   "It appears to have happened only once. We can trace the origin of
mitochondria (genetically) to a single event. There could have previously been
transient associations, but the actual conversion occurred just once."

   Once independent, the mitochondria lost genetic material over time to their
hosts and eventually began to import genetic material that predates DNA, known
as transfer RNA, or ribonucleic acid, from the host cell.

   This is where Alfonzo's research enters the picture. He is studying how
mitochondria in single-cell protozoa called trypanisomes, a microscopic animal
made up of a single cell or group of cells, import this transfer RNA, a
single-strand chain of genetic material that differs from DNA, a double-strand
chain.

   "If we can interrupt this, we can kill it," he said.

   Using rat livers, Alfonzo cracks open the cells, collects their mitochondria
and studies the biochemical reactions in the test tube.

   Not only are new drugs needed to keep up with increasingly drug-resistant
parasites, but the biochemistry of parasites and humans is so similar that new
drugs are needed to kill the protozoa while not causing side effects in
patients.

   Schmitt also said that unraveling how mitochondria work in protozoa could
lead to understanding how they work in humans. Since many mitochondrial diseases
are caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA, gene therapy might be possible to
replace damaged genes.

   "If you know how to get transfer RNA in there, it might teach you something
about how to get DNA in," Schmitt said.

   mlafferty@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, Graphic, (1) JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MEDICINE/,
Scientists think mitochondria, red in these cow arterial cells, joined the,
evolutionary mix a billion years ago when a single-cell organism ate an, aerobic
bacterium./, (2) Graphic/, (3) FRED SQUILLANTE DISPATCH/, Angela Smith, an Ohio
State University graduate student, studies how, mitochondria function in
disease-producing protozoa called trypanosomes., Scientists hope to find a
treatment for the disease.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2005


                             117 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2005 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                      JUNE 20, 2005, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2727 words

HEADLINE: IS IT WORTH BANKING YOUR BABY'S CORD BLOOD?;

Doctors say hard sell of hope is deceptive

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Janine DeFao

BODY:
When Lisa Recker was pregnant, she was inundated with ads touting a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to make the "best investment" in the future
health of her child and her family: preserving the blood from her baby's
umbilical cord.

    Cord blood, as it is known, contains stem cells that can be used in
transplants to cure leukemia and other diseases and may someday treat ailments
from diabetes to Alzheimer's. For as little as $1,100, the ads read, preserved
cord blood taken from Recker's daughter would provide "biological insurance" if
the girl or another family member developed one of those diseases.

    As a gift, Recker's parents paid a San Bruno company, Cord Blood Registry,
to collect the cord blood of her daughter, Nicola, and preserve it four years
ago.

    But the ads for a burgeoning industry of private cord blood banks fail to
say that doctors rarely transplant a child's own blood because it can contain
the disease. And major medical societies advise against storing a child's blood
for the family's potential use because it's not likely that a relative will
develop a disease currently treatable by cord blood.

    "I don't feel completely hoodwinked, but more accurate information needs to
be out there," said Recker, an actress who lives in Redwood City.

    As cord blood is used increasingly as an alternative to bone marrow, the
success of more than 6,000 transplants worldwide since 1998 -- only 14 of them
using the child's own blood -- has spawned at least 15 private cord blood
companies that charge families an initial fee ranging from $1,100 to $1,800,
plus about $100 a year, to store a child's blood.

    "Most of the people in the hematology community think they're a bunch of
snake-oil salesmen in these private companies," said Dr. Bertram Lubin, a blood
specialist and president of Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute. The
hospital has the nation's only program that exclusively banks newborn cord
blood, for free, for a sick sibling.

    "I get calls from parents who are distraught because they cannot afford to
bank their kid's cord blood, and they feel like they're failing as parents
before their child is even born," Lubin said. "I tell them there's no data to
support that. You're being misled."

    The private firms argue that they provide a service that already can treat
numerous diseases and holds promise for illnesses from Parkinson's to heart
disease as research advances.

    "There are well over 70 diseases that have been successfully treated using
umbilical cord blood stem cells, and there are many diseases -- from Parkinson's
to stroke to heart disease to spinal-cord injuries and Alzheimer's -- in
promising stages of research and development right now," said Mercedes Walton,
interim CEO of Cryo-Cell International in Oldsmar, Fla. Her firm is one of the
three largest cord blood companies, along with Cord Blood Registry and Viacord
in Cambridge, Mass.

    Doctors such as Lubin do advise parents to save cord blood if they already
have a sick child who can be cured by a blood stem cell transplant. They also
recommend donating cord blood to public banks for anyone's use, although the
opportunity is limited in the Bay Area. In April, a national panel of scientists
recommended at least tripling the 50,000 cord-blood units now available through
public banks, saying it would enable nearly 90 percent of the 11,700 Americans
needing transplants each year to find cord blood or bone marrow matches.

    Benefits of cord blood

    Like bone marrow, cord blood contains hematopoietic stem cells that mature
into blood cells. They differ from the more controversial stem cells, which are
taken from human embryos and can develop into any type of cell in the body.
However, new research suggests that cord blood cells may also differentiate into
some tissue cells.

    Typically, when cord blood is banked, 3 to 4 ounces of blood from the
placenta is drawn from the umbilical cord immediately after a baby is born,
posing no risk to the child or mother. The blood is deposited in a bag or vial
and shipped to a storage facility for freezing.

    Cord blood transplants can be used to treat bone marrow failure, blood
diseases such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia, cancers including leukemia
and lymphoma, immune deficiencies, and metabolic diseases. In a transplant, the
cord blood is injected into the recipient's vein, similar to a blood
transfusion, with the hope it will grow into healthy new bone marrow.

    Just as babies have less-developed immune systems, their cord blood is
considered "immunologically immature," so its cells are less likely to attack a
transplant recipient's normal tissues -- a painful and potential deadly
transplant complication known as graft-versus-host disease.

    That means graft-versus-host is less severe in cord blood transplants, and
the tissues of donors and recipients don't have to be as closely matched as they
would for bone marrow transplants. That's particularly significant for
minorities, who often have trouble finding bone marrow matches because they have
less common tissue types and fewer potential donors.

    Most cord blood transplants in the United States are performed on children
because samples may not contain enough cells to treat adults, but research is
showing promising results for adults, too.

    Private cord blood companies say there are three reasons to save a baby's
cord blood: for the child, for family members and for presently undeveloped
uses. They sell parents on the fact that their baby's cord blood will be a
"perfect match" for the child.

    Marketing omissions

    But what generally isn't clear from the private banks' ubiquitous marketing
materials to pregnant women -- in magazines, maternity stores, doctors' offices,
direct mail and on the Internet -- is that genetic diseases, such as sickle cell
anemia, can't be treated with a child's own cord blood because it already
contains the disease.

    Many transplant doctors also are hesitant to use a child's own cord blood
for nongenetic diseases, such as cancer.

    "In children with cancer, I would definitely not use" a child's own cord
blood because it was probably contaminated with the disease at birth, said Dr.
Joanne Kurtzberg, director of the pediatric blood and marrow transplant program
at Duke University Medical Center.

    But David Harris, Cord Blood Registry's scientific director and a professor
of immunology at the University of Arizona, noted that patients currently are
treated with transplants of their own cells, extracted during remission, for
maladies such as Hodgkin's disease. He also cited evidence that there is not a
genetic predisposition to cancer in children who get sick after age 2.

    Kurtzberg disagreed. She noted one case in which a child, whose cord blood
was banked at birth, developed leukemia at age 11. The cord blood contained the
disease.

    Of the estimated 6,000 cord blood transplants worldwide, only 14 have been
done using a child's own cord blood. Half of those used samples stored by the
three biggest cord blood companies, including four transplants for aplastic
anemia, a disease in which the bone marrow stops making enough cells, and two
experimental brain injury transplants done by Kurtzberg.

    "It is very accurate that the majority of the uses for umbilical cord blood
stem cells would not be used (to treat a child with his own blood), but for a
related sibling," said Marc Beer, president and CEO of ViaCell, Viacord's parent
company.

    Industry officials say that siblings have a better chance of being able to
donate cord blood over bone marrow -- because a perfect match is not needed --
and that the survival rates are significantly higher in related transplants.

    But without a perfectly matched sibling -- whose bone marrow could be used
instead of cord blood -- some transplant doctors say an unrelated donor from a
public bank could be a better choice. Kurtzberg has done nearly all of her
600-plus cord blood transplants -- the most in the world -- with unrelated
donors.

    The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, both of which recommend against private cord blood banking,
put the odds of a child needing a blood stem cell transplant at between 1 in
1,000 and 1 in 200,000.

    Industry estimates range from Viacord's 1 in 27 to Cord Blood Registry's 1
in 1,000 to 2,000.

    That is without considering the potential future uses to cure such common
ailments as heart failure, stroke, Alzheimer's and diabetes through gene
therapy.

    Already, Kurtzberg's research at Duke has found that the immature blood
cells have the ability to develop into brain and heart muscle cells. Research
done by ViaCell also shows that the cells can develop into heart, neurological
and liver cells. Clinical trials are being done using the cells for heart
repair.

    "The potential for use is very small right now but could be very great in
the future," said Dr. Michael Trigg, who chairs Cryo-Cell's medical and
scientific advisory board and is chief of the division of blood and bone marrow
transplantation at the Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children in Wilmington,
Del. "It's expensive, and you will have to pay for it every year. But you just
have no idea what life holds for you or the curative potential of those blood
cells sitting in storage."

    Kurtzberg said it's not yet clear whether it would be beneficial to have
one's own cells for tissue repair and regeneration.

    "That's a 50-to-60-years-down-the-line question. But in 50 to 60 years,
we'll have other ways to isolate these cells, and you wouldn't have to have
saved cord blood," she said.

    Others, such as Cord Blood Registry's Harris, believe that such treatments
may come within a decade, and that having one's own cells will be critical.
Despite the rapidly developing science, medical societies and other experts
remain skeptical.

    Personal use 'impractical'

    An April report by the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, an
independent agency that advises Congress on scientific matters, said saving cord
blood for a person's own use is "impractical" on a large scale "because of the
limitations to its use and infrequency of the conditions that can be treated."

    The American Academy of Pediatrics, in its most recent statement to doctors
in 1999, says "private storage of cord blood as 'biological insurance' is
unwise" unless a family member might need a blood stem cell transplant.

    The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, whose members are a
key target audience for cord blood companies' marketing, advises its doctors to
proceed with "considerable circumspection."

    Industry representatives said they think the statements are outdated and
should be changed. But Lubin, who with Kurtzberg is updating the American
Academy of Pediatrics statement, said it's unlikely the new version will be more
favorable toward private banking.

    The American Academy of Pediatrics encourages parents to donate cord blood
to one of the country's 20 public banks, where any ill person could seek a donor
and the sample is not reserved for the family. The National Marrow Donor Program
includes more than 40,000 cord blood donors on its registry.

    The Institute of Medicine in April outlined recommendations for the creation
of a coordinated and standardized national public cord blood system, for which
Congress has earmarked $10 million. The goal of the National Cord Blood Stem
Cell Act, approved last year, is to collect 150,000 cord blood units over five
years to increase the chance that people needing a transplant will be able to
find a match.

    While there is not a public bank in the Bay Area, Lubin hopes to apply for
federal funds to start one. For now, mothers giving birth at Alta Bates Summit
Medical Center in Berkeley may be able to donate their baby's cord blood through
a new pilot program with Children's Hospital Oakland.

    Business is booming

    Admonitions against private cord blood banking don't appear to have hurt the
industry. Since Cryo-Cell began storing cord blood in 1992, more than a dozen
other companies have entered the field. "In the last 24 months, we think the
industry has doubled," said Beer of Viacord.

    But industry leaders believe the field may be winnowed by new Food and Drug
Administration guidelines that took effect May 25, subjecting the firms to FDA
inspection.

    Cord Blood Registry, which started with 1,200 clients in 1995, now claims
90,000 customers and hopes to add 50,000 this year alone, said Stephen Grant,
vice president of corporate communications. It has provided cord blood for 37
transplants, nearly all of them for siblings. About half have been part of a
program in which families with a sick child can bank newborn cord blood for
free, similar to the Children's Hospital Oakland program.

    Cryo-Cell has stored cord blood for nearly 80,000 customers and released
seven samples for transplant. Viacord has more than 70,000 clients. It has had
16 transplants, 13 done on children who were already ill when their siblings'
cord blood was banked.

    But the number of cord blood samples privately banked remains a tiny
fraction compared with the 4 million births a year nationwide. Most cord blood
is discarded.

    "The whole proposition for new parents to consider is that this is a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to preserve their child's cord blood for all
sorts of possibilities that may occur, health conditions they may develop over
time, and for diseases that potentially could be cured or treated," said
Cryo-Cell's Walton.

    Recker said the possible future uses make her believe that her decision to
bank her daughter's cord blood with Cord Blood Registry may be a good investment
even though she didn't understand the current limitations. She paid an up-front
fee of more than $2,600 to store the cord blood for 18 years.

    Yvette Rosedale of San Francisco also was surprised to learn that transplant
doctors say they're unlikely to use a child's own cord blood. But she said she
is glad she stored cord blood with Cord Blood Registry for her three children --
August, 5; Cecilia, 2; and Orion, 9 months.

    "We don't have any blood disorders in our family, but it wasn't going to put
a strain on us financially," said Rosedale, whose husband is CEO of a software
firm. "We had the luxury of saying, 'Why not have the insurance?' "

    But she said the marketing plays on parents' fears.

    "When it's your first child, you want to give them everything," Rosedale
said. "I certainly don't regret my decision. I would just encourage people to
think about what works for their families and not let fear take over."

   -------------------------------------------------------------

    STORING CORD BLOOD

    Umbilical cord blood, containing stem cells, has proven to be an effective
alternative in treating diseases that would otherwise require a bone marrow
transplant. Private firms charge a fee of more than $1,000 to freeze and store a
childs blood, but fail to mention that doctors rarely transplant a childs own
cord blood because it can contain the disease.

    -- Following a babys birth, 3 to 4 ounces of blood from the placenta is
drawn from the umbilical cord with a syringe.

    -- The blood is deposited in a bag or vial for freezing and storage..

    Transplant therapy

    Cord blood is injected into a patients vein, following chemotherapy or
radiation, in a procedure similar to a blood transfusion. The hope is that the
donated cord blood will grow into healthy bone marrow.

    -- Private cord blood companies initially charge $1,100 to $1,800 to
preserve cord blood.

    -- Since 1998, more than 6,000 cord blood transplants have been used
sucessfully as an alternative to bone marrow transplants. Only 14 transplants
have used the childs own cord blood.

    -- More than 70 diseases have been successfully treated using cord blood
stem cells.

    -- Estimated odds of a child needing a blood stem cell transplant vary
greatly anywhere from 1 in 27 to 1 in 200,000.

    -- Cord blood stem cells, like bone marrow, develop into red blood cells,
white blood cells and platelets. Research also has shown cord blood cells can
develop into brain, heart and liver cells.


    Sources: Cord Blood Registry; National Cord Blood Center

   E-mail Janine DeFao at jdefao@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (3), GRAPHIC, (1) Lisa Recker plays with her daughter, Nicola,
whose umbilical cord blood is privately banked. / Lance Iversen / The Chronicle,
(2) Dr. Bertram Lubin recommends saving a baby's cord blood for an already sick
sibling, but says private firms are misleading parents. / Paul Chinn / The
Chronicle, (3) Lisa Recker, who saved the cord blood of her daughter, Nicola, 4,
said firms should be forthright about the service. / Lance Iversen / The
Chronicle, GRAPHIC: John Blanchard / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2005


                             118 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            June 15, 2005 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: WORKING; Pg. 1K

LENGTH: 1619 words

HEADLINE: WALKING A FINE LINE WHEN SWITCHING JOBS;
Changing workplace can mean better opportunities for those who stay connected to
their industries

BYLINE: Dana Klosner-Wehner, SPECIAL TO THE SUN

BODY:

   Switching careers in midstream once was considered a setback. And moving from
one company to another often meant that a worker had to start over in terms of
salary, benefits and vacation.

   But a changing economy has made career diversions more commonplace than ever.
And most workplace experts said the stigma once attached to transforming a
career is all but gone as corporations downsize, merge and push employees to do
more with less.

   "People don't stay with one company throughout their career anymore," said
Don Spatner, senior vice president of global marketing and communications for
Korn/Ferry International, an executive recruitment firm based in Los Angeles.
"Companies are acquired and merge, management changes, companies downsize. You
can't always count on your employer being there."

   A 2002 study by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics found that the average
worker born during the latter years of the baby boom - between 1957 and 1964 -
held 10 different jobs through age 38, meaning they likely will switch employers
again as their career matures. And those in mid- and higher-level positions can
still transfer their skills and expertise to other places without giving up
everything they have worked for, experts said.

   Change often can mean better opportunities, experts said, whether it's
voluntary or a result of corporate cutbacks. And there is no need to wait for a
downsizing to make a change. The key for workers is staying connected to
colleagues within their industry, pushing to upgrade their talents to remain
competitive and knowing what skills they have or will need to have to move to
another field.

   Regardless of your role in an organization, experts said, cultivating
relationships and networking is important to building a circle of support within
and outside your workplace.

   "Don't wait until you are out of work to build your net," said Melissa
Giovagnoli, co-author of Networlding: Building Relationships and Opportunities
for Success and a career coach in Chicago. "The more options you have, the more
you can get perspective on your career.

   "The higher people climb the ladder, the more vulnerable they are," she said.
"They tend to not take the time to build key relationships. By having a network,
people have choices when the rug is pulled out by downsizing, or they are not
happy with a new boss, or they have relocated for a position and are not happy
where they moved."

   Corporate recruiters said they like to see job applicants from various
industries because they may have skills that can transfer well. It helps to keep
their staffs competitive and promotes a diverse kind of thinking in their
workplace.

   "We look at diversity of experience," said Linda Olin-Weiss, director of
staffing services for Lockheed Martin Corp. in Bethesda. "We look at their
career goals and development. Did they change fields? Did they go from human
resources to communications? What was that individual trying to do?"

   Even leaving a company is not necessarily considered burning a bridge.

   "We put up an alumni network as a way to communicate with people that left
for whatever reason," Olin-Weiss said. "These are folks that know Lockheed."

   Before making a change, experts said a worker needs to understand his or her
current salary package by breaking it down into cash and noncash components,
meaning medical benefits, stock options and other perks. When considering a job
offer, remember to consider factors besides money - weigh quality of life,
intellectual challenge and balance of work and life, according to Korn/Ferry
International.

   Many factors can be negotiated, Spatner said. For example, if the cost of
living is higher in the city where you plan to live, make sure the salary and
benefits will meet your expectations, he said.

   Molecular biologist Harshawardhan Bal has held five jobs since moving from
India in 1997 to work on a research fellowship on gene therapy.

   He has a master's degree in pharmacy, a doctorate in molecular biology and a
strong background in software development. He joined management and consulting
firm Booz Allen Hamilton in Rockville about a year ago and is working with the
National Cancer Institute on a Web-based system connecting 60 cancer centers.

   He also has worked at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York, OSI
Pharmaceuticals, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. and the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute.

   "It's all been a career progression," Bal said. "Different skills allow me to
approach any problem from different points of view. How you assemble your skills
is a lifelong process. How you apply your skills is to help your employers
succeed."

   He said networking and keeping abreast of the job market are important
components to his career. He also belongs to the International Society for
Computational Biology and the Project Management Institute, which are both
industry trade groups.

   "It helps keep me plugged in," Bal said. "Apart from skills, it's also
important to know people. If I have a specific problem, I can call upon people
to give their suggestions to develop solutions.

   "Even if I have a job, I keep on thumbing through job boards and magazines to
understand the skills employers are looking for," he said.

   Face your fears

   There are some fears that people need to address when making a job change.

   Financial security and upward mobility were on Douglas Crocker's list of
needs when he took the leap from a full-time, salaried systems engineer for a
Roslyn, Va., firm to working as a contract employee for TAC Worldwide Cos., a
technical staffing company.

   The change took place about two years ago after the birth of Crocker's son.
He took time off to be with his newborn and was told that he would be moved to
another division upon his return, he said.

   "I was working as a systems engineer and was being transferred to the
communications group," said Crocker, who lives in Columbia. "[The move] didn't
fit with my career development goals."

   He posted his resume on job search Web sites and received four or five calls
a day from prospective employers, he said. When Crocker compared salaries, he
realized he could make more money as a contract employee even after paying for
his own benefits.

   "The advantage is there is much more flexibility," he said. "If a company
tells me they need me to relocate and I'm not interested, I can ask for a new
contract. I also get to see from the inside what it is like to work for a
company before I make a decision about taking a permanent position if one is
offered.

   "The down side is there is no security," Crocker added. "I wouldn't do this
if I didn't know there was a high demand for my profession." Still, Crocker said
he always keeps a lot in savings as a backup.

   Most experts said workers can upgrade their skills by taking advantage of
tuition reimbursement plans at their job. They also can visit free career
centers throughout the state to learn more about job trends, attend resume and
interview workshops and look for positions with other companies.

   "We help people focus on their transferable marketable skills," said Rosemary
Woren, senior program development specialist for the Mayor's Office of
Employment Development in Baltimore. "We can help them look at labor market
information to see what the new trends are and help them extrapolate what will
be needed in the future."

   She said more people are visiting the centers in hopes of switching careers.

   "We are seeing more people [in mid- to upper-level career] come in now based
on changes in the economy," Woren said. "We see banking" and other
professionals, she said. "Some see the handwriting on the wall. They want to do
their own career exploration and look at labor trends," she said. "There is a
constant need for change."

   Know your market

   That's why workers should always be looking for ways to make themselves more
competitive and identify the next post for themselves by knowing the job market
well, experts said.

   "There are many good ways to hear about new positions," said Carol J.
Vellucci, director of the Career Center at Towson University who also has a
private practice as a career coach. "Reading the business sections of local
newspapers, business journals and magazines provides some up-to-the-minute
information that can help the creative job-seeker. The No. 1 complaint of
employment recruiters is that candidates do not do enough research about the
company.

   "When you set up an interview, Google the name of the manager [to get his
background]," said Randy Block, a career coach in San Francisco. "If you know
anyone [at the company], ask them what they can tell you about the company."

   Spatner, the recruiter, has changed executive positions three times. He first
worked as vice president of corporate communications for Nissan North America
Inc. and later moved to a similar role with Sun America, which was bought out
shortly after he started.

   Besides networking, Spatner said workers need to make sure their bosses know
about the passion they have for their work and their hobbies. Offering their
expertise to help make the company more competitive can only be seen as a plus
by an organization, he said.

   "It's just like high school," Spatner said, "You have to raise your hand."

   Tips for branching out

   To find an executive search firm, visit the Association of Executive Search
Consultants at www.aesc.org or phone 212-398-9556.

   To find a career coach, visit the International Coach Federation at
www.coachfederation.org or call Terry Shafer, president of the Baltimore
chapter, at 410-728-2522.

   To find a career center in your county, visit the Maryland Department of
Labor, Licensing and Regulation at www.dllr.state.md.us/county.

   Contact the university you attended to take advantage of the school's career
counseling services.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / ILLUSTRATION(S)
 1. Molecular biologist Harshawardhan Bal has held five jobs since moving from
India in 1997 to work on a research fellowship on gene therapy. "It's all been a
career progression," he says. 2. (Two tall buildings)
 1. JED KIRSCHBAUM : SUN STAFF 2. GEORGE SHEWCHUK : IMAGES.COM

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2005


                             119 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Classified; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 243 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths
HORWITZ, MARSHALL S., M.D.

BODY:

    HORWITZ--Marshall S., M.D. All the staff members of the Department of
Pediatrics of the Children's Hospital at Montefiore and the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine are stunned and saddened by the sudden passing of our
beloved colleague of nearly 40 years. The quintessential physician-scientist,
Dr.

   Horwitz, Professor of Pediatrics and Cell Biology and Professor and Chairman
of Microbiology and Immunology, was an outstanding clinician, researcher, and
teacher, as well as one of the world's leading experts on adenovirus. Marshall
stood out for his gentlemanly character, modesty, integrity, warmth, and wisdom;
he had the unique ability to bring out the best in every person he trained and
with whom he worked. After winning international renown for discovering how
genes encoded by adenovirus caused disease, Marshall, in characteristic fashion,
converted those disease-causing genes into therapeutic tools to cure diabetes
mellitus. Marshall was tirelessly and enthusiastically devoted to mentoring and
nurturing the careers of generations of students, pediatric residents, fellows,
scientists and faculty members. Marshall will be keenly missed, but his impact
as an exemplary role model and his countless contributions to our Department,
our Medical School, and the world of Medicine, will endure for generations to
come. Gabriel Haddad, Chairman Department of Pediatrics Children's Hospital at
Montefiore and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2005


                             120 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JUNE 12, 2005 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1592 words

HEADLINE: Cancer vaccines in final test phase;
The drugs are not preventive, but provoke the body to fight cancer cells.

BYLINE: Marie McCullough INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   More than a dozen cancer vaccines are now in the final phase of human
testing, the last step before Food and Drug Administration approval is sought
for marketing.

   Provenge, a prostate-cancer vaccine, may be the first to be approved,
possibly this year. Vaccines for skin, kidney and lung cancers are on the
horizon. Not far behind are versions for leukemia and myeloma as well as breast,
ovarian, pancreatic, colorectal and brain cancers.

   Unlike conventional disease-preventing vaccines, the new ones are designed to
work after cancer develops by provoking a heightened immune response.

   Within four years, the market for such products could be $2 billion, analysts
predict.

   "Cancer vaccines have finally come of age," said Yvonne Paterson, a
University of Pennsylvania microbiologist and scientific founder of Advaxis Inc.
The company is about to begin human testing of a therapeutic cervical-cancer
vaccine that produced stunning results in mice.

   Paterson and two other vaccine pioneers will talk about their infant industry
on June 20 at the Biotechnology Industry Organization's annual gathering, this
year at the Pennsylvania Convention Center.

   Olivera Finn, a University of Pittsburgh immunologist, will make the
provocative argument that treatment vaccines will not do much to reduce the toll
of cancer unless they are also used in a traditional way: to prevent the disease
in high-risk patients.

   "If we diagnose a pre-malignant lesion - for example, in the lungs - right
now that person is watched until he develops cancer, or he's given a cytotoxic
therapy," she said. "Why not vaccinate that person?"

   Conventional immunizations, familiar around the world, are synonymous with
prevention.

   Vaccines such as those that ward off measles, polio, and flu work by
forewarning the body's natural defenses to attack an invading virus. The vaccine
primes the immune system to watch for the invader's unique proteins, called
antigens.

   With cancer, this preemptive approach is effective only for the few
malignancies known to be caused by infectious invaders. The one cancer vaccine
already on the market prevents infection with hepatitis B virus, a cause of
liver cancer. Two new vaccines, both racing toward FDA approval, avert infection
with human papillomavirus, which causes cervical cancer.

   But for most cancers, jump-starting the immune system is complicated by the
fact that the disease starts with enemies from within - the body's own cells
that turn malignant due to genetic or environmental forces. In effect, vaccines
that fight established cancer must trick the body into a self-attack.

   This is no easy feat. Cancer cells have antigens that are unique or unusually
abundant, but the immune system is very tolerant of these abnormal cells, like
the parent of a troubled child. Tumors also shed or change antigens to stay
under the immune radar.

   Even though researchers began isolating cancer antigens in 1991 - the
breakthrough was with melanoma cells - they have had difficulty presenting these
antigens to the body in ways that prompt an immune response.

   Paradoxically, even though the immune system does not like to kill its own
cancerous cells, most therapeutic vaccines are tailor-made, using the patient's
own cancer-cell antigens. Among exceptions is Canvaxin, a melanoma vaccine made
from three lab-engineered cell lines containing many known melanoma antigens.

   "Five years ago, it seemed to be possible to use generic vaccines, but many
of those immune responses had no effect on the patient's outcome," said Thomas
Jefferson University oncologist David Berd, medical chief of Avax Technologies
Inc., which is developing M-Vax, a melanoma vaccine tailor-made from the
patient's cells. "It underscored the idea that tumor antigens for one patient
are not exactly the same for another."

   A number of strategies have worked to get the body to go after its own
renegade cells.

   Paterson, for example, has engineered the common listeria bacteria to be a
"vector," or carrier, of the cervical-cancer antigen. The body's first-line
immune cells gobble up the listeria and simultaneously release chemical signals,
called cytokines, that call in the big immune guns - cytotoxic T cells.

   These killer cells go looking for anything bearing the antigen carried by
listeria and wind up destroying cervical-cancer tumors - at least, in
experiments with mice.

   Listeria is a cause of serious food-borne illness, so Paterson weakens, or
attenuates, it before using it as a carrier. Still, she is keenly aware that
vectors can be risky; the death of Jesse Gelsinger, a volunteer in a Penn
gene-therapy experiment, was linked to a viral vector.

   "But that's another reason we like Listeria," Paterson said. "Suppose someone
spikes a fever when we do a clinical trial. Penicillin can kill this bacteria."

   Provenge, made by Dendreon Corp. of Seattle, harvests the patient's dendritic
cells - another first-line immune cell - then uses them to deliver a prostate
cancer antigen found on 95 percent of prostate cancer cells. Dendreon is also
developing a breast-cancer vaccine.

   The M-Vax melanoma vaccine - a 17-year development odyssey for Berd - is
based on yet another strategy, one that also seems promising for ovarian and
lung cancers. M-Vax combines the patient's tumor cells with a "hapten," a
molecule that acts like an antigen when coupled with a carrier.

   The vaccine is injected along with a skin-prick test that serves as an
indicator of success; if itchy, sore bumps rise at the site, the patient is
mounting an immune response.

   In theory, M-Vax and other vaccines could send the immune system into a
harmful overreaction.

   "Scientists and regulators always raise that issue: If you get too much
response, theoretically you could get an autoimmune response," said Berd. "We
have to monitor for it. But in our patients, we've never seen it."

   One of those patients, Bruce Godfriaux, 62, of Mertztown, Berks County, opted
to be a guinea pig for M-Vax after having surgeries to remove a melanoma and
diseased lymph nodes.

   Without the vaccine, he had about a one in three chance of surviving five
years. An 18-month course of interferon might have slightly improved those odds,
but the drug has toxic, flu-like side effects.

   Now, seven years later, Godfriaux is fine - apparently cured.

   "Dr. Berd and his vaccine are phenomenal," said the retired zoologist.

   Godfriaux's dramatic case notwithstanding, only about half of patients in
M-Vax trials have responded, Berd said. Their five-year survival has been 45
percent, compared with 25 percent for those who only had surgery.

   Putting such results in perspective is tricky - and goes to the heart of
Finn's rationale for extending treatment vaccines to prevention.

   Consider data from testing of some promising vaccines.

   The median survival of men treated with Provenge was 26 months, just 4.5
months more than patients who received a dummy vaccine. The drug did not achieve
one of its primary goals of delaying disease progression. Yet Provenge's
survival benefit of 4.5 months was almost double that of Taxotere, the next best
treatment for advanced-stage prostate cancer.

   Canvaxin, the melanoma vaccine made by CancerVax Corp., kept patients with
stage 3 cancer alive a median of 55 months, compared with 31 months for
untreated patients. But Canvaxin offered no survival benefit for stage 4
melanoma patients.

   Two years ago, a final trial of Theratope, a vaccine for breast cancer that
has spread, showed no benefit. Biomira, a Canadian-based biotech company, says
it is currently "seeking partners" to continue development of the product.

   Finn, for one, is not surprised by such results.

   "Therapeutic-vaccine success is marginal for many reasons," she said. "One
reason is that most patients are older, so their immune system is older. Then,
you're dealing with a disease that suppresses the immune system because the
cancer has . . . learned how to avoid the immune system. Finally, because
therapeutic vaccines are considered by the Food and Drug Administration to be
experimental, you can only give them after regular therapy - chemotherapy and
radiation - that destroys the immune system."

   She advocates vaccinating patients with known cancer-risk factors, such as
colon polyps or premalignant abnormal cells that have formed in the milk ducts
of the breast.

   "We know from animal models, prophylaxis [prevention] works," Finn said. "In
a preventive setting, the vaccine would have a qualitatively and quantitatively
better response."

   "I would agree that we need to change the paradigm for approval of therapies
like this," said Dendreon CEO Mitchell Gold. "These drugs have very low side
effects, so their safety profile is appealing."

   But CancerVax CEO David Hale, who will be on the panel with Finn and
Paterson, thinks such talk is premature.

   So does Paterson: "I don't think it will be in my lifetime that we can
predict who will get cancer. Nobody comes to you and says: 'I think I'm going to
get prostate cancer in 30 years. Give me a shot.' "

   On the other hand, Paterson can't wait to turn cancer - diagnosed in 11
million more people worldwide each year - from a terrifying plague into a
manageable illness.

   "I'm at an age where I seem to be losing people to cancer all the time," said
Paterson, 64, herself a breast-cancer survivor. "It's time to stop curing cancer
in mice and start curing it in humans."

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720 or
mmccullough@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DIAGRAM;
JASON COHN, For The Inquirer
Olivera Finn, a University of Pittsburgh immunologist, argues that treatment
vaccines will not do much to reduce the toll of cancer unless they are used to
prevent the disease in high-risk patients.
APRIL SAUL, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Researcher Yvonne Paterson of Penn has engineered a way to trigger the
autoimmune system to attack cancer cells.
DIAGRAM
Attacker Cells (SOURCE: Dendreon Corp.; KEITA SULLIVAN, Inquirer Staff Artist)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2005


                             121 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2005 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                       June 10, 2005 Friday Metro Edition

SECTION: FORUM; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: Editorial; U of L's research coup

BODY:

   The latest major research grant that the University of Louisville's chief of
cardiology has won is, first and foremost, a ratification of the significance of
the cutting-edge work he and his team are pursuing.

   Dr. Robert Bolli already ranked as one of the nation's premiere scientists in
his highly competitive field, based on his extensive work on using the body's
own proteins to reduce the damage from or prevent heart attacks.

   Since coming to U of L in 1995, he has built a substantial research operation
of about 70 people supported by roughly $50 million in grants from the National
Institutes for Health.

   His latest coup is also the largest yet - a five-year, $11.7 million grant to
finance actual development and testing of a gene therapy to increase the heart's
ability to survive an attack with less damage.

   Dr. Bolli's competitive success is more, however, than a testament to the
quality and potential of his ideas. It's also another striking validation of the
state's now defunct "Bucks for Brains" program, which matched a contribution
from Jewish Hospital to finance the endowed chair he now holds at U of L.

   The intellectual, financial and reputational benefits from that program for U
of L and the city have been immense - exceeded only by the enormity of the
current Frankfort regime's folly in simultaneously abandoning the program,
shortchanging pressing research needs and retreating from education progress
generally.

   May Dr. Bolli's work succeed in strengthening patients' hearts - and with
them, Frankfort's will to attract and support many more like him

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2005


                             122 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 10, 2005 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY, Pg.E-6

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: MARSHALL HORWITZ;
VIROLOGIST, EXPERT ON CHILDREN'S IMMUNE SYSTEM

BYLINE: Jeremy Pearce, The New York Times

BODY:

   Dr. Marshall S. Horwitz, a virologist at the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine in New York City who studied potential keys to the immune system held
by adenoviruses, a group of about 40 viruses often affecting children, died May
31 at a Long Island hospital. He was 68 and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.

    A cause was not determined, his family said.

    Adenoviruses often appear in the respiratory system and can cause pneumonia,
croup and acute respiratory disease. Dr. Horwitz studied their growth, as well
as their genetic and molecular structures, in light of the viruses' success in
defeating the human immune system.

    Working in the 1980s and '90s, Dr. Horwitz and others investigated
adenoviruses as a vehicle in cellular and gene therapy. The scientists used
adenovirus genes as a gateway into immune defenses to transplant pancreatic
cells successfully in mice.

    The research may have applications in the transplantation of human tissue to
enable patients with diabetes to produce their own insulin.

    A colleague, Dr. Matthew Scharff, a professor in Einstein's department of
cell biology, said Dr. Horwitz "made the interesting discovery that the viruses
make substances that protect them from the immune response."

    "He then had a unique idea of putting the genes into cells to suspend the
response and went on to show how we can use it," Scharff said.

    Dr. Horwitz and other researchers also employed adenoviruses to study the
mechanism of DNA replication. In the 1980s, he was part of an early
international team that suggested an association between an adenovirus and the
AIDS virus. The team's findings, which were made before the discovery of HIV,
were published in The Lancet in 1983.

    Marshall Sydney Horwitz was born in Boston. He graduated from Harvard and
earned his medical degree from Tufts University in 1962.

    A virologist with the National Communicable Disease Center in Atlanta until
1969, Dr. Horwitz next joined Einstein, an affiliate of Yeshiva University. He
was appointed professor of cell biology there in 1979, and held a variety of
posts, including chairman of microbiology and immunology.

    From 1972 to 1999, he directed Einstein's division of pediatric infectious
diseases. He also served as an associate director of the medical college's
cancer center. In 1994, he was elected to the American Academy of Microbiology.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2005


                             123 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             June 9, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1568 words

HEADLINE: Effort grows to teach risks, benefits of clinical trials;
Programs help volunteers make informed choices

BYLINE: Julie Bell, SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Tamir Orbach had just learned that he had a potentially fatal bone marrow
disease when he had to grapple with an extraordinarily difficult choice.

   Should he have the standard treatment - a bone-marrow transplant with
high-dose chemotherapy and radiation, which could cause life-threatening
complications itself? Or should he choose a transplant and an experimental,
lower-dose treatment that might be easier on his body but was unproven?

   "I was terrified," said Orbach, 31, of Gaithersburg, who was told last year
that he had an aggressive case of a rare bone-marrow disease known as PNH.

   Like Orbach, patients and their families are often overwrought when they are
asked to consider participating in a clinical trial. Weighing the potential
risks and benefits is even more difficult when in an emotional fog.

   But recently, a small, yet growing number of clinical research programs have
been making efforts to better educate patients and the public about the risks
and benefits of participating in trials - the human tests of drugs and medical
devices for which millions of people volunteer annually.

   Those who run clinical trials acknowledge that the motivations for patient
and public education go beyond wanting to do the right thing. They are also a
response to fear of lawsuits, pressure from insurers, the desire to appear
competitive to drug companies in search of clinical trial sites, and concern
over a dip in public trust in the wake of research deaths.

   "Anybody who's in the field understands ... that there has been some erosion
of public trust as a result of some of the problems," said Susan Buskirk,
executive director of the University of Maryland School of Medicine human
research protections program.

   Aurora Health Care in Milwaukee recently held a forum to explain clinical
trials to the public. A National Institutes of Health grant pays for a clinical
trials educator at a nonprofit that helps bone-marrow disease patients. And
organizations such as Dallas-based Baylor Research Institute, which oversees
clinical trials in at least 13 institutions, and the University of Maryland
medical school have developed brochures and are planning improved Web sites to
help potential enrollees examine their options. The Johns Hopkins University is
deciding how to expand education, as well.

   An increasing number of academic medical centers and private clinical trials
oversight boards are seeking accreditation. They hope that will increase both
their efficiency and the public's trust - helping them attract more trials and
patients. The two organizations that offer such accreditation - the Partnership
for Human Research Protection and the Association for the Accreditation of Human
Research Protection Programs - require efforts to educate those who might
enroll.

   Potential conflicts

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires clinical trials - a series of
tests in humans - to show the safety and effectiveness of drugs and medical
devices before they are marketed. Without them, medical advances would grind to
a halt.

   But trials are also big business that can lead to conflicts of interest. Drug
company sponsors pay institutions that serve as hosts for trials; scientific
breakthroughs can bring fame and fortune to physician researchers; and medical
centers compete for trials to be at the forefront of cutting-edge medicine and
the money that comes with it.

   Alan C. Milstein, a Philadelphia-area attorney who represents clients harmed
in research experiments, said accreditation will do little to improve safety, no
matter how many questions the subjects learn to ask.

   "There's so much research going on, the money is so big, that I don't believe
this is a measure that solves the problems that exist," Milstein said.

   Worldwide, about 50,000 clinical trials were under way in 2003, with 35,000
in the United States, according to CenterWatch, a Boston-based unit of the
Thomson Corp. Up to 3.5 million people are enrolled in current U.S. trials, the
group estimates.

   Despite the large numbers, U.S. researchers have trouble recruiting patients
for clinical trials. About 80 percent of trials are delayed at least a month
partly because researchers can't find subjects fast enough, CenterWatch says.

   The theory behind increased outreach is in part that patients who are
knowledgeable about trials will be better able to weigh risks and benefits.

   Patient education is also in order, advocates say, because clinical trials
are overseen by a fragmented and understaffed federal oversight system.

   The 38-person Office of Human Research Protection has jurisdiction over
trials conducted or funded by the Health and Human Services Department. The FDA
- with 276 U.S. clinical investigators in 2002, the most recent figure available
- has oversight of any trial that spawns data submitted to put a drug or device
on the market.

   In practice, trials largely are overseen by local ethics panels called
institutional review boards (IRBs). The panels, which can be associated with an
institution or be independent, are charged with ensuring that human subjects are
protected and that the risks of an experiment are appropriate and in balance
with the potential benefits for society as a whole.

   But with federal oversight stretched thin, their performance isn't regularly
reviewed by any outside authority. That became clear after the deaths of
research volunteers Jesse Gelsinger at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999
and Ellen Roche at Hopkins in 2001.

   Gelsinger died in an experiment at Penn's gene therapy institute, whose
director co-founded a company that hoped to market the discoveries. Roche, a
Hopkins lab technician, died after inhaling a chemical in a study of healthy
lung function. Previous studies had shown that the chemical could cause fatal
reactions.

   Filling the gaps

   "Obviously, we had a terrible tragedy here," said Dr. Michael J. Klag, the
Hopkins physician and administrator who took the position of vice dean for
clinical research to help reform medical school practices in the wake of Roche's
death.

   The school went from two IRBs to five internal ones, while contracting with a
sixth, and has gone from spending less than $1 million a year on human research
oversight to a budget of about $5 million. Klag said the university is pursuing
accreditation to ensure that it is regularly reviewed - and looking at expanding
its patient education efforts.

   Though accreditation is voluntary and only 28 organizations have received it
so far, there is evidence that insurers may begin to require it. The Chubb Group
of Insurance Cos., which covers life science companies, has begun to ask whether
the sites they use for clinical trials are accredited.

   "My interest is safety," said Jill Wadlund, a Chub vice president.

   The two accreditation organizations say they can help fill in the gaps in
federal research oversight, including by requiring the kinds of outreach to
patients that traditionally haven't been required.

   The Partnership for Human Research Protection has begun its own national
education program, largely consisting of a brochure that explains trials and
gives patients questions to ask the physicians overseeing them.

   Among the questions that patients are encouraged to ask: "Who stands to
benefit financially?" and "Is it possible I will receive a placebo?"

   Orbach, whose doctor says he was cured by the treatment he got in a National
Institutes of Health clinical trial, used the Internet to find out about
clinical trials and PNH. But he says he supports patient-education efforts such
as the partnership's.

   "I had myself, my parents, my friends, ask" questions, he said. But there
were plenty he didn't know to ask, including questions about conflicts of
interest. "It wouldn't have occurred to me," he said, "and I think those are
important questions."

   Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, also supports such efforts. In a conference
call with reporters, he urged potential volunteers to ask questions about
clinical trials, saying: "I didn't know about the serious dangers Jesse faced
until after he died."

   Planning to enroll in a trial?

   Questions to ask your doctor or the researcher before enrolling in a clinical
trial:

   Why is this experiment being conducted?

   Who is doing the study?

   Will I be able to continue to see my own doctor?

   Is there any cost to me or will I be paid to participate in this study?

   Does anyone receive money for my enrollment in the study?

   How long will the study last?

   What tests or treatments will be used in the study?

   What other options do I have if I decide not to take part?

   Might I receive a placebo?

   What could happen to me if I take part in the study? Have there been any ill
effects reported? How serious?

   Could my condition get worse during the study? What will happen if it does?
If my condition worsens, will I be notified?

   Can I stop participating in the study if I change my mind?

   Could there be any danger to me if I stop participating?

   Who pays for my care if I'm injured during the study?

   What will happen to me at the end of the study? Will I be told the results?

   Whom do I contact for information about the study? Do you have patient
advocates, independent of your institution, I can talk to?

   Who stands to benefit financially from the results of the study? Does the
researcher have a potential conflict of interest? If so, how is it being
managed?

   Is the research program or institutional review board accredited?

   Source: Partnership for Human Research Protection

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / CHART(S)
 1. Researcher Dr. Richard W. Childs speaks with Tamir Orbach (right) about the
results of treatment for a potentially fatal bone marrow disease in a clinical
trial at the National Institutes of Health. 2. Trading places
 1. ANDRÉ F. CHUNG : SUN STAFF 2. SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                             124 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2005 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                     June 9, 2005 Thursday Indiana Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6B

HEADLINE: PHOTO ONLY

GRAPHIC: The grant, which is expected to add about 15 people to Dr. Roberto
Bolli's research crew of 70, will fund research intended to develop a gene
therapy that would condition the heart before a heart attack to minimize muscle
damage. By Michael Hayman, The Courier-Journal

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2005


                             125 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2005 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                      June 9, 2005 Thursday Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: Scientists at UofL get funds for study;
$11.7 million grant will aid research on gene therapy

BYLINE: HALL GREGORY A, ghall@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   Byline: Gregory A. Hall

   Source: The Courier-Journal

   When Dr. Roberto Bolli came from Baylor College of Medicine in Houston to the
University of Louisville in 1994, the medical school had a cardiology department
that had no federal research funding.

   "Nothing. Nada. Zippo," the 53-year-old native of Italy said yesterday.

   Since that time, Bolli and the team of researchers he helped assemble have
brought about $50million in grants to UofL from the National Institutes of
Health.

   And yesterday, the university announced that Bolli and his researchers have
earned a five-year, $11.7million grant - the largest earned by the school in an
NIH competition. The grant, which is expected to add about 15 people to Bolli's
research crew of 70, will fund research intended to develop a gene therapy that
would condition the heart before a heart attack to minimize muscle damage.

   If research efforts in animals are successful, Bolli said the next step would
be a clinical trial in humans in three to five years. After that it would be at
least three years until the treatment could be approved for general use.

   Bolli said the researchers now will find out whether their theory - that gene
therapy can help permanently protect the heart - is valid. "This is the
culmination of that effort."

   UofL President James Ramsey praised the research team's work and the grant.

   "This is what performance is all about, and that is increasing economic
opportunity and quality of life for the people of our community," Ramsey said.

   The new NIH grant builds on work Bolli began in the early 1990s and has
continued with others since he came to Louisville.

   Bolli, chief of cardiology in the UofL department of medicine, currently
personally oversees five NIH grants that total about $19million.

   His team of researchers has 16 active NIH grants that will bring in
$10million in the upcoming year .

   The research could have a major impact nationally and in Kentucky;
cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in both. Kentucky also has
the fifth-highest death rate in the country from cardiovascular disease,
according to American Heart Association data released this year.

   "This is a huge public health problem," Bolli said.

   Bolli's research offers hope that patients could endure heart attacks with
less damage, said John Fakunding, a program director in the NIH unit that
awarded the grant.

   "It is pretty cutting edge," he said.

   The research focuses on getting the heart to do in advance what it can do
when the heart muscle is short of blood.

   When brief blood shortages occur, the heart produces proteins that can
protect the tissue in the event of a subsequent heart attack.

   Bolli hopes to develop a gene therapy that would cause the proteins to be
produced even without the shortages of blood.

   A patient would be given a virus that contains the genes that trigger the
protective proteins and would "precondition" the heart to minimize damage from a
heart attack.

   That would allow more heart tissue to survive.

   The virus would remain "so the heart is always protected," Bolli said.

   GRANT HIGHLIGHTS

   WHAT: An $11.7million grant for research to develop gene therapies that would
protect or minimize damage to the heart muscle from a heart attack.

   WHO: A team of UofL researchers led by Dr. Roberto Bolli.

   IMPORTANCE: Kentucky has the nation's fifth-highest death rate from
cardiovascular disease.

   HOW IT WOULD WORK: The gene therapy is expected to cause the heart to produce
proteins in advance that protect the heart muscle from damage.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Roberto Bolli will head the team.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2005


                             126 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 09, 2005, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 890 words

HEADLINE: Texas woman with pancreatic cancer outlives prognosis ;
But now she is losing hope against the disease that is almost always fatal

SOURCE: FORT WORTH STAR-TELEGRAM

BYLINE: MITCH MITCHELL

BODY:

   Pancreatic cancer kills nearly everyone who gets it. And quickly: Death
typically follows diagnosis by less than a year.

   The disease takes its victims so fast they do not have time to help raise
funds. Research funding lags far behind that of many other cancer research
programs.

   Elaine Chastain discovered all these truths within days of her diagnosis.

   "It seemed like they were talking about somebody else," said Chastain, 62.
"But when it really soaked in that they were talking about me, I guess my first
reaction was that no human could tell me when I was going to die. I thought, why
should I plan on dying immediately when that may not be the Lord's plan? I had
to continue living, rather than preparing to die."

   Chastain entered the emergency room at a Fort Worth hospital on Feb. 8, 2003,
with stomach pain: "It felt like a knife going through me."

   Doctors gave her pain medication and ran tests. When Chastain went to her
doctor March 10, she was told she had pancreatic cancer and that, with
treatment, she might live nine months.

    Responded to chemo

    The tumor had split and traveled to other areas. The disease was too
advanced for surgery or radiation therapy. Chastain was placed on the
chemotherapy cocktail GTX and responded well.

   "The doctors have been pretty amazed that I am in as good a condition as I
am," she said. "Some people are afraid of the chemotherapy. You'd hear stories
about the cure being worse than the disease. Now they have so many medicines to
counteract the side effects. I didn't have any of the problems that I thought I
might have."

   But after more than 18 months of no tumor growth, the tumors began growing
and spreading again. Chastain took her final chemotherapy last November.

   "On rough days, I hold onto God and ask Him to hold us tight," Chastain said.
"He's my friend, not my enemy. I have a feeling that He's just as heartbroken
about my illness as I am."

   Pancreatic cancer is the fourth-leading cause of cancer death in the United
States, according to the American Cancer Society.

    Vaccine tested

    In June 2004, a firm based in Cambridge, Mass., began testing a vaccine in
cooperation with the National Cancer Institute. The trials by Therion Biologics
Corp. were based on earlier tests that showed a 12 percent increase in one-year
survival rates of pancreatic cancer victims. Still, most of the people in the
earlier studies died quickly, as did most of those on chemotherapy and those who
underwent surgery.

   "We don't find this cancer until it's pretty advanced," said Dr. Mark Redrow,
clinical oncologist on staff at Harris Methodist Fort Worth hospital. "Cancers
have the ability to become resistant to multiple drugs. You can get down to
1,000 cancer cells, and when they grow back they are resistant to the chemo."

   Therion's researchers concluded that the best way to kill the disease was to
use the vaccinia virus (used to fight smallpox) to train the immune system to
attack the cancer cells. It has fewer side effects than traditional
chemotherapies, and subjects who developed an immune response did live slightly
longer, said Dr. Thomas J. Schuetz, Therion's chief medical officer.

    'Highest medical need'

    The work created hope. Another year might bring another breakthrough therapy
to test.

   "The medical need of those with pancreatic cancer has got to be the highest
in all medical oncology," Schuetz said. "Most patients understand their
prognosis and their limited treatment options. But some of the people in our
studies have lived longer."

   Pancreatic cancer sufferers are often surprised by the limited research
funding and treatment options.

   "A lot of funding is a result of public awareness," said Rod Page, director
of research for the Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders in Fort Worth, a
vaccine trial site. "When you have survivors, those people are out there to
raise awareness and    research dollars for that particular type of cancer. When
everyone from that cancer dies, you don't have those survivors."

   With more research dollars, investigators might be able to look into ways to
test for the disease earlier, or for genetic therapies.

   "We need to find something new that hasn't been invented to treat this
disease," Redrow said. "Because it might help people with other cancers as
well."

    Looking at hospices

    In January, Chastain was one of about 250 patients in the United States
accepted for the vaccine trial. But after two months she dropped out. The
therapy wasn't working; the tumors were growing and all her cancer markers were
up.

   Chastain was offered chemotherapy that had been successful with colon cancer
patients but decided against it. It might have extended her life six weeks,
Chastain said.

   "I felt like I'd be spending my energy fighting the side effects," she said.
"And it was not really giving me any additional time to speak of."

   On Wednesday, Chastain was at home, suffering from pain, nausea and fever.
After living more than a year longer than the experts had predicted, Chastain
decided that she did not want to die at the hospital. Her husband was checking
into hospice care.

   "At this point, each day is a miracle," Chastain said. "This is a wonderful
celebration of life. My regret is what I'm leaving behind: my family, my
husband, not what I'm facing. What I'm facing is nothing."


LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2005


                             127 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 7, 2005 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.A-8

LENGTH: 673 words

HEADLINE: STUDY FINDS GENE THERAPY FOR RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS SAFE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   The world's first human study of gene therapy for rheumatoid arthritis has
found the technique to be safe, laying the foundation for tests of its potential
treatment value.

    Lead investigator Christopher Evans, now director of the molecular
orthopedics center at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, began the project
in 1996 when he worked at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

    "It's the first clinical trial of gene therapy for a nonlethal disease,"
Evans said. "The object of the exercise was to see if we can do in real human
joints what we've successfully done in experimental animals."

    For the study, the researchers first obtained cells from an
arthritis-damaged joint of each participant and inserted the therapeutic gene
into them in the laboratory. They then reinjected the altered cells into two of
four knuckles that each patient was scheduled to have surgically replaced a week
later.

    The gene makes a protein called interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, which
blocks the inflammatory process triggered by interleukin-1, Evans explained. The
body makes this anti-inflammatory protein but not in sufficient quantities to
alleviate arthritis. With gene therapy, scientists can help cells produce more
of it.

    "When we do it this way, the joint is making its own medicine," Evans said.
"It's synthesizing its own interleukin-1 blocker locally, exactly where the
disease activity is."

    In animal models, the gene therapy "relieved inflammation and it also
protected the structures of the joint from breakdown, particularly the
cartilage," he said.

    It's too early to tell whether it will have a similar effect in people. The
initial study was conducted to make sure the therapy did not cause dangerous
side effects, and to see if the gene would actively make protein in the treated
joints.

    The nine study participants, who were 49 to 73 years old, had their knuckles
replaced with artificial joints a week after the injections of genetically
modified cells. Subsequent examination of the diseased knuckles showed high
levels of the blocker protein, indicating that the gene transfer worked.

    A few participants told Evans that their knuckles felt better, but that
could have been a placebo effect. One woman accurately identified which two
knuckles got the gene-modified cells and which two didn't, he said.

    The patients had physical exams and blood tests for five years to check for
side effects.

    "So far, nothing has happened," Evans said. "We have been unable to pick up
any signs that the gene escaped from the joint."

    That's a good thing. A few years ago, three children developed leukemia
while participating in a French trial for severe immune deficiency.

    "We were just finishing up our study when the French data came out," Evans
said. "It put us on the alert and is one reason we bided our time before
publishing [our findings]."

    The French and Pittsburgh research projects used the same viral carrier, or
vector, to ferry the therapeutic gene into each cell.

    But the studies inserted different genes into different cells for different
diseases, and in the Pittsburgh study, the genetically altered cells were
extracted with the joint during surgery, Evans said.

    He added that follow-up studies of arthritis gene therapy will use a viral
vector that can be directly injected into the joint, avoiding the laborious and
expensive process of obtaining patient cells, altering them in the lab and then
reinjecting them.

    Evans hopes to begin a trial next year for osteoarthritis patients. It will
start in Boston, and if it grows into a multicenter study, Pittsburgh will
likely be a site.

    Gene therapy's potential for breakthrough treatments of gene defect
disorders and cancer has overshadowed its possible applications in orthopedics
and rheumatology, Evans said.

    "I really think where it's going to find its greatest clinical impact is
going to be in the area of ... diseases of bone and joints," he said. "I call it
gene therapy for everyday diseases."

NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                             128 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Marshall Horwitz, 68, Expert on Immune System, Dies

BYLINE: By JEREMY PEARCE

BODY:

   Dr. Marshall S. Horwitz, a virologist at the Albert Einstein College of
Medicine who studied potential keys to the immune system held by adenoviruses, a
group of about 40 DNA viruses often affecting children, died on Tuesday at North
Shore University Hospital on Long Island. He was 68 and lived in Larchmont, N.Y.

    A cause was not determined, his family said.

     Adenoviruses are contagious viruses that often appear in the respiratory
system and can cause pneumonia, croup and acute respiratory disease. Dr. Horwitz
studied their growth, as well as their genetic and molecular structures, in
light of the viruses' success in defeating the human immune system.

    Working in the 1980's and 90's, Dr. Horwitz and others investigated
adenoviruses as a vehicle in cellular and gene therapy. The scientists used
adenovirus genes as a gateway into immune defenses to transplant pancreatic
cells successfully in mice.

    The research may have applications in the transplantation of human tissue to
enable patients with diabetes to produce their own insulin.

    A colleague, Dr. Matthew Scharff, a professor in Einstein's department of
cell biology, said that Dr. Horwitz ''made the interesting discovery that the
viruses make substances that protect them from the immune response.''

    ''He then had a unique idea of putting the genes into cells to suspend the
response and went on to show how we can use it,'' Dr. Scharff said.

    Dr. Horwitz and other researchers also employed adenoviruses to study the
mechanism of DNA replication. In the 1980's, he was part of an early
international team that suggested an association between an adenovirus and the
AIDS virus. The team's findings, which were made before the discovery of H.I.V.,
were published in The Lancet in 1983.

    Marshall Sydney Horwitz was born in Boston. He graduated from Harvard and
earned his medical degree from Tufts University in 1962.

    A virologist with the National Communicable Disease Center in Atlanta until
1969, Dr. Horwitz next joined Einstein, an affiliate of Yeshiva University. He
was appointed professor of cell biology there in 1979, and held a variety of
posts, including chairman of microbiology and immunology.

    The son of an electrician, Dr. Horwitz understood electrical circuitry and
sometimes even reviewed plans for Einstein's building projects.

    From 1972 to 1999, he directed Einstein's division of pediatric infectious
diseases. He also served as an associate director of the medical college's
cancer center. In 1994, he was elected to the American Academy of Microbiology.

    He is survived by his wife, Dr. Susan Band Horwitz, who is a co-chairwoman
of the department of molecular pharmacology at Einstein; two sons, Dr. Bruce, of
Lexington, Mass., an assistant professor of pediatrics at Harvard, and Joshua,
of Arlington, Va.; a sister, Toba Hausner of Silver Spring, Md.; and two
grandchildren.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2005


                             129 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JUNE 6, 2005 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1074 words

HEADLINE: Building an empire;
Bruce Toll's job now goes far beyond housing.

BYLINE: Bob Fernandez INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Bruce Toll is making quite a second career for himself - without older
brother Bob.

   For years the public face of home builder Toll Bros. Inc., Bruce Toll quit
his executive post in 1998, saying he wanted to do something else.

   But instead of fading into early retirement, Bruce Toll embarked on a
building project of a different sort. He has sold 5.1 million Toll Bros. shares
worth $186.6 million in the last five years, and plowed the money into drug
companies, office buildings, telecommunications, a bagel chain,
methadone-treatment facilities, and, last year, the fraying Reedman auto
dealership in Langhorne.

   In that time, Toll Bros. stock has soared from pre-housing-boom prices of
about $15 in September 2000 to $88 in late February, the last time Toll sold. It
closed Friday at $94.28

   "I like the idea of buying businesses, setting them up, and letting them
run," Toll said recently, taking a seat in Reedman's conference room to relieve
an aching knee that was replaced Thursday at Abington Memorial Hospital. He has
scrapped the dealership's plastic-covered furniture - new executives had called
it "Archie Bunker" furniture, after the 1970s sitcom All in the Family - and
added a Subaru franchise to go along with Chrysler, Mercury, Jaguar, Chevrolet,
Lincoln and Dodge franchises. He is also negotiating to bring more nameplates to
the huge dealership off Route 1.

   "I have 125 acres. I could fit another 25 franchises here, but I think, over
the next five years, . . . I'll probably add five," he said.

   Toll, who is 61, now controls or is a major shareholder in more than a dozen
companies that employ 2,000 people and generate $500 million in annual revenue.
When he is not managing the enterprise from his cell phone, or in one of his
four homes, he is doing it out of the Toll Bros. headquarters in Horsham, where
he keeps his main office. Brother Bob's executive suite is just down the hall.

   Bruce and Bob Toll cofounded Toll Bros. in 1967, when they built two homes in
Chester County. They went on to become one of the most successful sibling
partners in American business. This year, Toll Bros., which now has 227
subdivisions under construction in 20 states, expects to nail sales of 8,100
homes and revenue of $5.2 billion. Led by the wisecracking and driven Bob Toll,
the company announced last month that second-quarter profit more than doubled
and revenue soared 52 percent.

   Bob Toll, 64, has noticed his brother's extracurricular activities. He noted
wryly in a recent phone conversation, "I'm not his accountant, but it's more
than a little conglomerate as far as I can tell."

   Bruce Toll has avoided conflicts of interest with Toll Bros., where he
remains the second-largest shareholder and vice chairman, by staying away from
home-building. But his use of the Toll name on the Reedman dealership rattled
some at Toll Bros., which spends millions of dollars a year on advertising aimed
at high-end home buyers.

   Toll renamed the dealership Reedman-Toll Auto World shortly after buying it
in mid-2004, and erected Reedman-Toll billboards along I-95 - some within
several miles of Toll Bros. billboards.

   Bruce Toll agreed that he would restrict his future use of Toll to "Bruce
Toll," "Bruce E. Toll" or "Toll Management," according to a noncompete and
consulting agreement that Toll Bros. filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission in February. The agreement also stated that Bruce Toll earns $675,000
a year as "special adviser" to Bob Toll.

   Outside director Robert S. Blank said the Toll Bros. board decided that the
Toll name was a corporate asset when used in connection with residential homes,
but not in relation to selling vehicles.

   Bruce Toll said the home-building company was still his passion and he had no
plans to add the Toll name to other ventures. He owns about 9 percent of Toll
Bros. stock, with a value of $650 million. "I'm there mentally every day," he
said. "I would never sell off Toll Bros. I hope to be there until I die."

   But his private conglomerate is taking up more attention. Business brokers
call regularly with pitches, and, when he buys a company, he says he wants it to
grow.

   At Reedman-Toll, vehicle sales have risen 25 percent to 1,000 a month in the
year he has owned it. He put his name on the dealership to allay fears that he
would close it for some other development, he said.

   "I wanted people to know that Reedman didn't own it," he said. "And I didn't
want people to think that someone else owned it. I wanted them to know it was
me."

   Contact staff writer Bob Fernandez at 215-854-5897 or
bob.fernandez@phillynews.com.

   Diversified holdings

   Bruce Toll's companies include:

   Medical:

   National Renal Alliance, Franklin, Tenn., a for-profit chain of 12
kidney-dialysis centers, is opening a dialysis center in the rural South at a
clip of one every six weeks. Toll is its largest shareholder.

   Premier Kids Care Inc., Atlanta, which markets human-growth hormones for
children and has operations in 21 states and Washington. Toll is the largest
shareholder.

   Puresyn Inc., Malvern, a biotechnology company that develops separation and
purification technology for gene-vaccine and gene-therapy products for
pharmaceutical companies. Toll owns it.

   Colonial Management Group L.P., Orlando, Fla., a chain of 50
methadone-treatment centers. Toll is the largest shareholder.

   Real estate:

   BET Investments, Huntingdon Valley, a commercial property developer and
owner, owns five million square feet of offices and retail space along the East
Coast and in Texas. BET purchased the former Selas factory site in Upper Dublin,
Montgomery County, last year for $4 million. Toll owns the company.

   Technology:

   UbiquiTel Inc., Conshohocken, a telecommunications company that sells
Sprint-branded personal digital wireless communications, or PCS, in parts of the
West and Midwest. Toll provided seed capital in the late 1990s. He is a board
member and the largest shareholder, with 6.2 million shares, or a 6.7 percent
stake.

   Aquilent Inc., Laurel, Md., which provides information-technology services
for the government. Toll is the largest shareholder.

   Automobiles:

   Roberts Automall, Downingtown, an auto dealership with Honda, Chevrolet,
Cadillac and Subaru franchises. Toll owns it.

   Reedman-Toll Auto World, Langhorne, Bucks County, one of the nation's largest
auto dealerships. Toll owns it.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
JOHN SLAVIN, Inquirer Suburban Staff
Bruce Toll, 61, who helped Toll Bros. become one of the nation's largest
homebuilders, bought Reedman's dealership in Langhorne last year.
MICHAEL BRYANT, Inquirer Staff Photographer
A billboard for Toll's dealership. Use of the Toll name raised issues for Toll
Bros.
CHART
Diversified holdings

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2005


                             130 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 5, 2005, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 2108 words

HEADLINE: HEALTHY DOSE OF REALITY MAY BE DUE
MOVE IS ON TO PUT MUSCLE INTO DOPING POLICIES

BYLINE: By John Powers Globe Staff

BODY:

   In the anti-doping world, it is known as The List, a chemical cornucopia that
includes every banned substance from steroids to beta-blockers, from human
growth hormones to erythropoietin, from diuretics to insulin. Olympic athletes
around the world can be tested for all of them, at any time, without notice. If
Congress, as proposed, makes professional athletes subject to The List, the four
major sporting leagues could be facing much deeper doping scandals, sports
scientists say.

   Although steroids were the prime topic during this spring's congressional
hearings, both anti-doping bills the Drug Free Sports Act and the Clean Sports
Act would cover all banned substances. They also would impose Olympic-style
penalties: a two-year suspension for the first offense, a lifetime ban for the
second.

       Those punishments would be a harsh reality for athletes who are
accustomed to few tests and are penalized lightly even after being caught
repeatedly. In the National Basketball Association, a third steroid violation
carries only a 25-game suspension. In Major League Baseball, the penalty is 60
days. In the National Football League, it's one year. And the National Hockey
League, when it was still in business, didn't test for steroids (or any other
drugs) at all.


   Meanwhile, doping labs are working hard to develop new techniques to
circumvent any drug testing policy that is being debated among government
officials and sports leagues, which insist that their present doping policies
which were collectively bargained with the players are adequate.

   "We feel we're doing everything we could do," NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue
told lawmakers, declaring that football has "the best program in the country."

   But both evidence and anecdote indicate that pro athletes are using a variety
of performance-enhancing drugs, especially amphetamines, which baseball and
football don't ban. "Amphetamines have become epidemic in both leagues," said
Dr. Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor and sports doping expert who is
writing a book on the history of amphetamine use.

   It's also likely, scientists say, that pro athletes are using "cocktails" of
four or five drugs. Bay Area Laboratory Cooperative (BALCO), the California
supplement lab at the center of the ongoing federal probe, allegedly supplied
cocktails to a clientele of elite athletes that included baseball players Barry
Bonds, Jason Giambi, and Gary Sheffield and several Oakland football players,
including Bill Romanowski.

   According to documents obtained by the San Francisco Chronicle, Bonds was
given the designer steroid THG, testosterone, growth hormones, insulin, the
stimulant modafinil, and Clomid, a female fertility drug. "It's alarming that
anybody would use some of these things, but it happens every day," said Dr. Don
Catlin, who heads the UCLA lab that devised the test for THG, which had been
undetectable.

   The BALCO investigation, which also involves numerous runners, including
former Olympic champion Marion Jones and double world titlist Kelli White, made
it clear that the sluggers and sprinters have been patronizing the same illicit
drugstore.

   "It's home-grown, guru-driven, designer pharmacology," said Dr. Gary Wadler,
a New York University medical professor and a member of the World Anti-Doping
Agency. "The cocktails are driven by what the street says, what the Internet
says, what your teammates say, what your coach says, what your trainer says.
It's naive to think you're dealing with just steroids."

      Improved testing

   The variety of drugs that dopers are being caught using has expanded
dramatically during the past quadrennium, as testing has improved. In 2001, when
the independent US Anti-Doping Agency began testing athletes in Olympic sports,
virtually all of the positives were for ephedrine and steroids.

   Last year, the positives included not only steroid cocktails and stimulants
but also testosterone, erythropoietin, and blood doping. In an era of
"polypharmacology," the drug labs are racing to keep up with doped athletes,
their chemists, and the compounds they're concocting.

   In the past five years, scientists have developed tests for EPO and blood
doping and tried a new detection method for growth hormones at last summer's
Olympics.

   "There may come a day when we've closed all the loopholes and everyone's
clean," said Catlin, who has been involved in the doping war for nearly two
dozen years. "Are we at that point? I'd like to think so, but I'm not naive."

   If a coach hadn't anonymously sent a syringeful of THG to the USADA two years
ago, the testers wouldn't have known it existed. And doping experts say there
are more THGs out there.

   "The notion that BALCO is the only designer lab in the world is as silly as
you can get," said Yesalis. "There's a ton of chemists out there who know how to
do this stuff."

   The cocktails are a potent but risky witches' brew designed to both build
strength and avoid detection. Steroids, testosterone, and growth hormones make
muscles bigger and stronger. Insulin is believed to enhance the impact of those
drugs, while Clomid counteracts the feminizing effects (such as breast growth)
that steroids have on men.

      The athletes, said Wadler, "are playing Russian roulette. It depends on
which chamber is loaded on which day."

   All of these drugs have beneficial uses. Steroids decrease inflammation,
growth hormones help cure dwarfism and AIDS wasting syndrome, and insulin treats
diabetes.

   "Almost all doping agents are a perverse use of the best that modern science
has had to offer patients," said Wadler.

   But as quickly as chemists pump out new therapeutic drugs for an aging
America, the athletes adapt them to the playing fields.

   "Athletes have had access to these drugs even before physicians can get
them," said Yesalis. "They have a lot of money and a lot of pull and they can
get stuff."

   As soon as the doping labs come up with new tests to detect banned drugs, the
cheaters start searching for an edge elsewhere.

   "We have closed most of the doors," said Travis Tygart, the USADA's senior
managing director. "But when you shut the door on one doping behavior, the
athlete will say, 'OK, where can I go?' "

      The next horizon, researchers say, is gene therapy, which could be used to
cure diseases like muscular dystrophy. Scientists, most notably H. Lee Sweeney
at the University of Pennsylvania, have developed "Schwarzenegger mice" who
become twice as powerful after being injected with an insulin-like growth factor
gene.

   How far, then, are we from running backs with 70-inch thighs?

   "The honest answer is, God only knows," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, director
of the human gene therapy program at the University of California at San Diego
and a WADA member. "The technology is evolving quickly enough. It's fairly easy
to imagine people using ham-fisted methods even now."

      Gauging pro policies

      While the Olympic world already has been discussing the ramifications of
gene therapy in sport for at least four years ("An anticipation of what is
inevitable," said Wadler), the pro leagues still test for just a fraction of the
drugs that Olympic athletes have used for years. Their programs tend to be
ineffective, inconsistent, or both.

   The NBA is much more concerned about recreational drugs than performance
enhancers. A snootful of cocaine brings a two-year suspension, a syringeful of
steroids merely four games.

   Baseball doesn't test for amphetamines, which have been widely used in
clubhouses for decades. And though it now tests for ephedra, the stimulant that
contributed to the death of Baltimore Orioles pitcher Steve Bechler in February
2003, MLB treats it as a "drug of abuse" like marijuana or LSD; players who test
positive must only enter a treatment program.

   Though the NFL has the toughest testing program of the four major sports, it
doesn't yet test for growth hormones, which many athletes take along with or
instead of steroids.

   "The NFL applauds itself for having the best program," said WADA president
Dick Pound, a longtime critic of pro testing. "But you look at it and say, 'How
is it you're not finding what some of those guys are using?' "

   Football randomly tests seven players per team each week during the season
and just recently increased offseason testing. Baseball tests major leaguers
once between spring training and the end of the regular season and can also test
at random. Basketball tests its veterans only in training camp, and hockey
doesn't test at all.

   With such limited detection windows, scientists say, it's relatively easy for
athletes to beat the system, especially in the NBA. Virginia congressman Tom
Davis, a co-sponsor of the Clean Sports Act, said the league has "Shaq-sized
holes" in its program, which other lawmakers derided as "pathetic" and "a joke"
during commissioner David Stern's testimony last month.

   "They need year-round, unannounced, 24/7 testing," said Wadler. "I know
that's hard to implement, but that has to be the standard we're in pursuit of."

   Three Carolina Panthers were given multiple prescriptions for testosterone in
the weeks before their Super Bowl showdown with the Patriots two seasons ago,
according to a CBS report based on a federal probe of a South Carolina
physician. But none of the Panthers tested positive. The same doctor allegedly
supplied six NFLers with growth hormones, which Yesalis says are "grossly
epidemic" in the league.

   Though the NBA insists that steroids don't help basketball players ("It's
anathema to what they do," Players Association chief Billy Hunter told
lawmakers), more than 40 international basketball players tested positive for
them during the last two years, according to WADA figures.

   The NHL is jacked up on stimulants, according to Los Angeles Kings defenseman
(and former Bruin) Stephane Quintal, who estimated this year that 40 percent of
the players take them and who himself used both caffeine and pseudoephedrine
before developing cardiac arrhythmia four years ago.

   "The guys are so fired up," Colorado forward Teemu Selanne told the Toronto
Sun last year. "I don't know if they're taking Sudies [Sudafed] or ephedrine or
whatever, but guys are not thinking clearly and if that's the case, we've got to
fix that problem."

      With Congress vowing to crack down this year, the leagues promise they'll
get tougher on dopers. Baseball commissioner Bud Selig has proposed a ban of 50
games for an initial steroid offense, 100 games for a second, and lifetime for a
third. Stern wants five annual tests for NBA veterans and the players may well
agree, even though Hunter thinks it would "fix what isn't broken." And hockey
management and players say there will be testing once the league resumes.

   But the leagues, which have flatly refused to adopt the WADA code, oppose the
one-size-fits-all solution that Congress wants.

   "A uniform system for all sports will necessarily fail to account for the
differences among sports organizations in structure, length of season, number of
players, average career length, and program cost," Tagliabue told lawmakers.

   But with steroids still in the headlines and alarming reports of rising use
by teenagers, legislators seem determined to bring all four sports into line.

   "I think it's got traction," said Pound, "and I don't think they'll let it
go."

   Adopting The List would be the first step.

   "The WADA code is the gold standard," said Wadler. "That's where they need to
ultimately go."

   Next would be independent year-round random testing, possibly by the USADA,
which handles everything from athlete selection to testing to adjudication in
the Olympic sports.

   "You've got to get away from the fox guarding the henhouse," said Yesalis.
"The penalties will be a smokescreen if [the leagues] can make a positive test
from a star athlete go away."

   The final step would be standard penalties for all pro leagues. If the WADA
can gather more than three dozen global sports from archery to synchronized
swimming under the same umbrella, putting four on the same page shouldn't be
difficult.

   Achieving all of that in one blow after years of denial and resistance from
the leagues would be a historic accomplishment. But one thing appears clear: The
day of the wrist-slap for steroid users is over.

   "No matter what the professional leagues do," said Wadler, "none of them will
be able to do business as they did previously."

SIDEBAR:

   PERFORMANCE ENHANCEMENT IN ATHLETICS

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.


NOTES:
CRACKDOWN ON DOPING

GRAPHIC: CHART   PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2005


                             131 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 5, 2005, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E15

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY LOOMS AS NEXT TEMPTATION

BYLINE: By John Powers Globe Staff

BODY:

   It is a tale of mice and men. Or, rather, of men who want to be mice. Once
researchers at the University of Pennsylvania produced a "Schwarzenegger mouse"
half a dozen years ago by injecting it with a gene that produced huge muscles,
athletes began contacting lab director H. Lee Sweeney, volunteering to become
human lab rats.


   At a time when elite athletes are injecting themselves with designer steroids
and testosterone and human growth hormones and erythropoietin in an effort to
gain a winning edge, the next frontier for dopers is gene therapy. "People are
determined to cheat, no matter what the cost," says Dr. Gary Wadler, a New York
University medical professor and author of "Drugs and the Athlete."

       Though scientists are hoping to use it to treat diseases like muscular
dystrophy, athletes already have seen the potential benefits of an insulin-like
growth-factor gene (IGF-1) that can build Mighty Mouse muscles that stay massive
for years and keep high-paying careers going indefinitely.

   While the side effects of gene therapy are unknown and it may be years before
the methods are ready for human use, that hasn't kept the athletes from knocking
on researchers' doors.

   "The sports world doesn't always wait to be safe," says Dr. Theodore
Friedmann, who runs the human gene therapy program at the University of
California/San Diego.

   What works on a mouse may not work on a man, and scientists warn that the
methods are still in the experimental stage.

   "Things are very different when you go from an animal to a human," says
Friedmann, who works with the World Anti-Doping Agency. "Given the current
methodology, anyone who tries it on humans is flirting with real disaster."

   Though researchers say it likely will be several years before athletes begin
experimenting with gene therapy, the WADA already has added it to its global
banned list.

   "Any time there's a breakthrough, you'll also see an athlete out there
saying, 'If I use this, can I enhance my performance?' " says Wadler. "To think
that's ever going to change is naive."


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2005


                             132 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Classified; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 244 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths
HOROWITZ, MARSHALL S., M.D.

BODY:

    HOROWITZ -- Marshall S., M.D. All the staff members of the Department of
Pediatrics of the Children's Hospital at Montefiore and the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine are stunned and saddened by the sudden passing of our
beloved colleague of nearly 40 years. The quintessential physician-scientist,
Dr.

   Horowitz, Professor of Pediatrics and Cell Biology and Professor and Chairman
of Microbiology and Immunology, was an outstanding clinician, researcher, and
teacher, as well as one of the world's leading experts on adenovirus. Marshall
stood out for his gentlemanly character, modesty, integrity, warmth, and wisdom;
he had the unique ability to bring out the best in every person he trained and
with whom he worked. After winning international renown for discovering how
genes encoded by adenovirus caused disease, Marshall, in characteristic fashion,
converted those disease-causing genes into therapeutic tools to cure diabetes
mellitus. Marshall was tirelessly and enthusiastically devoted to mentoring and
nurturing the careers of generations of students, pediatric residents, fellows,
scientists and faculty members. Marshall will be keenly missed, but his impact
as an exemplary role model and his countless contributions to our Department,
our Medical School, and the world of Medicine, will endure for generations to
come. Gabriel Haddad, Chairman Department of Pediatrics Children's Hospital at
Montefiore and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2005


                             133 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     June 1, 2005 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH WEDNESDAY, Pg.D-2 HEALTH CALENDER

LENGTH: 1147 words

BODY:

   Special Events

    The Commons at Squirrel Hill, 2025 Wightman St., will host a Health Fair
from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., June 3. Screenings, healthy lifestyle information and
safety tips will be offered. Free. For details, call 412-421-8443, ext. 268.

    n The Clergy & Churches United and the US TOO International are hosting a
series of events to promote prostate cancer awareness.

    -- Faith and Health Home Run Breakfast, 8:30 a.m. to noon, June 11 at the
Centre City Marriot.

    -- Faith and Health Walk, 7:45 a.m., June 19 at Riverfront Park at the Quay.

    -- US TOO Father's Day 5K/10K Race, 8 a.m., June 19 at the North Shore
Riverfront Park.

    For details, 412-765-3190.


    Charity Events

    The Mercy School of Nursing Alumni Association invites women of maturity to
a Red Hats & Purple Dresses luncheon, 11:15 a.m. June 25 at the Sister M.
Ferdinand Clark Auditorium, Level 2 Building C at Mercy Hospital, 1400 Locust
St., Uptown. $12. Proceeds benefit the The Mercy School of Nursing Alumni
Association. Registration deadline is June 7. For details, 412-232-7943.

    The Visiting Nurse Foundation is holding a fund raiser at 6:30 p.m. June 11
at the Terminal Buildings, South Side. Proceeds benefit the foundation's Stroke
Survivor Connection Program. Tickets are $125. For details, call 412-937-8350 or
visit www.vnf-pittsburgh.org.

    The Seneca Valley Army Junior ROTC is hosting a Zach Attack Car Show, noon
to 8 p.m. June 12 at Seneca Valley High School, Harmony. Proceeds benefit the
Zach Attack and Nathan's Battle Foundation to fund upcoming gene therapy
clinical trials for Batten Disease. $1 for children 12 and younger. For tickets:
724-452-6040, ext 115.


    Screenings

    Giant Eagle and Family Health Council will provide free health and wellness
screenings throughout June at the following store locations:

    -- 4 to 7 p.m., June 1, 331 Washington Rd., Washington. 724-228-2865.

    -- 9 a.m. to noon, June 2, 435 South 7 St., Indiana. 724-463-2181.

    -- 9 a.m. to noon, June 9, 1521 North Main St., Butler. 724-282-9160.

    -- 1 to 4 p.m., June 9, Green Garden Shopping Center, Aliquippa.
724-378-9170.

    -- 1 to 4 p.m., June 9, Donaldson's Crossroads, McMurray. 724-941-0788.

    Blood pressure screenings, 8:45 to 10:15 a.m., June 6 at the Peters Township
Community Center. Sponsored by the Canonsburg General Hospital. Free. To
register, 724-873-5835.

    Blood pressure screenings, 1 to 4 p.m., June 8 at St. Clair Hospital's
fourth floor lobby. Free. For details, 412-344-6600, ext. 1025.


    Blood Drives

    St. Benedict the Abbot Church, 120 Arbington Dr., McMurray will host a blood
drive from 8 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., June 5 in the church hall. To register,
724-746-6717.


    Seminars/Lectures

    Headache and migraine seminar, 7 to 8 p.m. June 7, Peters Township Public
Library. Q&A with Dr. Kevin Smith following. Register at the library circulation
desk or by calling 725-941-9430.

    Rolfing Structural Integration, part of the Wellness and Healing Series at
the Nuin Center, will be held at 6:30 p.m., June 1 at the center, 5655 Bryant
St., Highland Park. Free. For details, 412-661-6108.

    Jefferson Regional Medical Center's Health for Her initiative, is offering
its "Mind, Body & Spirit," summer program series for women.  The free series
begins with "Alzheimer's Fear of Forgetting," from 5 to 7 p.m., June 9. For
other topics, dates, or to register, call 412-469-7100.

    Steelers All Pro Dad Seminar, 10 a.m. to noon, June 11 at UPMC Sports
Performance Complex, South Side. $25. For details, 1-800-956-8300, ext. 302.


    Classes/Workshops

    The Family Health Council's Nutrition Services Program will offer a
four-week diabetes self-management classes with a registered dietitian at
council offices in Kittanning, Lower Burrell, McKees Rocks and Natrona Heights.
To register, 1-800-215-7494.

    St. Clair Hospital will offer a Heartsaver CPR class from 6 to 9 p.m. June 2
for adults and June 9 for pediatrics in the fourth-floor meeting room. To
register, 412-344-6600, ext. 2150.

    UPMC Passavant will offer a nine-week weight management course, "Create Your
Weight," designed by registered Dietitians and based on guidelines from the
American Dietetic Association. Free introductory session begins at 6 p.m. June 6
in the hospital's Assembly Hall. $75 for the remaining classes.  To register,
412-367-6468.

    Medical Rescue Team South Authority, 315 Cypress Way, Mt. Lebanon, will
offer the following community education classes:

    -- Adult CPR/AED, 6:30 p.m., June 7, $30.

    -- Infant and Child CPR/AED, 6:30 p.m., June 8, $30.

    To register: 412-343-5111.

    Durable Power of Attorney workshop, 10 a.m. June 8. Sunrise of Fox Chapel,
931 Route 910. $20. Co-sponsored by the law firm of Witt Burkett LLC and the St.
Margaret Foundation. To register, 412-784-4144.

    The Allegheny County Department of Human Services Area Agency on Aging is
sponsoring a one-day conference, "Spotlight on Aging Services," June 9 at the
IBEW Local 5 Complex, 5 Hot Metal St., South Side.  The morning session, for
organizations unfamiliar with AAA's offerings, begins at 8 a.m. The afternoon
session, which begins at 1 p.m., is for professionals and organizations familar
with the AAA's programs. For details and to register, 412-350-3192.


    Research

    University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Researchers are seeking participants
for a study to determine how depression affects the brain. Individuals between
the ages of 25 and 45 who may be depressed and are not on antidepressant
medication may be eligible to participate. Participants will be compensated $400
upon completion of the study. For details, call 412-246-6448.


    Support Groups

    The Cancer Caring Center announces a new support group at Ohio Valley
General Hospital that welcomes cancer patients and family members. For the
summer, the group will meet on the first Tuesday of each month from 6 to 7:30
p.m., starting June 7. The group is free but registration is required, call
412-622-1212.


    Volunteers

    The Greater Morgantown Convention and Visitors Bureau is seeking local
groups and organizations to staff aid stations for the Med-Express Mountaineer
Triathlon, June 26. For details, call Jay Redmond at 1-800-458-7373.


    Special Opportunities

    Conductive Education camp for children, ages 2 to 18 with cerebral palsy and
other types of motor disorders, will be held June 27 through July 29 in Squirrel
Hill and the North Hills. The camp is sponsored by Conductive Education of
Pittsburgh. For details, 412-361-3997.

    The Allegheny County Health Department is accepting nominations for its
Breastfeeding Friendly Place Awards. Nominations will be accepted until June 30
and awards will be announced during World Breastfeeding Week, August 1-7. To
nominate an employer or public place, call 412-687-2243 or visit www.achd.net.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                             134 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                      May 26, 2005 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1420 words

HEADLINE: Cord-blood banks hold parents' hopes;
City company keeps cells in storage as researchers seek cures for diseases,
defects.

BYLINE: BY NORM HEIKENS NORM.HEIKENS@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Ultrasound images showed Eli Welch would be born with spina bifida, a birth
defect characterized by an improperly formed spine and symptoms including
paralysis and learning disabilities.

   The report so upset his parents, Dawn Applegate-Welch and Shawn Welch, that
they told no one for two weeks.

   Then the Kalamazoo, Mich., couple sprang into action.

   Before Eli was born March 23, they arranged through a third party for a small
Indianapolis firm, Genesis Bank, to freeze stem cells taken from blood in the
infant's umbilical cord.

   Some day, the couple thinks, medical research will advance to the point
doctors will use the cells to repair Eli's spinal cord.

   "The technology is certainly there waiting to be tapped. I think it will be a
reality in the near future," said Applegate-Welch, a physician's assistant. "We
have pretty high hopes for it."

   Genesis Bank, the latest of about 20 companies and nonprofits to begin
storing cord blood, is thought to be the first in Indiana.

   President and Chief Executive Erik Woods thinks parents increasingly will pay
to store their children's cord blood for its potential to heal illnesses in both
the children and the immediate family.

   Stem cells are considered to be one of the most promising areas of medical
research because, as building blocks of the body, they can develop into nerves,
muscles and organs.

   Already used to treat such diseases as leukemia, the cells offer hope of
developing therapies for replacing faulty, diabetes-causing cells and regrowing
nerves in severed spinal cords, among other remedies.

   Some kinds of stem cell research are controversial and tied to the abortion
debate.

   This week, President Bush vowed to veto a measure passed by the House that
would lift limits on embryonic stem cell research, saying the bill would create
"new incentives for the ongoing destruction of emerging human life."

   Proponents contend research into embryonic stem cells holds great promise and
should not be limited.

   An alternative bill that would fund research on adult and umbilical cord stem
cells passed the House virtually unanimously.

   In November, California voters approved a referendum geared to raise $3
billion for embryonic research, and the research is under way in South Korea and
other countries.

   Genesis Bank doesn't store embryos.

   The company uses tissue engineering and cell preservation research from
parent General BioTechnology, also based at 1102 Stadium Drive.

   General BioTechnology, co-founded by Woods and former Indiana University
pathology professor John Critser, has landed $2.5 million in funding from the
National Institutes of Health and other sources since its start in 1997.

   Genesis Bank contracts storage services to Alpha Cord, an Atlanta-based
network of cord- blood banks, and Securacell of Canton, Ohio.

   Blood must arrive at Genesis Bank within 48 hours of birth and then be
handled carefully because the blood spoils quickly. The company attracts few
customers from outside the United States, though some are in Mexico and one in
Germany.

   Most customers locate cord-blood banks through the Internet.

   Parents receive a box with a blood bag that holds the equivalent of a third
of a can of soda pop, as well as vials for the mother's blood so it can be
tested for syphilis, hepatitis and other diseases.

   The bag is shipped in a foam-padded sack to Genesis Bank's facilities in a
refurbished warehouse near Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis.

   Gravity and centrifugal force isolate the stem cells from the rest of the
blood.

   Then a chemical is added to the stem cells to help them survive cooling that
ends with a vial suspended in nitrogen vapor at minus 180 degrees centigrade.

   The process takes four hours.

   Liquid nitrogen inside the storage containers is so cold that Genesis Bank
personnel write critical identification data directly on the vials as backup to
bar-coded labels.

   "You can't trust anything at minus 196," Woods quipped, referring to the
coldest temperature considered safe.

   Parents are charged about $1,000 for the initial services and $100 a year
thereafter for storage.

   Since accepting its first cord blood in July 2004, Genesis Bank has stored
nearly 300 samples, and revenue has reached a rate of $35,000 a month.

   Wade Lange, president of Indiana Health Industry Forum, a trade association
of hospitals and health care businesses, said demand for storing cord blood is
probably tiny, possibly less than 5 percent of parents.

   Not everyone can afford it, he noted. And few people understand implications
of using stem cells to fight Parkinson's and other diseases.

   "From a biz standpoint, there's a market there," Lange said. "I would think
it's a niche opportunity."

   Dr. Hal Broxmeyer, director of Walther Oncology Center at Indiana University
School of Medicine and a pioneer in using cord blood, said private companies
like Genesis Bank face stiff competition from "public" banks that get the blood
from hospitals and sell it.

   Yet the public banks often charge $25,000 for the cells.

   Despite the fact that patients have to pay upfront, Broxmeyer said he would
prefer a private bank: "I always feel better about having my own cells."

   Now Genesis Bank is launching its own consumer thrust by trying to sell the
kits at Wal-Mart and other large discounters.

   Creating awareness is an uphill battle in the Midwest. "They just don't know
it's available," Woods said.

   Woods wants the company to grow but not so large that customers can't talk
with knowledgeable people like himself, a scientist, or Director of Operations
Michael Byers, who holds a neurobiology degree.

   Genesis Bank will pitch its expertise in storage techniques, Byers said. The
firm has researched each step to optimize cell survival.

   Although marketing directly to consumers is new to a company more accustomed
to laboratory work, Woods already understands a key concept.

   Mothers make the decisions.

   "The fathers usually stay pretty much out of it," Woods said. "If the mother
wants this done and the father's not sure, it gets done."

   Call Star reporter Norm Heikens at (317) 444-6532.

   Genesis

   Bank

   Location: 1102 Stadium Drive.

   President: Erik Woods.

   Owner: General BioTechnology (shareholders include Dr. Erik Woods, John
Critser, other partners).

   What it does: Stores cord-blood stem cells and semen.

   Revenue: $35,000 a month (first sale was in July 2004).

   Employees: 9

   Cord-blood banking

   Advantages/ disadvantages of storing and transplanting cord blood.

   Pros:

   * Banked umbilical cord blood is a form of long-term "medical insurance" that
could be used to cure future diseases.

   * Cord blood can be stored in cryogenic freezers.

   * Stem cells in cord blood are highly adaptable and less likely to be
rejected by a recipient's immune system.

   * The future of stem cell research is promising; new medical discoveries may
use stem cells.

   Cons:

   * Diseases that require transplanted blood stem cells are rare, although the
list is growing.

   * Currently, typical cord-blood harvest contains only enough cells to help a
child or young adult.

   * Collecting and storing cord blood can be expensive. Most private banks
charge $500 to $1,500, and a storage fee of about $100 a year.

   * The American Academy of Pediatrics doesn't recommend cord-blood banking for
families that don't have a history of disease.

   Sources: Kidshealth.org; ParentsGuide CordBlood.org

   Questions to ask

   If you are considering a private cord-blood bank, here are some questions to
consider:

   * How financially stable is the cord-blood bank? What happens to your sample
if the facility goes out of business?

   * Can you switch to another facility if you choose?

   * Does it operate its own storage facility or lease space in one?

   * Are the yearly fees and maintenance costs fixed, or could they change
without notice?

   * Is the cord blood collected before or after delivery of the placenta? What
collection methods are used?

   * What storage container is used? Bags or vials? Is shipping included in the
contract?

   For more information:

   * www.parentsguide cordblood.org -- Web site created for parents to educate
them on cord blood.

   * www.celltherapy.org -- International Society for Cellular Therapy.

   * www.fda.gov/cber/gene.htm -- Food and Drug Administration's Web site on
cellular and gene therapy.

   * www.aap.org -- American Academy of Pediatrics.

   * www.marrow.org -- National Marrow Donor Program.

   Sources: Kidshealth.org; ParentsGuideCordBlood.org

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2005


                             135 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 The Columbus Dispatch

                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                    May 23, 2005 Monday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS - CONNECT; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: OSU SCIENTIST HONORED BY COLUMBUS TECH GROUP

BYLINE: Daniel Carroll, FOR THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   From the alarm clock that awakens us to the electric toothbrush we use before
bed, technology is something we commonly interact with daily. When the products
of science are so ubiquitous, what could set someone apart as the Technical
Person of the Year?

   The Columbus Technical Council has found an answer in Dublin resident Susan
Olesik, a chemistry professor at Ohio State University. The council honored her
for her designs of groundbreaking technology as well as how she teaches science.

   One of her inventions is intended to help detect lung cancer early through
breath analysis. It's five years away, but the medical world is eager for it,
she said.

   "I have physicians asking me, 'Are you done yet?' " She also has written more
than 80 scientific articles, publications and patents. One of her inventions was
sent to Saturn's moon Titan on a probe to help analyze the atmosphere there.

   But what excites Olesik most about technology's future is more opportunities
for collaboration.

   Ohio State's Nanoscience and Engineering Center is the result of "a really
unique merger of state-of-the-art science and engineering," she said, and
employs scientists, engineers and even an ethicist. Olesik is a researcher in
the group.

   Nanotechnology includes the study of devices or structures as small as one
nanometer, or one billionth of a meter.

   Olesik's current project involves creating parts of a nanofactory that could
end up making pharmaceuticals specific to a person's DNA.

   "It's going to revolutionize the world's capabilities," she said.

   The center has 44 faculty members; two-thirds are based at Ohio State while
the rest are scattered around the country.

   They communicate the way most of us do -- via e-mail, "the way of life these
days," Olesik said. Soon they'll begin videoconferencing using rooms specially
designed for telecommunications.

   Olesik's passion for science and technology extends to the Wonders of Our
World program she founded six years ago in Columbus. The program sends
volunteers -- usually OSU students and professional scientists -- to elementary
schools to teach science in a hands-on fashion.

   The program has led to significant increases in participating students'
proficiency-test scores, she said. It also has encouraged several of the college
volunteers to pursue careers in science education.

   After seeing how effective hands-on learning was with the younger students,
Olesik brought similar teaching methods to her college science classes. Now she
takes classes to the OSU wetlands to experiment instead of just lecturing.

   Olesik's personal scientific accomplishments range from interplanetary study
to microscopic inventions. But her most lasting achievement might be sharing her
scientific passion with students.

   She delivered an impassioned speech to the student scientists at the
Technology Council's banquet.

   "There were so many incredible young scientists," she said. "It was very
inspiring."

   dcarroll@dispatch.com

   Box Story:Susan Olesik's stuff
* Computer: IBM laptop ("nothing but polymers")
 * Cell phone: Samsung from T-Mobile
 * Gadgets: Robotic arms that move chemical samples
 * Applications: SYSTAT software (for statistics and graphing); ChemDraw
software (for drawing chemical compounds)
 * Browser: Firefox
 * Favorite Web site: AskJeeves.com
 / Outstanding students
 At its recent annual scientific achievements ceremony, the Columbus Technical
Council honored several high-school seniors, based on their research papers,
academic accomplishments and community service. The winners and their papers:/ *
Alyssa Larue, Teays Valley High School: "Geomagnetic Navigation in Monarchs and
Black Swallowtails"/ * Stacey Schall, Bloom Carroll High School: "Bridge
Busters: The Effect of Earthquakes on Bridge Structures"/ * Joline Fan, Upper
Arlington High School: "A Novel Approach for Gene Therapy and Drug Delivery:
Thiolated Gelatin Nanoparticles"/ Source: Columbus Technical Council

GRAPHIC: Photo, Susan Olesik

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2005


                             136 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 22, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1171 words

HEADLINE: Anatomy of Severe Melancholy

BYLINE: By Natalie Angier.

   Natalie Angier, who contributes science articles to The Times, is completing
a book about the scientific canon.

BODY:


   AGAINST DEPRESSION
By Peter D. Kramer.
353 pp. Viking. $25.95.

     PETER D. KRAMER, author of the phenomenally successful ''Listening to
Prozac,'' may be thought of as America's Dr. Depression, and he may have done
more than anybody else to illuminate the clawing, scabrous, catastrophic
monotony that is depressive illness. But he has never suffered from the mental
disorder himself. Not that he's a chipper bon vivant.

    ''I am easily upset,'' he writes in ''Against Depression.'' ''I brood over
failures. I require solitude. . . . In medieval or Renaissance terms, I am
melancholic as regards my preponderant humor.'' Still, he has never qualified
for a diagnosis of even low-level depression. My first reaction to that
biographical detail was to question Kramer's authority on the subject. How can
you really understand what pain is, I wondered, if you've never felt the
Cuisinart inside?

    I quickly dropped my objections, however, when I realized I was doing for
depression precisely what Kramer warns against in this eloquent, absorbing and
largely persuasive book. I was lifting it to the status of the metaphysical, or
at least the meta-medical. I was granting to its specific pain the presumed
reimbursement of revelation, the power to ennoble, instruct and certify the
sufferer. By contrast, I'd never insist that my endocrinologist suffer my
autoimmune disorder before treating me or talking publicly about autoimmunity;
or that my endodontist, before extracting my infected dental pulp, first be
''enlightened'' with a few root canals of his own.

    That Kramer has not been depressed may in fact allow him to resist doing
what depressives, and those who love them, too readily do, which is romanticize
and totemize and finally trivialize the illness. Instead, Kramer, who is a
clinical professor of psychiatry at Brown University, sees depression for what
it is. ''It is fragility, brittleness, lack of resilience, a failure to heal,''
he writes. It is sadness, hopelessness, chronic exhaustion allied with corrosive
anxiety, a loss of any emotion but guilt, of any desire but to stop, please
stop, and to stay stopped, forever. ''Depression is a disease of extraordinary
magnitude,'' he says, and ''the major scourge of humankind.''

    Found by the World Health Organization to be the single most disabling
disease, depression afflicts people of every age, class, race, creed and
calling: as many as 25 percent of us will be caught in its vise at least once in
our lives. The disease blights careers, shatters families and costs billions of
dollars in lost workdays a year. Kramer cites studies putting the annual
workplace cost in this country alone at $40 billion -- the+equivalent of 3
percent of the gross national product.

    Depression also kills, through suicide, heart disease, pneumonia, accidents.
Forget the persistent myth of depression as a source of artistry, soulfulness
and rebellion. Depression doesn't fan creative flames. It is photophobic and
anhedonic and would rather just drool in the dark.

    Kramer wrote ''Against Depression'' to dispel what he sees as the lingering
charisma of the disease. And yes, people talk about it now as a biological
disease rather than a moral or spiritual failing. The stigma of mental illness
has mainly faded, and antidepressants are among the most widely prescribed of
all medications. Nevertheless, in the dozen years since the publication of
''Listening to Prozac,'' Kramer has seen plenty of resistance to the idea that
depression, like cancer, AIDS or malaria, is a disease without redeeming value,
best annihilated entirely. He has read stacks of depression memoirs, and though
most have parroted the party line that depression is a disease like any other,
''hints of pride almost invariably showed through, as if affliction with
depression might after all be more enriching than, say . . . kidney failure.''
The writers couldn't help conveying the message: ''Depression gave me my soul.''

    Moreover, whenever Kramer gives a talk, sooner or later an audience member
invariably asks The Question. So, Dr. Kramer, what would have happened if van
Gogh had taken Prozac? Or Kierkegaard? Or Virginia Woolf? The implication of the
question is obvious. Throw out the depression bath water and, whoops, there go
''Starry Night'' and ''Mrs. Dalloway'' with it.

    Kramer presents a sustained case that depression, far from enhancing
cognitive or emotional powers, essentially pokes holes in the brain, killing
neurons and causing key regions of the prefrontal cortex -- the advanced part of
the brain, located just behind the forehead -- to shrink measurably in size. He
lucidly explains a wealth of recent research on the disease, citing work in
genetics, biochemistry, brain imaging, the biology of stress, studies of
identical twins. He compares the brain damage from depression with that caused
by strokes. As a result of diminished blood flow to the brain, he says, many
elderly stroke patients suffer crippling depressions. Is stroke-induced
depression a form of ''heroic melancholy''? If not, then why pin merit badges on
any expression of the disease?

    Rallying his extensive familiarity with art and literature, Kramer argues
that history's depressive luminaries were creative not because of but despite
their struggles with mental illness -- as a result of their underlying
resilience, a quality he admires. Kramer envisions a utopian future in which
neuro-resilience and neuro-regeneration may be easily induced with drugs or gene
therapy. How much more intellectually and emotionally courageous might we be, he
asks, how much more readily might we venture out on limbs and high wires, if we
knew a private trampoline would always break our fall?

    KRAMER'S narrative is not seamless. He argues that depression has long been
very much among us, and he rightly discounts pat evolutionary hypotheses about
the disease's ''adaptive value,'' but he doesn't offer much of an explanation
himself for how a condition so devastating+has come to be so common. Kramer can
also sound defensive and willfully dour. To counter possible charges of
superficiality or a fondness for smiley-face fixes, he presents his ''bona fides
as a person who can appreciate alienation, both the social and existential
varieties,'' among them being a New York-born German Jew who lost many relatives
in the Holocaust. He rejects our habitual conflation of tragedy with depth and
joy with shallowness, yet when A. L. Kennedy, author of the memoir ''On
Bullfighting,'' struggles to find some lightness by recalling how her suicidal
fantasies clashed with her fear of public embarrassment, Kramer dismisses her
attempts as an author's version of ''meeting cute.''

    Ah, but self-mockery can be a small source of joy, even redemption, which is
why, whenever I lapse into hand-wringing, I recall Ezra Pound's ode to misery, a
parody of A. E. Housman: ''O woe, woe, / People are born and die, / We also
shall be dead pretty soon / Therefore let us act as if we were dead already.''

    Now that's what I call cute.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Alexandra Leff)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2005


                             137 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             May 21, 2005 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Q&A;
With Clones Come Complex Concerns

BYLINE: Karen Kaplan, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   After scientists in South Korea announced they had cloned human embryos and
used them to create lines of stem cells that were genetic copies of sick or
injured patients, concerns began to arise that the U.S. was losing ground in an
important area of medical research.

   Many physicians and patients believe the research could lead to cures for
diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, but others are troubled by the
need to sacrifice embryos to produce stem cells.

   Democrats and Republicans are supporting a bill pending in Congress that
would loosen the Bush administration's restrictions on federal funding for stem
cell research, though the president said Friday that he would veto the measure.
Meanwhile, California and other states are moving forward with plans to promote
research in the burgeoning field of regenerative medicine.

   Here is a look at some of the issues involved:

   Question: What was the breakthrough in South Korea?

   Answer: Researchers at Seoul National University demonstrated that it was
possible to create stem cells tailored to individual patients with spinal cord
injuries or genetic ailments such as juvenile diabetes.

   Advocates of the research believe patient-specific stem cells could be used
to grow replacements for faulty body parts and develop therapies for a range of
diseases. Scientists believe such genetically matched material would be likely
to succeed in a transplant because there would be little danger of tissue
rejection.

   Q: How did they do it?

   A: Researchers removed the genetic material from eggs donated by healthy
women. Then they replaced it with DNA from the patients and prompted some of the
eggs to grow into embryos. After five days, the embryos were transferred into
culture dishes, where 11 of them developed into stem cells that were genetic
matches of their DNA donors.

   The procedure is called therapeutic cloning because the embryos are created
using cloning techniques rather than through traditional fertilization.

   Q: How are these stem cells different than the ones in the U.S.?

   A: Most of the embryonic stem cell lines available in the United States were
derived from surplus frozen embryos created in fertility clinics.

   In addition, when scientists isolated the stem cells, they used animal cells
to nourish them and encourage them to grow. They now believe the stem cell lines
are contaminated and would trigger an immune response if transplanted into
humans. The South Korean team was able to eliminate most, but not all, of the
animal cells used in the process.

   Q: Could the South Koreans' approach be used to produce a cloned baby?

   A: The general approach has been used to clone animals, including cats,
cattle and horses. But scientists have so far failed in their efforts to clone
primates.

   Hwang Woo-Suk, leader of the South Korean research team, said this week that
he believed "biologically, it may be impossible" to clone a baby. Many prominent
biologists agree.

   Q: Are there different ethical issues?

   A: Some people find stem cells derived from excess embryos from in vitro
fertilization to be less ethically troubling, since the embryos would have been
discarded anyway.

   Others, including many bioethicists, believe that stem cells derived from the
South Korean team's technique are ethically more acceptable because the cloned
embryos have no potential to become a baby. Thus, no life is lost in harvesting
the stem cells.

   Q: How long before stem cell therapies are widely available?

   A: No one knows for sure, but scientists have cautioned that there are no
cures right around the corner. Hwang and others have said that it will be years,
possibly decades, before therapies are widely available.

   Q: Could this research be done here?

   A: Yes, but it couldn't be funded by the National Institutes of Health, the
National Science Foundation or any other federal source.

   California's Proposition 71 specifically permits funding of research
involving therapeutic cloning. Zach Hall, interim president of the California
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, has said that such experiments could be
among the first to be funded when the new state agency begins awarding millions
of dollars in research funds. But some state lawmakers have proposed legislation
that would delay any plan to allow women to donate eggs for stem cell research.

   Times staff writer Megan Garvey contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2005


                             138 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                             May 19, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1321 words

HEADLINE: Krabbe's therapy shows promise;
Cord blood found to increase survival

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER and SUSANNE QUICK, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Watching her infant daughter die of Krabbe's disease was horrifying.

    At first, the baby cried all the time. Then, LeA Gartzke gagged on her milk
- throwing up everything she consumed. Unable to eat, the Shorewood child
rapidly began to lose weight, requiring doctors to insert a stomach tube.

    Soon after, the seizures began, sending her body into spasms, stiffening her
muscles, making it all but impossible for her or her parents to bend her arms
and legs. And as more of her defective brain cells died, she became blind and
unresponsive, said Micki Gartzke, LeA's mother.

    In 1998, at age 2, LeA died - the same age as the vast majority of babies
with Krabbe's.

    However, an experimental treatment using transplanted umbilical cord blood
has produced astonishing results for children like LeA. Indeed, another
Wisconsin child is among the first who may have been cured by this novel
therapy, reported today  in the New England Journal of Medicine.

    Although it'll be years before doctors will know whether it actually is a
cure, the research suggests that babies born with this genetic neurological
defect not only can survive, but also can have a fairly normal quality of life
if they are treated early.

    "This can really be lifesaving and life-altering," said Joanne Kurtzberg,
senior author of the study.

    Kurtzberg, a professor of pediatrics and pathology at Duke University
Medical Center, and other researchers reported that transfusing cord blood from
unrelated donors into infants with the disease before symptoms appear resulted
in 100% survival for the invariably fatal disorder.

    Krabbe's disease is from the same family of genetic neurological disorders
that includes the disease featured in the 1992 movie "Lorenzo's Oil."

    About one in 100,000 babies are born with Krabbe's, and about one in 7,000
are born with related nerve cell disorders.

     More recently, Krabbe's disease got national attention when former Buffalo
Bills quarterback Jim Kelly established a foundation to create awareness and
fund research after his son, Hunter, was born with the disease in 1997.

     Hunter now is 8 years old. He is one of the oldest living children with the
infantile form of the disorder, although he is severely disabled, according to
Lisa Donato, a spokeswoman for the Hunter's Hope Foundation, which provided
partial funding for the study.

   Lack of crucial enzyme

    Babies with the disease lack an enzyme that is crucial to the production of
myelin, a fatty substance that coats nerve cells. Without the coating, the brain
cells can't function properly.

    The umbilical cord blood contains stem cells that have the gene for the
enzyme. The researchers believe that when those cells get into the brain, normal
myelination can take place.

     Four-year-old Jeremy Thoms of Eau Claire was one of the first 11 infants
who got the therapy at Duke.

    In 1988, Jeremy's parents, Randy and Tanys, lost another son, Alex, to the
disease. As carriers of the defective gene, the Thomses knew there was a 25%
chance that Jeremy had the disease, Randy Thoms said.

    So Jeremy was tested right after he was born.

    "When Jeremy was diagnosed, we didn't know there was a treatment," Tanys
Thoms said. "We thought we were going to go through the same horror again."

    However, their pediatrician learned of the experimental treatment trial that
was going on at Duke in Durham, N.C. They decided to try it even though they
knew the treatment would involve a grueling regimen of chemotherapy for nine
days before the umbilical cord blood transplant.

    "You have to do it," Randy Thoms said. "It was a chance at life."

     The chemotherapy was designed to destroy Jeremy's bone marrow and immune
system before he got a transfusion of about 1 billion cord blood cells. He spent
the next four months recovering in Durham.

    Today, "he's doing great," said co-author Kurtzberg, who also is Jeremy's
physician. "He's one of the kids who walks, runs and climbs and does all the
things normal kids do. He's cognitively normal."

    In fact, Randy Thoms said, Jeremy has developed into a very smart boy, "a
little stinker" who loves firetrucks, trains and Thomas the Tank Engine. Jeremy
still has a little trouble pedaling a tricycle and walks upstairs slowly, but "I
think he'll be fine," Randy Thoms said. "He'll have a job. He'll marry."

   Lifetime effect unknown

    Doctors not associated with the study said the therapy was an important
advance.

    "It is clear they are surviving better and living longer," said William
Rhead, a professor of pediatrics and pathology at the Medical College of
Wisconsin and medical director of genetics at Children's Hospital of Wisconsin.
"This is a glass that is way more than half full. This is wonderful."

    But more time will be needed to learn if the therapy has long-term, lifetime
benefit, Rhead said.

    The oldest child in the study is a girl who is now 6 1/2 .

    "It is very striking that you can treat kids so early and get such a good
result," said Richard Jacobson, an associate professor of neurology and
pediatrics at the Medical College.

    Very few states test for the disease, said Jacobson, director of
neurophysiology at Children's Hospital, and Wisconsin is not one of those.

    But the success of the treatment, which he described as a crude form of gene
therapy, suggests that all babies should be tested for the disease early on.

    The success of the treatment largely was limited to Jeremy and 10 other
babies who received their transplants before symptoms appeared, all between 12
and 44 days after birth. All those babies survived and had improvements in
development skills, although a few had mild to moderate delays in language and
motor skills.

    Also, all of them were alive far longer than siblings who died of the
disease.

    Fourteen other babies between the ages of 142 days and 352 days got
transplants after symptoms appeared. Only 43% of those babies survived, and the
ones who lived had minimal neurological improvement and were extremely disabled.
Four died of Krabbe's disease, and four died because of complications from the
transplant, said lead author Maria Luisa Escolar.

    "The timing is critical," said Escolar, an assistant professor of pediatrics
at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "It has to be done early in
life."

    Indeed, the success of early treatment has prompted researchers to consider
the treatment as a possible in-utero therapy. Although in-utero procedures have
other risks, doing the transplants long before birth would eliminate the need
for chemotherapy because immune system rejection likely would not occur, Escolar
said.

    In-utero transplants likely are a few years off, Escolar said.

    The treatment now costs about $600,000.

    The transplant, said David Margolis, director of the bone marrow transplant
program at Children's Hospital of Wisconsin and associate professor of
pediatrics at the Medical College, is a very straightforward process and is
something that could easily be done at his hospital.

    But, he said, transplants are not slam-dunks - they are risky procedures.

    "There is the sad, realistic possibility that someday soon, a child will die
from a transplant-related complication."

    But the big question is how many will survive and how many years will the
treatment last?

    "Our hope is that it will be a permanent fix," Kurtzberg said.

    Tanys Thoms said that belief hit home when Jeremy returned to Duke for his
first annual follow-up visit.

    The visit involved a complete physical and an extensive battery of tests,
including an MRI, a spinal tap, X-rays and an echocardiogram, she said.

    Tanys Thoms asked how long the visits would have to continue.

    When they told her he'd have to keep coming back until he was 50, she was
shocked.

    "But then I realized they expected him to live that long," she said.

   Copyright 2005, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2005


                             139 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 San Antonio Express-News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            San Antonio Express-News

                             May 19, 2005 Thursday
                                 METRO Edition

SECTION: METRO AND STATE NEWS; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: S.A. doc contributes to Krabbe's disease research

BYLINE: Cindy Tumiel, EXPRESS-NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Doctors have found a way to use umbilical cord blood as a "poor man's gene
therapy" to fix a rare but deadly inherited disease that strips babies' brain
cells of their protective coating and routinely kills children by the time they
are 2.

   For seven years, doctors -- including one in San Antonio -- have been using
cord blood transplants to treat infants born with Krabbe's disease, a genetic
disorder in which children are born lacking an essential enzyme that helps form
the protective sheath around delicate brain neurons.

   Without this enzyme, brain cells become damaged as children's motor and
mental development deteriorates until they die.

   Cord blood from the placenta is rich in stem cells -- progenitor cells that
can become a variety of tissues in the body.

   And the Krabbe's disease study demonstrates the possibility of using cord
blood to treat 40 or more rare but deadly inherited enzyme or metabolic defects,
said Dr. Maria Louisa Escolar, an assistant professor at the University of North
Carolina and the lead author of the study.

   A study of the first 25 patients is being published today in the New England
Journal of Medicine and includes a San Antonio pediatrician whose patient
underwent a cord blood transplant in 2000 when she was 10 days old.

   The child now lives in Missouri and, except for some problems walking, is a
typical 5-year-old getting excited about entering kindergarten, said Dr. Donna
Wall, director of the pediatric blood and marrow transplant program at Texas
Transplant Institute.

   "We're kind of in new territory, said Wall, who helped treat the child when
she lived in St. Louis. "The fact that she is 5 years old shows we have changed
the nature of the disease."

   The treatment involves using chemotherapy to obliterate a baby's own bone
marrow, then giving the infant a cord blood transplant to set up a new
blood-building system, Escolar said.

   "Now all of the cells that control the blood all have the enzyme that the
babies are missing," she said.

   "With the transplant, we are doing poor man's gene therapy," said Wall,
referring to the still unperfected effort to knock out a defective gene and
replace it with a functioning one.

   With cord blood, "we are putting in a new blood-building system that has
normal amounts of this missing enzyme," she said.

   The study involved 25 children -- 14 who already showed symptoms and 11 who
were diagnosed before birth after having a sibling die from Krabbe's disease.
All are still alive, with the oldest now 6 1/2.

   Krabbe's disease occurs about once in every 100,000 births when a child is
missing an enzyme called galactocerebrosidase or GALC. Without this enzyme, the
brain begins to lose myelin, a fatty covering that protects nerve cells in the
brain.

   Babies with the condition typically develop normally for a few months, then
become irritable and begin regressing from developmental milestones. They cry
excessively, grow stiff, suffer seizures and have trouble eating. Most infants
diagnosed with the disease die by age 2.

   "My son started dying the day he was diagnosed," said Beatriz Herrera of Fort
Worth, whose son Andres died from Krabbe's when he was 17 months old. "You feel
so lonely; you don't know what to do."

   Little information or treatment was available when Andres was diagnosed in
1995, Herrera said. Since then, families have found a support network through
Hunter's Hope, a foundation established by former NFL quarterback Jim Kelly,
whose son Hunter was born with the disease.

   Through it, Herrera has become an advocate for other parents and for efforts
to raise money for more research. The foundation also is part of efforts to
establish national standards for newborn screening tests that can pick up
Krabbe's and other genetic disorders.

   Parents touched by the illness welcome the study results, Herrera said. "It
brings a lot of hope to a lot of the families that have gone through this," she
said. "This is a horrible, horrible disease."

   ctumiel@express-news.net

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2005


                             140 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     May 18, 2005 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH WEDNESDAY, Pg.E-3

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: PROMISING THERAPY MAY STEM MENTAL DECLINE OF ALZHEIMER'S

BYLINE: Lee Bowman, Scripps Howard News Service

BODY:

   Tests done on a small group of patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease
nearly two years after they received injections of nerve-growth factor deep into
their brains show a reduction in the rate of mental decline and increased
activity in key regions, according to a study published April 24.

    Researchers at the University of California-San Diego said mental-status
tests showed that the rate of cognitive decline had been reduced between 36
percent and 51 percent in the patients, who were all in the early stages of the
disease.

    By comparison, the best reductions in rate of decline for patients taking
drugs for Alzheimer's are 6 percent, with an average duration of three to six
months.

    "If validated in further clinical trials, this would represent a
substantially more effective therapy than current treatments for Alzheimer's
disease," said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, the principal investigator for the study and
a professor of neuroscience at UCSD.

    The study was published online by the journal Nature Medicine.

    "This would also mark the first therapy for a human neurological disease
that acts by preventing cell death," Tuszynski added.

    Brain-imaging studies also found an increase in the use of glucose in the
brains of the treated patients compared with patients at the same stage who had
not been treated.

    In addition, researchers examined the brain tissue of one study participant
who died of a heart attack five weeks after getting the injections and found
robust growth of extensions from brain cells around the area where growth factor
was inserted.

    Higher brain regions that are the center of language, memory and other
functions are regulated by a chemical substance called acetylcholine that is
produced from a small clump of cells located below the frontal lobe of the
brain. Cells from around the brain send nerve-growth factor to the acetylcholine
center, called the nucleus basalis, telling it to make more.

    As brain cells in those higher brain regions are killed in Alzheimer's
patients, the production center for acetylcholine doesn't get the signals it
needs to keep memory, attention and reasoning functions active.

    Other studies have shown that the loss of the chemical messenger cells
matches the severity of dementia, the pace of loss of nerve-cell connections and
the growth of plaque deposits that damage cells in the brains of Alzheimer's
patients.

    The gene therapy is designed to fix this problem by injecting a large source
of nerve-growth factor right into the nucleus basalis.

    The San Diego researchers gave the injections to eight patients starting in
April 2001. Cells from the patients' skin were genetically modified to produce
nerve-growth factor. Those cells were cultured in labs and several million of
them were then implanted deep within the brain in operations that lasted up to
11 hours.

    The procedures were primarily done to test the safety and toxicity of the
implants. It was the first attempt in humans to expand on years of successful
experiments Tuszynski and colleagues had done on monkeys suffering from
atrophied brain cells.

    Injections were first done with the patients awake but lightly sedated.
However, two patients moved as the injections were being done, causing bleeding
in the brain. One of those patients was the heart-attack victim.

    So surgeons on the team changed their approach, putting the remaining six
patients under general anesthesia, and there were no further complications.
Cognitive outcomes were measured in those patients at the time of treatment and
every few months afterward.

    Another round of studies of nerve-growth factor in Alzheimer's patients,
using a different delivery agent, is under way at Rush University Medical Center
in Chicago.

NOTES:
SENIOR LIFESTYLES: About This Issue -- Today's edition of Health & Fitness
focuses on senior health and wellness

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2005


                             141 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             May 18, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: N.O. bioscience district plan faces fight;
Proposal draws opposition of LSU and governor

BYLINE: By Robert Travis Scott, Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE  --  A proposal to develop a special district in downtown New
Orleans to nurture the biosciences industry has led to a legislative scuffle
pitting the governor and Louisiana State University against Mayor Ray Nagin,
Tulane University and the city's business establishment.

   House Bill 742 by Rep. Karen Carter, D-New Orleans, squeaked out of the House
Ways & Means Committee by a vote of 10-8 after an unusually long debate
featuring the mayor, university chiefs, business leaders and the governor's top
budget chief.

   It now goes to the House floor for further discussion.

   When recent talks between the city and Gov. Kathleen Blanco's administration
failed to reach a compromise, Carter, normally a Blanco ally, pushed the bill
forward without the governor's consent.

   "It is unfortunate that Ms. Carter has placed us in a position of opposing
the bill," Blanco's commissioner of administration, Jerry Luke LeBlanc, told the
committee.

   After the hearing, Nagin said he wanted to meet with Blanco to discuss a
range of issues that include the biosciences initiative. An official with the
governor's office said such a meeting is being scheduled and would take place
"soon."

   Nagin urges stronger focus

   The 27-page bill would create a special district to encourage research and
development related to the biological sciences, which the bill does not
specifically define. The area is bounded by Earhart Boulevard, Carrollton
Avenue, Loyola Avenue and Iberville Street.

   District authorities would be able to levy taxes, borrow money, buy and sell
property and change the area's boundaries. The new entity also could enter into
special contracts, or cooperative-endeavor agreements, with private enterprises
using government support for their work.

   It would be led by a nine-member board with four representatives from
academia  --  including Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Tulane University Health Sciences Center, Xavier University and Delgado
Community College  --  as well as four from business and one appointed by the
mayor.

   The city already has or is developing significant elements of health-related
research downtown, including research institutions for cancer and gene therapy.
LSU and Tulane cooperate with medical teaching and research centers in the area.

   But Nagin said the efforts need better focus and financing to create a
biosciences research environment providing a competitive advantage to companies
that locate in the area. He wants to see public and private institutions in the
district develop new products and initiatives for patent and sale in the
marketplace.

   "We are not effectively or efficiently organized to take advantage of this
opportunity," Nagin told the committee. "We have looked at what we want to be
when we grow up."

   His comments were echoed by Tulane Chancellor Scott Cowen, Xavier University
Chancellor Norman Francis, Business Council of New Orleans Chairman Jimmy Reiss
and officials with Greater New Orleans Inc., a regional business development
group.

   'Expensive project' feared

   LeBlanc told the committee that he agreed in principle with the bill's goals,
but the governor can't accept its current form.

   "The intent somehow doesn't match the written word," LeBlanc said.

   After initial talks, proponents were supposed to give the governor a copy of
the new draft, but that did not occur, LeBlanc said. The administration
disagrees with some provisions related to money and governance and finds other
points unclear, LeBlanc said.

   Although the bill does not require state expenditures directly, it is "an
expensive project" that will cost the state money down the road, LeBlanc said.
The district seems destined to raise money with bonds and will need some form of
revenue stream to pay them off, which signals eventual state support or a
bailout, he said.

   Even though LSU would have a board seat, school officials criticized the
proposed district's legal structure, saying it would be a "city within a city"
with broad powers and ruled largely by private-sector appointments with
inadequate oversight from any elected body.

   Ray Lamonica, an attorney for the LSU Board of Supervisors, said the
district's authority to enter into contracts creates concerns about whether the
agreements would skirt existing laws ensuring public scrutiny of government
deals with private enterprise. Also, those deals could overlap or interfere with
LSU's research and clinical trials, Lamonica said, and the school would not have
the ability to stop them.

   Sen. Ann Duplessis, D-New Orleans, a supporter of the bill, said the
disagreements revolve around who would control the district and how, and that a
compromise was still possible. She said Sen. Diana Bajoie, D-New Orleans, would
take a lead role in the Legislature to bring the sides together.

   The bill met stiff opposition in its first committee hearing earlier in the
session, when Carter pulled back the measure and amended it extensively.

   . . . . . . .

   Robert Travis Scott can be reached at rscott@timespicayune.com or (225)
342-4197.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2005


                             142 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 10, 2005 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; SCIENTIST AT WORK: MICHAEL
GAZZANIGA; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1661 words

HEADLINE: A Career Spent Learning How the Mind Emerges From the Brain

BYLINE: By CARL ZIMMER

DATELINE: HANOVER, N.H.

BODY:

   If you walk into the office of a scientist, chances are you'll see a white
board hanging on the wall covered in scrawls. A molecular biologist's white
board might be covered by hideous tangles of protein chains. A geophysicist
might doodle India crashing into southern Asia.

    The scribbles of Dr. Michael Gazzaniga, the director of the Center for
Cognitive Neuroscience at Dartmouth, are more metaphysical. Arrows travel from a
pair of eyes into a cartoon brain, finally ending at the word ''Apple.'' Another
picture bluntly sums up the modern debate over free will, with a stick figure's
head labeled ''Brain,'' and two bubbles point toward it -- one labeled ''Judge''
and the other ''Neu'' -- short for neuroscience. Floating uncertainly off to one
side is a third bubble that asks, ''Mind?''

     Big questions are Dr. Gazzaniga's stock in trade. In the 1980's he helped
found cognitive neuroscience, a discipline designed to find out how the mind
emerges from the brain. Today, at age 65, he continues to oversee a busy lab
where brain scans offer clues to how we unconsciously create theories to explain
the outer world and our inner lives.

    Dr. Gazzaniga (pronounced guh-ZAHN-eh-guh) deals with another set of big
questions as a member of President Bush's Council on Bioethics, where he and his
fellow members grapple with the moral dimensions of cutting-edge scientific
research ranging from life-extending medicine to gene therapy. While he is
congenial and diplomatic, Dr. Gazzaniga has also proved to be a powerful voice
of dissent on the council.

    These two experiences, as veteran neuroscientist and fledgling bioethicist,
have come together in a new book by Dr. Gazzaniga called ''The Ethical Brain.''
In it, Dr. Gazzaniga argues that understanding the latest developments in
neuroscience is essential for the public to make sound decisions about the
promise and dangers of advances in medicine. Neuroscience is even shedding light
on how moral beliefs take shape in our brain.

    ''If people learn more about what the underlying brain story is, I think it
will help them think more clearly about the situation,'' Dr. Gazzaniga said in
an interview at his Dartmouth office.

    Other neuroscientists have high praise for Dr. Gazzaniga's book, which is
one of the first examination of neuroethics, the intersection of ethics and
neuroscience.

    ''It's a new lens for looking at these issue, and he's the first person to
focus it and get a sharp picture,'' said Dr. Judy Illes, director of the program
in neuroethics at the Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics.

    Dr. Gazzaniga's career began in the lab of Dr. Roger W. Sperry, a California
Institute of Technology neuroscientist who won the 1981 Nobel Prize in Medicine
for his studies on the connection between the brain's hemispheres. The right
side of the brain is linked to the left side of the body, and vice versa. The
two hemispheres communicate through a bundle of fibers called the corpus
callosum. Dr. Sperry showed in animal experiments that if the corpus callosum
was cut, each hemisphere became unaware of what was experienced in the other.

    Dr. Gazzaniga studied this effect in humans. Surgeons sometimes cut the
corpus callosum of people with severe epilepsy to reduce their seizures. In
1960, Dr. Gazzaniga examined one such patient, known as W.J. He found that human
hemispheres became isolated as well. W.J. could put together a simple jigsaw
puzzle with either his left or right hand, for example, but not both.

    The hemispheres also displayed different strengths and weaknesses. W.J.
could read complicated writing with his right eye, but with his left eye he gave
only a blank response.

    ''Boom -- the whole thing unfolds in front of your eyes,'' Dr. Gazzaniga
said. ''It was a great moment. I'm not sure I've had such a great moment of a
scientific nature since.''

    Studies on split-brain patients have dominated Dr. Gazzaniga's work ever
since. In the 1970's, he and his colleagues reported that the left hemisphere
acts as an interpreter, creating theories to makes sense of a person's
experiences.

    Their first clue came from an experiment Dr. Gazzaniga carried out with Dr.
Joseph LeDoux, now at New York University. A patient called P.S. was shown a
picture, and was then asked to choose a related image from a set of other
pictures. What P.S. didn't know was that he was being shown a different image in
each eye.

    Dr. Gazzaniga and Dr. LeDoux showed P.S. a picture of a chicken claw in his
right eye and a snow-covered house in the left eye. P.S. pointed to a chicken
with his right hand and a snow shovel with his left.

    ''I'll never forget the day we got around to asking P.S., 'Why did you do
that?''' said Dr. Gazzaniga. ''He said, 'The chicken claw goes with the
chicken.' That's all the left hemisphere saw. And then he looks at the shovel
and said, 'The reason you need a shovel is to clean out the chicken shed.'''

    Dr. Gazzaniga hypothesized that P.S.'s left hemisphere made up a story to
explain his actions, based on the limited information it received. Dr. Gazzaniga
and his colleagues have carried out the same experiment hundreds of times since,
and the left hemisphere has consistently acted this way.

    ''The interpreter tells the story line of a person,'' Dr. Gazzaniga said.
''It's collecting all the information that is in all these separate systems that
are distributed through the brain.'' While the story feels like an unfiltered
picture of reality, it's just a quickly-thrown-together narrative.

    In the late 1970's, Dr. Gazzaniga rallied his colleagues to turn this sort
of research into a full-fledged field, which they called cognitive neuroscience.
He helped organize a scientific society and started a journal, and every five
years he edits a gigantic tome summarizing what scientists know about how the
mind emerges from the brain.

    ''More than anyone else, Mike Gazzaniga created the field of cognitive
neuroscience,'' said Dr. George Miller, a cognitive psychologist at Princeton.

    In December 2001, Dr. Gazzaniga was invited to join the bioethics council by
Dr. Leon Kass, its current chairman. ''I said, 'I don't know anything about
bioethics,''' Dr. Gazzaniga recalled. Dr. Kass assured him that the council
wasn't supposed to be a group of bioethicists, and Dr. Gazzaniga agreed to join.

    The council immediately took up the debate on stem cell research. Dr.
Gazzaniga supports the cloning of cells to produce embryos that can be used to
extract stem cells. Others on the council felt very differently. They argued
that a fertilized human egg represented a potential unique individual and that
creating such eggs solely for research was wrong.

    Dr. Gazzaniga is quick to point out that his differences with other council
members were strictly intellectual. ''There's no one I don't respect on the
committee. They're all smart people,'' he said. ''I heatedly disagree with some
of them, but they're not lunatics.''

    Nevertheless, he did not shy from argument. At one meeting in 2002, Dr. Kass
described his sense of awe at watching cells divide. ''I countered him with,
'You ever see a tumor cell divide?''' Dr. Gazzaniga said. ''It's also pretty
miraculous event, but all it does is fill you up with rage. You can look at it
in two different ways.''

    Dr. Gazzaniga argues that it is meaningless to call a fertilized egg a
potential human being. ''There's potential for 30 homes in a Home Depot, but if
the Home Depot burns down, the headline isn't '30 Homes Burn Down.' It's 'Home
Depot Burns Down,''' Dr. Gazzaniga said.

    He argues that stem cell policy makers should take brain death as their
model. After brain death, surgeons routinely remove organs for transplants. Stem
cell research should, therefore, be acceptable on embryos in which the
structures that will develop into the brain have not yet emerged -- before 14
days postfertilization.

    The actual biology of embryos doesn't conform to notions of unique human
potential in early embryos, Dr. Gazzaniga argued. A single fertilized egg can
split into twins -- turning one supposedly unique human being into two. What's
more, twins can then sometimes fuse back together into a single embryo, known as
a chimera. ''So we had one person, and then we had two people, and then we have
one person again,'' he said. ''So what's that all about?''

    In ''The Ethical Brain,'' Dr. Gazzaniga discusses his views on stem cell
research, along with a range of other important issues. He describes his worry
that the techniques of neuroscience may be misused.

    For example, he thinks it is wrong to use neuroimaging as a lie detector or
as a tool to determine whether criminals are responsible for their crimes. ''It
shouldn't be dragged into the courtroom,'' he said. ''I think it's totally
misused if you're trying to find the errant pixel in the brain that's
responsible for why someone killed someone.''

    Neuroscience's biggest contribution to ethics, Dr. Gazzaniga predicted, is
only just emerging: a biological explanation of morality. ''In the next 20
years, we're probably going to define why our species seems to have a certain
sort of moral compass,'' he said.

    Current research suggests that this moral compass appears to be the product
of the human brain's intricate circuitry for understanding other people's
thoughts and feelings. Just looking at pictures of people stubbing their toes in
doors, for example, activates the same regions of the brain that switch on when
people stub their own toes. ''When I have an empathetic moment, I literally feel
your pain,'' Dr. Gazzaniga said.

    Dr. Gazzaniga argues that when we experience these feelings, the brain's
interpreter produces rational explanations for them. The particular explanation
it produces depends on a person's particular upbringing. ''Each culture may
build up a theory, and that may be passed down as traditions and religious moral
systems.''

    But, he said, ''the basic reason you don't kill is because your brain tells
you it's not a good idea to kill.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 19, 2005

CORRECTION:

   A profile of the neuroscientist Michael Gazzaniga in Science Times on May 10
misstated the way the brain receives signals from the eyes. Each eye projects
the left side of its field of vision to the right hemisphere, and the right side
to the left hemisphere. Neither eye projects its entire field of vision to a
single hemisphere.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Michael Gazzaniga is a veteran neuroscientist and a
fledgling bioethicist as a member of President Bush's Council on Bioethics.
(Photo by Rick Friedman for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2005


                             143 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                               May 8, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 2080 words

HEADLINE: INDUSTRY TIES TESTING SCHOOLS;
Universities and researchers embrace business, then work to avoid bias. But
critics say existing safeguards are not enough.;
MEDICAL ETHICS

BYLINE: By Julie Bell, SUN STAFF

BODY:

   DR. ALESSIO FASANO once publicly disclosed his research results without first
ensuring that the University of Maryland, Baltimore, where he works, had secured
the commercial rights. Scolded by a university technology manager, he altered
his habits.

   These days, balancing the interests of private companies that provide a
growing amount of income to academic institutions with ethical obligations is
making life much more complex for university leaders and researchers such as
Fasano.

   Fasano, 48, heads the university's Center for Celiac Research and is also
chief scientific officer of Alba Therapeutics Corp., a company that hopes to
market a treatment - based on his ideas - for intestinal disorders or other
illnesses.

   The challenges that such relationships present have been spotlighted by an
angry debate at the National Institutes of Health that followed a recent
decision by administrators there to ban consulting deals between its researchers
and industry.

   The NIH ethics requirements, announced in February, were in response to Los
Angeles Times revelations that certain NIH employees were paid by drug companies
while simultaneously involved with government research or drug guidelines of
direct interest to the clients.

   Some NIH researchers complain the ban is too sweeping and will prompt
excellent scientists to look elsewhere for work. Supporters of the ban say
extraordinary care must be taken to guard against biased science.

   At universities such as Maryland and Johns Hopkins in Baltimore, and many
others across the nation, managing the internal controls intended to prevent
bias without disturbing an increasingly important flow of income from industry
is a continuing test. It's a test that critics say some are failing.

   Dr. Marcia Angell, the former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine,
has repeatedly objected to academia overseeing the ethics of partnerships from
which they stand to profit. "It sounds like it's part and parcel of the
universities' efforts to have it both ways," she said.

   "They want to act like a business but set up an apparatus that makes it look
like they're not doing it like that," said Angell, referring to the way
universities appoint conflict-of-interest committees to police researchers.

   The University of Maryland, Baltimore introduced Fasano and Alba. Now, a
university committee serves as watchdog to help him avoid conflicts of interest,
from personal to financial to scientific.

   The committee, skeptical that he could keep up all his teaching, patient care
and research commitments, approved Fasano's role with Alba only after
adjustments to his schedule and a cut in his university compensation, among
other steps.

   "I am under tremendous scrutiny here," Fasano said, pulling up a spreadsheet
on which he documents his hours.

   Making matches

   To play matchmaker with industry, Maryland and Hopkins employees scout their
labs in search of potentially marketable research. Fasano's was a finding that
one protein regulates certain passageways between cells - a discovery that could
be used in treating disorders in which a misguided immune system attacks itself.

   "We've got to learn how to work with pharmaceutical companies, who in turn
have to learn how to work with universities," said University of Maryland,
Baltimore President David J. Ramsay, who has the final say on corporate deals
with researchers.

   Alba is expected to move from its Canton offices to the university's new
biotechnology business park, closer to Fasano's university lab.

   If Fasano's work should result in development of a drug, patients would be
available at the nearby campus for clinical trials. But Fasano is barred from
involvement in human testing of drugs that are "of interest" to the company - a
condition imposed by the university.

   Fasano says he plans to leave Alba before any clinical trials would begin and
turn all his attention back to teaching, research and the practice of medicine.

   Praying for a cure

   That pleases Sandra Metius, 55, of Reisterstown. Such an arrangement would
allow her to keep the same relationship with Fasano should she one day enter a
trial based on his research. Because of a gluten-free diet that he and a
nutritionist prescribed, she is beginning to feel free of celiac disease
symptoms that have included intense fatigue and numerous trips to the bathroom
each day. Still, she yearns for a cure.

   "I have people praying for you," she told Fasano during a recent visit while
an invited reporter listened. "Some pills or a shot or whatever it takes: That
would be wonderful."

   Making sure the financial interests of researchers do not influence the
outcome of clinical trials is one aspect of the ethics tightening that followed
a patient's death in 1999 at the University of Pennsylvania. Jesse Gelsinger
died in an experiment at the university's gene therapy institute, whose director
co-founded a company that hoped to market the discoveries.

   Subsequently, many universities put greater restrictions on
academic-corporate relationships, a recent Association of American Medical
Colleges survey showed.

   The question now is whether universities that benefit financially should
oversee deals involving their researchers. "If the university also has a
monetary interest in what that faculty member is doing," there is a potential
problem, noted Tufts University Professor Sheldon Krimsky, author of Science in
the Private Interest. The university could "easily turn a blind eye."

   On some campuses, there are differences on how aggressively a university
should promote industry relationships.

   Dr. Donald E. Wilson, dean of the University of Maryland School of Medicine,
said, "We're certainly not an institution encouraging relationships. We're an
institution encouraging people who are doing good research."

   But schools such as Maryland are also clearly interested in gaining maximum
economic benefit from that research.

   Universities have been allowed to retain and transfer rights to
government-funded inventions since Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act in 1980. It
encourages the transfer of ideas, including for medicines and devices, to
benefit the public.

   Not wanting to offer their ideas for free, institutions generally demand that
companies give them combinations of cash, stock or a promise of royalties from
product sales. Bayh-Dole requires that researcher-inventors share in any
royalties.

   Nationwide, licensing-related income reached $968.1 million at 165
universities responding to a 2003 survey. That was up from $959 million at 156
responding the previous year, according to the Association of University
Technology Managers.

   Hopkins - which took in $6.6 million from such deals in fiscal 2003 - hired a
new director of technology licensing in March after faculty grumbling about the
previous director's lack of assertiveness. Former venture capitalists staff its
two-year-old Enterprise Development Office.

   Hopkins ranks second to the University of California System in total research
paid for by others, but Hopkins' licensing revenue is dwarfed by the California
system's $61.1 million a year.

   The University of Maryland, Baltimore lags even further in licensing,
reporting $156,535 in revenue in fiscal 2003. Yet it has made strides in
attracting grant money. It ranked 31st in the nation by raising $318 million for
research in fiscal 2003.

   Ethics law altered

   Under Ramsay, the university successfully pushed for a 1996 amendment to the
state's Public Ethics Law to permit its researchers, who are public employees,
to engage in commercial deals.

   Ramsay has encouraged the relationships and has personally recruited
companies during overseas trips for the West Baltimore biopark being built.

   But before a deal is done, Ramsay said, it is vetted by department chairs,
the dean, a conflict-of-interest officer and a conflict-of-interest committee.

   "If anybody ever says `no,' that's the end of it," he said.

   Fasano said that, as a young scientist, he thought that working closely with
industry would be like "poisoning myself."

   Now, he said, he believes that industry is a necessary go-between to quickly
get treatments to patients. "It's pretty clear that if you want to pursue what
you've found [in the lab] into a clinical trial, we don't have the resources in
academia to do this," he said.

   "If you want to make a difference in the quality of life, you have to involve
industry," Fasano said.

   Managing the deals

   The details of his agreement with Alba show how the university manages such
deals.

   Last August, Fasano filled out an application saying that he expected to buy
1.3 million shares of Alba stock, giving him a stake of about 14 percent that he
valued at $1,300. He listed his university salary at $242,320 a year and his
expected compensation from Alba at $120,000 a year.

   But Wilson and Dr. Alice Ackerman, Fasano's department chair, were skeptical
that he could work the long hours required to be chief scientific officer at
Alba while also maintaining his university and other research commitments, said
J. Joseph Giffels, the school's conflict of interest officer.

   Fasano had to cut back on some university duties - and lose some of his
salary.

   Fasano said his annual university salary was set at about $155,000. Alba pays
him a salary of $80,000, plus $40,000 a year to make up for the loss of other
consulting income he forgoes.

   As for the stock, Fasano said his percentage ownership has dropped as Alba
sold shares. His stake will likely wind up at less than 1 percent, he said.
Unless Ramsay makes an exception, Fasano is prohibited from selling or
transferring shares until the company is sold or two years after products based
on his discovery hit the market.

   The university declined to disclose the terms of its licensing deal with
Alba. But it is structured to split revenues - with the university getting half
and inventors getting half - after all of the university's patent expenses are
paid, said James L. Hughes, vice president of research and development.

   Royalties negotiated by the university vary from about 1 percent to 20
percent but generally are about 5 percent, he said.

   Hughes, Giffels, Ramsay, Fasano and a university attorney provided details of
Fasano's deal at The Sun's request.

   At Hopkins' School of Medicine, an official familiar with its
conflict-of-interest committee declined to provide specific terms of deals.
Julie Gottlieb, assistant dean for policy coordination, cited the fact that
Hopkins is not a public university, as well as confidentiality agreements that
protect the researchers and the companies, none of whom was named.

   Gottlieb stated in general how the committee, made up of faculty members, had
altered deals for ethical reasons. In one case, it eliminated a fee that could
have become an "an incentive to the inventor to promote rapid and possibly
inappropriate enrollment" of a first patient in a clinical trial, she said in a
written reply. Another decision found that financial incentives were too great
to allow a researcher to be chief overseer of a trial testing his invention.

   Running the trials

   Dr. Drew Pardoll, a researcher at Hopkins who helped look for its new
technology director, obtained permission from Cerus Corp of Concord, Calif., to
discuss his steps to reduce potential conflicts. He declined stock and stock
options in Cerus, which is developing a cancer vaccine based in part on a
bacterium-engineering technology that he helped discover.

   He said he feels strongly that he is most qualified to run a clinical trial.
"If we live, eat, breathe and drink this stuff, to blindly give it over to the
company" doesn't make sense, he said.

   If a trial begins, Pardoll said, he plans to forgo his annual consulting fee.
He would not disclose the amount except to say it is far less than Hopkins'
$25,000 limit.

   But the steps Pardoll has taken don't change the fact that Hopkins, which
also stands to benefit from the results, oversees the deal and might serve as
host of the clinical trial. One idea that would put such deals at arm's length
from institutions has yet to be embraced. It would allow a third party to broker
the deals for multiple universities, manage them and distribute the proceeds.

   "There is intense effort and concern to try and come up with the best way of
managing these relationships at the institutional level without screwing up the
transfer [of ideas] that patients and government and the press are all
demanding," said Dr. David Korn, an Association of American Medical Colleges
senior vice president. "We're struggling with how to do that."

NOTES:  SEE HARD COPY FOR CHART and SEE ALSO SIDEBAR

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / CHART(S)
 1. Dr. Alessio Fasano consults with a patient, Sandra Metius. Fasano heads the
University of Maryland's Center for Celiac Research and is chief scientific
officer of Alba Therapeutics Corp., a company that hopes to market a treatment
based on his ideas. 2. Dr. Alessio Fasano (center) talks with assistants in his
lab at the University of Maryland, Baltimore. A university committee helps
Fasano avoid conflicts of interest, from personal to financial to scientific, in
his dealings with a private medical corporation. 3. HOW TOP-FUNDED RESEARCH
UNIVERSITIES STACK UP
 1. AMY DAVIS : SUN STAFF 2. CHRISTOPHER T. ASSAF : SUN STAFF 3. SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2005


                             144 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2005 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                               May 8, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. E-01

LENGTH: 829 words

HEADLINE: Common-sense approach to cloning

BYLINE: Richard Hayes Executive director of the Center for Genetics and Society,
based in Oakland, Calif.

BODY:

   After more than six years of increasingly polarized debate, the United States
remains one of the few major countries lacking national policies addressing
human cloning, stem cell research and other new genetic and reproductive
technologies.

   We can ill afford to wait longer.

   The deadlock exists because the constituencies that are most politically
active on these issues are unwilling to consider the sorts of middle-ground
positions that would allow legislation to pass.

   Religious conservatives want all cloning banned, whether for reproduction or
research, as well as any research involving the destruction of human embryos.
The biomedical research and industrial community agrees that reproductive
cloning should be banned but wants a free hand to create human embryos for
research, and has resisted meaningful oversight.

   Both sides sincerely believe they are standing for fundamental principles
that cannot be compromised. Religious conservatives cite the sanctity of the
human embryo. Biomedical researchers cite the paramount importance of the
scientific quest for knowledge and the moral obligation to prevent suffering
from disease.

   One unfortunate result of the policy stalemate at the federal level is that
individual states are now rushing to establish lavishly funded human embryo
research programs of their own. California approved a $3 billion program last
fall, and at least 10 other states are establishing their own programs.

   These programs are being promoted by legislators with only a partial
understanding of the issues at stake. While stem cell research certainly
deserves public funding, the state programs are committing more resources than
is justified, and are doing so with grossly inadequate ethical and regulatory
oversight.

   There is still time to agree on principles that can guide research involving
human cloning, stem cells and embryos, whether at the state or federal levels.
But it will require that all sides acknowledge certain realities.

   Religious conservatives need to realize that the American people are willing
to support some forms of research using human embryos, if the research offers
real prospects for beneficial results and is effectively regulated.
Conservatives also need to realize that most Americans support legal abortion,
and that attempts to use public concern over cloning to support anti-abortion
policies will backfire.

   The biotech researchers, for their part, need to realize that most Americans
are uncomfortable treating human embryos as "just a clump of cells." Neither are
Americans willing to entrust the genetic future of the human species to the
whims of individual scientists, fertility clinic operators, and the
profit-driven biotech industry.

   In the debate over human cloning, both religious conservatives and the
biotech industry have opposed creating effective regulatory structures.
Conservatives believe that their very existence would legitimize research they
believe to be immoral. The biotech industry opposes effective regulation for the
reasons that industries always do: to fend off potential constraints on their
ability to make a buck.

   But what is the alternative? In 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger was killed
by a gene therapy experiment that never should have been conducted. In 2001,
Advanced Cell Technologies in Massachusetts began creating clonal embryos under
wraps of corporate secrecy. In 2003, Craig Venter used off-the-shelf DNA to
construct an artificial virus, free of any public oversight. And in 2004, Korean
scientists created the first viable clonal human embryos, with eggs obtained
from female "donors" under questionable circumstances.

   We can and must do better. Establishment of a national regulatory structure
affords a way - perhaps the only way - for people of good faith to work together
to agree on rules that we all can live with.

   Working models for such structures are close at hand. In 1991, the United
Kingdom established the Human Fertility and Embryology Authority. In 2002,
Australia set up a similar structure. And last year, after intense public
consultation, Canada passed landmark legislation establishing the Assisted Human
Reproduction Agency of Canada.

   The laws that established these agencies ban certain practices, such as
reproductive cloning or creation of human/animal chimeras, and affirm others,
notably those that help infertile people and those for medical research. All
require public review and approval before controversial experiments can begin.

   Six years ago, cloning, stem cells and the new genetic and reproductive
technologies were barely visible on the public policy horizon. Now, biotech
researchers and entrepreneurs are seeking to raise billions of dollars for
genetic technology research, almost all of it from taxpayers. We urgently need
federal legislation that will allow us to reap the benefits and avoid the
dangers of these profoundly consequential technologies. It's time for
responsible leaders to take steps to break the policy deadlock.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2005


                             145 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                              May 7, 2005 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 177 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER

BODY:

   Quick hits

   ** Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which just agreed to be acquired by British
drugmaker Shire Pharmaceuticals, posted a bigger than expected first-quarter
loss of $21.7million, or 62 cents a share, on revenues of $22.6 million,
compared to $14.2 million same period last year.

   ** The Utility Workers Union said yesterday that its negotiators walked out
of bargaining talks with Nstar, saying the company was trying to break the
union. About 2,000 workers have authorized a strike on May 15 if a new contract
isn't signed with Nstar later this month.

   ** Consumers accelerated their borrowing by a less-than-expected $5.5 billion
in March, the smallest gain since November, as credit card borrowing rose
modestly, a Federal Reserve report showed yesterday.

   - STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

   Ron Saar's ebay-oddity

   Item: Row's Tamarac Pure Lump chewing gum

   Auction #: 7154232166

   Description: Though it may be wicked hard by now, this full box of gum,
believed from the early 1900s, promises to keep gum healthy and aid in
digestion. Yum!

   Opening bid: $24.99

   Auction ends: May 10.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2005


                             146 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 4, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: Schering to close research unit here;
Move by drug company eliminates 47 S.D. jobs

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Pharmaceutical company Schering-Plough Corp. said yesterday that it will
close its San Diego research operations, eliminating 47 jobs here.

   The New Jersey-based drug company said it is creating a new
biotechnology-oriented research unit, Schering-Plough Biopharma, by folding its
San Diego unit, Canji, into its larger Palo Alto facility, DNAX Research
Institute.

   Schering is struggling to return to profitability after two years of losses
and has consolidated other operations in New Jersey to cut expenses.

   All 47 of Canji's employees will be offered jobs in Palo Alto, Schering
spokeswoman Rosemarie Yancosek said. The researchers will focus on developing
monoclonal antibodies and therapeutic proteins to treat inflammation and cancer,
she said.

   Although Schering did not have a large presence in San Diego County, the
region will lose a potentially valuable connection and bragging rights as the
research hub for yet another major pharmaceutical company. In January, Merck &
Co. closed its San Diego research facility, Merck Research Laboratories, which
at one time employed almost 200.

   San Diego remains a West Coast mecca for a handful of other global
pharmaceutical companies, including Pfizer, which employs about 1,500 at its La
Jolla research campus, and Novartis, which employs about 500 at its La Jolla
genomics institute.

   Such research hubs are a crucial source for collaborations and alliances with
San Diego's cluster of biotechnology companies. Schering established its San
Diego unit in 1996 with the $60 million acquisition of local gene therapy
company Canji.

   Canji focused on the development of tumor-supressing gene therapy products,
but late-stage human studies of its treatments were halted in 2000, along with
similar clinical trials, after a patient died in an unrelated gene therapy
study.

   The halt on gene therapy studies has since been lifted. But Yancosek declined
to discuss the status of Canji's gene therapy research, saying only that none of
Schering's current pipeline of experimental drugs was developed at Canji.

   The decision to close the San Diego facility and move its employees and
research projects to Palo Alto was one of logistics and research focus, Yancosek
said.

   Schering employs 133 people at the Palo Alto laboratory, which is already
focused on the development of monoclonal antibodies, Yancosek said.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2005


                             147 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2005 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        May 3, 2005 Tuesday Home Edition

SECTION: Editorial; Pg. 15A; EQUAL TIME

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: No snap judgments in stem cell research

BYLINE: DAVID A. SHAYWITZ

BODY:

   Last week the National Academy of Sciences released new guidelines for
research involving human embryonic stem cells, the latest milestone for
investigators in this field. Last November the voters of California approved $3
billion for stem cell research, and last month Massachusetts lawmakers approved
powerful new legislation that defines and defends this exciting new area of
science.

   Yet, unless proponents of stem cell research learn to preach patience as well
as promise, their celebration will be short-lived.

   While stem cell advocates have helped voters connect embryonic stem cell
research with compelling images of patients who might one day benefit from
treatment, such therapies are unlikely to emerge soon enough to benefit most
current proponents --- although patients with Type 1 diabetes may represent an
important exception.

   Soon the advocacy groups will face mounting pressure to demonstrate that they
have bet on the right technology. From the researchers, tremendous progress will
be expected, and the science is unlikely to keep pace with the eager
expectations.

   This scenario has a familiar ring. For years it was not stem cells but gene
therapy --- the idea of fixing a disease by mending broken DNA --- that seemed
to be the ultimate expression of molecular medicine.

   Unfortunately, success turned out to be much harder to achieve in people than
to diagram on a chalkboard. The tragic death of clinical study volunteer Jesse
Gelsinger, and the concurrent realization that the promised cures were years
away, finally burst the bubble. Today a disappointingly small number of hardy
investigators remain in what was once medicine's most highly anticipated new
area of research.

   Is this going to be the fate of embryonic stem cell science in five or 10
years? I hope not, and yet it's also not very difficult to imagine this
happening.

   How can we avoid this fate? For starters, scientists must do a better job of
articulating the limitations of our existing knowledge, taking care to emphasize
not only the ultimate therapeutic potential of these cells, but also how far we
are from achieving such therapies.

   I suspect embryonic stem cells will evolve into a therapeutic tool even more
useful than anything we can now envision. But the development will take
dedication, funding and, above all, time.

   "Genius is eternal patience," Michelangelo observed. Let us hope that for
those looking to stem cells for treatment, the wait will not be quite so long.

* David A. Shaywitz is an endocrinologist and stem cell researcher at Harvard.

   This column is solicited to provide another viewpoint to an AJC editorial
published today. To respond to an AJC editorial, contact David Beasley at
dbeasley@ajc.com or call 404-526-7371. Responses should be no longer than 600
words. Not all responses can be published. Published responses may be
republished and made available in the AJC or other databases and electronic
formats.

GRAPHIC: Bloomberg News A five-day-old embryo, known as a blastocyst, contains a
dark cell called the inner cell mass, from which embryonic stem cells are
obtained. New guidelines focus on the ethics of stem cell research.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2005


                             148 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                              May 3, 2005 Tuesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BYLINE: From staff and wire reports, The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   MANUFACTURING

   Timken Foundation gives grant

   The Timken Foundation in Canton has donated $1 million to the Manufacturing
Institute, the education and research arm of the National Association of
Manufacturers. Jerry Jasinowski, president of the institute, said the $1 million
will be used as a challenge grant to support programs aimed at portraying the
positive role of manufacturing in America's economic future and spurring greater
interest in manufacturing careers.

   INVESTMENTS

   Riverside sells sealing maker

   Riverside Co. has agreed to sell one of its portfolio companies - Selig
Sealing Products Inc. - to New York buyout firm Behrman Capital for $100
million. Selig, based in Forrest, Ill., makes foil innerseals and laminated foil
and plastic seals used mostly by companies in the food, beverage and
pharmaceutical industries. Riverside, a leveraged buyout firm co-based in
Cleveland, bought Selig in June 2002. Behrman Capital already owns Hunter
Defense Technologies in Solon, which the New York firm bought in late 2003.

   BIOTECHNOLOGY

   Gene research gets FDA designation

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has granted Copernicus Therapeutics
Inc. orphan-drug designation for the gene therapy drug it is developing to treat
cystic fibrosis. The designation means Copernicus, of Cleveland, can get tax
credits for some research related to the drug and, if the FDA approves it, seven
years' exclusive marketing.

   REAL ESTATE

   Forest City buys Virginia building

   Cleveland real estate developer Forest City Enterprises Inc. said it bought a
176,000-square-foot office center in Arlington, Va. Terms of the deal weren't
disclosed. The office center, which is almost fully leased, sits atop Ballston
Common Mall, a four-level, 578,000-square-foot retail center that Forest City
owns.

   RETAIL

   Tops sets dates for store closings

   Tops Markets LLC will close its Clark Avenue supermarket in Cleveland on
Saturday and its Solon supermarket, at 33311 Aurora Road, on May 14. The two
stores together employed about 100 people, company spokeswoman Stefanie Zakowicz
said. The stores are among the chain's smallest and oldest. Tops, based in
Williamsville, N.Y., is a subsidiary of Dutch retailer Ahold NV. It had
announced the closings earlier but hadn't set dates.

   SECURITY

   Diebold acquires TASC Security

   North Canton-based Diebold Inc., a maker of automated banking devices,
security systems and voting machines, said Monday it has acquired TASC Security,
a privately owned London-based maker of electronic security systems. Myles Hick,
chief executive officer of TASC, will join Diebold as president of the
subsidiary, the Associated Press reported. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
TASC makes alarms, access control, closed-circuit television and video
surveillance systems.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2005


                             149 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: Ethics Rules for Stem Cells

BODY:

   The National Academy of Sciences gave a much-needed boost to embryonic stem
cell research last week when it issued ethics guidelines that should help
researchers find a clear path through a minefield of controversial issues.
Ideally, such guidelines would have been issued by the federal government, but
both Congress and the Bush administration have imposed restrictions on federal
financing of research on human embryonic stem cells and have largely left the
field's development -- both scientifically and ethically -- to the private
sector.

    The guidelines would outlaw some far-out research completely, at least for
now. Thus scientists could not insert embryonic stem cells into a human embryo,
a potentially promising method of gene therapy to repair defects or engineer new
characteristics. Nor could they introduce the stem cells into apes or monkeys;
the aim is to avoid the remote but nightmarish possibility that an animal could
give birth to a human or develop a human mind.

    Otherwise, most research is considered fair game, provided it adheres to
ethical guidelines that are stricter in some ways than current practice. No
money beyond direct expenses would be paid to women who donated eggs for
therapeutic cloning research, a restriction that could cramp the style of any
small biotech company that has depended on cash inducements to attract donors.
Embryos could be cultured in the laboratory no longer than 14 days, the point
when a central nervous system begins to appear. And institutions that conduct
stem cell research would need to establish oversight committees to approve and
monitor the research, while a national committee would periodically update and
perhaps tighten or relax the standards.

    The guidelines are voluntary, but it is hoped that they will be adopted by
most research institutions, state stem cell programs, scientific journals and
organizations offering research grants. They will not satisfy die-hard opponents
who believe that all such research is evil because it involves destroying
days-old embryos to extract their stem cells. But they will give practicing
scientists the assurance that they can proceed with their work while adhering to
principles endorsed by a panel of distinguished scientists, ethicists and
others.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2005


                             150 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2005 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                               May 2, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1080 words

HEADLINE: Shocking Cancer

BYLINE: KURT LOFT, kloft@tampatrib.com

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

   Tampa researchers are taking an electrifying approach to treating melanoma,
using the therapy for the first time on a Sarasota man.

   By KURT LOFT

   kloft@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA -- When Joe Picone noticed a mole on the bottom of his foot four years
ago, he decided to have it checked out.

   Today, the 35-year-old Sarasota man is lucky to be alive. He and doctors at
the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute and University of South
Florida are fighting stage four melanoma, a deadly, metastasizing form of
cancer. Hope, they say, may come in the form of new therapy used for the first
time on Picone.

   "We could be looking at something on the cutting edge," Picone says, "and I'm
the first person to try it."

   In a milestone clinical trial, the Tampa researchers are testing a therapy
that prompts the immune system to fight melanoma tumors. Called electroporation,
it literally shocks the tissue, delivering pulses of electricity to open pores
in the tumor cell membrane. The openings allow therapeutic molecules to enter
the tumor before the membrane closes.

   "The principle is you use electricity to open pores in cancer cells and get a
gene of interest into those cells," says Adil Daud, an oncologist at Moffitt who
is working with electroporation. "You're sending a message that tells the immune
system to get this particular cancer."

   Melanoma does not respond well to conventional chemotherapy, Daud says, and
gene therapy gives researchers more flexibility in treatment. If electroporation
can reliably deliver genes into tumors, and without harmful side effects,
melanoma might become less elusive.

   About 10,000 Americans die each year from skin cancers, the majority being
melanoma. Since the early 1980s, the incidence rate of malignant melanoma has
doubled, according to the American Cancer Society.

   "So it's critical to get early diagnosis if you suspect anything weird on
your skin," Picone says. "It doesn't have to be a mole. Melanoma is deadly."

   The electroporation technique was adapted over six years by Daud and Richard
Heller, a USF professor of microbiology and immunology. It uses a simple
hand-held device pressed onto the skin above the tumor.

   Experiments on mice, and now clinical trials on people, employ a DNA plasmid
that encodes a gene to stimulate the immune system. The electrical jolts help
the plasmid move into the tumor, which uses the plasmid's genetic makeup to
create proteins. These proteins then signal the immune system to attack the
cancer.

   "It's like you put a warning sign on the cancer cell that says, "Get rid of
me,' " Daud says.

   In the mice experiments, 80 percent were cured, the researchers say. Their
tumors disappeared and the treated animals remained disease-free for the
remainder of the 100-day study. When melanoma was reinjected into the treated
mice, their bodies rejected the cancer, suggesting that the immune system formed
a memory response.

   "We're very encouraged," Heller says. "We're hoping this translates to a
beneficial treatment for patients."

   The clinical trial at Moffitt will include up to 25 patients. Picone says
there are no guarantees.

   "I can't say electroporation is working 100 percent for me," he says. "I
still have six or seven more [cancer] lesions to be taken out. But it hasn't
metastasized to any of my vital organs."

   Melanoma festers in cells called melanocytes, which make the brown pigment
called melanin. It appears as a pre-existing mole that changes or as a new mole
on unaffected skin. Melanoma often is the result of years of exposure to the
sun. Experts say one sunburn early in life can damage as much as 3 percent of
the affected collagen, the inner barrier of the skin.

   Experts warn people not to wait until melanoma takes hold. Get screened
often, they say, especially if you spend lots of time in the sun.

   That's the point of Melanoma Monday, the 11th annual awareness campaign
sponsored by the American Cancer Society and other health groups. Most skin
cancer, if detected early, can be treated and the person cured. However, neglect
can lead to life-threatening conditions, Daud says.

   "When you have melanoma detected early on, there's a very high chance of
curing it," he says. "About 97 percent of the time, we can remove a stage one
tumor. But for advanced melanoma, things aren't quite so good."

   Free public screenings will be from 5 to 7 p.m. today at the University of
South Florida Medical Clinics, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd. No appointments are
necessary. For directions, call (813) 974-2201.

   (CHART) BACK TO BASICS

   TYPES OF CANCER

   * Basal Cell Carcinoma: This type of cancer arises in the basal layer of skin
beneath the epidermis. It seldom metastasizes, although it may do so if the
cancer invades lymph or blood vessels that can carry cancer cells to distant
organs. If left untreated, it may become large and disfiguring. About 80 percent
of all skin cancers are of this type.

   * Squamous Cell Carcinoma: It develops in the outer layers of the skin but
can metastasize to other areas of the body if not treated early. It also spreads
locally and may cause significant disfigurement. This type makes up 16 percent
of skin cancers.

   * Melanoma: The most serious form of skin cancer arises in pre-existing moles
or pigmented lesions. Early diagnosis and treatment of melanoma is essential.
People with many moles or a family history of melanoma should be examined
regularly by a dermatologist. Melanoma makes up 4 percent of all skin cancers.

   Sources: American Academy of Dermatology, American Cancer Society

   WARNING SIGNS

   Adults should have regular self-examinations to detect melanoma. This can be
done using the A-B-C-D method:

   A - ASYMMETRY: The left side of the lesion is unlike the right side.

   B - BORDER IRREGULARITY: The lesion has a scalloped or poorly defined border.

   C - COLOR VARIATION: The lesion may be tan, brown, black, pink, white or
blue.

   D - DIAMETER: A melanoma is usually larger than 6 millimeters in diameter,
about the size of a pencil eraser.

   ON THE WEB

   For information on melanoma, visit the American Academy of Dermatology at
www.aad.org or the American Cancer Society at www.cancer.org.

   MELANOMA MONDAY

   CANCER SCREENINGS

   Call your doctor or a local dermatologist for information about screenings. A
free public screenings will be from 5 to 7 p.m. today at the University of South
Florida Medical Clinics; call (813) 974-2201.

   Reporter Kurt Loft can be reached at (813) 259-7570.

   Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: SCIENCE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 6 CHART
Photos from H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center& Research Institute It took USF
professor Richard Heller, left, and Moffitt oncologist Adil Daud six years to
adapt the electroporation technique that shocks the immune system into fighting
melanoma tumors. "It's like you put a warning sign on the cancer cell that says,
"Get rid of me,' " Daud says. Electroporation uses a hand-held device pressed
onto the skin over the tumor. It helps create proteins that tell the immune
system to attack. (4) (Melanomas)

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2005


                             151 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                               May 1, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 843 words

HEADLINE: Beware of hype on stem cells

BYLINE: DAVID A. SHAYWITZ, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   The National Academies released new guidelines last week for research
involving human embryonic stem cells, the latest milestone in what has been an
unusually eventful time for investigators in this field. Last November the
voters of California approved $3 billion in funding for stem cell research, and
this year New Jersey acting Gov. Richard Codey has proposed a $380 million
initiative for the Garden State. Earlier this month Massachusetts lawmakers
approved powerful new legislation that defines and defends this exciting new
area of science. Yet, unless proponents of stem cell research learn to preach
patience as well as promise, their celebration will be short-lived.

   Human embryonic stem cells were first identified less than a decade ago. They
captured the attention of scientists because of two essential properties: They
can duplicate themselves in a culture dish, and they can go on to form any cell
type in the body. The therapeutic potential seems unlimited: Convert these cells
into neurons and treat Parkinson's disease, the reasoning goes; turn them into
insulin cells and cure diabetes.

   That's the plan, anyway. In fact, the deliberate conversion of human
embryonic stem cells into any other type of cell remains a formidable scientific
challenge. Even growing these stubborn cells is notoriously difficult. And even
if we could make replacement cells in a culture dish, we would still face the
daunting task of introducing them into the body.

    The real question, however, isn't whether these problems will be solved, but
when. And here, the unfortunate truth is that science - good science - can be
maddeningly slow. While stem cell advocates have helped voters connect embryonic
stem cell research with compelling images of patients who might one day benefit
from treatment, such therapies are unlikely to emerge soon enough to benefit
most current proponents.

   Soon the advocacy groups that have been so instrumental in supporting stem
cell science will face mounting pressure to demonstrate that they have bet on
the right technology. From the researchers, tremendous progress will be
expected, and the science is unlikely to keep pace with the eager expectations.

   This scenario has a familiar ring. For years it was not stem cells but gene
therapy - the idea of fixing a disease by mending broken DNA - that seemed to be
the ultimate expression of molecular medicine. Cures, we were told, lay just
around the corner. Unfortunately, success turned out to be much harder to
achieve in people than to diagram on a chalkboard.

   Is this going to be the fate of embryonic stem cell science in five or 10
years? I hope not, and yet it's also not very difficult to imagine this
happening. Already newspapers are filled with extravagant claims of progress and
cures. Add to this the explicit expectation of rapid clinical progress - a key
component of California's recently approved stem cell initiative, for example -
and you have a recipe for trouble. If embryonic stem cells are rushed into
clinical trials before the solid science has been done, the resulting fiasco
could easily doom the entire future of the field.

    How can we avoid this fate? For starters, scientists must do a better job of
articulating the limitations of our existing knowledge, taking care to emphasize
not only the ultimate therapeutic potential of these cells, but also how far we
are from achieving such therapies. Advocacy groups must also level with their
stakeholders and explain why treatments based on stem cells will take such a
long time to materialize - and why the wait is worth it. At the same time, these
organizations must continue to push scientists to work harder and achieve
results faster, encouraging investigators to keep in mind the patients in whose
name the research is being conducted (and funded).

   Editors of scientific journals, as well as mainstream reporters, must shape
up as well. Research articles of questionable quality shouldn't be accepted for
publication, even if they are certain to garner significant media coverage.
Similarly, journalists must resist the temptation to lavish attention on every
published scientific article with the words "stem cell" in the title.

   Finally, we would all do well to keep in mind that in contrast to the tidy,
syncopated tableau of television's "CSI," science in the real world is
frequently tedious and almost always messy. But there are also moments of great
clarity and wondrous insight - moments I anticipate we will experience with
increasing frequency in stem cell research. In the end, I suspect embryonic stem
cells will evolve into a therapeutic tool even more useful than anything we can
now envision. But the development of this entirely new area of science will take
dedication, funding and, above all, time. "Genius is eternal patience,"
Michelangelo observed. Let us hope that for those looking to stem cells for
treatment, the wait will not be quite so long.

   David A. Shaywitz is an endocri nologist and stem cell researcher at Harvard
University. He wrote this article for the Washington Post.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             152 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2005 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                               May 1, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: COMMENTARY; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: Centers Of Excellence Make Case For Expansion

BYLINE: JACK SULLIVAN JR.

BODY:

   JACK SULLIVAN JR.

   In 2002 Gov. Jeb Bush proposed a radical idea to transform and diversify
Florida's economy: a competitive process to allocate seed funds to enhance the
talent, facilities and equipment at university research programs.

   Among the selection factors were how well the research program would
stimulate technology-based business in Florida, how effectively it could
leverage state funding with federal and private funds, the strength of the
university in the identified research area and the potential for recruitment and
retention of world-class scholars.

   To back it up, the governor included $100 million in his 2002-03 budget. The
Legislature chose a more conservative approach to the then-untested concept,
allocating $30 million in three equal grants.

   Today the concept is proven, and Rep. David Mealor of Lake Mary and Sen. Ron
Klein of Boca Raton have introduced legislation, House Bill 131 and Senate Bill
1444, to allocate $50 million to create more centers. The results from the three
centers selected and funded in 2003 are proof that this legislation is critical
to Florida's future:

   The Florida Photonics Center of Excellence at the University of Central
Florida has in 18 months leveraged the state's $10 million investment with $15.1
million of federal and private funds. Three start-up businesses employing more
than 40 have resulted from its research; average salaries exceed $62,000. One
company, Raydiance Inc., has raised $10.5 million in venture capital, attracting
the Silicon Valley powerhouse firm of Draper, Fisher and Jurvetson to make a
rare investment in Florida. Raydiance develops lasers for medical and military
applications and is completing a $4.7 million subcontract for
Lockheed-Martin/DARPA.

   At the University of Florida, the Center of Excellence for Regenerative
Health Biotechnology boasts of $13.25 million in federal and private funds. A
facility under construction will allow Florida researchers and companies
priority access to low-cost manufacture of new biopharmaceuticals for early
clinical trials. One of the enterprises that will benefit, Applied Genetics
Technologies Corp., recently attracted $15 million in new financing. The company
is collaborating with Genzyme, a global biotechnology company, to develop novel
therapeutics involving gene therapy.

   At Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton, the Center of Excellence in
Biomedical and Marine Biotechnology has added $14.6 million in federal and
private funds to the state's investment. Russ Kerr, director and lead scientist,
together with K.C. Nicolaou, chairman of Scripps' chemistry department, and Rhys
Williams, a former venture capitalist, has formed Tequesta Marine Biosciences,
the first start-up company to emerge from the Scripps Florida initiative and the
center. Matching the biochemical expertise of Kerr's lab with the synthetic
capabilities in Nicolaou's, they are developing biotech production methods for a
new class of marine anti-inflammatory agents.

   Clearly Gov. Bush got it right. Based on our own tested programs and the
results of similar programs in other states, these are our expectations for the
next 10 years:

   * Leveraging the state's funds for research by more than six times.

   * Generating, for every state dollar invested, between $25 and $40 of
economic activity.

   * From 16 to 32 new technology companies and high-wage jobs for Floridians.

   * Return of at least half of the state's initial investment in incremental
tax revenue.

   Legislative caution was appropriate in 2002. Quick action to expand this
proven concept would be wise in 2005.

   Jack Sullivan Jr. is president and CEO of the Florida Research Consortium.

   Copyright © 2005, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: OTHER VIEWS

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
Jack Sullivan Jr.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2005


                             153 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     APRIL 30, 2005 Saturday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D06

LENGTH: 293 words

HEADLINE: Shire profit falls, sales inch up

BYLINE: Josh Goldstein INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Despite a sharp decline in profit and only modest revenue growth, executives
of Shire Pharmaceuticals Group P.L.C. were upbeat about the drugmaker's
first-quarter results.

   Shire, of Basingstoke, England, posted a profit of $20.5 million, or 4 cents
a share, compared with $74.6 million, or 15 cents a share, for the first quarter
of 2004. Revenue rose to $333.7 million from $323.6 million.

   The company, which has its U.S. headquarters in Wayne, noted that spending on
marketing increased by $30 million due to the launch of four products this year
and that an additional $50 million was spent to acquire the rights to a
promising attention deficit hyperactivity disorder product from New River
Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   In addition, changes in how drug wholesalers stock products held down revenue
growth.

   Chief financial officer Angus Russell said that, accounting for the various
changes, growth above and below the line was strong.

   "The performance underlying is very strong," Russell said. "If you adjust for
these impacts, the top-line growth would have been 12 percent; . . . and the
bottom line, 11 percent."

   Just last week, Shire agreed to buy the biotechnology firm Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. for $1.6 billion in order to broaden its product line.

   Shire's American depository receipts, each of which represent three ordinary
shares, were down 32 cents each yesterday at $31.08.

   Contact staff writer Josh Goldstein at 215-854-4733 or
jgoldstein@phillynews.com.

   Company (Symbol) Exchange

   Shire Pharm. (SHPGY) NASD

   1 qtr. '05 1 qtr. '04 Pct.

   end 03/31 end 03/31 chg.

   Revenue (millions) $333.7 $323.6 +3

   Net income (millions) $20.5 $74.6 -73

   Per share $0.04 $0.15 -73

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2005


                             154 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 29, 2005 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial; A23

LENGTH: 904 words

HEADLINE: Stem Cell Reality

BYLINE: David A. Shaywitz

BODY:

    This week the National Academies released new guidelines for research
involving human embryonic stem cells, the latest milestone in what has been an
unusually eventful time for investigators in this field. Last November the
voters of California approved $3 billion in funding for stem cell research, and
earlier this month Massachusetts lawmakers approved powerful new legislation
that defines and defends this exciting new area of science. Yet, unless
proponents of stem cell research learn to preach patience as well as promise,
their celebration will be short-lived.

     Human embryonic stem cells were first identified less than a decade ago.
They captured the attention of scientists because of two essential properties:
They can duplicate themselves in a culture dish, and they can go on to form any
cell type in the body. The therapeutic potential seems both apparent and
unlimited: Convert these cells into neurons and treat Parkinson's disease, the
reasoning goes; turn them into insulin cells and cure diabetes.

     That's the plan, anyway. In fact, the deliberate conversion of human
embryonic stem cells into any other type of cell remains a formidable scientific
challenge. Even growing these stubborn cells is notoriously difficult. And even
if we could make replacement cells in a culture dish, we would still face the
daunting task of introducing them into the body.

     The real question, however, isn't whether these problems will be solved,
but when. And here, the unfortunate truth is that science  --  good science  --
can be maddeningly slow. While stem cell advocates have helped voters connect
embryonic stem cell research with compelling images of patients who might one
day benefit from treatment, such therapies are unlikely to emerge soon enough to
benefit most current proponents  --  although patients with Type 1  diabetes may
represent an important exception.

     Soon the advocacy groups that have been so instrumental in supporting stem
cell science will face mounting pressure to demonstrate that they have bet on
the right technology. From the researchers, tremendous progress will be
expected, and the science is unlikely to keep pace with the eager expectations.

     This scenario has a familiar ring. For years it was not stem cells but gene
therapy  --  the idea of fixing a disease by mending broken DNA  --  that seemed
to be the ultimate expression of molecular medicine. Cures, we were told, lay
just around the corner. Unfortunately, success turned out to be much harder to
achieve in people than to diagram on a chalkboard. The tragic death of clinical
study volunteer Jesse Gelsinger, and the concurrent realization that the
promised cures were years away, finally burst the bubble. Today a
disappointingly small number of hardy investigators remain in what was once
medicine's most highly anticipated new area of research.

     Is this going to be the fate of embryonic stem cell science in five or 10
years? I hope not, and yet it's also not very difficult to imagine this
happening. Already newspapers are filled with extravagant claims of progress and
cures. These reports belie the very slow rate of true scientific advancement.
Add to this the explicit expectation of rapid clinical progress  --  a key
component of California's recently approved stem cell initiative, for example
--  and you have a recipe for trouble. If embryonic stem cells are rushed into
clinical trials before the solid science has been done, the resulting fiasco
could easily doom the entire future of the field.

     How can we avoid this fate? For starters, scientists must do a better job
of articulating the limitations of our existing knowledge, taking care to
emphasize not only the ultimate therapeutic potential of these cells, but also
how far we are from achieving such therapies. Advocacy groups must also level
with their stakeholders and explain why treatments based on stem cells will take
such a long time to materialize  --  and why the wait is worth it. At the same
time, these organizations must continue to push scientists to work harder and
achieve results faster, encouraging investigators to keep in mind the patients
in whose name the research is being conducted (and funded).

     Editors of scientific journals, as well as mainstream reporters, must shape
up as well. Research articles of questionable quality shouldn't be accepted for
publication, even if they are certain to garner significant media coverage.
Similarly, journalists must resist the temptation to lavish attention on every
published scientific article with the words "stem cell" in the title.

     Finally, we would all do well to keep in mind that in contrast to the tidy,
syncopated tableau of television's "CSI," science in the real world is
frequently tedious and almost always messy. But there are also moments of great
clarity and wondrous insight  --  moments I anticipate we will experience with
increasing frequency in stem cell research. In the end, I suspect embryonic stem
cells will evolve into a therapeutic tool even more useful than anything we can
now envision. But the development of this entirely new area of science will take
dedication, funding and, above all, time. "Genius is eternal patience,"
Michaelangelo observed. Let us hope that for those looking to stem cells for
treatment, the wait will not be quite so long.

    The writer is an endocrinologist and stem cell researcher at Harvard
University.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2005


                             155 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 525 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's Patients Suing Amgen Over Drug

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Two participants in a discontinued clinical drug trial have sued Amgen,
demanding that it resume giving them an experimental treatment for Parkinson's
disease that they say helped them immensely but that the company says is
ineffective and potentially dangerous.

    In their lawsuit, filed yesterday in Federal District Court in Manhattan,
the plaintiffs say Amgen ''treated the patients as mere guinea pigs, as material
to be discarded,'' and had violated a legal and moral obligation to continue to
supply the drug.

     A spokeswoman for Amgen said that the company had only started to review
the complaint but typically would not comment on litigation.

    The lawsuit is the latest step in a conflict that has raised questions about
the obligations of drug companies to participants in clinical trials.

    Last year, Amgen said that a clinical trial showed that the drug -- glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor, or G.D.N.F. -- was not significantly
better than a placebo. It also said that some monkeys given high doses had
developed brain damage. So Amgen stopped giving the drug to about four dozen
people in the trials.

    But many of those patients wrote letters imploring Amgen to let them have
the drug, insisting that it had greatly improved their condition. Some of the
doctors involved in the trial also argued that the drug worked and was safe.

    But in February, Amgen reiterated its position, saying it would be
unethical, would raise false hopes and would hinder long-term development of the
product.

    The two plaintiffs in the clinical trials, Robert Suthers of Greenlawn,
N.Y., and Niwana Martin of Harpers Ferry, W.Va., were both treated at New York
University.

    Alan C. Milstein, their lawyer, said that other patients might be added to
the suit but that it was more efficient to start with two plaintiffs because the
goal was to get the court quickly to order Amgen to provide the drug.

    Mr. Milstein, who is based in Pennsauken, N.J., represented the family of
Jesse Gelsinger, a teenager who died in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania in 1999. That lawsuit was settled but details remain
confidential.

    The suit against Amgen argues that, in effect, drug companies and
participants in their clinical trials enter into a contract. In this drug trial
in particular, the lawsuit argues, patients had to undergo surgery so that
G.D.N.F. could be delivered directly into their brains from tubes extending
underneath the skin to pumps implanted in the abdomen. According to the lawsuit,
Mr. Suthers suffered a stroke after his surgery and had to undergo a second
brain operation to correctly position a catheter that had come loose.

    The suit also says the company promised that if the drug were safe and
effective, that it would continue to provide it to participants in the trial as
long as it was helping them.

    With the drug, Mr. Suthers has said he was routinely able to walk two miles.

    Now, since coming off the drug, ''he can't walk a block,'' said his wife,
Elaine Suthers. ''We don't want millions of dollars,'' she said. ''We want the
G.D.N.F. and we want a chance for some degree of normalcy in our life.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Suthers said the experimental treatment helped him.
(Photo by Kirk Condyles for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             156 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 27, 2005 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-2

LENGTH: 1038 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS

BODY:

   Alzheimer's therapy

   Writing in the journal Nature, neuroscientists at UCSD say that brain scans
and cognitive tests suggest that Alzheimer's patients treated with an
experimental form of gene therapy show an increase in metabolic activity in the
brain and a reduced rate of mental decline.

   The results stem from the first phase of a clinical trial in which
genetically modified skin cells from eight volunteer patients diagnosed with
early Alzheimer's disease were injected into their brains. The cells were
altered to express nerve growth factor (NGF), a naturally occurring protein that
prevents cell death and stimulates cell function.

   The trial, conducted by Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a UCSD professor of neurosciences
and neurologist with the VA San Diego Healthcare System, and colleagues, is the
first to employ gene therapy in treating Alzheimer's, a progressively
devastating neurological disease.

   PET scans of the patients demonstrated an increase in the brain's use of
glucose, an indication of increased brain activity. Mental status tests showed a
slowing, from 36 percent to 51 percent, of the patients' rate of cognitive
decline.

   Researchers also examined the brain of one study participant who died and
found "robust growth" in brain cells near the injection sites.

   Salton Sea fish healthier

   People can safely consume more than six times the amount of Salton Sea fish
previously advised, according to a new SDSU study.

   The findings, reported by ecology doctoral candidate Marie Francoise Moreau
and colleagues at a recent meeting of the Salton Sea Centennial Symposium,
indicate it is safe to eat up to three pounds of Salton Sea fish a month
indefinitely and remain within EPA safety guidelines for selenium intake.
Selenium is an essential trace mineral that can be toxic at higher levels.

   The new study counters a 1986 health advisory that indicated people should
not consume more than four ounces of Salton Sea fish in a two-week period. After
the advisory, recreational fishing at the Salton Sea sharply declined.

   Moreau's new risk assessment shows that selenium levels in Salton Sea fish
are much lower than the 1986 advisory indicates and that Salton Sea fish may
have long been safer eating than ocean fish caught at many points along
California's Pacific coast. However, the study did find arsenic in the fish, and
based on EPA guidelines for arsenic, people should not consume more than 26 to
46 ounces of Salton Sea fish every two weeks.

   Memorable plastic

   Plastics have been called a lot of things by a lot of people, but "smart"
isn't one that usually comes to mind.

   Yet researchers in Germany have developed a new kind of plastic that can be
shaped by ultraviolet light and returned to its original shape the same way. The
material, described in the journal Nature, may eventually find use in medicine
or other fields.

   Such shape-memory polymers are not unknown, but the usual way of inducing the
changes is through heating. The new material, developed at GKSS Research Center
in Teltow, Germany, can be shaped at temperatures of about 80 degrees
Fahrenheit, and the changes are stable to at least 125 degrees.

   The secret behind the polymer's ability is the addition of cinnamic acid or
similar molecules, which can form or break bonds under light of certain
wavelengths. The researchers took a thin sheet of this doped polymer, lengthened
it by stretching and exposed it to UV light of a wavelength greater than 260
nanometers. This caused cross-links to form, so that when the film was released,
it remained stretched.

   Exposing the altered material to UV light of a wavelength shorter than 260
nanometers broke the cross-links, returning it to its original length.

   By exposing only portions of the material to light, various shapes can be
formed.

   Hold breath on bus

   University of California researchers calculate that in large urban areas,
children riding in school buses with diesel engines collectively inhale more
school-bus exhaust than everyone else in the city combined. Exposure to the
ultrafine particles of diesel particulate matter, or DPM, is known to increase
the risk for cancer.

   Scientists at the Berkeley and Los Angeles campuses tested the air inside six
buses while they were being driven through the Los Angeles metropolitan area
with the windows opened and closed. Except for one 1975 model, all the buses
were built from 1985 to 2002.

   Air pollution inside all six buses was substantial, although newer buses and
those driven with the windows open exposed passengers to fewer pollutants. The
study, published in Environmental Science & Technology, found that children
riding in these school buses inhaled 34 percent to 70 percent more DPM than the
average weekday commuter did during the same day.

   But don't abandon the school bus yet. "School buses are built like tanks,"
said Julian D. Marshall of Berkeley, the lead author. "When you compare the
relative risk to your health of riding in a school bus to riding in a car, the
school bus wins hands down."

   Exposure to DPM inside the buses is so concentrated, the researchers
conclude, that a 20 percent reduction in their emissions alone would be as
beneficial to a student's health as a 20 percent cut in the emissions of all
other vehicles in the Los Angeles area.

   Cleaning the greenhouse

   If much of the industrialized world switched from coal and oil to natural
gas, it might have a mitigating effect on climate change. That's because burning
natural gas produces far less of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide than burning
coal or oil.

   But natural gas is largely methane, which is a powerful greenhouse gas as
well. And natural-gas production centers and pipelines leak. So, would the
leaking methane make switching to natural gas worse for the climate?

   A study in Nature suggests it wouldn't. Researchers from the Max Planck
Institute for Chemistry in Germany measured methane leaks along Russia's
extensive gas distribution system, which some experts suggest has losses as high
as 10 percent.

   But the researchers calculated the actual leakage in the system at about 1.5
percent, which is similar to the percentage lost in gas pipelines in the United
States. The loss is below the percentage that would worsen the climate situation
compared with oil and coal.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: New studies have found that it's safe to eat up to
three pounds of fish a month from the Salton Sea.; PHOTOBY: Associated Press
file photo

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2005


                             157 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 26, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Breast Cancer Recurrence Is Cut in Half by a Drug

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A biotechnology cancer drug cuts in half the risk that one type of breast
cancer will recur after surgery, the National Cancer Institute and the drug's
manufacturer announced yesterday.

    Some experts said the results of two clinical trials were so strong that the
drug, Genentech's Herceptin, would soon be added to chemotherapy as a standard
part of postsurgical treatment for some women. Indeed, the two trials were
stopped about two years early because they had already established that
Herceptin cuts recurrences and prolongs survival.

    ''This is a practice-changing result,'' said Dr. Edith A. Perez of the Mayo
Clinic in Jacksonville, Fla., the principal investigator for one of the trials.
Dr. Perez said the reduction in disease recurrence was ''the largest improvement
in clinical research in breast cancer in my lifetime.''

    The catch is that the results of the clinical trials apply only to the 20 to
30 percent of women whose breast cancer has a particular genetic mutation,
because Herceptin works against such tumors only.

    Herceptin is already approved as a treatment for breast cancer that has
recurred after surgery or that has spread elsewhere in the body. The two new
trials were intended to look at whether the drug might also work earlier in the
course of the disease, after a tumor is removed by surgery.

    Various chemotherapy drugs are already used for this purpose, which is
called adjuvant therapy. For certain cancers, so are hormonal drugs like
tamoxifen or the newer aromatase inhibitors.

    The results of the two new trials, sponsored by the National Cancer
Institute, showed that Herceptin reduced recurrences by 52 percent on top of
those other therapies. After four years, only 15 percent of the women who took
the drug combined with traditional chemotherapy had a relapse, compared with 33
percent of the women who received only chemotherapy, Dr. Perez said.

    Other statistics from the trial were not provided. Dr. Perez said the
results would be presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology meeting
in Orlando, Fla., next month. Conference rules, she said, prohibit discussion of
results beforehand.

    The two trials, which began enrolling patients in 2000, involved a combined
total of more than 5,000 women, though the analysis that resulted in the trials'
being stopped was based on only 3,300 of them.

    All were so-called HER2 positive, a reference to the genetic characteristic
of the tumors that makes a patient a candidate for Herceptin. All had operable
cancer that in most cases had spread to the lymph nodes. All patients were given
chemotherapy, and some were also given Herceptin.

    Dr. Clifford A. Hudis, chief of breast cancer medicine service at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, called the results ''big news''
because using the drug in early-stage treatment could have an impact on a
greater number of women and perhaps help keep them free of cancer.

    ''It's one thing to treat a recurrent disease, and it's another thing to
prevent a recurrence outright,'' Dr. Hudis said. ''If you don't have a
recurrence of breast cancer you can't die of the disease.''

    But he said he thought doctors should wait for the full data before deciding
whether to give Herceptin to patients after surgery. The drug can cause heart
problems, and the clinical trial data should be analyzed to see how severe these
side effects were, he said.

    Herceptin, given intravenously, is designed to block a particular protein
that juts out of tumor cells and spurs them to grow when it is activated. The 20
to 30 percent of tumors that Herceptin is approved to treat have an abnormally
high level of this protein, called HER2. These tumors tend to be aggressive and
may be less likely to be held in check by tamoxifen, doctors said, so there is a
particular need for new ways to treat them.

    The results are more good news for Genentech. Use of Herceptin earlier in
breast cancer will mean a bigger market for the drug, which last year had sales
of $483 million. Genentech said there were 34,000 women a year in the United
States who received adjuvant treatment for HER2-positive breast cancer.

    Moreover, in the last few weeks two other trials involving another Genentech
cancer drug, Avastin, were stopped early after that drug, already approved for
colon cancer, was shown to work for lung cancer and breast cancer as well.

    Indeed, the company, based in South San Francisco, Calif., said yesterday
that with demand for Avastin and Herceptin expected to grow faster than
expected, it would have to review its plans to make sure it has enough
manufacturing capacity.

    Genentech stock has risen more than 50 percent in the last six weeks, and
the company is now neck and neck with the larger Amgen as the most valuable
company in biotechnology, with a market capitalization of about $73 billion.

    Yesterday's announcement came after the close of regular trading, in which
Genentech's shares fell 41 cents to $69.43. But in after-hours trading the stock
was up to $76.50.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2005


                             158 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; SUN NEWS DIGEST; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: SUN NEWS DIGEST

BODY:

   NATIONAL

   Army revamps Iraq training

   The Army has revamped its training to better prepare the National Guard
soldiers for the field and to teach them what to expect once they get to Iraq.
The lessons are designed to be so real that the government has hired Iraqi
Americans to play roles. [Page 1a]

   Frist asks vote on nominees

   Majority Leader Bill Frist says it's not "radical" to ask senators to vote on
judicial nominees as he hardens his effort to strip Democrats of their ability
to stall consideration of President Bush's picks for the federal court. [Page
3a]

   Therapy delays Alzheimer's

   The first attempt at gene therapy for Alzheimer's patients appeared to
significantly delay worsening of the disease in a few people who have tested it
so far, scientists reported. But far more research is needed to see whether the
experimental treatment, which requires brain surgery, really helps. [Page 4a]

   WORLD

   Israel's Weizman dies at 80

   Former Israeli President Ezer Weizman, a warrior-turned-statesman who helped
build his fledgling state's air force and later played a key role in peacemaking
with Egypt, died yesterday at his home in the Israeli coastal city of Caesarea.
He was 80. [Page 1a]

   Ecuador's ex-leader in exile

   Ecuador's former president began his life in exile in Brazil yesterday,
ending a four-day drama that began when protesters who accused him of abuse of
power drove him from office and forced him to take refuge in the Brazilian
ambassador's home. [Page 8a]

   MARYLAND

   Critics target gay rights bills

   Conservative and Christian groups are mounting a widespread effort - using
e-mail and Web sites with often fiery rhetoric- against four bills they contend
promote the gay agenda. The bills passed the Senate and House of Delegates this
session and are awaiting action from Gov. Robert L. Ehrlich Jr. before becoming
law. [Page 1b]

   Summer school plan assailed

   A Baltimore school board member is criticizing the system's plan for summer
school, saying it excludes some low-performing students because summer classes
would not be offered citywide. Kalman R. "Buzzy" Hettleman described the plan as
an unwise departure from the system's past summer programs. [Page 1b]

   Polish massacre remembered

   The 65th anniversary of the massacre of thousands of Polish military officers
by Soviet troops was marked yesterday by a ceremony at the National Katyn
Memorial at President and Aliceanna streets in Baltimore. [Page 3b]

   TODAY

   Rare appearance for Herrera

   Carolina Herrera is one of those classically stylish women - something that
radiated during one of her rare public appearances last week in Chevy Chase. At
the cocktail party and book signing for her new coffee table book, Carolina
Herrera: Portrait of a Fashion Icon, by Alexandra Kotur, Herrera stood out in a
crowd. [Page 1c]

   Hubble telescope turns 15

   Today, to mark the Hubble Space Telescope's 15th anniversary, NASA and the
European Space Agency plan to release two spectacular new views of celestial
objects that have made headlines in the past. [Page 1c]

   SPORTS

   O's sweep Blue Jays

   The Orioles completed a three-game sweep of the Toronto Blue Jays with a 7-1
victory. Sidney Ponson pitched a complete game and Sammy Sosa hit two home runs.
[Page 1d]

   Wizards drop playoff opener

   The Chicago Bulls gained their first playoff victory since 1998 with a 103-94
triumph over the visiting Washington Wizards in Game 1 of their first-round
series. [Page 1d]

   BUSINESS REPORT

   Start the week with our expanded Monday Business report at:

   www.baltimoresun.com/mondaybiz.

   `STAR WARS' BLOG

   Write a blog about your experience standing in line for the new Star Wars
movie at:

   www.baltimoresun.com/starwarsblog

   QUOTE OF THE DAY

   "Pray for me that I may not flee for fear of the wolves."

   Pope Benedict XVI, at his Mass of investiture in St. Peter's Square in
Vatican City (Article, Page 1A)

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1.  Papal transition A day at `the Beach': Johns Hopkins University students
Betsy Maragakes (left), Steph Leaman, Britt Aronovich and Vincent Typper relax
at "the Beach," a large expanse of lawn at the Homewood campus where students
flock in warm weather. (Article, Page 1B) 2. Pope Benedict XVI puts on the Ring
of the Fisherman, a symbol of papal author ity, during a Mass marking his
installation as pope. An estimated 350,000 spectators and dignitaries filled St.
Peter's Square and surrounding streets. (Article, Page 1A)
 1. ELIZABETH MALBY : SUN STAFF 2. ROMAIN BLANQUART : DETROIT FREE PRESS

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             159 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             April 25, 2005 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: Small study raises hope for therapy that slows Alzheimer's

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- The first attempt at gene therapy for Alzheimer's  patients
appeared to significantly delay worsening of the disease  in a few people who
have tested it so far, scientists reported  Sunday.

   Far more research is needed to see if the experimental treatment,  which
requires a form of brain surgery, really helps.

   But if the approach pans out, researchers say delivering protective
substances, called growth factors, into a diseased brain holds the  potential to
rescue some dying brain cells.

   In one patient, the brain tissue showed new growth, which was a  first,
according to a study published in Sunday's edition of the  journal Nature
Medicine.

   "It won't cure the disease," said the lead researcher, Dr. Mark  Tuszynski of
the University of California, San Diego. That is  because Alzheimer's destroys
different types of cells in different  areas of the brain; the new gene therapy
targets just one of those.

   The preliminary success indicates that similar approaches might  help other
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's,  Tuszynski said.

   Doctors at Chicago's Rush University Medical Center have begun a  second
small study of the approach in Alzheimer's patients.

   Tuszynski, who co-founded a biotechnology company that is funding  the
Chicago work, hopes larger studies will begin within another  year.

   "It's cautious optimism with a big C," Rush's Dr. David Bennett  stressed.
AP

GRAPHIC: Dr. David Bennett of Rush University Medical Center in Chicago says
he's cautiously optimistic, "with a big C." Al Podgorski

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2005


                             160 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 25, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: NEWS IN 90 SECONDS

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   NATION & WORLD

   Pope Benedict XVI holds inaugural Mass

   In his inaugural Mass on Sunday, Pope Benedict XVI said his task was "not to
do my own will, not to pursue my own ideas, but to listen, together with the
whole church, to the word and the will of the Lord." Homily: He also talked
about the role of pastor in a time when "so many are living in the desert." The
outdoor Mass was attended by dignitaries from around the world and hundreds of
thousands of pilgrims. PAGE A1

   Peace elusive in parts of Central America: Two years of anti-gang crackdowns
in Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala have brought a relative calm to many
violence-racked communities in the region.  Will it endure?: Lasting peace,
analysts and government officials say, will come only with sustained economic
growth. Despite economic spurts last year such progress seems as elusive as
ever.  Second of two parts. PAGE A1

   New revelations about DeLay: Tom DeLay's claim that a lavish trip to Britain
in 2000 with two lobbyists conformed to House ethics rules has been undercut by
new revelations about the funding of that trip. Result: Ethics experts said
there will be increased pressure on congressional Republicans to address the
problem before it taints the party. PAGE A1

   Frist defends effort to halt filibusters: Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist
defended stripping Democrats of the power to block President Bush's judicial
picks. Significance: The Tennessean distanced himself from the harsher
anti-judiciary rhetoric of fellow Republicans, insisting that judges deserve
"respect, not retaliation" for their rulings. PAGE A3

   Gene therapy may delay Alzheimer's: Scientists report that the first attempt
at gene therapy for Alzheimer's patients appeared to significantly delay
worsening of the disease. However: Far more research is needed to see if the
experimental treatment, which requires a form of brain surgery, really helps.
PAGE A9


   CITY & STATE

   UH scientists push sun-powered rover

   The lonely, dusty lunar soil has everything needed to make solar cells
readily available and small rovers could quickly and safely build solar panels
to power a moon base. UH scientists say they have proved the concept is
workable, and now they're asking NASA for $ 20 million to build a prototype
rover. Long-term goal: Covering enough of the moon with solar cells to beam all
the power Earth needs home. PAGE A1

   Problems face new chief: With ever-growing numbers of uninsured patients and
ever-shrinking resources, Harris County Hospital District's new chief faces a
task that is daunting, some say no-win. Challenges: David Lopez faces an
inadequate budget, a county with about one million uninsured, many of them
illegal immigrants, and is able to treat just 300,000 of them a year. The
district has lost nearly $ 40 million already this year. PAGE A1

   IFest comes home: The Houston International Festival returned to downtown
this weekend after a disastrous year at Reliant Park.  Result: Organizers,
vendors and fans were rapturous about the turnout, the revenue and the ambience.
PAGE B1


   SPORTS

   Cards sweep Astros with 8-5 victory

   The St. Louis Cardinals beat the Astros 8-5 to complete a three-game sweep at
Busch Stadium. Early hole: Brandon Backe surrendered four runs in the St. Louis
first. PAGE C1

   Singh sings: Vijay Singh won the Shell Houston Open, beating John Daly in a
one-hole playoff. New ground: Singh is the first repeat winner in the
tournament's 59-year history. PAGE C1

   Andy's dandy: Andy Roddick cruised past Sebastien Grosjean 6-2, 6-2 to win
the U.S. Clay Court Championships at Westside Tennis Club.  Update the resume:
Roddick's 17th career title was his third in the event. PAGE C1


   BUSINESS

   Working hard to find qualified candidates

   Employers often face a catch-22 when trying to fill jobs - they need to
attract a broad pool of applicants, but it's illegal to hire someone based on
race, gender, religion or ethnicity.  Strategy: To get the best minority
candidates, companies must cast a wide net. PAGE D1

    Aggie rings not just another piece of jewelry

   Ring Day is just one of the many traditions at Texas A&M. Quote: "It's
something that when you wear it and you see somebody else (wearing it), you both
start a conversation and you instantly have a friend." PAGE E1


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             161 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 25, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 651 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may slow effects of Alzheimer's;
Scientists hope the test results on six patients will be borne out in larger
trials

SOURCE: WASHINGTON POST

BYLINE: RICK WEISS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Injections of genetically altered cells into the brain appear to
nourish ailing neurons and may slow the cognitive decline in patients with
Alzheimer's disease, scientists reported Sunday.

   The experimental approach, pursued by researchers at the University of
California at San Diego, aims to rejuvenate brain cells by providing a steady
supply of a nerve-nurturing hormone secreted by the injected cells.

   In studies involving a half-dozen Alzheimer's patients, most showed evidence
of increased nerve growth and activity in the region of the brain most affected
by the degenerative disease. Psychological test scores suggested the treatment
also tempered the slow slide into dementia that is characteristic of
Alzheimer's.

   "If these effects are borne out in larger, controlled trials, this could be a
significant advance over existing therapies for Alzheimer's disease," said study
leader Mark Tuszynski, director of UCSD's Center for Neural Repair and a
neurologist at the San Diego Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

   But Tuszynski and other experts cautioned that the study was designed to test
the technique's safety, not its efficacy, so the hints of improvement - while
tantalizing - are unreliable. And although the results do offer evidence that
nerve growth hormones may prove useful, the surgical implantation of
gene-altered cells is considered to be too complicated a technique for the
routine delivery of those hormones.

   "This would not be a practical way of going around treating 4 1/2 or 5
million Alzheimer's patients, although it would be a boon for neurosurgeons,"
said Zaven Khachaturian, a science adviser to the Alzheimer's Association in
Chicago and former director of the Office of Alzheimer's Research at the
National Institutes of Health. For that reason, a simpler system of getting the
hormones into the brain is now being tested.

   The experiments are the culmination of decades of research involving nerve
growth factors, which encourage nerve cells to grow new branchlike projections
that enhance communication with surrounding nerve cells.

   Alzheimer's disease involves many kinds of changes in the brain, among them a
loss of so-called cholinergic neurons. Animal studies have shown that the
prototypical nerve growth factor - the one that bears the formal name nerve
growth factor or NGF - can rejuvenate dying cholinergic neurons. So it has long
been a goal of scientists to test NGF's usefulness in patients with the disease,
which today has no cure.

   Delivery has been the bottleneck. NGF is too big a molecule to get into the
brain via the bloodstream. And when researchers injected the hormone directly
into patients' brains a few years ago, it caused intolerable side effects such
as pain.

   In the new experiment, the San Diego team took skin cells from patients and
enhanced them with snippets of DNA that gave the cells the ability to secrete
NGF. Then, with the patients sedated but awake, the researchers injected the
cells deep into their brains.

   There were serious problems at first. Two patients moved abruptly while
doctors were injecting the cells, resulting in brain damage and bleeding. One
died a few weeks later from complications, and the other has suffered lingering
problems that may be related to the surgery. That prompted a change so that all
subsequent patients were treated under anesthesia.

   In the six other volunteers, the cells seem to have caused no problems.

   Perhaps most exciting, Tuszynski said, is evidence that the hormones have
stimulated new outgrowths from cholinergic neurons.

   "These results need to be interpreted with cautious optimism," said William
Thies of the Alzheimer's Association.

   With so few patients in the study, "it's really impossible to tell whether
the benefit was due to the treatment or natural fluctuation in symptoms," he
said.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             162 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Study: Cells May Slow Alzheimer's

BYLINE: From the Washington Post

BODY:

   Injections of genetically altered cells into the brain appear to nourish
ailing neurons and may slow the cognitive decline in patients with Alzheimer's
disease, scientists reported Sunday in the online journal Nature Medicine.

   The experimental approach, pursued by researchers in a preliminary study at
UC San Diego, aims to rejuvenate brain cells by providing a steady supply of a
nerve-nurturing hormone secreted by the injected cells.

   In studies involving eight Alzheimer's patients, most showed evidence of
increased nerve growth and activity in the region of the brain most affected by
the degenerative disease. Psychological test scores suggested the treatment also
tempered the slow slide into dementia.

   "If these effects are borne out in larger, controlled trials, this could be a
significant advance over existing therapies for Alzheimer's disease," said study
leader Mark H. Tuszynski, director of UCSD's Center for Neural Repair.

   But Tuszynski and other experts cautioned that the study was designed to test
the technique's safety, not its efficacy, so the hints of improvement -- while
tantalizing -- are unreliable. And although the results do offer new evidence
that nerve growth hormones may prove useful, the surgical implantation of
gene-altered cells is widely considered to be too complicated a technique for
the routine delivery of those hormones.

   "This would not be a practical way of going around treating 4 1/2 [million]
or 5 million Alzheimer's patients, although it would be a boon for
neurosurgeons," said Zaven Khachaturian, a science advisor to the Alzheimer's
Assn. in Chicago and former director of the office of Alzheimer's research at
the National Institutes of Health.

   For that reason, a simpler system of getting the hormones into the brain is
being tested.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             163 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   European Union to Begin Inquiry on Chinese Textiles
The European Union's top trade official, Peter Mandelson, said that he would
open a formal investigation into the flood of Chinese textiles into European
markets.

    He also warned of possible sanctions by summer and swifter measures that
could allow Europe to impose limits on a range of Chinese-made items within
weeks. ''Europe cannot stand by and watch its industry disappear,'' he said.
[Page C6.]

Making Mobile Phones Smarter
With Windows-powered mobile devices lagging behind the Palms and BlackBerrys of
the world, Microsoft has enlisted an electrical engineer from China -- a master
of the strategy game Go -- to improve its products. He is Ya-Qin Zhang, 39, a
one time math prodigy and a veteran computer systems researcher who helped start
Microsoft's Beijing research laboratory in 1999. [C4.]

Nissan to Post a Small Profit Rise
The Nissan Motor Company will post a small increase in its net profit for the
recent fiscal year, a result of gains in vehicle sales in the United States and
China, officials said. [C2.]

Virgin Mobile Nears U.S. Offering
The Virgin Group has hired investment bankers to take its 50 percent stake in
the United States cellphone operator Virgin Mobile public this year, in an
offering valued at $2 billion, executives briefed on the plans said. [C6.]

When the Entire Game Is Too Much
Now that most Internet users have high-speed connections and television
executives view the Web as more an adjunct than a rival, sports leagues are
opening their video vaults to fans who just want the highlights. And for
organizations that are competing for a share of the fans' attention, such tools
can be critical in maintaining, or increasing, league revenues. Bob Tedeschi:
E-Commerce Report. [C9.]

Indians Investing in Hollywood
Decades after John Wayne and his cowboys vanquished the Indians for generations
of white movie audiences, American Indian tribes are beginning to invest more
than just lingering bad faith in Hollywood. [C7.]

Details on Affiliates of A.I.G.
New details about the inner workings of C. V. Starr and Starr International,
affiliates of American International Group, are contained in a confidential
internal report that was unsealed by a Delaware judge. [C2.]

Results in Alzheimer's Trial
A small clinical trial has produced preliminary evidence that gene therapy might
slow the decline in mental function associated with Alzheimer's disease. [C9.]

A New Trend in Online Games
Games including World of Warcraft from Blizzard Entertainment, above, are the
latest effort by companies to appeal to hard core game players as well as to a
wider audience. These massively multiplayer games, which are considered
mainstream entertainment in Taiwan and South Korea, still represent a fraction
of the United States video game business. [C4.]

$1 Billion Deal for DoubleClick
A private equity firm, Hellman & Friedman, is buying the Internet marketer
DoubleClick in an all-cash deal worth $1.1 billion, expected to be announced
today. [C8.]


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PhotosChart: ''LAST WEEK''Dow industrials -- 10,157.71 up 70.20Nasdaq
composite -- 1,932.19 up 24.0410-yr. Treasury yield -- 4.25% up 0.01The euro --
$1.3074 up 0.0167The dollar -- 106.04 yen down 1.72

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             164 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: In Small Trial, Gene Therapy Is Seen as Aid in Alzheimer's

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A small clinical trial has produced preliminary evidence that gene therapy
may slow the decline in mental functioning associated with Alzheimer's disease.

    Eight patients with early-stage Alzheimer's were enrolled in the study,
which its sponsor said was the first gene therapy trial for the disease. Six
successfully received the gene transfer, and they had a slower rate of cognitive
decline in the 22 months after treatment than in the 14 months before, as
measured by a standardized test.

    A paper on the trial was published online yesterday in Nature Medicine. The
lead author, Mark H. Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego, is a
founder of Ceregene, a privately held company with rights to the technique.
Ceregene said this was the first trial of gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease.

    Gene therapy has been tried for 15 years for various diseases, with barely
any success. In many cases, hints of efficacy in early trials like this one were
not confirmed in larger studies where treatment was compared with a placebo.

    The gene involved in this trial controls production of nerve growth factor,
a protein that can protect brain cells from death. Previous attempts to use the
growth factor itself as a drug have had severe side effects.

    Dr. Tuszynski and colleagues said in the paper that they thought it might be
better to use the gene to induce cells in the brain to produce their own growth
factor just where it was needed. They took skin cells from each patient's back
and, in the laboratory, used a virus to carry the gene into the cells. The
cells, which began producing the growth factor, were then injected into the
brain.

    The first two patients, sedated but awake, moved their heads during the
surgery and suffered brain hemorrhages, with one of them eventually dying. So
the next six operations used general anesthesia and were successful.

    Many industry pioneers have withdrawn from gene therapy, most recently
Avigen. But some venture capitalists are financing new companies, betting that
gene therapy is finally on the brink of success. Ceregene, minority owned by
Cell Genesys, raised $32 million last August.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             165 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                          FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy delays worsening of Alzheimer's, study says

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON -

BODY:

   The first attempt at gene therapy for Alzheimer's patients appeared to
significantly delay the worsening of the disease in a few people who have tested
it so far, scientists reported Sunday.

   Far more research is needed to see whether the experimental treatment, which
requires a form of brain surgery, really helps.

   But if the approach pans out, researchers say, delivering protective
substances, called growth factors, into a diseased brain holds the potential to
rescue some dying cells.

   In one patient, the brain tissue showed new growth, which was a first,
according to a study published in Sunday's edition of the journal Nature
Medicine.

   "It won't cure the disease," said the lead researcher, Dr. Mark Tuszynski of
the University of California at San Diego. That is because Alzheimer's destroys
different types of cells in different areas of the brain; the new gene therapy
targets just one of those.

   The preliminary success indicates that similar approaches might help other
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's, Tuszynski said. "This is in a
sense proof of principle for the potential use of growth factors," he said.

   Doctors at Chicago's Rush University Medical Center have begun a second small
study of the approach in Alzheimer's patients. Tuszynski, who co-founded a
biotechnology company that is funding the Chicago work, hopes larger studies
will begin within another year.

   Tuszynski and colleagues took skin cells from eight patients in the early
stages of Alzheimer's and modified the genes to secrete a protein found in
healthy brains called nerve growth factor, or NGF.

   Earlier studies had shown that injecting NGF-producing tissue into the brains
of aging monkeys could reverse deterioration. Simply injecting NGF into people
would not work. If it goes into the wrong part of the brain, it can cause
serious side effects.

   So, doctors drilled holes into the patients' skulls and implanted the
NGF-producing skin cells directly onto Alzheimer's-injured spots.

   Six patients were tracked for almost two years. Tests involving memory and
other skills found their rate of cognitive decline slowed by 36 percent to 51
percent, better than is usually seen with medication, Tuszynski reported.

   The first two patients were awake and moved during the cell implantation,
causing bleeding in their brains; one patient died five weeks later. Remaining
patients received the implants under general anesthesia to keep them still, and
the researchers reported no further problems.

   The brain tissue of the study participant who died had new growth protruding
from Alzheimer's-injured cells at the implant site, the first time that sort of
recovery has been seen from a human brain treatment, Tuszynski said.
Additionally, PET scans of the other participants showed a measurable increase
in their brains' metabolic activity.

   "These results need to be interpreted with cautious optimism," said William
Thies of the Alzheimer's Association. With so few patients in the study, "it's
really impossible to tell whether the benefit was due to the treatment or
natural fluctuation in symptoms," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             166 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 25, 2005 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers hope for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The first attempt at gene therapy for Alzheimer's patients appeared to
significantly delay worsening of the disease in a few people who have tested it
so far, scientists reported yesterday.

   Far more research is needed to see if the experimental treatment, which
requires a form of brain surgery, really helps.

   But if the approach pans out, researchers say delivering protective
substances, called growth factors, into a diseased brain holds the potential to
rescue some dying brain cells.

   In one patient, the brain tissue showed new growth, which was a first,
according to a study published in yesterday's edition of the journal Nature
Medicine.

   "It won't cure the disease," said the lead researcher, Mark Tuszynski of the
University of California, San Diego. That is because Alzheimer's destroys
different types of cells in different areas of the brain; the new gene therapy
targets just one of those.

    The preliminary success indicates that similar approaches might help other
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Parkinson's, Tuszynski said. "This is in a
sense proof of principle for the potential use of growth factors," he said.

   Doctors at Chicago's Rush University Medical Center have begun a second small
study of the approach in Alzheimer's patients. Tuszynski, who co-founded a
biotechnology company that is funding the Chicago work, hopes larger studies
will begin within another year.

   Tuszynski and colleagues took skin cells from eight patients in the early
stages of Alzheimer's and modified the genes to secrete a protein found in
healthy brains called nerve growth factor, or NGF.

   Earlier studies had shown that injecting NGF-producing tissue into the brains
of aging monkeys could reverse deterioration. Simply injecting NGF into people
would not work. If it goes into the wrong part of the brain, it can cause
serious side effects.

   So, doctors drilled holes into the patients' skulls and implanted the
NGF-producing skin cells directly onto Alzheimer's-injured spots.

   Six patients were tracked for almost two years. Tests involving memory and
other skills found their rate of cognitive decline slowed by 36 percent to 51
percent, better than is usually seen with medication, Tuszynski reported.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             167 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            April 23, 2005 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER

BODY:

   Quick hits

   ** EBay Inc., which this year may collect more revenue overseas than in the
U.S., launched its first site in Eastern Europe with EBay Poland.

   ** A special edition of the ``Monopoly'' board game featuring Warren Buffett
and his Berkshire Hathaway Inc. companies will be unveiled next week in
conjunction with Buffett's annual shareholder meeting.

   ** As the debate grows over the future of Social Security, officials in most
of the states are struggling with a $260 billion gap in another frayed
retirement safety net: public pension programs.

   ** Eastman Kodak Co. swung to a loss and missed Wall Street forecasts by a
wide margin largely because its digital makeover proved costlier than expected
in the first quarter.

   ** Microsoft Corp. faces a patent infringement claim from a small Texas
company over technology that's used in JPEG files, one of the most common image
formats.

   ** A federal grand jury is reviewing allegations of misspending within
Wal-Mart Stores Inc., an investigation triggered when the world's largest
retailer voluntarily handed over internal documents to the Justice Department, a
company spokesman said.

   Corrections

   A story in Friday's Herald stated the wrong day the board of Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. voted to be acquired by Shire Pharmaceuticals Group. The vote
took place Wednesday. A second story, about the Royal Bank of Scotland and
Citizens Bank, incorrectly reported Citizens' 2004 profit number. The bank
registered a pre-tax profit of $1.9 billion in 2004.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             168 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            April 23, 2005 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Wall St. disses TKT bid

BYLINE: By JOHN STRAHINICH

BODY:

   The market yesterday seemed to have second thoughts about Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc.'s proposed $1.6 billion acquisition by Britain's Shire
Pharmaceuticals Group - with analysts and investors questioning which side was
getting the worst end of the deal.

   The price of TKT stock slipped by $1.06, closing at $34.15 - well below the
$37 cash per share that Shire has agreed to pay for the Cambridge biotech
company.

   Wachovia Securities yesterday downgraded its TKT rating to ``market perform''
from ``outperform,'' attributing its action to disappointment in the Shire deal.

   ``Usually, the price of the (acquired company) goes up to meet the takeover
price,'' said one former TKT insider, who requested anonymity. ``Investors are
concerned the deal won't go through.''

   Meanwhile, Britannic Asset Management, which holds about 2 percent of Shire,
advised the drugmaker to kill the deal - and absorb a resulting $40 million
penalty. Britannic said TKT isn't worth $1.6 billion.

   ``This is not an attractive deal,'' Britannic fund manager Dennis Wyles told
Bloomberg News.

   Credit Suisse First Boston also downgraded Shire stock, telling Bloomberg it
``did not view the acquisition as opportunistic.''

   Shire shares fell 3.7 percent yesterday on the London Stock Exchange. Shares
had already dropped 7.8 percent after the Thursday announcement.

   The TKT board voted 5-2 to accept Shire's offer on Wednesday, approving the
deal over objections from Chief Executive Michael Astrue and Nobel Prize winner
Walter Gilbert.

   Sources say Astrue, who subsequently resigned, had argued the company would
fetch a better price if it waited longer.

   One Wall Street analyst who used to track TKT agreed.

   ``They could have held off for a better deal,'' said the analyst, who
requested anonymity.

   He added that TKT could have also held out for a better partner. The analyst
noted that Shire has little experience in two main markets for TKT drugs: cancer
and dialysis.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                             169 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                             April 22, 2005 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 027

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: BRITS BUY BIOTECH IN $1.6B DEAL;
 Savior CEO astrue quits over Transkaryotic sale

BYLINE: By JOHN STRAHINICH

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which makes drugs that treat rare diseases, has
agreed to be acquired by a British specialty pharmaceutical company for $1.6
billion in cash, the companies said.

   But the deal came over the opposition of the man who rescued the Cambridge
biotech company from the brink of financial disaster, Chief Executive Michael
Astrue, according to a source with knowledge of the agreement.

   Astrue, who joined with Nobel Prize winner Walter Gilbert in opposing the
sale, stepped down on Tuesday after the board voted 5-2 to sell the company to
Shire Pharmaceuticals Group, the source told the Herald.

   TKT Chief Financial Officer Gregory Perry defended the deal, abeit with
lukewarm language.

   ``Clearly the board came to a conclusion this was a fair price,'' Perry said.
``We represent a great fit for Shire.''

   Gilbert did not return a phone call to his home. Astrue declined to be
interviewed for this story.

   But the insider source said Astrue, in particular, complained to colleagues
that the company would have fetched a better price than $37 a share had it
waited until year's end, when its next rare disease treatment, dubbed 12S, is
expected to clear U.S. and European regulatory hurdles.

   ``This (price) is a steal,'' the source said. ``It would have gone to $37 on
its own. (They) could have sold for between $45 and $50.''

   TKT board member Dr. Lydia Villa-Komaroff gave the board some wiggle room on
the deal, saying: ``We have not closed yet. If a deal comes up that's better for
our shareholders, we have a fiduciary responsibility to consider it.''

   Wall Street thought TKT was getting the better of the deal. Its shares rose
$4.77 yesterday, to close at $35.31, while Shire fell $3.50, to $31.02.

   One analyst believed that was because European investors didn't know TKT from
TNT.

   ``They're freaking out a little bit because they don't understand the TKT
story,'' said Caroline Stewart, of IRG Research. ``TKT is a robust little
company. It's a really a great buy.''

   In February 2003, Astrue replaced Dr. Richard Selden, who resigned under a
cloud when the company lost 90 percent of its value after a series of regulatory
setbacks.

   ``(Astrue) was what the company needed,'' said IRG's Stewart. ``He gave the
company credibility again.''

   Perry said Genzyme's 400 employees worldwide were safe for the time being.
Ditto the company's planned expansion at an undetermined Massachusetts location.

   ``They've made commitments to the Massachusetts facility,'' he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             170 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                             April 22, 2005 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 188 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme profits soar, stock sags

BYLINE: By JOHN STRAHINICH

BODY:

   First-quarter profits at Genzyme Corp. jumped 41 percent, boosted by strong
sales of its drugs that treat rare genetic diseases, the Cambridge biotech
company said.

   Nevertheless, Genzyme shares shed $1.37, to close at $59.45, on the news that
the company's Cambridge rival, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., agreed to be
acquired by British drugmaker Shire Pharmaceuticals Group.

   Net income jumped to $95.6 million, or 36 cents a share, from $67.9 million a
year earlier. Revenues surged 28 percent, to $629 million. Sales of Genzyme's
top seller, Cerezyme - which treats the inherited metabolic disorder Gaucher's
disease - rose by 11 percent, to $226 million.

   Sales of Fabrazyme - which fights Fabry disease, another disorder caused by a
missing enzyme - climbed 84 percent, to $70 million, on strong demand in Europe.

   ``The thing about Genzyme is, they don't have any major blockbusters, but
they have a number of different things that do well,'' said Frank DiLorenzo, an
analyst with Standard & Poor's Equity Services. ``They're very well
diversified.''

   Genzyme hiked its earnings forecast for the year to between $1.72 and $1.78 a
share.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             171 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 792 words

HEADLINE: British Company to Buy U.S. Maker of Anemia Treatment

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Shire Pharmaceuticals Group, a British drug company, agreed to pay $1.6
billion in cash to acquire Transkaryotic Therapies, an American company that has
developed its own version of an anemia-fighting protein that is the
biotechnology industry's biggest-selling product.

    The deal, announced yesterday, represents a substantial move into
biotechnology by Shire, best known for its Adderall drug for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder.

     The transaction was strongly opposed by Michael J. Astrue, Transkaryotic's
chief executive. According to people close to the negotiations, Mr. Astrue had
argued that the company would be better off on its own, and he resigned rather
than carry out the transition to new ownership.

    ''Mike didn't want to do the transition,'' Lydia Villa-Komaroff, the
chairwoman of Transkaryotic's board, said in an interview. Dr. Villa-Komaroff,
who is the chief operating officer of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, said that the board had ''intense discussions'' about the merger.

    The biggest potential product in Transkaryotic's portfolio is Dynepo, the
company's version of erythropoietin, an anemia drug sold under the names Epogen
and Aranesp by Amgen, and as Procrit and Eprex by Johnson & Johnson. Combined
global sales of erythropoietin by these two companies and others exceeded $10
billion last year.

    Shire agreed to pay $37 a share, a 22 percent premium to Wednesday's closing
price for TKT, as Transkaryotic is generally called.

    TKT said a majority of its board approved the deal, suggesting there might
have been opposition beyond Mr. Astrue. But the transaction had the backing of
Warburg Pincus, an investment firm that owns 14 percent of TKT and controls two
of its seven board seats.

    Shares of TKT rose $4.77, or nearly 16 percent, to $35.21. Shire's American
depositary receipts fell $3.50, or 10 percent, to $31.02.

    Shire, based in Basingstoke, England, has been looking for new products. The
company had $1.4 billion in revenues last year, with about half coming from
Adderall.

    But generic drug manufacturers are challenging Adderall's patents and, if
successful, could introduce versions as early as next year. And in February,
Canadian regulators suspended sales of Adderall XR, the extended-release version
that accounts for the bulk of sales, saying the drug was linked to 20 deaths, 12
of them in children. The Food and Drug Administration in the United States has
allowed sales to continue, saying it sees little evidence the deaths were caused
by the drug.

    So far, TKT, based in Cambridge, Mass., has only one drug on the market, a
treatment for Fabry disease, a rare genetic disorder. Sales were $77 million
last year and the company has not been profitable. The drug, Replagal, is sold
in Europe and some other countries but is not approved in the United States.

    TKT has clinical trials under way for drugs aimed at two other rare genetic
conditions, Hunter syndrome and Gaucher disease. Although only several thousand
people in the world have each of these rare diseases, sales of drugs to treat
them can reach hundreds of millions of dollars a year if the price is high
enough.

    But the prize could be Dynepo, TKT's version of erythropoietin, or EPO. TKT
has not been able to sell Dynepo in the United States because of Amgen's
patents. TKT believed it would not infringe Amgen's patents because it makes its
EPO a different way. But courts have so far sided with Amgen in a protracted
battle.

    TKT won a patent fight in Europe, where Amgen's patent protection was
weaker. Dynepo is approved in Europe and TKT has been looking for a marketing
partner to introduce the drug in early 2006.

    Shire initially approached TKT last year about being that marketing partner,
and the talks broadened into an acquisition, executives of the two companies
said yesterday.

    Shire said annual sales for all versions of EPO in Europe were about $2.3
billion. But Dynepo is a first-generation product. Amgen sells a
second-generation product, Aranesp, which requires less frequent injections or
infusions. Roche is also working on a new version, called Cera.

    And several companies hope to market generic versions of EPO in the next few
years.

    TKT's stock price collapsed in late 2002 when it became clear that the
F.D.A. had reservations about the clinical trial data for the company's Fabry
disease drug. Richard F. Selden, chief executive at the time, resigned in
February 2003, to be replaced by Mr. Astrue, the company's former general
counsel. The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether the
company and Dr. Selden misled investors.

    The investment bank SG Cowen represented TKT in the deal, while Goldman
Sachs was Shire's banker.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             172 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 22, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Google's Revenue Doubles On Sharply Higher Profit
Google's reported that its revenue for the first quarter nearly doubled from the
comparable period a year ago, and its profits increased more than fivefold.

    The fastest growth came from Google.com and other sites owned by the
company, but it also posted sharp increases in revenue it receives from selling
ads and placing them on other sites. [Page C3.]

Nokia, the largest maker of cellphones, reported a bigger-than-expected jump in
profit and increased its sales forecast. [C5.]

AT&T and BellSouth topped Wall Street forecasts for the first quarter. [C3.]

$17.6 Billion Deal to Buy Adelphia
Time Warner and Comcast Corporation agreed to acquire Adelphia Communications
for $17.6 billion in cash and stock, a deal that indicates that Time Warner is
betting heavily on growth in its cable unit. As a result of the acquisition and
several swaps with Comcast, Time Warner will end up with 85 percent of its
subscribers in five regions with strong pockets of its systems in Texas and a
dominant position in Los Angeles. [C4.]

Qwest Raises Offer for MCI
Qwest Communications has raised its takeover offer for MCI by 9 percent, to $30
a share, in its latest effort to wrest control of the long-distance carrier from
Verizon Communications. [C3.]

Drug Companies in $1.6 Billion Deal
Shire Pharmaceuticals Group has agreed to pay $1.6 billion to acquire
Transkaryotic Therapies, which has developed a version of an anemia-fighting
protein. [C2.]

Raising the Curtain on Advertisers
Product placement has come to Broadway, with Hormel, maker of Spam canned meat,
for example, endorsing the musical ''Monty Python's Spamalot.'' [A1.]

Pernod Seeks Further Expansion
Pernod Ricard of France plans to use its $14 billion purchase of Allied Domecq
as a springboard to become the world's largest liquor company. [C5.]

Hynix Admits Guilt in Fixing Prices
Federal prosecutors announced that Hynix Semiconductor of South Korea had agreed
to plead guilty to participating in a global conspiracy to fix prices and would
pay a $185 million fine. [C3.]

Greenspan Urges Federal Restraint
Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, urged lawmakers to scale
back promised benefits for both Social Security and Medicare ''sooner rather
than later.'' [C2.]

Index of Leading Indicators Drops
The composite index of leading economic indicators fell 0.4 percent last month.
[C2.]

Trade Nominee Answers Critics
Representative Rob Portman of Ohio, President Bush's nominee to be the trade
representative, answered mounting criticism of the administration's trade
policies by promising that he would take a stricter approach to China if he is
confirmed [C2.]

House Approves Energy Bill
The House approved energy legislation that seeks to improve the electrical
grid's reliability, increase domestic energy production and extend daylight
saving time. [A14.]

Fuel Costs Hurt Airlines' Results
Delta Air Lines and Northwest Airlines reported steep first-quarter losses on
higher fuel costs, while JetBlue Airways posted a modest profit. Gerald
Grinstein, left, Delta's chief executive, asserted that despite its heavy
losses, Delta was making major progress with its turnaround plan. [C4.]

First Phase of Tobacco Trial Ends
The government's racketeering case against cigarette companies reached the end
of its first phase as lawyers disputed whether the companies had misled the
public. [A19.]


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PhotoChart: ''YESTERDAY''Dow industrials -- 10,218.60 up 206.24Nasdaq
composite -- 1,962.41 up 48.6510-yr. Treasury yield -- 4.29% up 0.10The euro --
$1.3058 down 0.0028The dollar -- 106.86 yen up 0.04Graph tracks the daily
closing price of Time Warner shares for the week.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             173 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   APRIL 22, 2005 Friday CITY-D-EAST EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 733 words

HEADLINE: Shire to acquire specialty drugmaker;
The move will add both approved and late-stage products to Shire's lineup. Some
analysts, though, said the price was high.
Shire Pharmaceuticals to buy specialty maker

BYLINE: Linda Loyd INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire Pharmaceuticals Group P.L.C. agreed yesterday to buy a Cambridge,
Mass., biotechnology company for $1.6 billion in cash in an effort to broaden
its product line.

   Shire, Britain's third-largest drugmaker with its U.S. headquarters in Wayne,
said it would pay $37 a share in cash for Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a 22
percent premium over its closing price Wednesday of $30.44.

   Shares of Transkaryotic, which is known as TKT, closed at $35.21, up $4.77,
or 16 percent, on the Nasdaq yesterday, while Shire closed at $31.02, down $3.50
or 10 percent. Several analysts said the deal looked expensive and cautioned it
would take several years to boost earnings for Shire, based in Basingstoke,
England.

   "This is about products," Shire chief executive officer Matthew Emmens said
in a conference call. "We will add two approved products to Shire by this
transaction, and two late-stage clinical development products."

   TKT focuses on treatments for rare genetic disorders. Emmens said TKT's
"capabilities and skill sets" fit well with Shire because the two firms focus on
medicines sold to specialist physicians by small sales forces. "In short, we
think this is an engine for future growth for Shire and for TKT."

   The acquisition gives Shire TKT's Replagal, which treats a genetic disorder
called Fabry disease, and had $77 million in sales in 2004. The market for the
drug, approved in 34 countries outside the United States, is worth $190 million
in Western Europe, Emmens said.

   Shire also gains the European rights to Dynepo, which treats anemia
associated with kidney disease and is expected to launch in Europe early next
year. Shire now sells the kidney treatment Fosrenol.

   French drugmaker Sanofi-Aventis S.A. owns U.S. marketing rights to Dynepo,
and Shire does not expect to introduce the product in the United States until
after 2010.

   Yesterday's announcement prompted the abrupt resignation of TKT's chief
executive officer, Michael J. Astrue. Asked on the conference call why Astrue
resigned, Emmens said it was a decision made by TKT's board. "It wasn't up to
us."

   David D. Pendergast, who was TKT's chief operating officer, was promoted to
CEO.

   Gregory D. Perry, TKT's chief financial officer, said Astrue's resignation
was "a mutual decision by him and the TKT board. This is clearly an important
transition to a new stage. It's really not our position at this point to be
talking for Mike."

   TKT had $78.1 million in sales last year and about 400 employees. Shire had
2004 sales of $1.4 billion and more than 2,000 employees worldwide, including
465 at its U.S. corporate headquarters in the Chesterbrook Corporate Center in
Wayne.

   The deal is expected to close in the third quarter, subject to approval by
both companies' shareholders and regulatory authorities, Shire said.

   TKT will operate as a Shire subsidiary, and Emmens said he expected to keep
the Cambridge facility "and as many people as we possibly can in Massachusetts."

   He declined to provide further details, saying "it is early. I would say the
plans will not change at this time."

   An acquisition by Shire had been long expected by analysts and investors. But
the price for this portfolio of drugs that address rare diseases was met with
some skepticism on Wall Street.

   Corey Davis, an analyst with JPMorgan, said in a note to clients: "The price
tag has been the subject of some debate. At first blush, this seemed high to a
large chunk of the market."

   But Davis said the acquisition gave Shire "near-term products as well as a
longer-term pipeline. We can't help but think the company is now much better
positioned for 2008 and beyond in the event it loses exclusivity on Adderall
XR."

   Last month, Shire warned that it expected flat sales from Adderall XR after
Canada asked the company to pull the drug from its market following several
deaths. Sales of Adderall XR were $606.7 million in 2004.

   Shire's chief financial officer Angus Russell said the company needed the
acquisition to replenish its product portfolio: "If we did no further
acquisitions, or in-licensing of products, within two years our
research-and-development costs would start to decline quite significantly
because we would come to the end of pipeline studies on our current drugs."

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2005


                             174 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 22, 2005 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1112 words

HEADLINE: The right stuff;
Which local life sciences startups have it?

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Call it the "oomph" factor.

   In San Diego's thriving life sciences industry, there are a few hundred small
startup companies at any given time, each competing for funds and manpower to
develop the next potential blockbuster medicine or medical device.

   Yet the number of companies with a truly novel drug or technology --
something that offers a new approach to solving a therapeutic problem -- is far
smaller.

   Biotech experts agree that having a potential product with that extra oomph
is no guarantee that a startup will succeed -- for instance, only one out of 10
experimental drugs make it to market -- but at least it helps provide a
competitive edge.

   In March 2002, The San Diego Union-Tribune offered a list of 10 local life
sciences startups whose potential novel products appeared to improve the odds of
success, at least according to an informal survey of venture capitalists and
other industry insiders.

   Three years later, and after one of the worst funding droughts for life
sciences companies in years, the scorecard is mixed: Two companies, Favrille and
Senomyx, went public, and a third company, CryoCor, filed this month for an
initial public offering. Another company, Idun Pharmaceuticals, was acquired by
Pfizer this year, while CryoGen was acquired by American Medical Systems in late
2002.

   Late last year, unable to raise money, Carlsbad's Quorex Pharmaceuticals laid
off most of its employees and quietly closed its doors.

   The rest of the startups -- Genoptix, Ambit Biosciences, Genomatica and
InnerCool Therapies -- remain in private hands and have either brought a product
to market or achieved other milestones.

   As the class of 2002 moves forward, another crop of San Diego early-stage
innovators is emerging. And with good management, solid research, the right
timing and a little luck, these 10 biotech and medical device companies have a
novel technology or experimental drug that could bring success, according to an
informal survey of local life sciences industry leaders:

   Cardionet

   San Diego startup CardioNet has developed a heart-rate monitor technology and
service to help physicians diagnose or monitor heart arrhythmia conditions in
patients who are going about their daily lives.

   Patients wear sensors and carry a Palm Pilot-sized monitor in their pocket,
which collects every heart beat in real time. The data is transmitted via cell
phone technology to a monitoring center; if a serious arrhythmia occurs, the
center contacts the doctor and the patient so the appropriate treatment can be
given.

   "The technology is really proving itself in the marketplace and in clinical
studies," said CardioNet spokesman Larry Watts. "We're finding people with
undiagnosed conditions who wouldn't otherwise be found, and getting them
treatment that is critically important in preventing all kinds of terrible
consequences."

   CardioNet has monitored more than 25,000 patients in 23 states since the
startup rolled out its technology in August 2002, and will be providing the
service on the West Coast by the end of the year.

   Celladon Corp.and Ceregene

   Gene therapy has a long and largely unsuccessful history in medicine, but two
San Diego companies -- Celladon and Ceregene -- hope to move the field forward
with their own unique approach.

   Celladon is developing a therapy to reverse the consequences of congestive
heart failure by delivering an enzyme to strengthen heart muscle.

   Ceregene is using gene therapy to deliver nerve growth factor into regions of
the brain where nerve cells are degenerating. The biotech hopes the treatment
can be used to slow or reverse Alzheimer's disease.

   Ophthonix

   So you have 20/20 vision, but the street lights at night still look like the
blurry swirl of Van Gogh's "Starry Night"? Ophthonix has developed a laser-based
technology to both diagnose the complex aberrations that affect the crispness of
vision and create the eyeglasses to correct them.

   The San Diego eye care company just began a regional rollout of its
diagnostic machine, dubbed the Z-View Aberrometer, to Southern California eye
doctors. The machine maps the unique foibles of each eye, then generates a
prescription that is sent to Ophthonix, which manufactures the custom lenses.

   Targegen

   Heart attacks are the leading cause of disease-related death in the developed
world, and TargeGen is taking aim at the killer with an experimental drug
designed to reduce heart muscle damage after an attack.

   Following a heart attack, an enzyme is activated that causes biochemical
changes to blood vessels that permit leakage and inflammation. The San Diego
biotech is developing a drug designed to preserve heart tissue by blocking
leakage and reducing inflammation.

   TargeGen began testing the drug this year in an early-stage, 100-patient
clinical trial.

   Ambrx

   Ambrx is in the business of one-upping Mother Nature. The San Diego biotech
has developed a way to incorporate "unnatural" amino acids -- beyond the common
20 found in nature -- into cells, enabling the production of proteins with
potential new or enhanced properties.

   Rincon Pharmaceuticals

   Using a technology developed at Scripps Research Institute, tiny startup
Rincon, with five employees, seeks to use a fresh-water algae as the production
system for making more affordable monoclonal antibody therapies.

   Proveri

   Proveri seeks to develop a diagnostic test that can distinguish aggressive
from indolent forms of prostate cancer -- thus sparing patients with
nonaggressive tumors unnecessary and often debilitating surgery.

   The small biotech's technology utilizes gene markers that were identified
during a large clinical trial funded by the National Institutes of Health.

   Vala Sciences

   The La Jolla-based biotech has developed economical software that allows
researchers to rapidly analyze cell images, an important tool for gaining
insight into how cells function and how new drug compounds interact with them.

   The company was founded by Jeffrey Price and Ed Hunter, the team that
co-founded Q3DM, a successful life science software company acquired by Beckman
Coulter in 2003.

   Astral Therapeutics

   The tiny biotech hopes to tackle type 1 diabetes with a hybrid drug that
combines a monoclonal antibody -- a genetically engineered protein -- with small
protein fragments called epitopes.

   In type 1 diabetes, the immune system's T cells destroy insulin-producing
beta cells in the pancreas. People with the disease have to inject themselves
with insulin, which is needed for the body to be able to use sugar, the basic
fuel for cells.

   Astral's experimental drug, which is still in laboratory development, is
designed to block the T cells from attacking the beta cells.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. OPHTHONIX -- OPHTHONIX MAKES CUTTING-EDGE EYE
LENSES. 2. AMBRX -- AMBRX SEEKS TO IMPROVE PROTEIN MEDICINES 3. CARDIONET --
CARDIONET WIRELESSLY MONITORS THE HEART 4. Ambrx employee Michael Ong used a
cell disrupter to break open cells so proteins can be collected.; PHOTOBY: 4.
Scott Linnett / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2005


                             175 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2005 The Oregonian
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 21, 2005 Thursday
                                SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SOUTHWEST ZONER LAKE OSWEGO; Pg. 04

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: TEEN TALK - WEST LINN STUDENTS TAP VARIETY OF NEWS SOURCES

BYLINE: SKIPP THOMSEN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Today's teenagers turn to a wide variety of sources to find news on
everything from entertainment to medical research, and the sources aren't
necessarily the same ones their parents use. In a visit last week to West Linn
High School, students mentioned television, the Internet and magazines the most,
but never brought up newspapers or radio. The oldest news source, word of mouth,
still seems to be alive and well in the hallways and classrooms.

   Q: Where do you get most of your news from?

   A: Hannah Watkins, 16, sophomore: "Whatever is being talked about around
school. Sometimes history teachers will talk about news, if someone brings it
up."

   Brooke Norman, 16, sophomore: "Magazines, cheesy teen magazines."

   Emily Locke, 15, sophomore: "Sometimes I'll just watch the TV news if my dad
has it on or something. It's mostly political stuff, like on Fox News."

   Keith Burton, 16, junior: "Just watching news while eating dinner with my
family. Or sometimes from discussions in English class about what's going on in
the news."

   Victor Tseng, 16, junior: "I use the Internet as a big source. I can even get
sources that aren't American sources on the Internet, like Taiwanese or English,
things that won't be as biased toward American news."

   Nick Blakeslee, 17, junior: "I mostly use the Internet, like when I log into
my e-mail or something. When the pope died, that's how I heard about it."

   Q: What kind of news do you follow?

   A: Blakeslee: "I don't really follow news. I just get it when I see it."

   Susan Schrank, 16, sophomore: "Celebrity stuff, from MTV or VH1."

   Burton: "I could really care less about celebrities. I think they are just
people with money. And for sports, I would rather just watch a game. I more
follow up on the war right now and bigger issues that are more global, and the
economy, too."

   Tseng: "I follow medical and science news, like breakthroughs in cancer
treatment and gene therapy and stuff like that. I also kind of track politics
and world affairs, but not as much as I do with science."

   Q: Do you think teens pay more attention to news when celebrities make public
statements about politics or other issues?

   A: Watkins: "Not really."

   Blakeslee: "I could care less what celebrities think. I have my own
opinions."

   Burton: "There's a stereotype of kids and how easily they are persuaded by
their parents' views or a celebrity's views. If a celebrity wants to speak up
and contribute their views, it's not going to affect mine."

   Tseng: "Although I don't like how celebrities express their views, I cannot
fail to recognize their influence on American society. They do have positions of
power because of their jobs, so you can't deny the influence they have. But I
would rather see people tackle the issues than be drawn to the celebrities."

   Skipp Thomsen: 503-294-5115; skippthomsen@news.oregonian.com

GRAPHIC: 6 BW photos

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2005


                             176 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 17, 2005 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Features Desk; Part R; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1474 words

HEADLINE: 2004 Times Book Prize finalists

BODY:

   Since 1980, the annual Los Angeles Times Book Prizes have honored literary
achievement. The Times presents the awards and sponsors the annual Festival of
Books (launched in 1996) as part of a continuing commitment to celebrate the
written word. Kenneth Turan, Times film critic and a former books editor for the
paper, has directed the Book Prize program since 1995.

   The prizes have grown from five awards to 10 and recognize books in
categories including fiction, biography, history and science and technology. The
Robert Kirsch Award honors a living author whose residence or focus is the
American West and whose contributions to American letters merit recognition. The
winning authors and the Kirsch Award recipient receive a $1,000 prize. Finalists
are listed below.

   This year's award ceremony will be held Friday at Royce Hall on the UCLA
campus. The ceremony begins at 8 p.m. and will be emceed by Sir Harold Evans.
Tickets are $14 and are available from the UCLA central ticket office at (310)
825-2101 or at tickets.ucla.edu. For more information:
www.latimes.com/bookprizes.

   Robert Kirsch Award

   Presented to Tony Hillerman

   *

   Biography

   Alexander Hamilton

   Ron Chernow

   (Penguin)

   A portrait of a gifted Founding Father and the newborn nation he helped guide
through crises.

   Will in the World

   How Shakespeare

   Became Shakespeare

   Stephen Greenblatt

   (W.W. Norton)

   A young man from the provinces ascends to theatrical greatness in Elizabethan
England.

   John James

   Audubon

   The Making of an American

   Richard Rhodes

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   The private and family life of a master illustrator whose crowning
achievement is the multivolume work "The Birds of America."

   De Kooning

   An American Master

   Mark Stevens and

   Annalyn Swan

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   The rise of a key figure in the Abstract Expressionist movement and his later
descent into alcoholism and Alzheimer's disease.

   Washington

   Gone Crazy

   Senator Pat McCarran

   and the Great American

   Communist Hunt

   Michael J. Ybarra

   (Steerforth Press)

   The extraordinary career of a U.S. senator who wielded

   power during the anti-Communist hysteria

   of the 1950s.

   *

   Current Interest

   The Spiral Staircase

   My Climb Out of Darkness

   Karen Armstrong

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   The memoir of a preeminent writer on religion, who

   describes her troubled years after leaving the convent.

   Blue Blood

   Edward Conlon

   (Riverhead Books)

   The author, a fourth-generation New York City police officer, looks back on
his encounters with the city in all its turmoil and splendor.

   Bound to Please

   An Extraordinary

   One Volume Literary

   Education -- Essays on Great Writers and Their Books

   Michael Dirda

   (W.W. Norton)

   A volume of essays on writers including Herodotus and James Boswell as well
as modern masters such as Cormac McCarthy and Joseph Roth.

   Truth & Beauty

   A Friendship

   Ann Patchett

   (HarperCollins)

   A memoir in praise of a friendship between two writers that spanned 20 years.

   Generation Kill

   Devil Dogs, Iceman, Captain America, and the New Face of American War

   Evan Wright

   (Putnam)

   A journalist joins up with an elite Army unit searching for

   enemy fighters after the fall of

   Baghdad.

   *

   Fiction

   GraceLand

   A Novel

   Chris Abani

   (Farrar, Straus & Giroux)

   A young man comes of age in Nigeria during the 1970s and early 1980s.

   The Darling

   A Novel

   Russell Banks

   (HarperCollins)

   A child of privilege becomes a political radical and flees the U.S. for
Africa, where she marries a dictator's henchman.

   Gilead

   A Novel

   Marilynne Robinson

   (Farrar, Straus & Giroux)

   In failing health, an Iowa preacher writes a letter to his 7-year-old son as
a way of leaving a record of himself for the boy to consider when he grows up.

   The Master

   A Novel

   Colm Toibin

   (Scribner)

   Loneliness, hope and despair loom in the life of Henry James after theatrical
success eludes him in 1895.

   Honored Guest

   Stories

   Joy Williams

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   Lyrical short stories about characters facing their and others' mortality.

   *

   Art Seidenbaum Award for First Fiction

   Harbor

   A Novel

   Lorraine Adams

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   Desperation and uncertainty hover over the lives of illegal Algerian
immigrants who arrive here hoping for a better life.

   Natasha

   and Other Stories

   David Bezmozgis

   (Farrar, Straus & Giroux)

   A family of Russian Jews settles in Toronto and the members attempt to
reinvent themselves.

   Rear View

   Stories

   Pete Duval

   (Mariner Books/Houghton

   Mifflin)

   Working-class characters wrestle with their fates in these stories set in New
England.

   Eve Green

   A Novel

   Susan Fletcher

   (W.W. Norton)

   A pregnant young woman meditates on her childhood and her mother's death as
she settles down in a quiet rural community in Wales.

   A Girl Becomes a

   Comma Like That

   A Novel

   Lisa Glatt

   (Simon & Schuster)

   Power and vulnerability shift in the lives of the female characters in this
novel, as one of them moves home to tend her mother, who is dying of cancer.

   *

   History

   The Coming

   of the Third Reich

   Richard J. Evans

   (Penguin)

   A detailed reckoning, full of drama, of the rise to power of Hitler and the
Nazi Party in Germany.

   High Noon in

   the Cold War

   Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Cuban Missile Crisis

   Max Frankel

   (Presidio Press/Ballantine

   Books)

   Drawing on new material, theauthor portrays one of the most dangerous moments
in the Cold War.

   Perilous Times

   Free Speech in Wartime From the Sedition Act of 1798 to the War on Terrorism

   Geoffrey R. Stone

   (W.W. Norton)

   A study of six periods in American history when free speech was repressed.

   Beasts of the Field

   A Narrative History of California Farm Workers, 1769-1913

   Richard Steven Street

   (Stanford University Press)

   A comprehensive look at California's agriculture industry and its treatment
of migratory farmworkers.

   Masquerade

   The Life and Times of

   Deborah Sampson,

   Continental Soldier

   Alfred F. Young

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   How a woman in disguise served in a Massachusetts regiment during the
American Revolution.

   *

   Mystery/Thriller

   Dark Voyage

   A Novel

   Alan Furst

   (Random House)

   In 1941, workers in a Lisbon dockyard witness the approach of a rusty tramp
steamer that conceals spies working for British intelligence.

   The Return of the

   Dancing Master

   A Novel

   Henning Mankell, translated from the Swedish by Laurie Thompson

   (New Press)

   A Swedish policeman on medical leave investigates the murder of a former
colleague, only to find that his old friend was a Nazi.

   Old Boys

   A Novel

   Charles McCarry

   (Overlook Press)

   A retired CIA spy recruits some former colleagues to help him find a lost
cousin, who is a veteran covert agent.

   Tijuana Straits

   A Novel

   Kem Nunn

   (Scribner)

   A washed-up surfer struggling with his demons helps a woman on the run from
danger in the no-man's land along the Mexican border.

   A Question of Blood

   An Inspector Rebus Novel

   Ian Rankin

   (Little, Brown)

   An Edinburgh policeman investigates the shooting of three students at a
private school by a man who then took his own

   life.

   *

   Poetry

   Inner Voices

   Selected Poems, 1963-2003

   Richard Howard

   (Farrar, Straus & Giroux)

   Poems pondering what is within the soul and in the heavens.

   The Orchard

   Poems

   Brigit Pegeen Kelly

   (BOA Editions)

   Using allegory and myth in

   verse to study the nexus of

   consciousness and the dream world.

   The Optimist

   Poems

   Joshua Mehigan

   (Ohio University Press)

   A look at the darker side of the world today and the desire of the self.

   The Clerk's Tale

   Poems

   Spencer Reece

   (Mariner Books / Houghton

   Mifflin)

   Poems harking back to Chaucer and the life of a salesman.

   Keeping My Name

   Poems

   Catherine Tufariello

   (Texas Tech University Press)

   Formal poetry with themes drawn from contemporary life.

   *

   Science and Technology

   The Proteus Effect

   Stem Cells and Their Promise

   for Medicine

   Ann B. Parson

   (Joseph Henry Press/National

   Academies Press)

   A look at the controversial research that holds promise but entails ethical
issues.

   Opening Skinner's

   Box

   Great Psychological Experiments of the Twentieth Century

   Lauren Slater

   (W.W. Norton)

   How psychologists developed theories on free will, conformity and morality.

   On the Wing

   To the Edge of the Earth With

   the Peregrine Falcon

   Alan Tennant

   (Alfred A. Knopf)

   Trailing peregrine falcons as they migrate between the Caribbean and the
Arctic.

   His Brother's Keeper

   A Story From the Edge

   of Medicine

   Jonathan Weiner

   (Ecco/HarperCollins)

   An entrepreneur banks on the promise of gene therapy to save his younger
brother's life.

   The Whale and the

   Supercomputer

   On the Northern Front

   of Climate Change

   Charles Wohlforth

   (North Point Press/Farrar,

   Straus & Giroux)

   Global warming's effects on Alaska.

   *

   Young Adult Fiction

   Sammy and Juliana

   in Hollywood

   Benjamin Alire Saenz

   (Cinco Puntos Press)

   A high school senior faces a rough world in a 1969 New Mexico barrio.

   Doing It

   Melvin Burgess

   (Henry Holt Books for Young

   Readers)

   The sexual awakenings of three British teens.

   Private Peaceful

   Michael Morpurgo

   (Scholastic Press)

   A British World War I soldier on battlefield watch recalls his childhood.

   Under the Wolf,

   Under the Dog

   Adam Rapp

   (Candlewick Press)

   A troubled teen tries to deal with his mother's death and an older brother's
suicide.

   How I Live Now

   Meg Rosoff

   (Wendy Lamb Books/Random

   House Children's Books)

   An American teen becomes smitten with her English cousin as London comes
under attack.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2005


                             177 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            April 14, 2005 Thursday
                          FINAL Edition; ALL Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 535 words

HEADLINE: 14-year-old Ohioan loses cancer battle;
His 'big' heart failed in last-hope surgery

BYLINE: HARLAN SPECTOR, PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Jordan Aron's heart gave out on a Los Angeles operating table Monday, just
after doctors removed a baseball-size tumor from his skull during a last-hope
surgery for the 14-year-old, suburban Youngstown boy.

   Jordan's parents had taken their son from hospital to hospital, city to city,
in hope of beating the fast-growing cancer known as rhabdomyosarcoma. Several
doctors had said it was incurable.

   A surgeon at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center agreed to operate on the tumor,
which grew unabated despite three previous surgeries and numerous rounds of
chemotherapy.

   The cancerous tumor protruded from Jordan's freckled cheek and his temple,
and in recent weeks grew into his mouth.

   The surgery took place two months after Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center decided Jordan would not be a candidate for an experimental gene
therapy treatment sought by his parents.

   Dr. Hrayr Shahinian, director of the Skull Base Institute at Cedars-Sinai,
described the surgery Wednesday as a "Hail Mary pass." At best it would not cure
the cancer, but would give Jordan more time and improve chances of success with
cancer drugs.

   Shahinian said he had awakened at 2:15 that morning with worries about the
operation, but the tumor at Jordan's temple came out easily. "I was almost
euphoric."

   Five minutes later, Jordan's heart went into ventricular fibrillation, an
irregular contraction of the lower chambers. For 40 minutes, doctors tried to
resuscitate him.

   "We never got a rhythm back," Shahinian said.

   Wendy Aron, Jordan's mother, fought for medical treatment while doctors at
different hospitals debated behind the scenes whether Jordan should be at home
receiving hospice care. One specialist at the Cleveland Clinic criticized Dr.
Timothy Cripe in Cincinnati for taking on the case in the fall.

   "He's gone," Wendy Aron said Wednesday, sobbing on the telephone. "I tried so
hard, so did he."

   Before surgery, "I said, 'You all right, boy?' He shook his head yes and gave
me the peace sign. That was the last time I saw him.

   "I loved that boy. The world is going to miss him. He was special."

   Jordan struggled quietly with his disease and disfigurement. He asked his
mother recently why God didn't like him. But the outside world only saw a boy
who never complained during two years of near-constant treatment.

   "He's an example of how to take what God gives you and keep on walking," said
Rabbi Joel Berman, who will deliver a eulogy at a memorial service Friday.

   At the end, Jordan was weak and unable to eat solid food. The tumor pushed on
his tongue. For the past two weeks, he was fed through a tube.

   But he continued to ride his four-wheeler and talked about going fishing with
Adam Sandler, his mother said. The actor/comedian kept in touch with Jordan and
had sent him a 55-gallon aquarium stocked with tropical fish.

   Jordan played the saxophone before the tumor made it impossible. He loved
swimming and drag racing.

   "I told his parents, you can never look back and say you did not do
everything humanly possible," said Shahinian, the Los Angeles surgeon. "Despite
the fact we never gave up on him, the guy upstairs had other plans."

   Besides his mother and father, George, Jordan is survived by a sister,
Lindsay.

   Wendy Aron said the memorial service is private.

GRAPHIC: DALE OMORI PLAIN DEALER FILE PHOTOGRAPH Jordan Aron, 14, is shown with
his mother, Wendy, in their Boardman home recently. Jordan died on an operating
table in a hospital in Los Angeles on Monday.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2005


                             178 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                            April 13, 2005 Wednesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & SOUL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2126 words

HEADLINE: BATTLING FOR A CURE

BYLINE: BY JULIAN KESNER DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   JACOB SONTAG

   6, RYE, N.Y.

   Shortly after her son Jacob Sontag was born in 1996, Jordana Holovach began
to feel that something wasn't quite right.

   "When I started hanging out with other moms, I noticed something was a little
different," remembers the Rye, N.Y., mother, now 34. "At 2 months, I began to
get concerned that he wasn't lifting his head. He had started smiling and was
really alert, but I was concerned that he wasn't holding up his head."

   A series of tests and misdiagnoses followed. Finally, Jacob's father went in
for genetic testing to rule out certain diseases. In fact, Holovach had already
undergone a prenatal screening - both parents are Ashkenazi Jews, a group prone
to certain hereditary diseases - but the geneticist had failed to test for one
genetic mutation in particular: Canavan disease. A test for it was just becoming
widely available.

   A BIG LAUGH AND RADIANT SMILE

   "I start researching all the diseases that we were ruling out," recalls
Holovach. "I get to Canavan and I'm like, 'Oh, please, God.' I remember calling
my mother in the middle of the night because it was too upsetting to sleep.
You'd hope this was a nightmare and you'd wake up and this would all go away."

   It didn't go away. Eventually diagnosed with Canavan disease, Jacob Sontag is
now 9 years old and cannot walk, talk, sit up or do just about anything else
that other 9-year-olds regularly accomplish. He eats through a feeding tube,
accompanying his meals with daunting medications like Topamax, Baclofen,
Clonopin, lithium carbonate and others.

   What he can do is laugh and smile widely, a grin that could light up several
city blocks, let alone a room. "When people meet Jacob, they become magnetized
by him and his smile," says his mother.

   Canavan is caused by a mutated gene that inhibits production of an enzyme
called aspartoacylase. This enzyme normally breaks down N-acetyl aspartate
(NAA), an acid in the brain; without the enzyme, NAA levels are allowed to build
up and eat away at the ­myelin - better known as the "white matter" - that
serves as the protective ­layer around nerve paths in the brain and spinal cord.

   The NAA eats away the ­myelin, and the nervous system eventually shuts down.
Canavan children rarely live to their fifth birthday.

   The genetic mutation is most common among Ashkenazi Jews (those of Eastern or
Central European descent); approximately 1 in 40 are carriers. If both parents
have the trait, a child has a 25% chance of developing Canavan disease.

   KITCHEN AS CURE CENTER

   There are approximately 1,000 Canavan patients in the U.S. at present. The
rarity of this disease and other leukodystrophies - disorders affecting the
myelin, such as Krabbe or Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease - has made research and
funding from the government and pharmaceutical companies scarce at best. That's
why Holovach founded the nonprofit foundation Jacob's Cure in 2000.

   "People can see where their money is going, they don't see great
administrative costs. I don't have an office in Manhattan - this is Jacob's Cure
center here," says Holovach, motioning to her kitchen table.

   Jacob Sontag is still alive primarily because of the foundation's funding of
the work of Dr. Paola Leone, an Italian neuroscientist who has been researching
myelin disorders for a decade. Leone first met Jacob in 1996, shortly after
performing a first-of-kind gene therapy trial in New Zealand on two American
girls suffering from Canavan disease.

   "There was an increase in white matter in the brain and the children did
better neurologically," says Leone of the first trial. The girls, now 9 and 10,
are "doing well - for what a disease like Canavan means."

   Holovach heard about the trial when Jacob was 6 months old. "All I wanted to
do was get in my car and drive to Yale and wait for Paola to come to work the
next day," she remembers. "It was the longest night of my life because I
couldn't sleep and I couldn't get on the phone."

   But Leone, at Yale at the time, was out of funding and preparing to close
shop. "I said, 'When's the next gene therapy? I'm in,'" recalls Holovach. "She
said, 'Sorry, we're shutting down our lab, we don't have any more funds to work
on this.' I said, 'No, no, no, I don't think you heard me. Whatever you need,
I'm going to get for you.'"

   Holovach has been battling for funding and clinical trial approval ever
since, any way she can. There has been testimony before Congress. Meetings with
Sens. Hillary Clinton and Chuck Schumer. Television appearances. A
much-publicized shouting match with a Yale geneticist in the university's
hospital lobby.

   Much has been accomplished. Leone was awarded the first-ever National
Institute of Health (NIH) grant for viral gene therapy, where the gene is
delivered inside a nonpathogenic virus and injected into six regions of the
brain (formerly, a fat molecule was used for delivery into the ventricles; Jacob
also received two such treatments).

   Leone will soon publish the viral clinical trial results, which she says show
"anything but failure." Jacob was one of the trial's 10 patients.

   Now, the battlefield has shifted to stem cells. Currently at Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School in New Jersey, Leone and others believe the greatest hope
for Canavan and similar myelin disorders lies in using both stem cell and gene
therapies.

   "It's therapy for repopulating the brain," says Leone. "If the brain is
missing cells or has cells that are no longer working, it's cell replacement.
Sometimes, you have to use both." The gene therapy, which Leone calls a
"prerequisite," lowers NAA levels in the brain, which then allow the stem cells
to generate new white matter.

   COMBINED APPROACH BEST

   Leone does not work with embryonic stem cells - the subject of nationwide
debate over the last few years - and instead uses fetal stem cells derived from
abortions performed because of a health risk to the mother. An Italian
colleague, Dr. Angelo Vescovi, and others have published results on using such
cells to repopulate the brain and grow white matter in animals with multiple
sclerosis, a disease also affected by myelin deterioration.

   At the University of Rochester Medical School, Dr. Steve Goldman was recently
able to use human neural stem cells to restore nerve function in mice born
without any myelin at all. "The cells migrated throughout the brain and the
brain stem, and formed normal myelin," reports Goldman. "The brain looked
substantially remyelinated - much improved from the standpoint of the brain
anatomy." Much of the lab work was performed at New York Presbyterian
Hospital-New York Weill Cornell.

   Goldman says that to his group's surprise, stem cells derived from adult
brain tissue were better at making new myelin than those from aborted fetuses.
Regardless of the efficacy of the various sources, Goldman agrees that using
both genes and stem cells holds promise. "There are a number of diseases like
Canavan's that will likely require combined approaches," he says.

   A RESEARCH VACUUM

   Despite such promising results, obstacles continue to arise. The day before
Jacob's ninth birthday, the NIH denied Leone's grant application for basic
research on the Canavan animal model for the next five years.

   "A year and a half of work, so much data, so many animals' lives - it's a
huge turndown," says Leone, her head-shaking almost visible over the phone.
"This used to be the country of resources and opportunity, but it's turning out
not to be anymore for young and creative investigators." Holovach is equally
angry. "What are they doing to protect their investment?" she asks, referring to
past NIH funding. "Are they just going to stand by and watch the lab shut down?"

   Leone, who has already had to move labs three times in the last eight years,
is considering relocating overseas to continue her work.

   "She's put her career on the line to do what she wants to do, which is cure
disease and make science applicable to the patients," says Holovach. "If she has
to leave the country, I'll be devastated. It would be such a great, great loss
to lose such a scientist. My government is doing things so wrong."

   Time, Jacob's worst enemy, ticks on. His NAA levels will begin to drop again
without further treatment. But his mother tirelessly refuses to quit.

   "I'm equipped to sleep three hours a night," says Holovach. "I'm not equipped
for a life without Jacob."

   'WE NEVER KNEW HE HAD A DISEASE.'

   OMAR ODEH

   6, CHATTANOOGA

   It is unbearable enough for an infant to show signs of illness right from
birth. It is perhaps even harder, however, to watch a child flourish for years -
and then suddenly crumble seemingly out of nowhere.

   "He developed just like a normal kid, he walked and talked - he even knew his
alphabets," says Saussan Odeh, of her son Omar, now 6. "We never knew he had a
disease."

   When Omar was 2, Odeh and her husband, who live in Chattanooga, Tenn. (they
declined to be photographed for this article), noticed he was tripping and
falling down frequently. A neurologist soon diagnosed Omar with metachromatic
leukodystrophy (MLD), a debilitating hereditary illness that affects myelin like
Canavan disease.

   At ages 5 and 6, Omar suffered violent seizures. "The seizure really cut off
his speech," says Odeh. "After the seizure, he just could say 'water,' 'Mommy'
or 'Daddy.' After the second time he had a seizure, he couldn't say any of
those."

   Bone marrow therapy for MLD can cost upwards of $250,000 for a single
treatment, and is notoriously risky. Omar is also too old for such operations to
be effective. So Odeh, 25, stays home with her son now while her husband,
Ashraf, works at a beauty-supply store.

   Aside from giving Omar his daily doses of anti-seizure medication, his mother
feels increasingly helpless.

   "We're just trying to hang on," she says. "It's very, very hard. I would do
anything for my son."

   'THERE'S A VERY LOVING, DETERMINED LITTLE PERSON INSIDE THAT WE HAVE TO HELP
GET OUT.'

   HUNTER KELLY

   8, BUFFALO

   Former Buffalo Bills quarterback Jim Kelly and his wife, Jill, realized that
something was wrong with their son Hunter on the way home from the hospital
after his birth in 1997.

   "As soon as we walked through our door, he began to act very uncomfortable
and cry all the time," remembers Jill Kelly. "That persisted for the first few
months of his life. He was irritable constantly. He was arching his back and
acting like he was in pain. He never held his head up, he never reached any of
the milestones that newborns have in the first few months."

   While Jim Kelly had overcome plenty of obstacles playing with the Bills, they
paled in comparison with the ones that his family would now face with their son.
Hunter's symptoms began to worsen; one doctor thought he might have cerebral
palsy. But when Hunter began having seizures, they paid a ­isit to a neurologist
at Children's Hospital in Buffalo.

   "She just said, 'I'm going to take some blood and test for leukodystrophies.'
Of course, we didn't know what that was," remembers Jim. "We had never heard of
it. I went home that day and checked on the Web for these things.

   "I was pretty confident, but two weeks later, our neurologist called us into
her office and our pediatrician was there. She sat us down and told us the
diagnosis and that it was Krabbe disease. We were devastated, to say the least."

   Like Canavan, Krabbe disease is a rare neurodegenerative ailment affecting
the myelin, or white matter, of the brain. Also similar to Canavan is the
eventual complete neurological breakdown of patients - and a life expectancy of
only a few years.

   Within a week, their son was using a feeding tube. "Hunter wasn't able to
swallow. It took us, like, an hour to give him just an ounce of formula," says
Jim. "We almost waited for him to die.

   "She told us there's no cure, there's nothing anyone is doing. So we just
left it at that, even though here we're thinking, 'Wait, this is Jim Kelly, we
can do stuff.' But there was nothing, which is why we started the foundation."

   The nonprofit institution Hunter's Hope has raised close to $4 million so far
to fund Krabbe research and treatment options. Much of the money raised has gone
toward umbilical-cord blood transplants, a procedure that, although somewhat
risky, has shown promising results in Krabbe patients who are only a few months
old. Several hundred such cord blood transplants are performed annually.

   Hunter, meanwhile, turned 8 on Valentine's Day. He shares his birthday with
his dad, who retired from the NFL at the end of the 1996 season. Jill says both
she and her husband are impressed every day with Hunter's cognitive abilities
and progress.

   "Every single person that works with Hunter is amazed," she says, beaming.
"He blinks once for yes. He's been trying to pull his head forward. There's a
very loving, determined little person inside that we have to help get out."

GRAPHIC: CHET GORDON HOPEFUL: Jacob Sontag and his mother, Jordana Holovach, are
awaiting the results of the clinical trial in which he participated. SABINA
PIERCE FRUSTRATED: Despite promising results, Dr. Paola Leone faces funding
obstacles. BRODY WHEELER PROACTIVE: Jim and Jill Kelly with son Hunter.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2005


                             179 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                             April 9, 2005 Saturday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; CRITTERS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: NEW HELP FOR CRIPPLED DOGS

BYLINE: BY AMY SACKS DAILY NEWS WRITER

BODY:

   IT'S LETHAL when ingested by dogs. But now one Long Island animal hospital is
gearing up to use a chemical relative of anti-freeze to reverse paralysis and
spinal injuries in dogs.

   Long Island Veterinary Specialists, in Plainview, L.I., will be one of the
first facilities in the country to offer the breakthrough procedure, which is
based on medical research at Purdue University.

   The study found that dogs with paralyzed hind legs regained the ability to
walk after getting a shot of the nontoxic polymer - called polyethylene glycol
(PEG) - when used in addition to surgery and rehabilitation.

   The research first appeared in the December 2004 issue of the Journal of
Neurotrauma.

   "This process dramatically improves the success rate of spinal surgeries,"
said Dr. Dominic Marino, chief of staff at Long Island Veterinary Specialists.
The veterinary surgeon plans to receive the first batch of the new chemical next
week, and to put it to immediate use as part of a wide-scale clinical trial.

   "Our goal is to figure out appropriate dose, appropriate application and
which patient would benefit the most," he said.

   Exactly how PEG works is murky, however. Marino said the chemical, which is
injected into the patient's spinal cord during surgery, acts like "biological
glue" and forms a seal over damaged areas of the nerve cells.

   Dogs with recent spinal damage - from car accidents, slipped discs or other
trauma - reportedly stand a 70% chance of regaining motor function when the
chemical is used during spinal surgery, more than double the old rate, he added.

   It could be great news for Manhattan's most popular breed - the dachshund -
which is prone to back problems, and accounts for about one-third of dogs with
spinal injuries. Despite its success, treatment only worked on dogs given the
injections within about three days of an injury.

   Marino estimates Long Island Veterinary Specialists will help hundreds of
dogs a year regain motor function, in many cases restoring the ability to walk
after paralysis.

   He also believed PEG will open the door to reversing other types of
neurological damage, including brain trauma and peripheral nerve injury.

   Researchers are currently seeking FDA approval to test on humans.

   Meanwhile, other pioneering advances in animal medicine also could add to the
quality - and quantity - of a companion animal's life.

   A needle-free vaccine, which blasts through the skin, recently made available
for feline leukemia could change the way other vaccines are administered.

   "This is probably going to be the way of the future for cat vaccines," said
Dr. Arnold Plotnick of Manhattan Cat Specialists on the upper West side.

   So far, the needleless injection system is available only for leukemia
vaccines.

   For cats, the needleless injection systems means a painless shot that doesn't
require shaving a patch of fur. Its main advantage, however, is the ability to
produce better immunity.

   Rather than pool in one place, the vaccine is dispersed throughout the
dermis, which results in better immunity and less chance for adverse vaccine
reactions, Plotnick said.

   Cancer vaccines that boost the animal's immune system are also on the
horizon, said Dr. Gerald Post, founder of the Veterinary Oncology and Hematology
Center in Norwalk, Conn.

   But as the number of pets diagnosed with cancer increases, Post believes the
next breakthrough in cancer therapy for people and pets will include molecular
targeted therapy, or gene therapy, in place of traditional chemotherapy.

   "Cancer is not a death sentence," Post said.In fact, he added, "It's a very
exciting time in animal medicine."

   amysacks1@hotmail.com

GRAPHIC: TANYA BRAGANTI Dr. Arnold Plotnick of Manhattan Cat Specialists on the
upper West Side is working with a new needle-free - and painless - feline
vaccine device.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2005


                             180 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     April 5, 2005, Tuesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1312 words

HEADLINE: Will stem cells be able to repair human hearts?

BYLINE: Josephine Marcotty; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Patricia Short is 57 and her heart has already failed her. It gets so little
blood that even picking up her smallest grandchild leaves her gasping with pain.

   Nothing in the armament of treatments - including surgery, stents and drugs -
has succeeded in keeping her blocked coronary arteries open.

   That's why she was lying on a bed at Abbott Northwestern Hospital in
Minneapolis in December as doctors probed her heart with a catheter in one of
the first experiments to test whether adult stem cells can repair the heart.

   If this remarkable procedure succeeds, it could help establish a new field of
medicine that harnesses the healing power of the body's own stem cells to repair
severed spines and organs that modern medicine can't fix.

   Short is one of 24 patients in a stem cell study conducted by researchers at
Abbott and another hospital near Boston. Short won't know for several months
whether the procedure worked.

   Scientists believe that adult stem cells repair the body because they can
turn into several different kinds of tissue. They come from bone marrow or
muscle, and increasingly scientists are finding them in other organs as well.

   While research using stem cells from human embryos has been slowed by
political and ethical debates, studies using adult stem cells are moving forward
briskly. Dozens of studies using many different types of adult stem cells are in
the pipeline, some involving hundreds of patients. One planned research project
is a joint venture between Medtronic of Fridley and Genzyme Corp. in Boston that
will include 300 heart attack patients from around the world.

   Yet the pace of adult stem cell research has left some researchers worried
that the field may be moving chaotically and too fast.

   No treatment worked

   Short, of Inver Grove Heights, found out she had heart disease three years
ago when she went to see a doctor about a constant burning sensation in her
chest. A week later she had heart bypass surgery.

   But within two months, heart disease closed her newly grafted arteries. Drugs
didn't work, and neither did stents, the tiny mesh devices that doctors inserted
to keep her arteries clear. She could no longer work, climb the stairs, teach
dance at the family's dance studio, or hold the smallest of her 14
grandchildren. With no options left, her doctor sent her to Dr. Tim Henry, a
cardiology researcher at Abbott, who was looking for people with her condition
for the stem cell study.

   Short said she would happy to be "a guinea pig." She would take a chance "if
only so the little ones can run into my arms again."

   The stem-cell treatment first required Short to lie in a bed at Abbott while
her blood flowed into clear plastic tubes and through a machine that filtered
out stem cells.

   A few days later she lay partially sedated under a bank of TV monitors as
doctors fed a catheter through an artery from her groin. Using an electronic map
of her heart as a guide, Henry carefully maneuvered the tip through her coronary
arteries to the areas that were most deprived of blood.

   He pressed a button and watched on the monitor as a faint cloud appeared in
her heart. He was either injecting the area with 10 million of her own stem
cells - or a placebo. Because the study is blind, neither Short nor Henry will
know which one she received until the study is completed this summer.

   The hope is that stem cells will build new blood vessels to supply Short's
heart. The cells also might become heart muscle, Henry said. If the procedure
works, Henry and his research partners will seek federal funding for a second
phase with 200 patients.

   In about 10 earlier studies, all small, cells from either bone marrow or
muscle were injected into the hearts of patients. Some of the patients had had
heart attacks. Some were undergoing bypass surgery at the same time. Almost all
of the patients showed at least some improvement after the injection,
researchers said.

   Stem cell mystery

   No one is quite sure why stem cells seem able to repair heart tissue.

   Do the cells become blood vessels or muscle or both? Do they release
chemicals that promote healing or wake up cells that were already there? Or do
they do all of that?

   "What has become increasingly clear is that the mechanism is unknown," said
Dr. Noel Caplice, a cardiologist who does adult stem cell research at the Mayo
Clinic. And that makes some researchers nervous.

   Dr. Doris Taylor, a professor and head of the Center for Cardiovascular
Repair at the University of Minnesota, is among the researchers urging a slow,
steady pace.

   "The question I ask myself is, 'Would I want this done on my mother?'-" she
said. "The truth is, this is a new field, and we don't understand all the
implications."

   Taylor and other researchers said they are concerned about the safety of stem
cells and do not want to repeat what happened with gene therapy. That is another
field of research that involves inserting healthy genes into the cells of people
with genetic disorders.

   Gene therapy once was seen as a potential Holy Grail for curing hundreds of
sometimes deadly genetic conditions - until Jesse Gelsinger died. He was an
18-year-old with a genetic liver disorder who died in 1999 from an experimental
gene therapy treatment at the University of Pennsylvania. A subsequent federal
investigation found that gene therapy researchers across the country had not
reported nearly 700 serious medical events involving research subjects.

   Research proposals and funding for gene therapy shrank substantially,
scientists said.

   "One very tragic death really affected the field," Caplice said.

   Researchers on adult stem cells have a powerful argument for their basic
safety: Patients are treated with cells made by their own bodies. That makes it
safer than experiments that use a foreign substance in patients who are already
sick, experts said.

   Still, researchers can conjure up risky scenarios. For example, they said,
cells that manufacture blood vessels could find their way to an undetected
cancer tumor. They could then set up shop and build a network of blood vessels
to feed - and grow - the tumor.

   Muscle cells injected into the heart might make themselves at home there. But
they might respond differently to the electrical signals from the brain that
make the heart contract, causing an erratic heartbeat, experts said.

   That's why it is critical to proceed cautiously with small trials that first
test the safety of stem cells, Taylor said. She and other researchers at the
university are waiting for approval to start a study that, like Henry's, will be
a small, first phase that tests the safety of a procedure. They want to inject a
variety of stem cells into the hearts of patients who are awaiting heart
transplants.

   They hope that one of two things will happen:

   Either the patient will get a new heart, and they can study the old one to
find out what happened to those injected cells. Or the patients will get better,
and they won't need transplants at all, Taylor said.

   "And then we will have the home run," she said. "I can live with either of
those."

   Josephine Marcotty is at marcotty@startribune.com.

   Repairing damaged hearts with stem cells

   Researchers at Abbott Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis are testing
stem-cell therapies in people with heart disease that can't otherwise be
treated.

   1. Patient is injected with a drug that increases a type of bone marrow cell
called an adult stem cell. These cells can differentiate into some other types
of cells.

   2. Blood from patient is filtered through a machine that extracts stem cells.

   3. A catheter, threaded up a blood vessel in the patient's groin, injects
stem cells into the damaged area of the heart.

   4. Researchers hope to learn whether the stem cells will grow into tiny blood
vessels that will feed blood to the heart.

   Source: University of Minnesota


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2005


                             181 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 5, 2005, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy's slow path

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:
Fifteen years ago, scientists heralded gene therapy as a medical revolution that
would quickly bring cures for crippling and deadly diseases.After more than 900
clinical trials, however, gene scientists can claim few real successes, and even
the technology's longtime supporters say gene therapy has developed far more
slowly than they had expected.

   "Everybody realizes that using a gene as a drug is a good idea," says Ronald
Crystal, chairman of genetic medicine at Cornell University's Weill Medical
College. "The difficulty is making it work."


   Treatment comes with a cost

   Experts say the story of the treatment of 10 sick children at a Paris
hospital, which made news in March, illustrates the technology's promise as well
as its challenges. The boys were born with a rare and lethal genetic disorder
that left them without working immune systems.

   Although bone marrow transplants can cure the disease, many children are
unable to find matched donors, says Donald Kohn, a professor of pediatrics at
Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern California.

   Instead of treating the symptoms, French doctors hoped to correct the source
of the illness by providing the boys with working copies of a gene that helps
the immune system develop.

   Almost all the children got better. Today, most of them are healthy.

   "They're out with their playmates rolling around in the dirt," says Theodore
Friedmann, a professor of pediatrics and biomedical ethics at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine. "They're doing things they never could
have dreamed of."

   The French trial began in 1999, and in 2002, two of the children developed
leukemia.

   Doctors discovered that the new genes either settled next to or inside a gene
that spurs growth. The event may have caused the growth of cancerous cells,
Crystal says.

   Recently, French doctors announced that one of the children died and a third
has developed a condition that appears similar to leukemia.

   "This is the first example of a really effective, robust treatment of
anything by gene therapy," Friedmann says. "But that treatment carries an
enormous cost."

   Science seeks the answer

   Yet scientists say they haven't given up. Children treated in similar
experiments in England appear healthy, Friedmann says.

   And although doctors cannot control where genes settle, they are working on
ways to insulate neighboring cells from newly transferred DNA, says Katherine
High, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.

   Many new medical treatments -- from heart transplants to cancer drugs -- took
decades to perfect, doctors say. Chemotherapy and radiation treatments that cure
cancer often lead to heart damage or even second tumors.

   Scientists still are struggling to deliver genes in "the right way, at the
right time in a regulated way," Friedmann says.

   High, a researcher at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, has worked for
years to cure a type of severe hemophilia. People with the disease fail to
produce a critical substance that helps their blood clot.

   High has developed a therapy that, with one shot, successfully treats
hemophilia in dogs for five years.

   In humans, however, the effects last only a few weeks, probably because the
body reacts against the crippled virus that carries the genes, High says.

   Other gene therapy experiments have failed because the body rejects the genes
themselves as foreign, High says.

   Some investors aren't willing to wait for scientists to solve these problems.
The company that sponsored High's hemophilia research backed out. She now plans
to finance her work through grants.

   Other investors lost faith in gene therapy in 1999 when teenager Jesse
Gelsinger died after he was injected with a modified virus carrying a gene in an
experiment at the University of Philadelphia. The number of gene trials in the
USA, which peaked at 91 that year, fell sharply.

   Progress amid setbacks

   Scientific companies are shifting efforts away from rare disorders and toward
more common maladies such as cancer, blindness and Parkinson's disease because
of the larger potential markets, says Mark Kay, a researcher at Stanford
University and president-elect of the gene therapy society.

   Only 10% of gene therapy trials in the USA now involve single-gene disorders,
says Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator for the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Nearly 70% target cancer.

   Yet scientists say they are tantalizingly close to finding solutions, Kay
says.

   Doctors are experimenting with genes that suppress tumors and ones that
interfere with the blood vessels that feed cancers.

   Another method, described this week in Nature, uses a different approach.
Instead of replacing missing or defective genes, it uses proteins to repair
mistakes in original DNA.

   "It's too easy to forget the incredible progress that has been made and to
say, 'Well, why haven't we cured all these diseases?' " says Daniel Salomon, an
associate professor at The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "But
when you're pioneering a new field, there are going to be advances and setbacks
that are going to frustrate both the scientists and the public."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Source: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (LINE
GRAPH); GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY, Source: Donald Kohn, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Reporting by Liz Szabo (DIAGRAM)

LOAD-DATE: April 05, 2005


                             182 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 5, 2005, Tuesday, FIRST EDITION

SECTION: ; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 866 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy's slow path

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:
Fifteen years ago, scientists heralded gene therapy as a medical revolution that
would quickly bring cures for crippling and deadly diseases.
After more than 900 clinical trials, however, gene scientists can claim few real
successes, and even the technology's longtime supporters say gene therapy has
developed far more slowly than they had expected.
"Everybody realizes that using a gene as a drug is a good idea," says Ronald
Crystal, chairman of genetic medicine at Cornell University's Weill Medical
College. "The difficulty is making it work."
Treatment comes with a cost Experts say the story of the treatment of 10 sick
children at a Paris hospital, which made news in March, illustrates the
technology's promise as well as its challenges. The boys were born with a rare
and lethal genetic disorder that left them without working immune systems.
Although bone marrow transplants can cure the disease, many children are unable
to find matched donors, says Donald Kohn, a professor of pediatrics at Keck
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California.
Instead of treating the symptoms, French doctors hoped to correct the source of
the illness by providing the boys with working copies of a gene that helps the
immune system develop.
Almost all the children got better. Today, most of them are healthy.
"They're out with their playmates rolling around in the dirt," says Theodore
Friedmann, a professor of pediatrics and biomedical ethics at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine. "They're doing things they never could
have dreamed of."
The French trial began in 1999, and in 2002, two of the children developed
leukemia.
Doctors discovered that the new genes either settled next to or inside a gene
that spurs growth. The event may have caused the growth of cancerous cells,
Crystal says.
Recently, French doctors announced that one of the children died and a third has
developed a condition that appears similar to leukemia.
"This is the first example of a really effective, robust treatment of anything
by gene therapy," Friedmann says. "But that treatment carries an enormous cost."

Science seeks the answer Yet scientists say they haven't given up. Children
treated in similar experiments in England appear healthy, Friedmann says.
And although doctors cannot control where genes settle, they are working on ways
to insulate neighboring cells from newly transferred DNA, says Katherine High,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.
Many new medical treatments -- from heart transplants to cancer drugs -- took
decades to perfect, doctors say.  Chemotherapy and radiation treatments that
cure cancer often lead to heart damage or even second tumors.
Scientists still are struggling to deliver genes in "the right way, at the right
time in a regulated way," Friedmann says.
High, a researcher at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, has worked for years
to cure a type of severe hemophilia.  People with the disease fail to produce a
critical substance that helps their blood clot.
High has developed a therapy that, with one shot, successfully treats hemophilia
in dogs for five years.
In humans, however, the effects last only a few weeks, probably because the body
reacts against the crippled virus that carries the genes, High says.
Other gene therapy experiments have failed because the body rejects the genes
themselves as foreign, High says.
Some investors aren't willing to wait for scientists to solve these problems.
The company that sponsored High's hemophilia research backed out. She now plans
to finance her work through grants.
Other investors lost faith in gene therapy in 1999 when teenager Jesse Gelsinger
died after he was injected with a modified virus carrying a gene in an
experiment at the University of Philadelphia. The number of gene trials in the
USA, which peaked at 91 that year, fell sharply.
Progress amid setbacks Scientific companies are shifting efforts away from rare
disorders and toward more common maladies such as cancer, blindness and
Parkinson's disease because of the larger potential markets, says Mark Kay, a
researcher at Stanford University and president-elect of the gene therapy
society.
Only 10% of gene therapy trials in the USA now involve single-gene disorders,
says Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator for the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Nearly 70% target cancer.
Yet scientists say they are tantalizingly close to finding solutions, Kay says.
Doctors are experimenting with genes that suppress tumors and ones that
interfere with the blood vessels that feed cancers.
Another method, described this week in Nature, uses a different approach.
Instead of replacing missing or defective genes, it uses proteins to repair
mistakes in original DNA.
"It's too easy to forget the incredible progress that has been made and to say,
'Well, why haven't we cured all these diseases?'" says Daniel Salomon, an
associate professor at The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "But
when you're pioneering a new field, there are going to be advances and setbacks
that are going to frustrate both the scientists and the public."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             183 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 5, 2005, Tuesday, FIRST EDITION

SECTION: ; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 866 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy's slow path

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:
Fifteen years ago, scientists heralded gene therapy as a medical revolution that
would quickly bring cures for crippling and deadly diseases.
After more than 900 clinical trials, however, gene scientists can claim few real
successes, and even the technology's longtime supporters say gene therapy has
developed far more slowly than they had expected.
"Everybody realizes that using a gene as a drug is a good idea," says Ronald
Crystal, chairman of genetic medicine at Cornell University's Weill Medical
College. "The difficulty is making it work."
Treatment comes with a cost Experts say the story of the treatment of 10 sick
children at a Paris hospital, which made news in March, illustrates the
technology's promise as well as its challenges. The boys were born with a rare
and lethal genetic disorder that left them without working immune systems.
Although bone marrow transplants can cure the disease, many children are unable
to find matched donors, says Donald Kohn, a professor of pediatrics at Keck
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California.
Instead of treating the symptoms, French doctors hoped to correct the source of
the illness by providing the boys with working copies of a gene that helps the
immune system develop.
Almost all the children got better. Today, most of them are healthy.
"They're out with their playmates rolling around in the dirt," says Theodore
Friedmann, a professor of pediatrics and biomedical ethics at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine. "They're doing things they never could
have dreamed of."
The French trial began in 1999, and in 2002, two of the children developed
leukemia.
Doctors discovered that the new genes either settled next to or inside a gene
that spurs growth. The event may have caused the growth of cancerous cells,
Crystal says.
Recently, French doctors announced that one of the children died and a third has
developed a condition that appears similar to leukemia.
"This is the first example of a really effective, robust treatment of anything
by gene therapy," Friedmann says. "But that treatment carries an enormous cost."

Science seeks the answer Yet scientists say they haven't given up. Children
treated in similar experiments in England appear healthy, Friedmann says.
And although doctors cannot control where genes settle, they are working on ways
to insulate neighboring cells from newly transferred DNA, says Katherine High,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.
Many new medical treatments -- from heart transplants to cancer drugs -- took
decades to perfect, doctors say.  Chemotherapy and radiation treatments that
cure cancer often lead to heart damage or even second tumors.
Scientists still are struggling to deliver genes in "the right way, at the right
time in a regulated way," Friedmann says.
High, a researcher at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, has worked for years
to cure a type of severe hemophilia.  People with the disease fail to produce a
critical substance that helps their blood clot.
High has developed a therapy that, with one shot, successfully treats hemophilia
in dogs for five years.
In humans, however, the effects last only a few weeks, probably because the body
reacts against the crippled virus that carries the genes, High says.
Other gene therapy experiments have failed because the body rejects the genes
themselves as foreign, High says.
Some investors aren't willing to wait for scientists to solve these problems.
The company that sponsored High's hemophilia research backed out. She now plans
to finance her work through grants.
Other investors lost faith in gene therapy in 1999 when teenager Jesse Gelsinger
died after he was injected with a modified virus carrying a gene in an
experiment at the University of Philadelphia. The number of gene trials in the
USA, which peaked at 91 that year, fell sharply.
Progress amid setbacks Scientific companies are shifting efforts away from rare
disorders and toward more common maladies such as cancer, blindness and
Parkinson's disease because of the larger potential markets, says Mark Kay, a
researcher at Stanford University and president-elect of the gene therapy
society.
Only 10% of gene therapy trials in the USA now involve single-gene disorders,
says Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator for the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Nearly 70% target cancer.
Yet scientists say they are tantalizingly close to finding solutions, Kay says.
Doctors are experimenting with genes that suppress tumors and ones that
interfere with the blood vessels that feed cancers.
Another method, described this week in Nature, uses a different approach.
Instead of replacing missing or defective genes, it uses proteins to repair
mistakes in original DNA.
"It's too easy to forget the incredible progress that has been made and to say,
'Well, why haven't we cured all these diseases?'" says Daniel Salomon, an
associate professor at The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "But
when you're pioneering a new field, there are going to be advances and setbacks
that are going to frustrate both the scientists and the public."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             184 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 5, 2005, Tuesday, FIRST EDITION

SECTION: ; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 866 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy's slow path

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:
Fifteen years ago, scientists heralded gene therapy as a medical revolution that
would quickly bring cures for crippling and deadly diseases.
After more than 900 clinical trials, however, gene scientists can claim few real
successes, and even the technology's longtime supporters say gene therapy has
developed far more slowly than they had expected.
"Everybody realizes that using a gene as a drug is a good idea," says Ronald
Crystal, chairman of genetic medicine at Cornell University's Weill Medical
College. "The difficulty is making it work."
Treatment comes with a cost Experts say the story of the treatment of 10 sick
children at a Paris hospital, which made news in March, illustrates the
technology's promise as well as its challenges. The boys were born with a rare
and lethal genetic disorder that left them without working immune systems.
Although bone marrow transplants can cure the disease, many children are unable
to find matched donors, says Donald Kohn, a professor of pediatrics at Keck
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California.
Instead of treating the symptoms, French doctors hoped to correct the source of
the illness by providing the boys with working copies of a gene that helps the
immune system develop.
Almost all the children got better. Today, most of them are healthy.
"They're out with their playmates rolling around in the dirt," says Theodore
Friedmann, a professor of pediatrics and biomedical ethics at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine. "They're doing things they never could
have dreamed of."
The French trial began in 1999, and in 2002, two of the children developed
leukemia.
Doctors discovered that the new genes either settled next to or inside a gene
that spurs growth. The event may have caused the growth of cancerous cells,
Crystal says.
Recently, French doctors announced that one of the children died and a third has
developed a condition that appears similar to leukemia.
"This is the first example of a really effective, robust treatment of anything
by gene therapy," Friedmann says. "But that treatment carries an enormous cost."

Science seeks the answer Yet scientists say they haven't given up. Children
treated in similar experiments in England appear healthy, Friedmann says.
And although doctors cannot control where genes settle, they are working on ways
to insulate neighboring cells from newly transferred DNA, says Katherine High,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.
Many new medical treatments -- from heart transplants to cancer drugs -- took
decades to perfect, doctors say.  Chemotherapy and radiation treatments that
cure cancer often lead to heart damage or even second tumors.
Scientists still are struggling to deliver genes in "the right way, at the right
time in a regulated way," Friedmann says.
High, a researcher at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, has worked for years
to cure a type of severe hemophilia.  People with the disease fail to produce a
critical substance that helps their blood clot.
High has developed a therapy that, with one shot, successfully treats hemophilia
in dogs for five years.
In humans, however, the effects last only a few weeks, probably because the body
reacts against the crippled virus that carries the genes, High says.
Other gene therapy experiments have failed because the body rejects the genes
themselves as foreign, High says.
Some investors aren't willing to wait for scientists to solve these problems.
The company that sponsored High's hemophilia research backed out. She now plans
to finance her work through grants.
Other investors lost faith in gene therapy in 1999 when teenager Jesse Gelsinger
died after he was injected with a modified virus carrying a gene in an
experiment at the University of Philadelphia. The number of gene trials in the
USA, which peaked at 91 that year, fell sharply.
Progress amid setbacks Scientific companies are shifting efforts away from rare
disorders and toward more common maladies such as cancer, blindness and
Parkinson's disease because of the larger potential markets, says Mark Kay, a
researcher at Stanford University and president-elect of the gene therapy
society.
Only 10% of gene therapy trials in the USA now involve single-gene disorders,
says Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator for the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Nearly 70% target cancer.
Yet scientists say they are tantalizingly close to finding solutions, Kay says.
Doctors are experimenting with genes that suppress tumors and ones that
interfere with the blood vessels that feed cancers.
Another method, described this week in Nature, uses a different approach.
Instead of replacing missing or defective genes, it uses proteins to repair
mistakes in original DNA.
"It's too easy to forget the incredible progress that has been made and to say,
'Well, why haven't we cured all these diseases?'" says Daniel Salomon, an
associate professor at The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "But
when you're pioneering a new field, there are going to be advances and setbacks
that are going to frustrate both the scientists and the public."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             185 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 5, 2005, Tuesday, FIRST EDITION

SECTION: ; Pg. 7D

LENGTH: 866 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy's slow path

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:
Fifteen years ago, scientists heralded gene therapy as a medical revolution that
would quickly bring cures for crippling and deadly diseases.
After more than 900 clinical trials, however, gene scientists can claim few real
successes, and even the technology's longtime supporters say gene therapy has
developed far more slowly than they had expected.
"Everybody realizes that using a gene as a drug is a good idea," says Ronald
Crystal, chairman of genetic medicine at Cornell University's Weill Medical
College. "The difficulty is making it work."
Treatment comes with a cost Experts say the story of the treatment of 10 sick
children at a Paris hospital, which made news in March, illustrates the
technology's promise as well as its challenges. The boys were born with a rare
and lethal genetic disorder that left them without working immune systems.
Although bone marrow transplants can cure the disease, many children are unable
to find matched donors, says Donald Kohn, a professor of pediatrics at Keck
School of Medicine at the University of Southern California.
Instead of treating the symptoms, French doctors hoped to correct the source of
the illness by providing the boys with working copies of a gene that helps the
immune system develop.
Almost all the children got better. Today, most of them are healthy.
"They're out with their playmates rolling around in the dirt," says Theodore
Friedmann, a professor of pediatrics and biomedical ethics at the University of
California San Diego School of Medicine. "They're doing things they never could
have dreamed of."
The French trial began in 1999, and in 2002, two of the children developed
leukemia.
Doctors discovered that the new genes either settled next to or inside a gene
that spurs growth. The event may have caused the growth of cancerous cells,
Crystal says.
Recently, French doctors announced that one of the children died and a third has
developed a condition that appears similar to leukemia.
"This is the first example of a really effective, robust treatment of anything
by gene therapy," Friedmann says. "But that treatment carries an enormous cost."

Science seeks the answer Yet scientists say they haven't given up. Children
treated in similar experiments in England appear healthy, Friedmann says.
And although doctors cannot control where genes settle, they are working on ways
to insulate neighboring cells from newly transferred DNA, says Katherine High,
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy.
Many new medical treatments -- from heart transplants to cancer drugs -- took
decades to perfect, doctors say.  Chemotherapy and radiation treatments that
cure cancer often lead to heart damage or even second tumors.
Scientists still are struggling to deliver genes in "the right way, at the right
time in a regulated way," Friedmann says.
High, a researcher at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, has worked for years
to cure a type of severe hemophilia.  People with the disease fail to produce a
critical substance that helps their blood clot.
High has developed a therapy that, with one shot, successfully treats hemophilia
in dogs for five years.
In humans, however, the effects last only a few weeks, probably because the body
reacts against the crippled virus that carries the genes, High says.
Other gene therapy experiments have failed because the body rejects the genes
themselves as foreign, High says.
Some investors aren't willing to wait for scientists to solve these problems.
The company that sponsored High's hemophilia research backed out. She now plans
to finance her work through grants.
Other investors lost faith in gene therapy in 1999 when teenager Jesse Gelsinger
died after he was injected with a modified virus carrying a gene in an
experiment at the University of Philadelphia. The number of gene trials in the
USA, which peaked at 91 that year, fell sharply.
Progress amid setbacks Scientific companies are shifting efforts away from rare
disorders and toward more common maladies such as cancer, blindness and
Parkinson's disease because of the larger potential markets, says Mark Kay, a
researcher at Stanford University and president-elect of the gene therapy
society.
Only 10% of gene therapy trials in the USA now involve single-gene disorders,
says Sonia Skarlatos, gene therapy coordinator for the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Nearly 70% target cancer.
Yet scientists say they are tantalizingly close to finding solutions, Kay says.
Doctors are experimenting with genes that suppress tumors and ones that
interfere with the blood vessels that feed cancers.
Another method, described this week in Nature, uses a different approach.
Instead of replacing missing or defective genes, it uses proteins to repair
mistakes in original DNA.
"It's too easy to forget the incredible progress that has been made and to say,
'Well, why haven't we cured all these diseases?'" says Daniel Salomon, an
associate professor at The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif. "But
when you're pioneering a new field, there are going to be advances and setbacks
that are going to frustrate both the scientists and the public."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             186 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      April 4, 2005, Monday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1342 words

HEADLINE: INVESTORS RECONSIDER GENETIC THERAPIES

BYLINE: By Kimberly W. Moy, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   Nearly 20 years after the first gene therapy company was started,
biotechnology investors are again opening their minds and wallets to the concept
of making drugs that fix genetic flaws and cure diseases.

      Four start-ups in Cambridge, Florida, and California have raised
significant backing in the last 18 months; all have started or hope to soon
start clinical trials.

          While raising funds to run such companies remains a crusade for the
dedicated, a small number of venture capitalists say they are convinced that two
decades of gene therapy research will eventually translate into handsome
payoffs, both in terms of profits and lives saved.

     "I don't run in the other direction because it's gene therapy, which a lot
of people do still," said David Mack of Alta Partners, a San Francisco venture
capital firm, which recruited other firms, such as MPM Capital, to raise $32
million for Ceregene in August. The company is developing therapies for
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Lou Gehrig's diseases.


     Gene therapy in its early years "overpromised and underdelivered," Mack
said, echoing the views of other investors and scientists.

     By the mid-1990s, nearly a decade after the first companies were founded in
1987, biotech investors had tired of waiting. The money was running out even
before teenager Jesse Gelsinger died in 1999 in a Pennsylvania clinic, due to
what experts agree was a protocol violation, not a problem with gene therapy
itself.

   This spotty history, with more than a thousand gene therapy trials started
but no big successes so far, "created a scorched earth for investors interested
in the area and for new companies seeking to raise money," said Steven Dickman,
chief executive of the Cambridge biotech consulting firm CBT Advisors. Dickman's
due diligence at Techno Venture Management in the early 2000s helped persuade
the firm to invest in Cambridge-based Genetix Pharmaceuticals Inc., as part of a
$12 million round in October 2004. The company is developing a hemoglobin gene
therapy for sickle cell anemia and beta-thalessemia.

      "As much as venture capitalists are risk-takers, it's hard to be first,"
Dickman said.

     But a growing knowledge of the science of gene therapy has led to improved
technology for delivering working genes into the body and a sharper focus on the
types of ailments gene therapy is best suited to repair, entrepreneurs and
investors say. The start-ups all aim to develop cures for conditions, often
fatal, for which there aren't many options for patients.

   "Two things compelled us," said Drew Senyei, of Enterprise Partners Venture
Capital, "the amount of clinical data in small and large animals, and a huge
unmet need." Senyei is chairman of La Jolla, Calif.-based Celladon, which is
developing a therapy to deliver an enzyme to strengthen heart muscle and reverse
congestive heart failure, which he called "the number one cause of hospital
admissions in the US."

      Investors are viewing gene therapy as merely a different way of delivering
a drug, said David Lowe, of Skyline Ventures in Palo Alto, which joined a $15
million investment round in Applied Genetic Technologies Corp., a Florida
start-up in Alachua, northwest of Gainesville, in December 2003.

   Traditionally, the drug would be an enzyme or protein injected into the body
to correct emphysema, stem heart failure, or slow Alzheimer's disease.
Scientists are fine-tuning techniques to import copies of the genes themselves
into a patient's blood, heart or brain, for example to direct a person's body to
make the desired compound.

      Another key to success is avoiding trying to do too much, said Sue Washer,
AGTC's chief executive, pointing to early gene therapy companies that saw
missteps while working on cancer and other diseases with multiple genes
interacting.

      "They picked targets that were really complicated and laid on top of that
the complications of gene therapy," Washer said.

      With diseases that AGTC is targeting, such as an inherited form of
emphysema and a type of congenital blindness, "Everyone knows what gene is
broken and what will happen to the patient over time."

      And with their newly raised capital, at least two start-ups are
collaborating with established companies to get a head start on the
manufacturing technology and capability they will eventually need: AGTC with
Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge, and Celladon with Targeted Genetics Corp. of
Seattle.

      Even Boston Scientific has gotten into gene therapy, through a $25 million
deal with Atlanta-based Corautus Genetics Inc. in July 2003.

   The Massachusetts life sciences giant invested $9 million for 10 percent
equity in Corautus, paid a $1 million licensing fee, and committed itself to
loaning the company up to $15 million. Corautus will be using a Boston
Scientific catheter in phase II clinical trials to inject DNA into the heart
muscle of patients with severe angina, to grow blood vessels that would increase
blood supply.

      Clinical trials will tell researchers how large a dose and just how
frequently the gene therapies will be needed.

   "In the next two years you'll see if this is safe or not, if it'll work or
not, and whether the FDA will approve it or not," said Chris Ehrlich of
InterWest Partners of Menlo Park, the lead investor in AGTC.

   Also making use of collective knowledge, Genetix will be working closely with
French regulators and is hoping to conduct clinical trials in Paris by this
summer, under the same researchers who tested gene therapy on children with a
genetic immune disorder, said Geert-Jan Mulder, a venture capitalist with ABN
AMRO Capital in Amsterdam and an AGTC director.

   "That of course gives you a lot of confidence as an investor. Even though
there is a failure rate, these guys are doing everything right," Mulder said.
"From a medical standpoint, there's a real solution to a severe problem."

   Eyes are also on Introgen Therapeutics Inc., a 12-year-old company in Austin,
Texas, that has applied for accelerated approval to sell the first gene therapy
product, to control the growth of tumors in head and neck cancer.

   "Part of the problem with a sector that's out of favor is it takes incentive
to invest," said Introgen's chief executive, David Nance.

   "Because gene therapy has been so out of favor, I don't think anybody has
looked at the field for five or six years. . . . A lot of the questions and
misunderstandings are really based on old information."

SIDEBAR:
Gene therapy redux
Funding for gene therapy projects has grown over the past few years.

      Company   - Financing   - Investors   - Disease target(s)  - Research
status   - Industry collaboration

      Applied Genetic Technologies - Alachua, Fla. $15.25m investment round in
Dec. 2003 Led by InterWest Partners Inherited form of em-physema and congenital
blindness Hopes to get first product into clinic by 2006 (some data by late
2006) Dec. 2004 deal to collaborate with Genzyme Corp.

      Ceregene - San Diego $32m in Aug. 2004 Co-led by Alta Partners and MPM
Capital Alzheimers, Parkinson's, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients In
phase 1 trials Licensing agreement with Genentech

      Celladon - LaJolla, Calif. $4m in Sept. 2004 Enterprise Partners Ven-ture
Capital and Venrock Associates Congestive heart failure Hopes to be in clinical
trials in 12-24 months Targeted Genetics

      Genetix - Cambridge $12m in Oct. 2004 Led by TVM Techno Venture Management
Sickle cell disease and thalassemia major Hopes to start trials in Paris by
summer None

       Introgen Therapeutics - Austin, Texas Raised $24m in Dec. 2004 None
Cancerous tumors Phase 3 on head and neck cancer None

       Boston Scientific - Natick July 2003 deal with Corautus Genetics for up
to $25m None Severe angina Expects to complete patient enrollment in phase 2b
trial by year-end None

      SOURCE: the companies


NOTES:
LIFE SCIENCES: BIOTECH

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2005


                             187 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              April 4, 2005 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A02

LENGTH: 836 words

HEADLINE: Technique to Fix DNA Flaws Is Tested

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Inspired by the body's own system for fixing genetic glitches, scientists at
a company in California have made a molecular repair kit that corrects mutations
in a cell's DNA.

    In experiments with human cells harboring mutations such as those that cause
a fatal childhood disease, the new system fixed the broken genes in up to 20
percent of the tested cells. That is a level of efficiency hundreds of times
better than previous experiments using other approaches, and one probably
adequate to elicit a cure if the technique were to be used on an actual patient,
the scientists reported yesterday.

    The team is only now beginning to assess the technique in live animals, a
prerequisite for the human testing the company hopes to begin next year. But if
it works as well in mice as it does in laboratory dishes, experts said, the
approach could become a serious competitor to conventional gene therapy.

    That field, which attempts to force-feed healthy genes into cells hobbled by
defective ones, has been plagued by failure for more than a decade and recently
was found to cause leukemia in some patients.

    By contrast, the new system simply rewrites the small stretch of
"misspelled" genetic code that is typically the reason a gene has gone bad.

    "This is the first time anyone has been able to precisely and with high
efficiency edit the human genome," said study leader Michael Holmes, director of
the gene modification group at Sangamo BioSciences Inc., of Richmond, Calif.,
which funded the study.

    More than 4,000 diseases are caused by tiny DNA code "misspellings" in one
or another of the 30,000 or so genes tucked inside the body's cells. Lacking any
method for repairing such tiny errors, researchers have been injecting entirely
new genes into patients' cells  --  usually ferrying them, in Trojan horse
fashion, inside viruses, which have a natural talent for entering and infecting
cells.

    That system has proved imperfect. For one thing, viruses inject their
payloads at random within a cell's tangled mass of DNA, sometimes disrupting
normal genes. Even when new genes land in good locations, the molecular
machinery that regulates their activity is often thrown off, leaving the healthy
genes operating at a level too low to be helpful or functioning in wrong parts
of the body.

    Sangamo's scientists took a different approach, opting to rewrite the small
errors in bad genes instead of replacing them.

     They focused on tiny proteins called zinc fingers, which are made naturally
by virtually all living organisms. Zinc fingers come in many varieties, each
with a strong penchant for attaching itself to a particular sequence of DNA
code. Once attached, they act like little levers to ratchet up or down the
activity of genes. At other times, they help cells repair damaged DNA.

    The Sangamo team created an entire library of zinc fingers, each designed to
attach to a particular DNA sequence known to cause a disease. Each was also
custom-equipped with an enzyme that allows it to cut open the strands of DNA at
that location, making the code accessible for editing. When fresh snippets of
correctly spelled DNA were added to cells along with these engineered zinc
fingers, the cells used those bits of DNA as templates to guide the rewriting of
the mutated region.

     The company's prime goal is to remove blood cells from patients with
genetic diseases, use zinc fingers and corrective DNA to edit errors, then
reinfuse the repaired cells into the patients.

    In the newest experiments on cells in culture dishes, described in
yesterday's online version of the journal Nature, the method corrected an error
in the gene that causes X-linked  severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), a
fatal disease of childhood.

    Tests indicated that the zinc fingers degraded after a few days, leaving the
cells permanently repaired

    Other scientists said the approach looked promising but predicted it would
end up struggling with problems of its own.

    James M. Wilson, a gene therapy researcher at the University of
Pennsylvania, noted that the first step of the new process calls for the zinc
fingers to make a fresh break in the DNA to accommodate the insertion of a
corrected sequence. "That's the same kind of break you get with radiation,"
which can lead to cancer, he said.

    Wilson and others also noted that the published study was not designed to
detect whether the system caused DNA breaks in unexpected places in the genome.
"Even if it's 99 percent specific, which would be rare in biology," Wilson said,
that could still lead to problems, because a large number of cells would be
targeted.

    Donald Kohn, a researcher at the University of Southern California who is
using conventional gene therapy in an effort to cure children with SCID, said:
"I think that gene correction, rather than gene addition as most gene therapy is
currently approached, is theoretically a better way to go for many genetic
diseases." But he, too, warned that much work remained to prove the approach
useful and safe.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2005


                             188 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              April 3, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1574 words

HEADLINE: READER FORUM

BODY:

   Mandatory terms   Your March 20 editorial supporting the loss of pensions for
persons convicted of public corruption is correct. However, I take exception to
your position against mandatory sentences.

   Mandatory sentences may not deter crime by an uneducated, inner-city
18-year-old, who may see it as his only method of escape. Most people convicted
of corruption are middle-aged, educated and should know better. But for some
reason they decide to try to beat the system. These people deserve a minimum of
10 years of incarceration. They do not deserve and should not get pretrial
intervention, probation in lieu of incarceration, probation as a form of
sentence reduction, house arrest, time off for good behavior or gubernatorial
pardons.

   All judges owe their status to elected officials. There will always be the
desire to help a friend if conditions allow. If there is no judicial discretion,
judges need never worry about making such decisions. With judges not involved in
sentencing, harsh justice will be served and quite possibly the threat of 10
years of hard time may deter further corruption. - Harold Kane, Monroe Township

   Gambling opportunity

    The logic you apply to supporting video lottery terminals at racetracks
could easily apply to the state becoming among the first in the nation to
legislate and regulate Internet gaming.

   You note that video slots are the fastest-expanding sector of the industry
and that with so many other states employing them, New Jersey will lose revenue
if it fails to act. And, you note, with New Jersey desperate for revenue, why
shouldn't the state seize the opportunity to raise $150 million on video slots
to help plug the budget gap?

   Since 2001, Internet gaming revenues have skyrocketed. Estimates predict
Internet gambling increasing to at least $14.5 billion by 2006. There are 1,800
Web sites devoted to Internet gambling, attracting more than 100 million people
- most Americans.

   Recently state Sen. Barbara Buono held a hearing on Internet gaming. I
applaud her attempts to get out front on this issue. If New Jersey doesn't act
quickly, other states will jump ahead and begin regulating and taxing Internet
gaming. North Dakota is considering such legislation.

   Why shouldn't New Jersey be a leader in regulating an industry that can
provide millions for our treasury? - Frank Catania, North Haledon

   The writer, a former director of the Division of Gaming Enforcement, is a
lobbyist for the Interactive Gaming Council.

   Tax reform now

    We recognize the problems that confronted acting Gov. Richard Codey in
formulating the budget he presented to the Legislature. We understand but don't
necessarily agree with some of the steps he outlined to curtail spending. The
burdens generated by budget cuts and freezes aren't equally shared.

   The largest negative impact will again fall on property tax payers and
renters - perennial victims whenever there is a shortfall. Codey says he has
held the line on income and sales taxes, but his cuts in aid and funding freezes
to schools and municipalities will generate property tax increases. When will
governors and legislators discuss taxes in a total context, considering changes
made in one tax category and the impact on other categories?

   Many of our budget problems stem from a cancer in our property tax system. We
must immediately act to bring the budget under control, but we must also speed
up reform of the property tax system. Codey must re-energize the longterm plan
developed for property tax reform via a constitutional convention. His budget
proposal underscores the need for a plan to resolve inequities in our property
tax system. - Mark J. Markos, Cherry Hill

   The writer is chairman of the Cherry Hill Committee for Property Tax Reform.

   Try controlling expenses

    New Jersey politicians want residents who are hard workers, don't mind high
taxes, are too busy to examine what politicians are doing for themselves and
their friends and won't look closely at their wanton spending. Who is doing this
to us? Our friends in the Democratic Party. A year ago we were given a little
property tax relief only to have it taken away by our acting governor. This is
to make up for the budget shortfall. He is increasing taxes without calling it
that.

   My wife and I started our own business. For 10 years we struggled to make it
work. Then we got competition from a big-box outfit while losing the big store
in our center and ambient traffic for our store. Unlike the government, we could
not simply raise taxes (prices). We did everything we could. Alas, we finally
had to declare bankruptcy. But we tried to save our business by controlling
expenses. My guess is that a 5 percent reduction in all departmental expenses
would go a long way toward bringing the budget into line. Those working in state
offices aren't challenged to save money when things get tight. - Tom Draves,
Hackettstown

   Two - faced leaders

    Tom Moran couldn't have put it more succinctly when he said that our
representatives in Trenton, in this case the Democrats, speak out of both sides
of their mouths when it comes to campaign finance reform. The backpedaling by
Jon Corzine and Richard Codey regarding the loopholes in the new ban on
pay-to-play shows that they take voters for granted. Having the attorney who
crafted the legislation also create loopholes is downright insulting. What has
been business as usual in New Jersey probably would have gotten me arrested when
I was a contracting officer for the federal government. Let's call pay-to play
what it really is: legalized bribery. - John A. Trosky, Rutherford

   Freedom vs . license

    John Farmer's March 27 article "Who are we?" is a thought-provoking
discussion of a deeply troubling feature of our society: "Ours is a culture of
unrestrained appetites . . . its message - that individual freedom means the
freedom of individuals to acquire and consume without limits or conscience - has
transformed the face of our culture." Farmer sees advertising as a factor in
this change.

   Twenty years ago, Neil Postman, a professor at New York University,
identified this feature in an astoundingly perceptive book, "Amusing Ourselves
to Death." He argued that our economic and political activities have been
subsumed under the aegis of entertainment. Under the guise of entertainment,
everything is encouraged. The TV-advertising compact has devalued our idea of
freedom and twisted it to become unlicensed consumption.

   Farmer says we must re-establish the idea of individual freedom as one that
"stands humbly before ultimate questions and frees individuals to ask and answer
those questions for themselves."

   There is a significant difference between freedom and license. And unless we
demonstrate that difference in our daily lives, how can we expect Islam to
embrace individual freedom as a "good idea"? - Robert Latzer, Chatham

   Research hype

    In her March 20 Perspective piece, Kitta MacPherson proclaimed that
embryonic stem cell research would provide tremendous benefits and chided the
federal government for its lack of regulatory and financial support. Glaringly
absent from the article was any mention of the ethical problems entailed, the
fact that more than 40 million Americans lack access to even basic health care
or that there is not one iota of evidence that these technologies will work.
Instead, she appeals to fear of international competitive disadvantage and
asserts as truth the opinions of persons and corporations standing to earn big
money from federal support.

   This silence isn't surprising since trials to date show that embryonic cells
tend to be rejected or to grow too quickly and into too many types of cells to
be therapeutic. If this work really held such promise of cures, why aren't
investors falling over each other to fund it to capture the patents and products
developed? As 15 years of human gene therapy failures shows, industry and media
are good at spreading hype and misleading the public, but the human body is not
so easily convinced. - Ellen Maughan, Highland Park

   False hope on hiring

    A March 20 business article, "Some unemployed don't count in stats," quotes
Rutgers economist James Hughes as follows:

   "A half percentage point increase in the labor force participation rate would
bring 300,000 workers into the New Jersey labor force. That would happen in a
very, very strong economy, when rising wages make it really worthwhile to return
to the labor market."

   Considering that, according to the article, 4.04 million workers represent
roughly two-thirds of the working-age population, we can calculate that there
are roughly 6 million potential workers in New Jersey. One percent of 6 million
is 60,000. Therefore, an increase of a half percentage point in the labor force
would bring 30,000 workers into the labor force, not 300,000. Three hundred
thousand would be 5 percent.

   In a time when economic policy and quality jobs are topics of concern,
especially in the high-tech area of the economy that my company occupies, let's
not give the false impression that such small changes in the hiring practices of
firms can make such a huge difference for the unemployed. - Walter J. Krieg,
Princeton

   Undue honors

    Legislators want to name the tomato as the state vegetable, although it's
not a vegetable but a fruit. We also have a state insect, the honeybee, which is
not an insect. In that light, I'd like to nominate New Jersey legislators as
official state fiscal guardians. - Mike Lyon, Mountain Lakes

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             189 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            March 31, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: MANDEVILLE PICAYUNE; Mandeville Moments; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: Cancer gets one-two punch on April 9

BYLINE: Kadee Krieger

BODY:

   Mandeville-area residents can look forward to one night and two events that
will double up to fight cancer.

   The West St. Tammany Relay for Life will take place April 9 at the parish
fairgrounds in Covington. Meanwhile, on the same night, Cancer Crusaders'
Northshore Chapter is presenting its second Jazz Under the Stars.

   The all-night Relay for Life, held from 5 p.m. to 5 a.m., depends on
community members to form teams to raise money for the American Cancer Society.

   Jazz Under the Stars will be held from 6 to 9 p.m. in Mandeville. The $75 per
person ticket will help Cancer Crusaders' goal of creating a designated cancer
center in New Orleans.

   Jazz Under the Stars and Relay for Life are united in their fight against
cancer. But the money from Relay for Life reaches a wider range of needs, while
proceeds from Jazz Under the Stars go toward a specific goal.

   The American Cancer Society dedicates funds from Relay for Life to cancer
research and education and administration of the national organization.

   The Cancer Crusaders is a metro New Orleans organization that has only one
mission: finding a cure through research, north shore President Ellen Miller
said.

   Miller joined the nonprofit, all-volunteer group 12 years ago when she moved
to Algiers from Florida. Then, when she moved to Mandeville 10 years ago, she
decided to start a north shore chapter.

   Cancer Crusaders divides its proceeds equally between the Tulane Cancer
Center and LSU's Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Miller said. Tulane and LSU
have formed a cancer research consortium, which means improved cancer research
for Louisiana citizens, Miller said.

   The main goal of Cancer Crusaders is to turn that consortium into a National
Cancer Institute Designated Cancer Center, which would give the facility
worldwide recognition and networking opportunities.

   "It would be the same thing as having M.D. Anderson here. People go there
because it is so well-known. We want to keep people here in Louisiana," Miller
said. There are only 61 designated cancer centers nationwide, and none are in
Louisiana, Mississippi or Arkansas, Miller said.

   Getting the cancer center designation will take millions, Miller said, but it
would allow state-of-the-art cancer research equipment and laboratories and the
chance to do more research such as gene therapy and neruobiotechnology, which
offer some of the best hopes for finding a cure.

   Jazz Under the Stars will be held at the Mandeville home of the Gauthier
family, 730 Copal St. Participants can dance to the tunes of Amanda Shaw and the
New Orleans Jazz Band, bid for items in live and silent auctions, and enjoy food
and drink provided by local restaurants. For ticket information, call Miller at
674-7897.

   Because Jazz Under the Stars is from 6 to 9 p.m., there will still be plenty
of time for anyone to head over to the Relay For Life event, Miller said.

   Mandeville residents can participate in both events and give cancer a one-two
punch.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2005


                             190 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            March 31, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: COVINGTON PICAYUNE; Mandeville Moments; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Cancer gets one-two punch on April 9

BYLINE: Kadee Krieger

BODY:

   Mandeville-area residents can look forward to one night and two events that
will double up to fight cancer.

   The West St. Tammany Relay for Life will take place April 9 at the parish
fairgrounds in Covington. Meanwhile, on the same night, Cancer Crusaders'
Northshore Chapter is presenting its second Jazz Under the Stars.

   The all-night Relay for Life, held from 5 p.m. to 5 a.m., depends on
community members to form teams to raise money for the American Cancer Society.

   Jazz Under the Stars will be held from 6 to 9 p.m. in Mandeville. The $75 per
person ticket will help Cancer Crusaders' goal of creating a designated cancer
center in New Orleans.

   Jazz Under the Stars and Relay for Life are united in their fight against
cancer. But the money from Relay for Life reaches a wider range of needs, while
proceeds from Jazz Under the Stars go toward a specific goal.

   The American Cancer Society dedicates funds from Relay for Life to cancer
research and education and administration of the national organization.

   The Cancer Crusaders is a metro New Orleans organization which has only one
mission: finding a cure through research, north shore President Ellen Miller
said.

   The Cancer Crusaders is nonprofit, all-volunteer organization without any
administrative overhead, Miller said.

   Miller joined the group 12 years ago when she moved to Algiers from Florida.
Then, when she moved to Mandeville 10 years ago, she decided to start a north
shore chapter.

   Cancer Crusaders divides its proceeds equally between the Tulane Cancer
Center and LSU's Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center, Miller said.

   Tulane and LSU have formed a cancer research consortium, which means improved
cancer research for Louisiana citizens, Miller said.

   The main goal of Cancer Crusaders is to turn that consortium into a National
Cancer Institute Designated Cancer Center, which would give the facility
worldwide recognition and networking opportunities.

   "It would be the same thing as having M.D. Anderson here. People go there
because it is so well-known. We want to keep people here in Louisiana," Miller
said. There are only 61 designated cancer centers in the nation, with the
closest ones to the Mandeville area 350 miles to the east in Birmingham and 350
to the west in Houston.

   There are no designated cancer centers in Louisiana, Mississippi or Arkansas,
Miller said.

   Getting the cancer center designation will take millions, Miller said, but it
would allow state-of-the-art cancer research equipment and laboratories and the
chance to do more research such as gene therapy and neruobiotechnology, which
offer some of the best hopes for finding a cure.

   Jazz Under the Stars will be held at the Mandeville home of the Gauthier
family, 730 Copal St.

   Participants can dance to the tunes of Amanda Shaw and the New Orleans Jazz
Band, bid for items in live and silent auctions, and enjoy food and drink
provided by local restaurants. For ticket information, call Miller at 674-7897.
Because Jazz Under the Stars is from 6 to 9 p.m., there will still be plenty of
time for anyone to head over to the Relay For Life event, Miller said.

   Mandeville residents can participate in both events and give cancer a one-two
punch.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2005


                             191 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            March 24, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HOME&GARDEN; Pg. 67

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: Study defies Mendel's law

BYLINE: VALERIE SUDOL, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   With the help of principles established by Gregor Mendel in the mid-1800s, we
thought we had a handle on how inherited traits are passed along to subsequent
generations.

   Scientists at Purdue University in Indiana are now telling us we may need to
revise textbooks in use for more than 100 years.

   "While Mendel's laws that we learned in high school still are fundamentally
correct, they're not absolute," says Robert Pruitt, the molecular geneticist who
with collaborator Susan Lolle discovered mutant plants that failed to pass
malfunctioning genes to 10 percent of their offspring.

   Confounding predictions, mutant plants under study passed on malfunctioning
genes that inhibit flowering to 90 percent of their offspring, but 10 percent
reverted to the normal traits of their grandparents. Mendel found that when both
parents carry genes for a dominant trait, offspring should also retain that
characteristic.

    The plants, a type of Arabidopsis, are commonly used in botanical genome
mapping. In this case, both parents had a pair of mutated "hothead" genes that
caused organs like flowers to fuse. When 10 percent of the plants' offspring
bloomed normally, scientists had to look for a new explanation.

   They believe that the deformed plants somehow kept a copy of genetic
information from the previous generation, even though no trace of it showed up
in their DNA or chromosomes. Pruitt's team is now trying to untangle the
molecular mechanics of this skip-a-generation inheritance.

   If the same flexibility exists in animals, it may lead to advances in gene
therapy aimed at treating and curing disease. Pruitt said the real value of his
research is that "the discovery has opened an important new line of thinking."

GRAPHIC: 1. Malfunctioning genes that inhibit flowering in this mutant plant are
passed to 90 percent of its "children," but 10 percent are normal like the
"grandparents."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             192 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            March 23, 2005 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Plants Can Fix Bad Genes, Study Shows

BYLINE: Karen Kaplan, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Upending prevailing genetic theory, a team of scientists at Purdue University
has discovered a mechanism in plants that allows them to correct defective genes
from their parents by tapping into an ancestral data bank of healthy genetic
material.

   In essence, the plants back up the evolutionary path and use past genes to
restore traits that would otherwise be lost, according to a study published
Tuesday in the online version of the journal Nature.

   The finding proposes "an extraordinary view of inheritance," the scientists
said in their paper.

   The mechanism appears to be a way for self-fertilizing plants, which are more
likely to suffer from the negative consequences of inbreeding, to maintain a
healthy level of genetic diversity and increase their chances of survival.

   It could also be a way for plants to adapt to changing environmental
conditions by having a store of diverse traits at their disposal, the scientists
said.

   The proposal offers a radical addition to the widely embraced laws of
Mendelian genetics, which date back to the mid-1800s. They hold that plants and
animals inherit only two copies of a gene -- one from each parent. If both
copies were defective, a plant would have no ability to correct the error.

   "This means that inheritance can happen more flexibly than we thought in the
past," said Robert Pruitt, a molecular geneticist who co-authored the paper.
"While Mendel's laws that we learned in high school are still fundamentally
correct, they're not absolute."

   If the newly discovered mechanism is also found to be at work in people,
"it's possible that it will be an avenue for gene therapy to treat or cure
diseases in both plants and animals," Pruitt said.

   The Purdue scientists happened upon their discovery by accident. They were
intending to study a deformed version of the Arabidopsis plant, a member of the
mustard family.

   Their particular variety produced flowers that were fused into tight balls, a
consequence of the plants' having two defective copies of a gene dubbed
"hothead."

   Breeding the plants should produce only offspring that are also deformed. But
the scientists were startled to see that 10% of the offspring produced normal
flowers that radiated out from the center of a cluster.

   They conducted a series of experiments that indicated the bright white
flowers were not the result of accidental cross-pollination or other contact
with normal seeds.

   The plants "can recover DNA variants that have come from one of their
great-grandparents, even if their immediate parent did not contain the variant,"
wrote molecular biologists Detlef Weigel and Gerd Jurgens in an accompanying
article.

   The researchers said the plants must contain a normal version of the hothead
gene, although they searched the plants' genomes and were unable to find it.

   That has led them to believe that the genetic information could be contained
in the plant's RNA, a close cousin to DNA that is thought to be a less reliable
vessel of genetic information.

   Each of the steps necessary for RNA to modify the genes in DNA has already
been demonstrated in other research, the scientists said.

   In addition to Pruitt, the authors were Susan Lolle, Jennifer Victor and
Jessica Young, all of the department of botany and plant pathology at Purdue.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: MUTANT: Some offspring of this defective Arabidopsis produced
normal flowers, evidence that the offspring drew healthy genetic material from
an earlier generation, defying accepted wisdom.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Purdue University

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2005


                             193 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            March 17, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Style; C01

LENGTH: 996 words

HEADLINE: Beyond Steroids: Designer Genes;
For Unscrupulous Athletes, Better Bodies Are a Tweaked Chromosome Away

BYLINE: Paul Farhi, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Today,  as a series of muscular baseball superstars troop to Capitol Hill
for what is sure to be a well-publicized congressional hearing, the word on
everyone's lips (and possibly in a few hips) is: steroids.

    But in a few years, some scientists suggest, the phrase whispered among
would-be home-run hitters and Olympic contenders could well be: gene doping.

    Steroids, after all, are very 20th century, very East German Olympic team,
circa 1976. Today's hearing is, in effect, about yesterday's ballgame.

    By manipulating the human genetic code, by adding and subtracting genes to
replace defective or missing ones, researchers may someday unlock cures for a
variety of diseases, from Parkinson's to muscular dystrophy to certain cancers.
At the same time, however, researchers are starting to see a more mundane, but
culturally significant, sideline to gene therapy: the potential to create nearly
superhuman athletes. The same techniques that could repair diseased muscles may
enable athletes to heft more weight, run faster or jump higher than ever thought
possible.

    Gene doping hasn't moved out of the research clinic yet, as far as is known.
But the possibility that it will  --  and soon  --  has moved the World
Anti-Doping Agency, which governs Olympic drug testing, to establish a panel to
monitor its development. "The feeling is that in sports, where there's so much
financial pressure and other pressures to skirt the rules, some people will feel
compelled to do a genetic version of BALCO,"  the California lab at the heart of
baseball's steroid scandal, says Theodore Friedmann, a gene-therapy expert who
is a member of the Anti-Doping Agency's panel.

     The  agency's concern is that  gene manipulation will evolve not just into
a new form of cheating, but into a new form of undetectable cheating. Unlike
steroids, which can be identified through blood and urine tests, the technology
for determining alterations in the human genetic code is still crude and
uncertain.

    It may be possible to glimpse the coming debate in a laboratory at the
University of Pennsylvania. There, through gene transplantation, physiologist H.
Lee Sweeney has created "Schwarzenegger mice," rodents with unnaturally
developed physiques. After Sweeney and his associates injected the mice with a
gene known to stimulate a protein that promotes muscle growth, the mice grew
muscles that were 15 to 30 percent bigger than normal, even though the rodents
were sedentary.

    Next, Sweeney and exercise physiologist Roger Farrar injected the same
muscle-building gene into one leg of a group of lab rats and subjected them to
an eight-week weight-training regimen (imagine rats scurrying up ladders with
weights strapped to their backs). Result: The injected leg became twice as
strong as the uninjected leg. After the training stopped, the injected muscles
lost strength at a much slower rate than those on the unenhanced leg.

    It's easy to see where this is going. Athletes not only would look and
perform like Six Million Dollar Men, they could also be easily be rebuilt
through gene therapy when their muscles are injured.

     Sweeney says  last summer's Olympic Games may be the last without
genetically enhanced athletes.

     In another decade, he says, "this will become a major issue. There will be
people  --  if not in this country, then in other countries  --  who will have
the technology in hand and are entrepreneurial enough to offer it to people who
have legitimate [health] reasons to try and change their muscle performance.
There will be some athletes with money who will try it. That's how it's going to
begin."

    Gene therapy is strictly regulated in the United States, as well as
countries including Great Britain, Germany, Japan, China and Australia, where
clinical trials are taking place. The World Anti-Doping Agency also has gene
treatments on its prohibited list.

    But as the steroid debate has shown, such measures are unlikely to stop a
rogue clinic from supplying willing athletes with experimental treatments for
the right price.

    Sweeney cautions that gene therapy still carries many unknowns and risks.
For example, in 1997 and 1998, scientists transferred genes designed to increase
oxygen-carrying red blood cells into monkeys and baboons. The animals' red blood
cell counts did indeed double in 10 weeks  --  a potential boon for marathoners
and other endurance athletes. But the monkeys' blood became so thick that it had
to be regularly diluted to prevent heart failure.

    Sweeney suggests a go-slow approach for athletes, even when gene therapies
show promise for treating muscle-wasting diseases. "If you're 85 years old and
losing the ability to walk, you probably don't mind taking a chance on something
that might be a cure," he says. "But if you're a 25-year-old athlete, you just
don't know what the long-term side effects are."

    This, too, mirrors the debate about steroids. They have been beneficial in
treating people who are ill with a wide variety of diseases, including lymphoma,
but their unsupervised use can have dangerous side effects in healthy athletes.
Problem is, athletes  --  and fans  --  are often of two minds about what's
tolerable: we tsk-tsk the cheating and grotesque physiques, but we love new
world records and home runs that never seem to land.

    Gene doping potentially pushes this cultural hypocrisy even further. "If
we're going to blur the distinction between what's training and effort, and
what's biotechnology, is society going to go along with that?" asks Friedmann,
who is director of the gene therapy program at the University of California at
San Diego. "If sport is going to masquerade as biotech, that should raise a
question in the minds of the public: What are we watching?"

    He adds, "Sports to me is about doing as much with your body as you can.
Maybe I'm obeying some old romantic rules that are probably gone. But I'd like
to admire an achievement without wondering whose achievement it really is."

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2005


                             194 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2005 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 16, 2005, Wednesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: BROAD INSTITUTE LEADS PUSH FOR TOOLS TO SPEED GENE THERAPIES

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Researchers at the Broad Institute in Cambridge are leading a cooperative,
industry-funded effort that could speed discovery of numerous targets for new
drugs.

      Novartis AG, Eli Lilly and Co., and Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. will each
contribute $3.6 million over three years to fund the research consortium, and
the results will be freely shared with the scientific community.

           The project's results will not by themselves provide cures to
diseases. Instead, they are creating a set of tools that biotechnology firms and
big drug companies can use to speed their own experiments to discover targets
for drugs.


      "We're creating a tool kit that lets you test the function of every human
gene in your own experiment," said Dr. Eric Lander, director of the Broad
Institute and one of the principal investigators of the project. "That's why
it's so important that it be made a public resource. We want a thousand people
using this tool kit, and we want them competing to discover their own drugs."

      Sigma-Aldrich Co., a manufacturer of laboratory supplies, and an academic
consortium sponsored by the Taiwanese government, Academia Sinica-National
Science Council, are also funding the project, called the RNAi Consortium.

      At the heart of the project is the emerging field of RNA interference. A
growing number of firms, including Alnylam Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge,
are using RNAi to develop drugs.

      Within a cell, DNA is the genetic blueprint that provides instructions on
how to operate. RNA serves as a messenger, delivering those instructions to the
parts of the cell that manufacture proteins. In diseased cells, faulty proteins
are produced that play a role in the disease.

      Traditional drug therapies seek to counteract or neutralize the faulty
proteins. Emerging genetic therapies seek to identify the genes that give bad
instructions and correct them. RNAi is a third approach, in which scientists
seek to create drugs that can destroy the messenger RNA before it delivers its
harmful instructions within the cell.

      The consortium will look at about 15,000 genes that play important roles
within cells, and will create RNAi material that can silence each individual
gene by not delivering its instructions. Researchers can then identify the role
of those individual genes in specific diseases. With the role of the genes
better known, it is hoped drug companies can more effectively develop treatments
that target those genes.

      "By getting a library of inhibitors for every gene, we could
systematically study which genes matter for every living process," said Lander.

      Performing experiments with the RNAi inhibitors "will provide the ability
to systematically identify the genes underlying disease process and thereby
identify previously unknown targets for drug discovery," said Steven Paul,
executive vice president of Eli Lilly's research laboratories.

      While the RNAi blockers to conduct such experiments will be shared
publicly, any discoveries made with the tools will remain the property of the
scientists and companies conducting the research.

      The project also includes scientists from Massachusetts General Hospital,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Washington University, and Columbia
University. The Broad Institute is a collaboration of MIT, Harvard University,
and the Whitehead Institute.


      Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.


LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2005


                             195 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                             March 15, 2005 Tuesday
                               STATEWIDE EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Medical Frontiers; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 602 words

HEADLINE: STIMULATION FENDS OFF ALZHEIMER'S

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   An active body and an active brain help mice avoid developing the plaques
associated with Alzheimer's disease, according to a study in the current issue
of the journal Cell.

   Scientists at the University of Chicago genetically engineered mice
predisposed to develop early-onset Alzheimer's and then raised them in either
lavish environments that included tunnels, chew toys and running wheels or in
more spartan cages. They then measured levels of b-amyloid peptides in their
brains, which form the plaques that are the hallmark of Alzheimer's.

   Mice in the more enriched environments had significantly lower levels of the
peptide than mice with less stimulating homes, the researchers reported.

   The experiments suggest that both physical and mental stimulation prevent the
formation of plaques, rather than helping dissolve them once they have formed,
the authors said.

   ``This goes back to the old idea of use it or lose it -- that using your
brain keeps it more active,'' said Sangram Sisodia, a neuroscientist and author
of the research.

   The researchers suggest that stimulation causes the formation of new
connections between brain cells, although they acknowledged they did not know
whether mental exercise or physical exercise was more important to improved
outcomes.

   ALS Advance

   Swiss researchers used gene therapy in mice to slow the progression of the
amytrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, a fatal motor neuron disease also known as
Lou Gehrig's Disease.

   Scientists used a technique called RNA interference to silence a mutated gene
known to cause the progressive disease in humans. RNA interference is a
technique used to interrupt the process of making proteins from genetic
instructions encoded in DNA.

   In the study published in the current edition of Nature Medicine, Swiss
scientists used the technique to interfere with production of the mutant protein
SOD1, which has been implicated in the development of some forms of inherited
ALS.

   The technique targeted only harmful forms of SOD1, the researchers said.

   While the safety of any type of gene therapy needs to be closely studied,
researchers said their technique has great promise, particularly in treating
inherited forms of neurological diseases such as ALS, Parkinson's and
Huntington's.

   Low-Carb Lowdown

   Dieters who dump carbohydrates spontaneously reduce their calorie
consumption, according to researchers who put 10 obese diabetics on the Atkins
diet for two weeks, according to a study published in the current issue of
Annals of Internal Medicine.

   The Atkins dieters, whose food intake was strictly monitored in a hospital,
lost weight -- but not because of factors often attributed to the diet, such as
water loss or metabolic change,

   The diabetics ate whatever they wanted for a week and then were limited to 20
grams of carbohydrates a day for two weeks, the amount allowed in the initial
phase of the Atkins diet, researchers at Temple University School of Medicine
reported. Although the study subjects could eat unlimited amounts of protein and
fat, they cut an average of 1,000 calories a day from their diets.

   ``The carbohydrates were clearly stimulating excessive appetites,'' said Dr.
Guenther Boden , lead author of the study, which was funded by grants from the
National Institutes of Health and the American Diabetes Association.

   Boden said dieters in the study showed marked improvements in glucose levels
and insulin sensitivity, as well as lower triglycerides and cholesterol levels.

   The researchers cautioned that long-term effects of low-carb diets are not
well known and that it is unclear whether other diets might lead to the same
results.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2005


                             196 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2005 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 5199 words

HEADLINE: The Quality Cure?

BYLINE: By Roger Lowenstein.

   Roger Lowenstein is a contributing writer. His last article for the magazine
was about Social Security.

BODY:

   David Cutler hit what seemed to be the peak of his career at 28, when as a
junior faculty member at Harvard he was whisked down to Washington to help draft
a health-care bill under the tutelage of Ira Magaziner and, of course, Hillary
Clinton. The project produced a dispiriting result: nothing.

    Corporations, consumers, the uninsured and doctors had all been clamoring
for reform, and the question of why the project failed has nagged at Cutler ever
since, especially as the problems have continued to worsen. In the years since
he left Washington, which was in 1994, the ranks of the uninsured have surged,
from 35 million people to 45 million. There are also serious gaps in the quality
of care, and there is a deep dissatisfaction with the way the system functions
-- in how it seems to make adversaries of patients, doctors and insurers, for
instance. Arguably, Americans want health-care reform more urgently than
anything else.

     Yet designing a national health-care policy has become a kind of taboo.
Congress provided prescription drugs for seniors, and President Bush, not
normally thought of as timid, has backed some modest initiatives: legislation to
limit malpractice suits, individual health savings accounts. But Washington has
done nothing on the scale that a social engineer -- a Robert Moses or a Daniel
Patrick Moynihan -- might to reinvent the system. Cutler has thought about this
ever since his failed experience in Washington, and his diagnosis has shaken up
the health-care-policy world. ''The real reason health-care reform has not
succeeded,'' he has written, ''is that it is rooted in a misconception of what
health-care reform should accomplish.''

    Virtually every would-be reformer, Democrat and Republican alike, starts
with the presumption that the major problem in health care is high costs. This
is understandable: America now spends 15 percent of its gross domestic product
on health care. That's a higher percentage than any country has ever spent in
the history of the planet, and the figure is increasing. The United States
spends more on health care than on automobiles; we spend more on health care
than China spends on tea; in fact, as Cutler likes to point out, we spend more
on health than the Chinese spend, per capita, on everything. And health care
threatens (far more than Social Security) to consume the federal government.
Medicare, the health-care program for retirees, and Medicaid, which provides
basic services for the poor, already account for one-fifth of the federal
budget, and their share could double in a generation.

    Curbing such growth has been the aim of every reformer, and according to
Cutler, it is the reason reform has failed. The Clinton team proposed to pay for
universal coverage by limiting increases in spending (partly through mandatory
caps). But limiting spending also meant limiting service. The proposed
legislation was never put to a vote.

    Managed care was next at trying to contain costs. It succeeded for a while,
until it became clear that Americans did not want health-maintenance
organizations to limit their choices any more than they wanted the government
to. Since then, reform has languished. The Medicare drug bill is suggestive of
why. The Republican Congress promised restraint but then passed a hugely
expensive law that barred Medicare from using its clout to negotiate prices with
drug companies. The pattern has been failed efforts to control costs, followed
by a void of new ideas.

    Cutler's approach is radically different. He says that most health-care
spending is actually good. Spending has been rising, he says, because it
delivers positive, and measurable, economic value, and because it can do more
things that Americans want. Therefore, Cutler says, we should focus on improving
the quality of care rather than on reducing our consumption of it. Rather than
pay less, he wants to pay more wisely -- to encourage health-care providers to
do more of what they should and less of what is wasteful.

   This, as it turns out, is exactly what some of the most innovative
health-plan sponsors -- from Kaiser Permanente to General Electric -- are doing.
To them, the Cutler approach of focusing on quality offers a way out of the void
and possibly, over the longer term, an acceptable route to restraining costs.

    To understand how Cutler has upended conventional thinking, you first have
to understand the political straitjacket in which health care has found itself.
Health care ''lefties,'' as Cutler refers to some of his colleagues, favor a
European system -- universal insurance financed by a single payer (the
government) and some sort of rationing to hold down the screaming increase in
high-tech procedures. Canada rations by limiting access: Ontario, with one-third
the population of California, has one-tenth the number of open-heart-surgery
facilities.

    While Cutler acknowledges the merits of such an approach, he also sees its
problems. The British may be accustomed to waiting for hip replacements, but
Americans do not like rationing. Also, systems with just one payer do not
encourage innovation and experimentation. Imagine America if everyone were on
Medicare. Doctors and hospitals would do whatever Medicare approved and nothing
more.

    Right-wingers go for a market approach -- it's not the technology they
object to, but people's cheap access to it. If people paid for their own
angioplasties, so the theory goes, they would have fewer of them. This is the
theory behind Bush's health savings accounts, initiated during his first term:
let people buy insurance from their own (tax-sheltered) pockets.

    Apart from the obvious objection that low-income people find it hard to save
for those accounts, Cutler points out another shortcoming: Most of the dollars
spent on health care are spent on people with serious illnesses or conditions.
Those with coverage quickly move into the territory covered by insurance. Few
people really pay for their own angioplasties, so few care what they cost.

    Moreover, it's not clear that we want people to be too price-sensitive,
especially people with chronic conditions, lest they try to starve themselves of
care. ''My grandmother used to say, 'Why should I take the blue pill -- I'm
feeling better,''' Cutler recounts. ''The blue pill was why she was feeling
better.'' As Cutler told me in the first of our many conversations,
''Ultimately, every discussion of health care turns personal.''

    A tweedy, self-effacing 39-year-old, Cutler is a seriously modified lefty.
He envisions a system in which everyone could get insurance while free-market
incentives would motivate health-care providers to be more effective as well as
more efficient. Instead of suppressing the market by rationing care, restraining
prices or regulating doctors, he wants to liberate it. It is neither Clinton nor
Bush -- but closer to Bill Bradley, whose 2000 campaign Cutler advised. Dr.
Robert Galvin, head of global health care at General Electric, says, ''David has
showed everyone that the way to rein in costs is not to squash innovation.''

    The soft-spoken Cutler was a star even as a Harvard undergraduate, when he
assisted an up-and-coming economics professor named Larry Summers. Finance --
not health care -- was the hot field among economists, but as a graduate
student, Cutler wrote a still cited dissertation on how changes in Medicare's
compensation scheme caused hospitals to release patients after shorter stays. It
proved, Cutler says, that doctors were incredibly and, in some cases,
''horribly,'' responsive to incentives.

    Hired onto the economics faculty at Harvard, he was urged by Summers to
continue in health care. After his stint in Washington, Cutler continued to
think of ways of rationing care until, at lunch one day, an economist named Zvi
Griliches asked him, ''Why is it you think I get too much health care?'' He said
it in a thick Polish accent -- ''Vy is it?'' Cutler immediately saw his point.
He was looking at the wrong side of the ledger; instead of worrying about the
cost of health care, he should think about the benefits.

    This sounds obvious, but almost no one was looking at it this way. Thinking
of people he knew -- ''all health care is personal'' -- Cutler wondered if
Americans might be spending more because they were getting more and better
treatment. Joining with Dr. Mark McClellan, another economist, he zeroed in on
heart disease. The pair discovered a curious fact: heart attacks were occurring
less frequently, thanks to drugs for treating high blood pressure and to
reductions in smoking, but spending on heart attacks was rising. Surgery rates
-- $25,000 for an angioplasty, $40,000 for a bypass -- had been relatively
stable. But as the technology improved, the operation was being performed far
more often. Was that an example of waste?

    Looking at the data, they discovered that, on average, heart attack victims
were surviving eight months longer than in the 1980's. In economic terms, they
argued, the increased spending was ''worth it.'' Subsequently, Cutler concluded
that a 45-year-old American could expect to spend $30,000 over the course of his
life on all forms of cardiac care and that, thanks to improvements in cardiac
technology alone, he could expect to live three years longer. That worked out to
$10,000 a year of added life. Cutler can rattle off figures to prove that
Americans value life even more. (Air bags cost something like $100,000 per year
of life saved, for instance.) But you don't need to be an economist to believe
that $30,000 for three extra years is a pretty good deal.

    McClellan now runs Medicare, where he is experimenting with paying doctors
for better results -- a Cutler-like departure from the old policy of simply
trying to restrain costs. But it is Cutler, now the dean of social sciences at
Harvard College, who has plainly broken from the health-care establishment. In a
book published last year, ''Your Money or Your Life,'' Cutler summarized his
research as follows: ''The evidence shows clearly that spending more has been
good; we get a lot more out of the medical system than we put in.''

    The book won praise from The New England Journal of Medicine and other
publications. ''It's good to see in Cutler's study an analysis of some of what
has gone right,'' a reviewer in The Los Angeles Times commented.

    Critics responded that good health care could be much less expensive. Canada
spends only 10 percent of its G.D.P. on health care, but according to common
yardsticks like longevity and infant mortality, Canadians are just as healthy.
Dr. John Wennberg, a health-care expert at Dartmouth, and his colleague Jonathan
Skinner point out that some areas of the United States, like Boston and Miami,
spend far more than others, like Minneapolis, without any noticeable improvement
in mortality. This leads them to conclude that the additional spending is
fruitless.

    Ira Magaziner, who ran the Clinton effort, says that project was meant to
eliminate just such redundancy and also to make a serious dent in administrative
costs. ''There is a lot of waste you can take out of the system before you get
to questions of rationing,'' he says. In any case, the Clinton plan's
complexity, as well as the secretive style in which it was developed, probably
did as much to torpedo it as rationing, which is what Cutler has focused on.

    Cutler, who reads as many medical journals as economics ones, does not
dispute that America buys more health care than it needs. He estimates that 20
percent of spending (such estimates are all over the map) is unnecessary, much
of it for tests and specialist consultations. Indulgent Boston, for instance,
has 1.7 times as many specialists per capita as frugal Minneapolis. But it is
extremely difficult to weed out only the ''bad stuff,'' Cutler says. Oregon, he
notes, tried to proscribe ''unnecessary'' procedures for Medicaid patients. It
ended up relenting on almost everything.

    In any case, the idea that America could trim spending to Canadian levels is
probably unrealistic. American doctors earn more than those in Canada. Our
culture tolerates, even approves of, greater disparities in income; Congress is
not likely to legislate a change. Canada also enjoys a ''free rider'' benefit.
Drug makers earn a return on their investment in the United States, and so are
willing to accept price caps in the smaller Canadian market. And since Canada
has just one insurer (the government), its doctors spend less on administration.

    However, health-care costs in Canada have increased at nearly the same rate
as in the United States. In fact, spending growth in most developed nations --
regardless of how they finance and organize care -- has been moving ahead at
similar rates. Since 1960, costs in six of the G-7 countries have risen, on
average, by 4.9 percent a year. The rise in costs in the United States, at 5.1
percent annually, is close to the middle of the pack. Sherry Glied, of
Columbia's School of Public Health, concludes that ''no particular
characteristic of any health-care regime is the main determinant of growth in
costs.'' Technology is.

    Critics of America's profligate ways fret about the relentless character of
spending increases, and they have a point. Even when technologies lower costs,
they increase spending by broadening the market. More people have gallbladders
removed because laparoscopic surgery is less invasive. More people take
medication for depression because the Prozac-era drugs have fewer side effects
than earlier drugs. In fact, doctors diagnose depression more often. Better
treatments lead to higher use.

    Contrary to the fears of many on the left, higher prices are not the chief
culprit. Thanks to continued pressure from H.M.O.'s, doctors' rates have been
held in check. So have the prices of pharmaceuticals already on the market. But
because new drugs are more expensive, and because people take more pills, total
spending on drugs since 1990 has quadrupled.

    As Cutler says, medical spending isn't increasing because of inflation so
much as because of people consuming more ''good stuff.'' This view is beginning
to course through the health-care world. Scanning the literature, you now happen
upon sentences like, ''We believe that some of the concern about the growth in
spending may be misplaced'' (Health Affairs) and ''On average . . . society is
better off exchanging more money for better health'' (The Journal of Economic
Perspectives). No one disputes that spending will continue to increase; limiting
the rate of growth is the most we can hope for.

    Since he reckons that most of what we get is beneficial, Cutler puts primary
emphasis on improving the quality of care. ''Most of economics is about the cost
of things,'' he notes. ''There has been little effort to figure out what the
benefits are. That's often more difficult. How do you value clean air, lower
crime or improved health?''

   What Cutler has in mind is a twofold plan. First, he proposes a variant of
the voucher system. Let the government finance people's -- everyone's -- health
care, with tax credits to be spent on private providers or insurers. But
vouchers would only broaden the system, not improve it. To accomplish the
latter, Cutler wants insurers, both public and private, to redesign the way
doctors and hospitals are compensated, to give them an incentive to compete on
quality.

    At first blush, this struck me as pretty naive -- the sort of mushy academic
theory that could lead, ultimately, to higher bills. Cutler's former mentor
Summers, now Harvard's president, shares that skepticism. How, after all, do you
measure performance in health care? It turns out that there are lots of ways.

    People (like me) often assume that the American system, while expensive, is
about as effective as possible. That turns out to be wrong. People are
prescribed pills for hypertension and don't take them. Diabetics are supposed to
monitor their blood sugar and don't. According to a study by the RAND
Corporation, people get only 55 percent of the care recommended for them.
Doctors themselves are surprisingly inconsistent. Alarmingly, many heart attack
patients do not receive beta blockers, inexpensive pills that significantly
reduce mortality.

    Dr. Donald Berwick, a pediatrician obsessed with the shortcomings in
health-care quality, has shown that it is possible to improve care rather
significantly. Berwick, who runs the Cambridge-based Institute for Healthcare,
teamed with the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for a trial in which six
hospitals and one H.M.O. focused on improving overall performance. The results
were stunning. Tallahassee Memorial Hospital reduced mortality after heart
attacks from 12 percent to 6 percent in two years. It also lowered mortality for
strokes by 41 percent and for pneumonia by 32 percent. The improved cardiac
performance was a result of systematically administering beta blockers and
aspirin, making sure EKG's arrived promptly and prodding the emergency-room
doctor and the cardiologist to be in closer touch. These procedures ''were being
done'' before the project began, says Winnie Schmeling, an administrator at
Tallahassee Memorial. ''They just weren't being done every time.''

    According to Berwick, Tallahassee's experience is common. ''Hospitals are
out to save lives, but they won't necessarily track survival rates, or compare
themselves to others, or think about what they could be doing better,'' he says.

    There is an aphorism for such behavior in the business world: ''You manage
what you measure.'' If doctors measure how long it takes to deliver an EKG, then
EKG's are delivered faster.

    America's fee-for-service system does not require doctors to measure. It
rewards them for each instance of delivered ''care,'' Cutler notes, but not
necessarily for the end result -- for ''health.'' This is especially true for
chronic patients, whose well-being depends on following a long-term regimen of
care. Diabetics, for instance, should receive yearly eye exams, regularly
monitor blood sugar and cholesterol and take other steps to avoid problematic
(and expensive) complications. ''Doctors say, 'You really should get your eyes
examined,''' Cutler notes. ''There is no follow-up. Every doctor you talk to
says: 'I know we don't do a good job on that. We don't get paid for it.' My way,
we would pay them.''

    How would ''paying for performance'' work? In the late 90's, HealthPartners,
a not-for-profit health plan in Minneapolis with 630,000 members, instituted a
bonus system to providers. It paid doctors extra if their diabetic patients got
blood sugar and cholesterol below certain levels, ceased smoking and took
aspirin daily. In 1996, 5 percent of patients met all criteria. By 2003, 17
percent did. Similar gains were registered with heart patients. ''These clinics
are trying to provide quality care,'' says Dr. George Isham, the plan's medical
director. ''What we're doing is putting a measurement on it.'' In 2003, the plan
awarded a total of $9 million to doctors on merit. But was it worth it?

    At Isham's request, Cutler and a team of colleagues analyzed the economic
payoff. They found that the program reaped huge rewards. It cost $330 a patient
and was expected to save roughly $30,000 over each patient's life. While the
analysis is not precise, Cutler wrote, it ''illustrates a general point that
professionals in health care have known intuitively for some time: . . .
comprehensive disease-management programs are clearly worth the investment.''

    The rub is that the investment was only marginally worth it for
HealthPartners. The gains went to the patients, in the form of better health,
and to their employers, who were expected to suffer less absenteeism.
HealthPartners did recoup some of its investment, as members were hospitalized
less frequently. But some of those people would change jobs and change insurers,
so the benefits were largely reaped by someone else. Ultimately, as patients
retire, they will be reaped by Medicare.

    This ''exemplifies some of the problems inherent in our current system,''
Cutler wrote. A program with huge benefits for society (and for patients)
offered only a marginal incentive to the health plan to create it.
HealthPartners did not have the option of simply raising its rates, because
healthy patients would have departed for a cheaper plan. This is why closed-loop
systems -- systems in which patients made healthy don't leave -- tend to work
best.

   Kaiser Permanente, the huge health plan based in California, is something of
an example. Both insurer and provider, Kaiser pays its doctors a fixed salary
regardless of how much (or little) they do. Its doctors also receive a bonus
tied to measures of performance. The theory is that its integrated approach will
pay off both in terms of patients' health and economically. So far, the approach
has shown significant improvement in health and after some missteps has been
able to stay competitive (though it is hardly cheap). Other major health plans
in the state recently agreed to a similar system of quality bonuses, so
California could become something of a closed loop.

    General Electric is another intriguing case. Despite its supposed fervor for
quality, until recently G.E. had been shelling out more than $2 billion a year
in health coverage without regard to the quality of care. Robert Galvin set out
to change that. In 2000, G.E. and several other companies began a program to
reward doctors in certain cities on the basis of quality. Specifically, the
companies split with doctors the savings that flowed from better care of
diabetes and heart disease. According to G.E., the average cost of caring for
diabetics who are properly treated drops by $350 a year, even before factoring
in the cost of the long-term complications of leaving the disease untreated.
Maybe pay-for-performance won't work for an earache, Galvin allows, ''but we
have found a business case for diabetes.'' Clinician groups that hit their
quality targets can earn up to $20,000 a year.

    Predictably, G.E. started with two conditions -- diabetes and heart disease
-- that afflict large numbers and for which care guidelines are well
established. G.E.'s next experiment was less predictable. Cutler and others
(including President Bush) have been pushing the health industry to invest in
computers. Many doctors still write prescriptions and keep records manually, and
Cutler says that digitizing the health-care system would save considerable
administrative expense and improve quality. It would minimize prescription
errors, speed paperwork and make a patient's medical history portable. But the
big kick is what information technology could do for the doctor's understanding
of his own performance.

    Most doctors' offices have no idea, say, what the average blood pressure is
of their patients being treated for heart disease. In fact, most clinics could
not tell you how many heart patients they have or how many have been prescribed
a particular drug. Cutler envisions a medical world in which doctors routinely
get readouts of their patients' blood-pressure levels, insulin, smoking rates --
the lot. This, of course, is how most of the business world already operates. So
the G.E. program is paying doctors' offices up to $15,000 a year for investing
in, and using, computers. G.E. and other companies have asked RAND to analyze
the financial payoff, but in the meantime they decided to kick-start doctors,
some of whom have reacted warily to any sort of proposed changes, into the
digital age.

   If you look at why Americans are going to the doctor, it strengthens the
economic case for performance goals. Half of the growth in spending is for
chronic conditions like asthma, obesity and diabetes. With proper treatment,
including preventive care, chronic patients require less intensive care and less
hospitalization. In their case, particularly, Cutler argues, quality will pay.

    One criticism is that pay-for-performance still rewards doctors for doing
something. It doesn't motivate them to cut waste -- to not do things. Another is
that doctors could game the system, just as C.E.O.'s with performance bonuses
can. Nonetheless, McClellan, the Medicare administrator and former Cutler
collaborator, is taking a gamble that pay-for-performance will work. Medicare
has started half a dozen pilot programs to test various incentives. In one,
hospitals scoring in the top 10 percent in a set of quality measures for certain
conditions will be given a 2 percent bonus.

    Medicare is also testing incentives that reward doctors for savings. The
American Medical Association is nervous about anything that smacks of
encouraging doctors to withhold care (a battle it fought with H.M.O.'s in the
90's), but it appears to be willing to look at schemes that link pay to quality.

    Medicare hopes that by making providers think about both quality and
efficiency, modern doctors might acquire some of the wisdom of those old-time
family practitioners who, so we like to recall, had their patients' health
uppermost in mind without losing all regard for their pocketbooks. ''Speaking as
an economist,'' McClellan says, ''it's clear that doctors respond to
incentives.''

    Cutler says that Medicare's willingness to experiment is hugely important.
Private health plans do not have the clout to force a clinic to purchase
software or adopt performance goals. But Medicare is so big that were it to
adopt performance targets, it would force every doctor to adjust. ''Medicare
could really jump-start'' pay-for-performance, Galvin says. Then H.M.O.'s would
surely begin to mimic Medicare and adopt similar targets.

    Reoriented to managing ''health'' rather than merely costs, H.M.O.'s might
again become a useful part of the health-care landscape, Cutler says. Managing
care, he says, was a necessary idea that went off the tracks as H.M.O.'s became
remote, single-minded cost-control freaks. His models for the future are the
progressive organizations (he calls them hippie places) like Kaiser that employ
their own doctors, invest in computers and ''engage'' their patients. They
manage quality as well as cost.

    This does sound sort of pie-in-the-sky, but Kaiser and the other California
health plans are already paying bonuses to doctors who score high on patient
surveys. Just imagine: a doctor paid to make you feel better.

    Cutler says that the next step is for Medicare to go beyond trials and move
from a fee-for-service model to, in part, pay-for-performance. ''If Medicare has
to pay more to doctors -- which it will, given current projections -- don't
raise fees across the board,'' he explains. ''Set up a bonus fund that goes to
M.D.'s who follow guidelines or have the best measures of outcome.'' Similarly,
Medicare could pay more for operations that are clearly indicated, less for
procedures (or drugs) that seem discretionary. By such steps, Medicare would
come to resemble a large, progressive H.M.O.

    All this would ease the way to Cutler's ultimate goal, which would be to
abolish the distinction between Medicare and private plans. That America has a
separate plan for seniors is an accident of history: it was a compromise adopted
in the 60's when business and the American Medical Association lobbied to defeat
universal coverage. Many corporations, however, are now quite eager for the
government to resolve the mess. And the present hodgepodge system (or nonsystem)
simply has no logic to support it. As former Senator Bob Kerrey testified in
2002, ''There are six main ways a resident of the United States can become
eligible for insurance'': wait until he is 65, demonstrate that he is disabled,
''get blown up in a war,'' prove he is poor and ''promise to remain poor,'' work
for the federal government or find a job with an employer who offers insurance.
Those who fall through the cracks get only half as much care as people with
insurance.

    To make coverage universal, Cutler advocates a $6,000 credit for poor
families (and less, on a sliding scale, for others, tapering off to a small
credit for people earning $50,000 and up). The credits would be redeemable as a
sort of health-insurance voucher. Significantly, Cutler would extend credits to
everyone -- even to people who are covered now. Many employers, for competitive
reasons, would still offer coverage, but access to care would no longer depend
on either employment status or age.

    Vouchers are a leap for a Democrat, but the idea is popular with
conservatives. Bush has also proposed tax credits, though on a smaller scale and
for only the uninsured. Stuart Butler of the Heritage Foundation prefers
Cutler's universal model. Butler points out that the government already
subsidizes people in corporate plans, who do not have to declare their
employers' contributions as income. This is a huge break: it costs the United
States Treasury more than the mortgage deduction. It is also distributed,
illogically, only to people whose employers provide a subsidy. As Cutler
declared in his book, ''Health insurance is not something that is made better by
tying it to employment.'' Even the A.M.A. has come around and favors having the
government finance universal access.

    Cutler's idea is to preserve the diversity of America's system while
subsidizing people's access to it -- to let the G.E.'s and the HealthPartners of
the world, and also the Mercks, continue to innovate.

    Cutler says that under his scheme, the government might spend an additional
$100 billion a year. Some of that would represent new spending for people who
previously did not have insurance; some would represent a transfer to the
government of costs now borne by others -- employers, or hospitals that provide
charity care. That's a big number, but, to keep it in perspective, spending for
Medicare and Medicaid currently totals just over $500 billion.

    More problematic is that Cutler's plan would seem not to brake the projected
future escalation of spending. By 2040, according to various projections, that
spending could rise from its present $1.8 trillion to something like $3 trillion
-- that is, to 20 percent of G.D.P. or conceivably 25 percent. This is why so
much attention is focused on cost. According to Henry Aaron of the Brookings
Institution, ''We can't continue to provide all care for all people.''

    Cutler's answer to these fears is not exactly cavalier, though some might
find it so. If we institute a more results-oriented, and a more
health-conscious, system, our dollars will buy us better care and probably
cheaper care. By emphasizing prevention and effective treatments for the
chronically ill, we might also reduce the rate at which spending grows. We'll
still consume more health care -- more ''good stuff,'' in Cutler's trademark
colloquialism. But the drive to keep spending down will forever be challenged by
technology's efforts to overcome it. If it turns out that gene therapy delivers
a cure for cancer, and if that turns out to be something that most Americans
want, we should be prepared to pay for it and indeed to tax for it, Cutler says.
Spending a fifth, even a quarter, of our resources on life-enhancing and
life-prolonging miracles would not be the worst of fates.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Kit Hinrichs/Pentagram)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2005


                             197 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                             March 13, 2005 Sunday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 2135 words

HEADLINE: Money and medicine;
Scientists grapple with expanding role of firms in research

BYLINE: Sarah Treffinger, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Dr. Toby Cosgrove, chief executive of the Cleveland Clinic, remembers a time
when relationships between medical companies and physicians revolved around the
sale of stethoscopes.

   Not too controversial.

   But those relationships became much more complicated when companies began
playing a huge role in research. And in recent years, they have raised a lot of
red flags.

   One particular case sent shock waves through the scientific community. In
1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Arizona died participating in a gene
therapy study at the University of Pennsylvania. Separate from medical issues,
his death raised questions about the financial interests, potentially millions
of dollars, of both the university and one of the trial's lead investigators.

   Two years later, agencies such as the U.S. General Accounting Office, the
Association of American Medical Colleges and the Association of American
Universities issued reports on conflicts of interest.

   "As the boundary between academia and industry has become less distinct," the
GAO report noted, "concerns have been raised about the potential for financial
conflicts of interest in investigators' as well as institutions' relationships
with private industry."

   Across the country, medical professionals and watchdogs are still trying to
get a handle on such conflicts.

   The National Institutes of Health issued an ethics regulation last month that
prohibits NIH employees from being employed by pharmaceutical and biotechnology
companies; health care providers and insurers; related trade, professional,
consumer or advocacy groups; and educational or nonprofit research institutions,
including NIH grantees.

   Dr. Elias Zerhouni, NIH director, described the regulation in a memo as
"critical to restoring the integrity of the NIH and the public trust."

   Guy Chisolm, chairman of the Cleveland Clinic's conflict of interest
committee, said the actions of the NIH have pushed conflict issues "more and
more into the national limelight."

   Lately, some of the focus has been directed at the Clinic, where Dr. Eric
Topol has severed his financial ties to drug, diagnostic and medical device
companies.

   "It's a personal decision, given the role I have," said Topol, chief academic
officer of the Clinic and provost of the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of
Medicine of Case Western Reserve University. "If I'm going to speak out about
COX-2 inhibitors, I don't want to have a relationship somehow be twisted."

   Topol, who also chairs the department of cardiovascular medicine, was a vocal
critic of one such drug, Vioxx, which was pulled from the worldwide market last
year by its maker, Merck & Co.

   In December, Fortune magazine reported that Topol was a paid scientific
adviser to Great Point Partners LLC, a company that runs a hedge fund that
"shorted" Merck stock. "Shorting" means selling borrowed shares on the belief
that they will lose value, then buying them back to return them when they are
cheaper, keeping the difference in price.

   Topol said in a written statement at the time that he had no personal
investment in the fund. He also said he quit the advisory board in October
"because of the concern about an appearance of a conflict of interest, even
though there was none."

   Topol, who has written articles about conflicts of interest, said his move to
end relationships dates to 2003 - well before the hedge fund flap. And since
that decision became public in a New York Times article, it has evoked
"exceptional praise," including more than 100 congratulatory e-mails and
letters, he said.

   Among the people applauding Topol's decision is Dr. Catherine DeAngelis,
editor-in-chief of the Journal of the American Medical Association.

   DeAngelis said Topol called her because he has been published in JAMA and he
wanted her to know that he "never took advantage of the hedge fund or anything
like that." He also sought her advice.

   "I said, 'Give it all up,' " she recalled. " 'You know, I do not know how
much money you make annually on these consultant fees and that sort of thing,
but no matter what it is, in your position, it's not worth it.' "

   DeAngelis, who won't eat at a dinner if she finds out that a pharmaceutical
company has paid for it, said she admires Topol for his actions and added she
would like to see all investigators follow his lead.

   "I think he did something that was very smart and very brave," she said.

   Dr. Ralph Horwitz, dean of the Case medical school, also supports Topol's
move.

   "I think he did absolutely the right thing in trying to wipe the slate clean
on those issues so that there would be no question about the motivations for the
things that he was doing," Horwitz said.

   Decades of experience

   Cosgrove, who has been at the Clinic's helm since October, said no one there
asked Topol to take that step. Cosgrove personally has 18 patents for medical
devices and sits on the boards of the device companies AtriCure, Novare Surgical
Systems and Corazon Technologies. He is also a consultant to Edwards
Lifesciences, which develops products and technologies to treat advanced
cardiovascular disease, and is a general partner in Foundation Medical Partners,
a venture capital firm.

   "I have been at this sort of process, involved with corporations and
developing products, for 30 years," Cosgrove said. "I think that, over the
years, I have been extremely straightforward with the institution. I never have
gone on any boards without talking with the institution and having the whole
process go through the review process at the Clinic."

   In fact, he said, his predecessor, Dr. Floyd Loop, asked him to get involved
with Foundation Medical Partners several years ago. Another general partner is
Harry Rein, the founder of Canaan Partners, a venture capital firm in which
Cosgrove has been invested for about 20 years. Cosgrove said he and Rein have
been friends for a long time - ever since they met in a Lamaze class in
Cleveland Heights.

   Foundation Medical Partners' Web site states that it is "sponsored by" the
Clinic. But Cosgrove said it is independent, not owned or governed by the
Clinic.

   Still, the Clinic has committed $35 million to the firm, whose portfolio of
nine companies includes CardioMEMS and AtriCure, which have had products tested
at the hospital.

   CardioMEMS, based in Atlanta, is a spinoff of the Clinic's technology
transfer and commercialization arm. It was co-founded by Dr. Jay Yadav, director
of vascular intervention at the Clinic.

   In July 2004, two of Yadav's Clinic colleagues implanted a CardioMEMS sensor
in a patient during a minimally invasive repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
It was the first time the sensor had been used in the United States.

   Last year, the Clinic's Institutional Review Board approved a long-term trial
of an AtriCure device that will look at whether it cures a group of patients of
atrial fibrillation, a type of irregular heart rhythm, said Eileen Sheil, a
hospital spokeswoman. The device is approved by the Food and Drug Administration
to ablate and coagulate soft tissue during surgical procedures.

   Patients enrolled in the trial from now on will sign a new, detailed consent
form, Sheil said. She noted the old form did not disclose specifics about the
Clinic's relationships.

   Sheil also said that, since Cosgrove became CEO, he has been working with the
Clinic's board "to identify, manage and, if necessary, modify his
relationships."

   That process will take time.

   "We can't just shut it off like a light switch," Sheil said. "There are
relationships that are important to the Clinic and good for the institution. You
can't just sever ties."

   Innovation can't be stymied

   Science has changed a lot in the 50 years since Dr. Jonas Salk told CBS
reporter Edward R. Murrow there was no patent on his polio vaccine, adding,
"Could you patent the sun?" In 1980, the Bayh-Dole Act allowed academic
institutions to patent inventions stemming from federally funded research.

   Nowadays, as DeAngelis wrote in a 2000 JAMA editorial, "There is little
chance that sufficient funding for important clinical research, especially
expensive clinical trials, will be forthcoming from sources other than sponsors
with a vested interest in the results."

   And so institutions like the Clinic are trying to strike a balance between
innovation and managing conflicts.

   Cosgrove said he intends to maintain the Clinic's culture, which promotes
creativity and entrepreneurship. After all, it was in that culture that he
developed a cannula for returning blood to a patient's heart after heart
surgery, which reduced the incidence of strokes by about 30 percent.

   Conflicts are "a part of everyday business," Cosgrove said, and
overregulation at the expense of innovation is not a good thing in the long run.

   "The most important issue is doing the best thing for the patient, and the
rest of it falls into relative degrees of importance," he said.

   To that end, associations with profit-making entities are not necessarily bad
things, said Dr. Jeffrey Drazen, editor-in-chief of The New England Journal of
Medicine.

   "There are times when you have true expertise and companies need that
expertise," Drazen said, "and it makes sense to try to tap that as part of our
scientific brain trust in order to advance patient care."

   Conflicts lessen work's impact

   The federal government relied on experts to come up with new recommendations,
published last year, for cholesterol management and the use of statin drugs. But
the National Cholesterol Education Program was criticized for not initially
revealing that most of the panelists had financial ties to drug companies.

   Concerns about the NCEP report's objectivity undermined its importance and
impact, Dr. Jerome Kassirer, former editor-in-chief of The New England Journal
of Medicine, wrote in The Washington Post. "What do we tell hundreds of
thousands of doctors and millions of patients about taking statins? I have no
prescription for the patients, only for the profession: We must clean up our
act."

   Kassirer, author of "On the Take: How Medicine's Complicity with Big Business
Can Endanger Your Health," said in an interview that he is not opposed to
doctors working with industry to develop new products that benefit patients. But
he is opposed to relationships that involve marketing products. Now an adjunct
professor at the Case medical school, he said he believes Topol took "a
high-minded approach."

   Though he has ended relationships with many companies, Topol said he will
remain on the advisory board of Perlegen Sciences - which is focused on
providing safer, more effective medicine and uncovering the genetic causes of
diseases - because of its connection to his genomic research efforts. But he
will not get paid in that capacity.

   Topol's colleague in cardiology, Dr. Steven Nissen, has a different way of
dealing with compensated outside work: He has his speaking and consulting
payments go directly to a philanthropic fund that he established at the American
College of Cardiology.

   Neither of those approaches is dictated by the Clinic's conflict of interest
policy, which is expected to undergo some changes in the coming weeks.

   Chisolm said a subgroup of the Clinic's conflict of interest committee has
drafted a new, more specific policy, with advice from the whole committee, the
Board of Governors and other research centers.

   If that policy is approved, $10,000 will be the annual limit that a faculty
member may receive from an outside company for performing research linked to
that company. Chisolm said anything above $10,000 will require the faculty
member to make a case for an exception, as well as a plan to manage the conflict
- real or perceived. Both would require approval of the conflict of interest
committee.

   The $10,000 threshold is a drop from $25,000, and it would put the Clinic's
policy more in line with guidelines set by the Association of American Medical
Colleges and the policies that already exist at Case, University Hospitals of
Cleveland and MetroHealth Medical Center.

   But that doesn't mean other policies are perfect.

   Horwitz said he does not think Case's policy is explicit enough, and he has
strong feelings about one particular aspect.

   "When we develop a new test or a new procedure or a new therapy and we want
to test that procedure here at Case and at University Hospitals, the university
and the medical school should not have ownership of companies that are carrying
out that work," he said. "Or, if we think we need to have ownership of
companies, then the work ought to be done elsewhere so that patients are never
put in a position where they need to worry that decisions are being made because
of a financial benefit that institutions might have."

   As Chisolm put it, patients should be the No. 1 priority.

   "We want all of this to take place in an atmosphere where the patients are
protected," he said.

   Cosgrove agreed, then added, "But we also don't want to kill creativity."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: streffinger@plaind.com, 216-999-3906

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION BY: MILAN KECMAN THE PLAIN DEALER
TONY DEJAK ASSOCIATED PRESS Dr. Eric Topol, chief academic officer of the
Cleveland Clinic and provost of the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine
of Case Western Reserve University, has severed his financial ties to drug,
diagnostic and medical device companies. Topol is shown in the boardroom at the
Cleveland Clinic Wednesday, Feb. 2, 2005.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2005


                             198 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             March 13, 2005 Sunday
                             FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 713 words

HEADLINE: After reading the St. Louis American, I'm asking the Jesus question

BYLINE: SYLVESTER BROWN

BODY:

   I can't ever recall thinking about Jesus after reading the St. Louis American
newspaper. I think about Christ occasionally, sure, but it's usually from a more
distant perspective. At first, I was simply curious that a general news
publication featured three articles on its cover involving the clergy. After
reading the stories, however, I found myself thinking about Jesus himself. Would
he support the causes championed by clergy members?

   The first article covered a rally orchestrated by local church groups to
oppose Gov. Matt Blunt's proposed budget cuts. Some of those cuts, protesters
shouted, will shutter a north St. Louis County mental health facility --
Bellefontaine Habilitation Center. The group circulated a flier that read:

   "We are opposed to balancing the budget on the backs of our state's most
vulnerable people."

   Yeah. I could imagine Jesus -- with bread, fish and wine in hand --
supporting that crowd.

   The second story focused on local clergy members and medical researchers
who've joined to fight state bills that would criminalize and ban the gene
therapy research called Somatic Cell Nuclear Transfer. They oppose human cloning
but agree that stem cell research could eventually cure many deadly and
debilitating diseases.

   Rev. James Morris of Lane Tabernacle Church took a strong religious posture
in the article.

   "The lives of people and health have always been important. They were
important to Christ."

   Would Jesus agree? Maybe so. After all, he was a product of virgin birth. If
medical miracles are to be found in stem cell research, who would know better
than the man who walked on water.

   It was a short blurb and photo on the American's front page that really
brought Christ home, however. A photo showed the Rev. Laurel Hickman preaching
at West Side MB Church. Hickman was one of many ministers involved in last
week's annual "Black Church Week of Prayer for the Healing of AIDS."

   The goal of the national effort is to form a coalition of black Christians,
Muslims and other denominations to offer consistent educational services and
prayer to heal the global scourge of AIDS.

   Whoa, wait a minute. I can see Jesus defending the poor, fighting for the
sick and mentally challenged, and maybe exploring stem cell research. But AIDS?
How would Christ view a disease that's stigmatized by homosexuality, sexual
promiscuity and illegal drug use?

   "He'd reach out to people afflicted with AIDS the same way he reached out to
lepers," answered the Rev. Lloyd Edwards, a pastor with Progressive Baptist
Church in St. Louis. "AIDS is the leprosy of the 21st century, and Jesus wasn't
afraid to help lepers. He healed them."

   Edwards, 51, is HIV-positive. The south St. Louis resident has been involved
with "Black Church Week of Prayer" since it was introduced in 1989 by the Balm
in Gilead, a New York nonprofit organization dedicated to stopping the spread of
HIV and AIDS.

   Just because people have AIDS or HIV doesn't necessarily mean they were
involved in risky behavior, Edwards told me in a phone interview. But even if
they were, it shouldn't matter.

   "Millions are infected. That's the facts. The question is, how will the
church respond to the crisis," Edwards said. "The Bible says 'Judge ye not, lest
ye be judged.' The church ought to be compassionate and respond from the heart."

   Edwards' comments reminded me of something I've been trying to wrap my mind
around since the presidential election last year. How did conservatives and the
religious right manage to narrowly define "moral values" as belonging to those
who oppose abortions, gay marriage and radical, liberal judges? Shouldn't it
also apply to people like Edwards who are addressing health care, housing,
hunger, homelessness and the AIDS crisis?

   I heard newly elected Illinois Sen. Barack Obama address the issue of "moral
concerns" on NPR Thursday. Democrats shouldn't compete with Republicans by
pretending like they found new moral values, he said. His party needs to embrace
the "moral values" that energized the worker's movement, ended segregation and
gained equal rights for women and minorities.

   Obama gives good advice. But my St. Louis American experience might be even
better. As we grapple with the controversial, morally troubling issues of our
times, it never hurts to consider Jesus.

NOTES:  METRO PAGE 2

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2005


                             199 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              March 7, 2005 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALENDAR; Calendar Desk; Part E; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 846 words

HEADLINE: BOOK REVIEW;
Era of souped-up humans is coming ;
More Than Human Embracing the Promise of Biological Enhancement Ramez Naam
Broadway Books: 278 pp., $24.95

BYLINE: Alex Soojung-Kim Pang, Special to The Times

BODY:

   Scientific and medical advances in the last 150 years have doubled average
life spans in advanced countries; made historical curiosities of fearsome
epidemic diseases; eliminated childhood scourges; turned fatal adult diseases
into chronic illnesses to be "managed"; and changed the way we think about
aging. But if you think these changes have pushed at our sense of what it means
to be human, just wait for what will happen in the next 20 years.

   Gene therapy could eliminate genetically based diseases; designer drugs could
combat neurological or brain disease, improve intelligence or sculpt
personality. A variety of therapies could affect life at its beginning and end,
allowing parents to modify the genes that shape an unborn child's mind and
physique, or elders to dramatically slow the aging process. Brain implants
already let us use thought to control prostheses and robotic devices. In a few
years, they could evolve into machine-mediated brain-to-brain connection --
Internet-enabled telepathy and mind reading.

   Authors as different as Bill McKibben in "Enough" and Francis Fukuyama in
"Our Posthuman Future" argue that technologies could so dramatically alter our
bodies, or challenge our capacity for self-determination and free will, that we
should be wise enough to refuse -- even ban -- them.

   Stop worrying, Ramez Naam says in "More Than Human." He argues that efforts
to ban such enhancements are either folly or futile for several reasons.
Prohibition wouldn't destroy the markets for life-extending therapies or genetic
redesign of human embryos, he says; it would just drive them abroad or
underground. Banning technologies and therapies also constrains the freedoms of
individuals and markets. The Declaration of Independence declared that "Life,
liberty and the pursuit of happiness" are inalienable rights: Denying someone
access to cortical implants hits the trifecta.

   Further, Naam argues, "scientists cannot draw a clear line between healing
and enhancing." Banning the latter would inevitably cripple the former. Finally
and most provocatively, "far from being unnatural, the drive to alter and
improve on ourselves is a fundamental part of who we humans are." This turns the
argument of bioethicists like Leon Kass (head of the President's Council on
Bioethics, which has been famously conservative in its recommendations) upside
down. Our limits don't define us, Naam says; our desire to overcome them does.

   "More Than Human" is a terrific survey of current work and future
possibilities in gene therapy, neurotechnology and other fields. Naam doesn't
shy away from technical detail, but his enthusiasm keeps the science from
becoming intimidating. But he's less successful in making the case for
"embracing the promise of biological enhancement." Yes, people are greedy,
regulations are often ineffective and the war on drugs has not gone well. But
none of these facts is likely to change the minds of people who oppose gene
therapy on moral or theological grounds. Many religions see the body as a
prison, not a temple, and illness and death as part of life's natural course.
Indeed, the Pontifical Academy of Life recently decried the Western world's
"health-fiend madness," arguing that it takes money away from simpler but more
potent public health measures -- and denies us the hard-won wisdom that
suffering can bring.

   But in today's borderless high-tech world, if gene therapies and neural
implants are banned in the U.S., they'll probably be available somewhere else.
Medical tourism is already a growth industry in parts of Latin America and Asia
that have low labor costs, attractive locations and good facilities. One can
only imagine the money a small tropical nation could make restoring youth to the
elderly. Rather than focus on banning them, we'd be better off making sure these
therapies are not available only to the super-rich and figuring out how their
availability could affect the future.

   Those efforts might be helped by realizing that "More Than Human" describes
two different technologies. Life-extending therapies, despite their likely
popularity, probably wouldn't dramatically change our sense of what it means to
be human. In contrast, neurotechnologies that allow a prosthetic device to feel
like a part of our bodies, or let us directly share thoughts and senses with
others, would scramble our basic notions of body and mind, self and other,
individual and community.

   I tend to agree with Naam that the desire to prolong life, acquire new
physical powers and extend the mind does not risk making us less human. There's
more to life than trying to recapture lost youth, but no one who defends the
humanity of the weak, the disabled and the very old should deny the humanity of
those who seek to re-engineer their bodies or minds. "More Than Human" maps some
of this future, but it probably won't help you decide whether you want to really
go there.

   Alex Soojung-Kim Pang is a research director at the Institute for the Future,
a Silicon Valley think tank, and writes a column on "The Future" published on
Red Herring Online.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2005


                             200 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2005 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                              March 6, 2005 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: C Sports; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: Ripken Jr. honored with Lombardi award

BYLINE: DON WALKER, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Bart Starr was riding in a car with Cal Ripken Jr. on Saturday when the topic
inevitably got around to Vince Lombardi, the celebrated and legendary coach of
the Green Bay Packers.

    As Ripken explained later, Starr told baseball's Iron Man what kind of
leader Lombardi was during his days coaching the Packers.

    Ripken, who never met Lombardi, had a pretty good idea what made the coach
so successful. But the talk with Starr reminded Ripken of another man who was
instrumental in his own life.

    "I got to thinking, 'That sounds like my dad,' " Ripken said Saturday in an
interview at the Pfister Hotel, where he was honored as this year's recipient of
the Vince Lombardi "Award of Excellence."

     "Both were old-school, and in search of excellence," Ripken added.
"Demanding. Hard-core disciplinarian. And Bart confirmed that."

    Cal Ripken Sr., a mainstay in the Baltimore Orioles organization for many
years, died of lung cancer in 1999. Cal and his brother, Billy, credit their
steely-eyed father for much of their success in baseball and in life.

    More than 850 people attended Saturday's 15th annual event. Proceeds from
the event will benefit the Vince Lombardi Cancer Clinic, and the Vince Lombardi
Gene Therapy Research Laboratory and Cancer Counseling Center at St. Luke's
Medical Center.

    Cal Ripken Jr.'s career in baseball is the stuff of legend. He spent 21
seasons with the Baltimore Orioles, retiring in 2001. He is one of only seven
players in history to have 400 home runs and 3,000 hits. In 1995, Ripken broke
Lou Gehrig's record for consecutive games played (2,130). He ended the streak in
1998 after playing 2,632 consecutive games.

    Ripken also was a two-time most valuable player and was a member of the
Orioles' championship team in 1983.

    Ripken has stayed close to the game. He and his brother operate the Ripken
Baseball Group, which includes ownership of the Class A Aberdeen (Md.)
IronBirds, Ripken Baseball for young people, Ripken Management & Design and the
Cal Ripken Sr. Foundation.

    The centerpiece of their business is the huge baseball complex in Aberdeen,
Ripken's hometown. The IronBirds play in a 6,000-seat minor-league facility.

    Besides his baseball business, Ripken plans to launch a weekly baseball show
with Billy Ripken on XM Satellite radio. And Ripken has been approached by some
ownership groups who have designs on bidding to buy the new Washington
Nationals.

    "There are some philosophies I want to test at that high level and this
might be one of those opportunities," Ripken said of his possible ownership
interest.

    For Ripken, it's a full life, but one that keeps him involved and still
gives him time to be with his family.

    "Baseball is the greatest game on the planet," he said.

     Besides Ripken and Starr, previous winners of the Lombardi award include
Bob Hope, President George H.W. Bush, Jane and Lloyd Pettit, Dan Jansen, Hank
Aaron and General H. Norman Schwarzkopf. The annual award recognizes a person
who has made a Hall of Fame contribution to a sport, professions, business or
community consistent with Lombardi's commitment to excellence philosophy.

    Copyright 2005, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This
notice does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received
through wire services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2005
