
                             201 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      MARCH 6, 2005 Sunday ADVANCE EDITION

SECTION: REPORT CARD ON THE SCHOOLS; Pg. P12

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: Bringing a boundless energy along with first-year jitters;
Carrie Rakowski, Holicong Middle School, Bucks County

BYLINE: Kellie Patrick INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The journey to becoming a good teacher starts with that first job. Every
year, about two-thirds of the teachers hired in the Philadelphia region are
first-year teachers.

   They are newcomers to a profession undergoing major change as new
requirements for student testing put the spotlight on teacher performance. These
newcomers - all eighth-grade teachers - offer a glimpse of the challenges faced
by new teachers: Jeaneane Kozlowski, a special-education teacher in
Philadelphia; Carrie Rakowski, a science teacher in Bucks County; and Michael
Berner, a language-arts teacher in Burlington County.

   They may teach in different places, but their experiences are similar. They
work long days. They look for ways to connect with parents, and they strive to
strike that delicate balance between being a good disciplinarian to challenging
adolescents, while building the charisma that inspires students to like them and
learn from them.

   *

   Carrie Rakowski's desist-or-die stare and professional attire are all that
keep the new teacher from blending in with her eighth-grade science students at
Doylestown's Holicong Middle School.

   Her face looks much younger than her 26 years. She stands nose-to-nose with
most of her students when wearing three-inch heels.

   But the former scientist's faith in her knowledge of the subject and her
comfort with adolescents belie the length of her teaching career.

   "I didn't even know she was new," said Matt Stagious, 14, about halfway
through the school year. "She teaches like she has a lot of experience."

   Rakowski has experience with science. Before becoming a teacher, she spent
four years in a lab at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. She loved her work
in genetic therapy, but soon discovered that her favorite part of the day was
the volunteer time she spent with sick children whose parents needed a break.

   So for two years, she took evening classes at Rider University, adding an
education degree to her Villanova biology degree.

   "What I was trying to do . . . was take the science I'm able to do and the
interaction with the kids I love and do it at the same time," she said.

   Holicong principal Nancy Silvious, leader of a fast-growing school in a
fast-growing district, hires eight to 15 new teachers a year. She knows what to
look for, and saw it in Rakowski.

   "She had the confidence to stand in front of 30 students right out of the
starting gate," Silvious said.

   But Rakowski admits she sometimes feels like the newcomer she is. It's then
that she is most thankful for the new-teacher safety net set up by her district
and school.

   New Central Bucks teachers meet several times in their first year for
training and discussion. New Holicong teachers meet monthly. Rakowski talks to
other science teachers and other eighth-grade teachers. And often, she seeks out
Tim Yanka, the ninth-grade science teacher assigned as her mentor.

   "She's not afraid to ask for help or ask a question," said Yanka. It's that
preparation that makes her confident when she's in front of students, he said.

   When Rakowski was uncertain how to interest her students in a lesson on skin,
Yanka, who has taught science for 28 years, suggested conducting a lab on how
skin keeps germs out of the body.

   Rakowski remembered the gelatinous substance she used to grow germs in her
old lab. Her former boss donated some, which her students used to test the
antibacterial properties of hand cleaners.

   The experiment was a hit.

   Lab partners Jennifer Jing, Brenna Hassler and Kara Kralik, all 13, got
excited just talking about it a few weeks later.

   "We used these petri dishes with this jelly stuff in them," Kara said.

   Students washed their hands with plain water, or water with antibacterial
soap, regular soap or hand sanitizer. Then, they put their hands on the stuff in
the petri dish.

   Rakowski incubated the petri dishes - in her hot car - and the students
counted bacteria clusters to see which cleaners got rid of the most germs.

   One day shortly before Thanksgiving, Rakowski was concerned with the results
of a quiz she had just graded. Many students had done poorly, and she wondered
whether she had made it too hard, or had failed to teach the material.

   It was a true/false quiz, and part of the assignment was to correct the false
answers. Many students lost points, even though she had showed them how to do
the exercise in class. Many even missed two questions that had been class
examples.

   The members of her teaching team assured her that she had gone over the
material and made her expectations clear.

   To her students, she was direct.

   "We practiced this in class, guys. How much simpler can I make it?" Her
students responded with an uncharacteristic silence.

   In Rakowski's classroom, there's an easy camaraderie between students and
teacher. Students feel relaxed enough to joke with her, and she jokes right
back. Class discussion can get lively. This atmosphere can lead to more class
participation, Yanka said, because students are comfortable enough to ask
questions.

   But when exasperated, Rakowski tends to get quiet.

   Very quiet.

   By eighth period, the last class of the day, some students are tired and have
trouble paying attention. When one rocks in his chair, nearly falling, she says
his name. And gives him the warning look. He refocuses.

   Sometimes, she'll just stop teaching, and quietly stare at whoever is out of
line.

   "That makes them uncomfortable," she said. When the student stops, she
continues.

   One afternoon this fall, it was Rakowski who was uncomfortable - with filling
out her budget request for the year.

   Because she had yet to finish a full year, she wasn't certain how many
supplies she would need for next year, and didn't want to ask for too much or
too little. The other science teachers helped her.

   Rakowski said she has all the books and supplies she needs to teach science
in the way she wants. Science teachers are in demand, and she received offers
from several districts. But Rakowski was drawn to Central Bucks partly because
she knew that her classroom would be well-equipped. A friend from high school
who teaches in the district praised its science department. And the district is
relatively easy to get to from her home in Levittown.

   Rakowski is pleased with her $39,680 salary, but said it was not critical in
her decision to teach at Holicong.

   As a science teacher, Rakowski escapes one source of pressure for many
eighth-grade teachers: The state does not test her students' knowledge of the
subject she teaches them.

   That day is coming, so she's already using state standards to guide her
teaching. A contraption on the board at the front of the room displays the
standard to which that day's lesson relates.

   With so much that could be taught on any science topic, Rakowski said she was
glad to have the state standards.

   She also uses her lessons to help students prepare for the reading and
writing portions of the state tests.

   Just back from winter break, Rakowski said that teaching was much harder and
more time-consuming than she thought. She has learned that not every lesson will
go as smoothly as planned or be finished in the time allotted.

   But the time she has spent teaching has reassured her that leaving the lab
was the right decision.

   Rakowski also has learned the joy of seeing students come around - even a few
who seemed uninterested when the year began.

   "Some do open up with you as you go throughout the year and they get
comfortable with you," she said. "That's been nice."

   Contact staff writer Kellie Patrick at 215-702-7807 or
kpatrick@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
Inquirer photographs by Clem Murray
At left, Carrie Rakowski plays traffic cop, directing students during an
experiment on the effects of certain enzymes on meat. With her are Katherine
Aseltine (left, facing to the side) and Kara Kralik (right). Rakowski, left a
job as a scientist so that she could work with children.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2005


                             202 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; SUN NEWS DIGEST; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 962 words

HEADLINE: SUN NEWS DIGEST

BODY:

   NATIONAL

   Bush taps scientist for EPA post

   President Bush turned to a career scientist yesterday to lead the
Environmental Protection Agency and push changes Bush wants in air-pollution and
clean water programs. Bush nominated Stephen L. Johnson, a biologist and
pathologist by training, to become the first person in the agency's 35-year
history to rise from within its ranks to the top job of administrator. [Page 3a]

   Gene therapy recommendations

   Two gene therapy trials should be allowed to resume as a last recourse for
the patients, an FDA advisory panel recommended yesterday. The scientists also
suggested the FDA clear a third trial to proceed because its participants have a
differing condition. [Page 3a]

   WORLD

   Freed journalist wounded in Iraq

   An Italian journalist freed after a month of captivity in Iraq was wounded
while traveling to the Baghdad airport when she came under fire from an American
armored vehicle. An Italian security agent who helped negotiate her release was
killed. [Page 1a]

   Ex-Ukraine minister dies

   The former Ukrainian interior minister died, apparently in a suicide,
yesterday, hours before he was to talk to prosecutors about possible government
involvement in the brutal killing of a journalist in 2000. [Page 8a]

   MARYLAND

   Defense lawyers review shootings

   Public defenders said yesterday that they believe a Baltimore police analyst
has possibly misidentified gunshot residue 92 times in the past four years. They
say they have begun a review to see how many city shooting cases may be
affected. But police and prosecutors defend the way they have handled gunshot
residue evidence. [Page 1a]

   Man gets life in detective's death

   The man identified as the getaway driver in the retaliatory killing of
Detective Thomas G. Newman was sentenced yesterday to life in prison without the
possibility of parole - meaning that all three of the Baltimore officer's
convicted killers will spend the rest of their lives behind bars. [Page 1b]

   SPORTS

   Ravens lose Baxter to Browns

   A miscommunication on a signing bonus shattered an agreement in principle
between Gary Baxter and the Ravens, leading the cornerback to a six-year deal
with the Cleveland Browns, according to a league source. His contract is worth
$30 million with a $10.5 million signing bonus. [Page 1c]

   Palmeiro says he won't testify

   Invited by a congressional committee to testify March 17 about the use of
performance-enhancing drugs in baseball, he'll decline, Orioles first baseman
Rafael Palmeiro said, because of a previous commitment to his family. Palmeiro
and outfielder Sammy Sosa were among the players singled out in Jose Canseco's
book for suspected steroid use. Sosa was also invited to testify but said he'd
consult with his agent before commenting. [Page 4c]

   Warriors rout Wizards

   Jason Richardson scored 16 of his 34 points in the fourth quarter of the
basketball game to lead the Golden State Warriors to a 103-90 victory over the
Washington Wizards. Larry Hughes scored 27 points, and Gilbert Arenas added 23
for the Wizards, who have won nine of their last 11 home games against Western
Conference teams. [Page 5c]

   BUSINESS

   Stocks rise on jobs report

   A surprisingly strong job creation report energized Wall Street yesterday,
propelling stocks sharply higher as investors grew more confident about the
economy and corporate earnings. The Dow Jones industrial average and Standard &
Poor's 500 index both reached 3 1/2 -year highs on the news. [Page 1a]

   Malpractice insurer claims loss

   Despite a hefty premium increase last year, the state's largest malpractice
insurer booked an underwriting loss of $41.4 million, according to a filing with
the Maryland Insurance Administration. The amount is the difference between
premium income and the projected value of claims received during the year. [Page
12c]

   Interim port chief named

   A veteran administrator at the port of Baltimore was named yesterday to lead
it on an interim basis while state officials replace the outgoing executive
director, who clashed with his boss in the Ehrlich administration. M. Kathleen
Broadwater, deputy executive director of the Maryland Port Administration, will
step in next week when James J. White ends his six-year tenure. [Page 12c]

   TODAY

   Testing D.C.'s loyalty to O's

   The forthcoming baseball season is testing the loyalty of Washington's
Orioles fans. Their devotion will come under scrutiny today, when the Orioles
and Nationals play for the first time at a spring-training matchup in Fort
Lauderdale. [Page 1a]

   Stewart's very public comeback

   For a woman confined to five months of house arrest, Martha Stewart will
saturate the media in coming months, with starring roles in two TV programs, a
magazine column and a press corps following her every move. [Page 1a]

   A not-so-fond farewell

   Usually when a network anchorman of long standing steps down, his farewell is
accompanied by kudos and kind recollections. But the departure of 73-year-old
Dan Rather from the CBS Evening News next week is generating an unprecedented
wave of harsh assessments - and not just from critics, but also from former
colleagues. [Page 1d]

   TODAY ONLINE

   NEW BELTWAY RIVALRY

   The Orioles and the Washington Nationals meet today for the first time in
Grapefruit League action. For updates and comprehensive coverage of the O's, go
to www.baltimoresun.com/orioles

   FIND A RESTAURANT

   Need help deciding where to go for lunch or dinner? Search our restaurants
database by neighborhood, cuisine and cost at
www.baltimoresun.com/entertainment/dining

   QUOTE OF THE DAY

   "This is something that happens in Hollywood, but it never happens here."

   Albert Schalm, mayor of the town where four Royal Canadian Mounted Police
died in a shootout during a drug raid (Article, Page 8A)

   MARKETS

   DOW

   +107.52

   10,940.55

   NASDAQ

   +12.21

   2,070.61

   S&P

   +11.65

   1,222.12

   SUNINDEX

   +1.76

   308.79

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 Watermen's obstacle Watermen Leon Elliott of Crocheron (left) and Harold
Robinson of Cambridge discuss a forthcoming meeting about Bloodsworth Island,
where the Navy is planning to resume expanded military exercises. (Article, Page
1B)
 AMY DAVIS : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2005


                             203 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: FDA panel recommends caution on gene therapy;
Studies should resume only when alternatives have been exhausted

BYLINE: Dennis O'Brien, SUN STAFF

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE

BODY:

   ROCKVILLE - A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel recommended
yesterday that two gene therapy experiments be allowed to resume only if the
patients have exhausted other "reasonable alternatives," including bone marrow
transplants.

   Otherwise, the panel suggested the trials - at the National Institutes of
Health and the University of Southern California - remain suspended. Along with
another trial at USC, the experiments had been curtailed after a third child
developed leukemia in a similar French study.

   "The additional data hasn't suggested that there's a heightened risk, but we
have to be careful," said Dr. Mahendra Rao, chairman of the FDA's Cellular,
Tissue and Gene Therapies Advisory Committee.

   Rao said the committee scheduled yesterday's session after learning about the
third child, who developed cancer while undergoing gene therapy in the French
medical trial. Two other children developed leukemia in the French trial in
2002, and one of those children died in October. Great Britain has allowed a
study to continue.

   The FDA has set no schedule for when it may act on the panel's
recommendations.

   French authorities reported the most recent cancer case Jan. 24, prompting
the FDA to suspend the three U.S. gene therapy trials. The action did not
pertain to any of the 15 gene therapy studies that are being conducted at the
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and that are focused in different areas.

   SCID

   The experiments being examined by the FDA involve treatment for severe
combined immunodeficiency disease, or SCID, a potentially fatal genetic
disorder. Victims - including the "boy in the bubble," who lived 12 years in a
sterile enclosure - are susceptible to life-threatening infections.

   The FDA panel recommended yesterday that one of the three suspended trials be
allowed to resume because researchers in that trial at USC are treating a
variation of SCID that differs from the strain being treated by French
researchers.

   "I'm hoping this will lead the FDA to take our study off hold," said Donald
Kohn, a professor of pediatrics and principal investigator for the USC study
that the panel recommended be allowed to continue.

   Kohn said that he has had no problems in the 18 patients he has treated and
that some of them have been undergoing gene therapy for as long as 10 years.

   In the French study, researchers had successfully treated 17 children with
SCID, making it one of the most promising areas of research. But two years ago,
Dr. Alain Fischer, a researcher at the Necker Hospital in Paris, reported that
two of his patients developed leukemia, prompting the FDA to halt a number of
gene therapy trials in the United States. They were later allowed to resume.

   Hopes for treatment

   Gene therapy was heralded as a major breakthrough when researchers began work
in the early 1990s, with hopes that it would lead to cures for a variety of
genetic disorders, such as cancer, Parkinson's disease and cystic fibrosis. But
the field has seen its share of disappointments. A teenager died while
undergoing gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   At yesterday's hearing, panel members expressed concerns about future
problems in gene therapy trials.

   "As more data is accumulating, it makes me more nervous, whether we see
another case like this or not," said Dr. Bruce R. Blazar, a bone marrow expert
at the University of Minnesota.

   Panel members said that in many cases, bone marrow transplants have proved to
be an effective alternative for children who have SCID and are diagnosed early.

   "We have SCIDs patients who are in college and some who have graduated, who
are doing very well," said Dr. Rebecca Buckley, a professor of pediatrics at
Duke University Medical Center.

   Several genes

   Buckley said the problem is SCID is associated with several genes, making it
difficult to develop one gene therapy that works.

   "I think we have to think of SCID as 10 different diseases because there are
about 10 different genes that when mutated, give you SCID," she said.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2005


                             204 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
FDA Panel Suggests Limits on Gene Therapy for Kids

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Federal health advisors recommended Friday that gene therapy treatments for
children with a severe immune deficiency be restricted to those who had no
alternative.

   The Food and Drug Administration convened the panel after a 3-year-old French
boy became the third child to develop cancer after receiving gene therapy for
treatment for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or X-linked
SCID.

   The FDA had asked U.S. researchers doing similar work to put it on hold.

   Doctors and scientists on the advisory panel said they didn't want to hold up
the therapy for children who had failed to respond to bone marrow transplants,
an alternative treatment. But they noted that the number of such children -- who
under Friday's recommendation would still be able to have experimental gene
therapy -- was small.

   "What is happening here today -- the big picture -- is that it shows the
difficulty in developing any new class of therapy," said Dr. Daniel Salomon, a
professor at the Scripps Research Institute and a member of the FDA panel.

   "There was a period of time that there was a tendency to say gene therapy ...
had been safe. What's clear now is that [problems can develop in] some gene
therapy for some diseases," Salomon said.

   The panel recommended that gene therapy trials could go forward for a similar
ailment called ADA-linked SCID, finding it was a different issue and that
research need not be limited.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2005


                             205 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: Council clears way for lab on Canal;
Office building to be torn down

BYLINE: By Bruce Eggler, Staff writer

BODY:

   A vote by the New Orleans City Council authorizing demolition of a 1950s
office building on Canal Street apparently has cleared the way for the
long-delayed New Orleans BioInnovation Center Inc. to get back on track.

   The Louisiana Legislature in 2002 appropriated millions of dollars to start
three biotech laboratories and business incubators around the state. Two of the
projects, in Baton Rouge and Shreveport, are expected to open this year.

   But the $30 million-plus New Orleans center, the largest and most extensive
of the three, got bogged down in bureaucracy and problems in finding a home.
It's a joint project of the Louisiana State University and Tulane University
health sciences centers.

   The long-vacant Wirth Building, a three-story 1950s concrete and brick
building at 1441 Canal St., was first slated to house the lab, but after two
years of planning, officials decided it was not structurally sound enough to
house the new facility, and that shoring it up would be prohibitively expensive.

   At the center's request and on the recommendation of the City Planning
Commission, the council voted 7-0 Thursday to authorize demolition of the Wirth
Building to make way for a four-story, 130,000-square-foot building that will
house laboratory, office and meeting space for the BioInnovation Center.

   The building will have parking for 54 vehicles on the ground floor and space
available for commercial leasing along Canal.

   Aaron Miscenich, executive director of the BioInnovation Center, said the
building also will have "state-of-the-art communications and presentation
equipment" and "promises to become a cornerstone of economic development on
Canal Street."

   With construction expected to take 18 to 24 months, the center could open by
mid-2007.

   Mayor Ray Nagin said the opening of the center will create 200 jobs in
research and development and will be a major step in the city's efforts to
diversify its economy and cultivate the burgeoning biotechnology sector.

   "With the BioInnovation Center, we are positioning our city to capitalize on
a thriving industry that will create high-paying jobs for the people of New
Orleans," Nagin said, adding that the center will help anchor the revitalization
of Canal Street by encouraging other businesses and residents to return to the
street.

   In addition to the 200 direct jobs, said Don Hutchinson, the city's director
of economic development, "this project will attract professors, scientists and
other related businesses, and represents our commitment to science and
entrepreneurship."

   The BioInnovation Center will join other cutting-edge research endeavors such
as the Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium and the Louisiana Cancer
Research Consortium in the medical district centered around the Tulane and LSU
facilities.

   The new facility will have a 60,000-square-foot "wet lab" similar to those
under construction in Baton Rouge and Shreveport. A wet lab has life sciences
lab equipment and office space where start-up companies can turn research into
businesses and create jobs. The companies will rent office space and get
assistance with tasks such as developing business plans and raising capital.

   Unlike the Baton Rouge and Shreveport facilities, the New Orleans project
also will have a 75,000-square-foot Good Manufacturing Practices lab, a term for
a laboratory that is fit to produce materials for human use.

   The GMP lab will house the gene therapy consortium, which will manufacture
adult stem cell lines for experiments.

   The BioInnovation Center will be in Councilwoman Jacquelyn Brechtel
Clarkson's district, and she said Thursday's vote was an important step toward
creating an industry that will marry medicine and technology and make New
Orleans competitive in the gene therapy field.

   "We don't get economic development every day in this city," she said.

   . . . . . . .

   Bruce Eggler can be reached at beggler@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3320.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2005


                             206 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             March 5, 2005 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A07

LENGTH: 206 words

HEADLINE: Limits on Gene Therapy Urged for Some Children

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Federal health advisers recommended yesterday that gene therapy for children
with a severe immune deficiency be restricted to those who have no alternative.

     The Food and Drug Administration convened the panel after a 3-year-old
French boy became the third child to develop cancer after receiving gene
treatment for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, or X-SCID.

   The FDA has asked U.S. researchers doing similar work to put it on hold.

     Doctors and scientists on the advisory panel said they do not want to hold
up the therapy for children who have already failed to respond to bone-marrow
transplants, an alternative treatment. But they noted that the number of such
children is very small.

     "What is happening here today -- the big picture -- is that it shows the
difficulty in developing any new class of therapy," said  Daniel R. Salomon, a
professor in the Scripps Research Institute and a member of the FDA panel.

     "There was a period of time that there was a tendency to say gene therapy .
. . had been safe. What's clear now is that [problems can develop in] some gene
therapy for some diseases," Salomon said.

     The panel recommended that gene therapy trials for a similar ailment called
ADA-SCID should go forward.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2005


                             207 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                              The Arizona Republic

                       March 4, 2005 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: SUN CITIES/SURPRISE COMMUNITY; ASK THE EXPERT; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: NEW TREATMENTS OFFER COLORECTAL CANCER VICTIMS HOPE

BYLINE: By Patrick R. Miller, Special for The Republic

BODY:

   QUESTION: Because colon cancer can develop so slowly, silently and quickly,
do new treatments offer hope?

   ANSWER: Symptoms of cancer include a change in bowel habits, blood in the
stool and unexplained anemia or weight loss, but in some cases, there are no
noticeable signs until the cancer has advanced too far to be treated
effectively. That's why screening is so important.

   If a polyp or early cancer is found, colonoscopy can be used to remove the
lesion without cutting through the abdominal wall. The patient may then require
more frequent screening and monitoring.

   In another development, recent studies indicate that aspirin and
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, including COX-2 inhibitors, may prevent
recurrence of polyps or cancer in such individuals, as well as in people with a
genetic risk for colon cancer.

   Calcium supplements also have been found effective in reducing the rate of
recurrence. Even though observational studies indicate that people eating a
high-fiber diet are less likely to die of colon cancer, studies have failed to
find increased fiber in the diet to be effective in preventing recurrence of
polyps or cancer.

   For larger cancers, the physician may need to remove part of the bowel plus
the lymph nodes near the colon for laboratory examination to tell whether the
cancer has spread.

   In some cases, the healthy ends of the bowel can be stitched back together,
but if too much has been removed, a colostomy may be necessary.

   Depending on how far the cancer has spread, chemotherapy and radiation
therapy may also be necessary.

   A new treatment medication, irinotecan (Camptostar), was introduced in 1998,
the first drug to get full approval for metastatic colorectal cancer in 40
years. Approval of oxaliplatin followed in 2002. Used in addition to a standard
therapy of fluorouracil and leucovorin, both new treatments have been shown to
result in greater tumor shrinkage and a delay in cancer growth for patients who
had not responded well to standard therapy.

   Experimental drugs that disrupt the tumor's supply of nutrients by inhibiting
the growth of new blood vessels also have been found to be effective and offer
hope for significant progress in the future, even against the most advanced
cancers.

   Other promising approaches include immunotherapy and gene therapy.

   /

   Dr. Patrick R. Miller is a radiation oncologist at Sun Health Boswell and Del
E. Webb Memorial hospitals.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2005


                             208 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              March 4, 2005 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; SUN NEWS DIGEST; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 897 words

HEADLINE: SUN NEWS DIGEST

BODY:

   NATIONAL

   Fossett a high flier again

   First by balloon, now by plane, Steve Fossett is once again a
'round-the-world record holder. The millionaire adventurer became the first
person to fly around the world alone without stopping or refueling, touching
down in central Kansas yesterday after a 67-hour, 23,000-mile journey that
appeared endangered at times by a troubled fuel system. [Page 1a]

   Gene therapy tests suspended

   The Food and Drug Administration has suspended several U.S. gene therapy
experiments after learning that a third child who underwent treatment in France
has developed cancer as a result, a development that has cast a pall over the
struggling research field. [Page 3a]

   WORLD

   Questions of change in Mideast

   From Syria to Israel to the Palestinian territories and Egypt, recent
headlines have noted encouraging developments for Middle East democracy and
peace - but the question for many is, will these changes be permanent? [Page
11a]

   Bombs kill six Iraqi policemen

   Car bombs killed six Iraqi policemen yesterday, while the U.S. military
announced that its death toll had surpassed 1,500 troops since the war began in
March 2003. [Page 13a]

   MARYLAND

   Auditors criticize state lease

   State auditors criticized a no-bid lease between the state and a private
developer building a $33 million educational retreat on state parkland in Cecil
County and recommended that the agreement be renegotiated to fix flaws and
better protect the public. [Page 1a]

   Navy seeks training expansion

   The Navy is proposing to expand military training exercises on Bloodsworth
Island in the Chesapeake Bay after a nine-year lull. The Naval Air Systems
Command in Patuxent River says year-round day and night practice runs on the
islands are necessary because the nation is at war. [Page 1a]

   Guilty pleas in girl's beating

   The ringleader of a birthday party beating of a 12-year-old girl in West
Baltimore last year, along with two other key figures in the assault, pleaded
guilty to charges related to the violence. Monique Baldwin, 37, who instigated
the brutal beating of Nicole Ashley Townes, faces up to 30 years in prison.
[Page 1b]

   TODAY

   `Be Cool' opens locally

   John Travolta and Uma Thurman reunite on the dance floor on the big screen's
Be Cool, which opens at area theaters today. [Page 1c]

   Symphony has new director

   The Annapolis Symphony Orchestra announced yesterday that Jose-Luis Novo
would be its new music director. Novo, conductor of the Binghamton Philharmonic
in New York, was selected by an eight-member search committee from more than 200
applicants. [Page 1c]

   Saget performs in Baltimore

   Bob Saget, the all-American TV dad from Full House and who some say is the
foulest comedian in the country, is in town. He will be onstage tonight and
tomorrow as he does four shows at the Baltimore Improv. [Page 1c]

   BUSINESS

   State's entertainment dry spell

   Maryland's entertainment industry is in the longest dry period it has had for
years, and advocates say an economic development war is to blame. Other states
are wooing major productions and their infusions of cash with aggressive
incentives. [Page 1a]

   Sinclair seeks ownership review

   Sinclair Broadcast Group Inc. petitioned yesterday the U.S. Supreme Court to
review a lower-court ruling that blocked the Federal Communications Commission
from relaxing restrictions on how many media outlets a company can own in one
market. The Hunt Valley company, which owns or operates 62 stations that reach
nearly a quarter of the nation's households, joins about a half-dozen other
broadcast companies, including Tribune Co., owner of The Sun. [Page 1d]

   Stewart to be released today

   After 21 weeks in a West Virginia prison camp, Martha Stewart will soon be
everywhere. She was to be released from prison early this morning after serving
a five-month term for lying to federal investigators about her sale of shares in
a biotechnology company in 2001. [Page 1d]

   SPORTS

   Orioles win exhibition opener

   The Orioles rallied from a three-run deficit to win their spring training
opener, 8-4, against the Florida Marlins. Also yesterday, a judge postponed the
assault case in Aruba against Sidney Ponson, giving the Orioles pitcher until
May to reach an out-of-court settlement and likely bringing an end to the
proceedings. [Pages 1f, 4f]

   Phelps sets American record

   Olympic star Michael Phelps of Rodgers Forge didn't show much rust in his
return to competitive swimming. In his first race at the American short-course
championships, the 200-yard freestyle, Phelps broke an American record that Matt
Biondi had held since 1987. Phelps covered the distance in 1 minute, 32.08
seconds. [Page 3f]

   TODAY ONLINE

   MARY SUE JINGLE

   Read Bill Atkinson's business column about the owner of Ruxton Chocolates,
and go online to hear the company's classic Mary Sue Easter eggs jingle.
www.baltimoresun.com/jingle

   HEALTH & SCIENCE

   Visit the online version of our weekly secTion, where you'll find new and
archived health and science articles, plus a collection of in-depth Sun series.
www.baltimoresun.com/healthscience

   QUOTE OF THE DAY

   "When you're talking about Thurgood Marshall, you're not talking about a
midget. ... He's a national hero and even an international hero."

   Del. Emmett C. Burns Jr., sponsor of a bill to honor the late Supreme Court
justice by renaming BWI (Article, Page 1B)

   MARKETS

   DOW - UP

   +21.06

   10,833.03

   NASDAQ - DOWN

   -9.10

   2,058.40

   S&P - UP

   +0.39

   1,210.47

   SUN INDEX - DOWN

   -0.12

   307.03

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 Stewart departs prison: A sign near Alderson Federal Prison Camp in Alderson,
W.Va., notes Martha Stewart's release, which took place early today after she
served a five-month term. She now faces five months under house arrest at her
N.Y. estate. (Article, Page 1D)
 KIICHIRO SATO : ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2005


                             209 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              March 4, 2005 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 801 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
Gene Therapy Experiments Put on Hold;
Suspension comes as a third child in a French study develops leukemia.
Researchers in U.S. believe incidents form an isolated case.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Federal authorities have temporarily suspended three gene therapy experiments
-- two of them in Los Angeles -- following news that a third child in a similar
French study has developed leukemia and that one of the three has died.

   A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel is meeting in suburban
Washington today in an effort to determine whether the French cases are an
isolated incident caused by the specific gene being used in the therapy or a
precursor of problems that will affect all gene therapy attempts.

   Experts don't expect an immediate consensus from the advisory panel, but
there appears to be a growing feeling among researchers that the problem is of
limited scope and reflects the combination of the virus and gene used by the
French. Experiments using other genes have, so far, been free of adverse
effects.

   Most of the researchers involved will be gathering in Washington March 15 for
a separate meeting sponsored by the National Institutes of Health's Recombinant
DNA Advisory Committee. They are scheduled to discuss their results to date.
Despite the three leukemia cases, the results have been promising.

   The experiments in question have involved treatments for severe combined
immunodeficiency disease, or SCID, a potentially fatal genetic disorder that
leaves its victims susceptible to life-threatening infections. The best-known
example of the disease was David, the Houston "bubble boy" who lived for 12
years in a sterile enclosure to keep infections out.

   Dr. Alain Fischer of Necker Hospital in Paris has been treating patients with
so-called X-linked SCID, which is caused by a defective gene called GammaC.
Fischer put a healthy form of the gene in a modified mouse leukemia virus, which
was used to insert the gene into embryonic blood cells that were then infused
into the patient.

   Fischer has treated 17 patients, and virtually all have shown major
improvement if not a cure. But two years ago, Fischer said that two of the
patients had developed leukemia, presumably as a result of the treatment.

   The FDA temporarily suspended 27 gene therapy trials in the United States but
eventually allowed them to proceed again after concluding that there were
special circumstances in the cancer victims. Both were below the age of 2 and
had received large doses of cells.

   In recent weeks, Fischer revealed that one of the two original leukemia
victims had died of the disease and that a third child had apparently contracted
it. That child, moreover, was older than the first two and received a lower dose
of altered cells.

   Some experts think the virus inserts the gene at a specific site within the
blood cells, called Lmo2, that triggers leukemia.

   Concern escalated when Cynthia E. Dunbar of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute revealed last month that one of 42 monkeys that had undergone
gene therapy experiments using the same virus had developed cancer.

   The cancer was found about three years after the monkey was treated, about
the same period of time that had elapsed in the French children.

   The FDA has not formally announced the suspensions of the gene therapy
experiments, but it has temporarily shut down three studies examining treatments
for SCID.

   One is run by Dr. Harry L. Malech and Dr. Jennifer Puck of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. A second is run by Dr. Donald Kohn
of the Keck School of Medicine at USC. The third is run by Dr. Kenneth I.
Weinberg of Keck.

   Malech and Puck's study has treated two patients and Kohn's has treated four.
Weinberg has not yet treated any. "Every time we have had patients we wanted to
treat, more [news] comes out of France," Weinberg said.

   All three studies will have to revise their consent forms to discuss the
potential risks more thoroughly. In effect, that means they will have to go
through most of the approval process a second time.

   The NIAID and Weinberg studies both involve X-linked SCID. Kohn's involves a
different form of SCID caused by a mutation in the gene for adenosine deaminase,
or ADA. Some preliminary evidence suggests that patients in that study are not
at as great a risk.

   Dr. Claudio Bordignon and his colleagues at the Hospital San Raffaele in
Milan, Italy, have successfully treated seven patients with ADA-linked SCID. The
first patients treated in Milan are now nearing the three-year mark without
incident. More important, a study of their blood cells indicates that the added
gene has not been inserted into the hazardous Lmo2 site.

   Dr. Robertson Parkman of USC, a member of Kohn's team, cautions that there is
risk associated with most therapies. The French gene therapy death was tragic,
but as many as 50% of those treated with the best available alternatives to gene
therapy will either die of their disease or suffer lifelong complications from
the therapy, Parkman said.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2005


                             210 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      March 4, 2005 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg.A-6 NATIONAL BRIEFS

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: FDA SUSPENDS GENE THERAPY WORK

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration has suspended several U.S.
gene therapy experiments after learning that a third child who underwent
treatment in France has developed cancer as a result, a development that has
cast a pall over the struggling research field.

    Adding to the gloom, researchers are scheduled to report today that a monkey
has died of cancer caused by a gene therapy experiment six years ago. That
suggests the treatments may carry long-term as well as near-term, risks, said
scientists who will be discussing the issue at an FDA meeting today.

    The events are the latest in a series of setbacks for a field that a decade
ago seemed poised to revolutionize medicine by replacing defective genes with
healthy ones, fixing the molecular underpinnings of disease instead of simply
treating its symptoms.


    Hale denies role in killings

    CHICAGO -- Jailed white supremacist Matthew Hale said yesterday the slaying
of a federal judge's husband and elderly mother was a "heinous crime" that "only
an idiot" would think he ordered, according to a statement released by his
mother.

    The shootings at U.S. District Judge Joan Humphrey Lefkow's home came a
month before Hale was to be sentenced by another judge for trying to have Lefkow
killed. In a trademark dispute presided over by Lefkow, she had ordered Hale to
change the name of his extremist group.

    Lefkow vowed to return to the bench. "Nobody is going to intimidate me off
my duty," she told the Chicago Sun-Times in an interview published yesterday.


    Yale to boost financial aid

    NEW HAVEN, Conn.  -- Yale University increased its financial aid for
lower-income families yesterday, the latest move by the Ivy League to attract
students who had seen the schools as out of their price range.

    Beginning next year, families making less than $45,000 will no longer have
to pay tuition for their children, and those earning between $45,000 and $60,000
will see their required contributions drop an average of 50 percent, Yale said.

    The tuition at Yale is about $41,000 a year, including room, board and other
fees.


    Man to sell 9/11 relic

    ORANGE, Va.  -- A man who has displayed an American flag pulled from the
damaged Pentagon after the 2001 terrorist attacks is selling the flag to raise
money for his cancer treatment.

    David Nicholson, who said he had previously turned down a $100,000 offer for
the flag, will auction it on eBay starting today.

    Nicholson, 44, is undergoing chemotherapy for kidney cancer and hopes the
auction will provide enough money for his family if he doesn't recover.


    Church donations rebound

    BOSTON -- Many Roman Catholics in Boston are beginning to support the church
again financially after a drop-off in donations following the clergy sex
scandal.

    The Boston Archdiocese said it raised $10.85 million in 2004 through its
annual fund drive, an increase of more than $500,000 over the previous year.
Nearly 54,000 Catholics contributed, up about 20 percent from the year before.

    However, the fund-raising campaign still fell far short of the $17 million
the archdiocese raised before the scandal erupted in early 2002.


    Senate bars Canadian cattle

    WASHINGTON -- The Senate voted yesterday to overturn the Bush
administration's decision to allow Canadian cattle into the country nearly two
years after they were banned because of mad cow disease.

    The White House said President Bush would veto the measure if it ever
reached his desk.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2005


                             211 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              March 4, 2005 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A02

LENGTH: 1008 words

HEADLINE: Boy's Cancer Prompts FDA to Halt Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration has suspended several U.S. gene therapy
experiments after learning that a third child who underwent treatment in France
has developed cancer as a result, a development that has cast a pall over the
struggling research field.

    Adding to the gloom, researchers are due to report today that a monkey has
died of cancer caused by a gene therapy experiment six years ago. That suggests
the treatments may carry long-term as well as near-term risks, said scientists
who will be discussing the issue at an FDA meeting.

    The events are the latest in a series of setbacks for a field that a decade
ago seemed poised to revolutionize medicine by replacing defective genes with
healthy ones -- fixing the molecular underpinnings of disease instead of simply
treating its symptoms.

    After thousands of efforts, the treatments appear to have cured only about a
dozen patients, all of them children in Europe who were born with a severe
immune system disorder. With three of those children having developed cancer
from the treatment and one recently dying of it, even the field's most ardent
supporters are discouraged.

    "We want to continue, but of course there is a safety issue," said Alain
Fischer of the Necker Hospital in Paris, leader of the French study. The details
are to be discussed at today's meeting of the FDA's Cellular, Tissue and Gene
Therapies Advisory Committee.

    The latest cancer case appeared a few weeks ago, in a 3-year-old boy Fischer
treated in the summer of 2002. Like the other children in the study, the boy was
born with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, or X-SCID. The disease,
which affects only boys and disables the immune system, was made famous in the
1970s by David Vetter, the Texas "bubble boy," who lived his 12 years in a
plastic tent to protect him from everyday infections that for him could prove
fatal.

    The only other way to cure the disease is a perfectly matched bone marrow
transplant, but such matches are rare, and recipients of unmatched transplants
do not  fare well. The experimental alternative involves infusions of mouse
viruses engineered to carry the immune system gene that patients lack.

    The viruses infect the patients' immune system cells to deliver the needed
gene. But the viruses sometimes disturb healthy genes -- including genes that,
when disrupted, can cause cancer.

    The first case arose in September 2002, triggering a suspension of all
similar experiments. A second treated boy was diagnosed with cancer in December
of that year. Both had been treated while infants and developed leukemia about
21/2 years later.

    Although both appeared to respond well to chemotherapy, one of the boys died
this past October, after the experiments were resumed with new safeguards.

    The latest case, a boy who was treated as an 8-month-old in 2002, was
diagnosed about five weeks ago -- just two weeks after the team had begun gene
therapy on a new patient, Fischer said in a phone interview. He said he
immediately stopped the study again and, although he is not regulated by the
FDA, notified the agency.

    The FDA does not generally tell the public about clinical trials it has put
on hold, and officials declined to say this week what actions they had taken in
light of the latest diagnosis. But U.S. researchers involved in two experiments
similar to the one in France told The Washington Post that the agency had
recently directed them to suspend their studies. One experiment is being led by
Harry L. Malech and Jennifer Puck at the National Institutes of Health, who have
treated two patients so far. The other, led by Donald B. Kohn of the University
of Southern California, has enrolled four patients.

    Fischer said the recently diagnosed boy in France is undergoing chemotherapy
and emphasized that the other cancer survivor -- along with the other dozen or
so children treated previously -- is doing well.

    "They can cope with infections. That tells us efficacy is there," Fischer
said. "There is a future in gene therapy."

     But in light of the monkey's case, Fischer and others acknowledged it will
be many years before the final verdict is in.

    The monkey, whose September death has not been previously publicly
disclosed, was one of 42 being watched by NIH scientists for delayed effects of
gene therapy. It is the only one to have developed cancer so far, said study
leader Cynthia E. Dunbar of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. But
with an average follow-up of  about three years so far, it is  too soon to know
how many might show delayed effects, she said.

    Unfortunately, she added, most research teams kill their animals less than a
year after using them in gene therapy experiments.

    "It's extremely expensive, but this shows how important it is" to study the
animals longer, said Dunbar,  who called the fatal cancer "very concerning."

    In both the human and monkey gene therapy experiments, the mouse virus used
-- known as a murine retrovirus -- is the most common means of delivering DNA.
The virus's predilection to interact with genes that can cause cancer has led
many scientists to look for better delivery systems.

    Among the most promising, several scientists said, are genetically modified
"lentiviruses" -- including the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes
AIDS -- in part because they appear less likely to trigger the kind of cell
replication that adds up to cancer.

    To date the FDA has approved three human studies involving infusions of
genetically engineered lentiviruses, according to NIH records -- all of them
restricted to patients who already have AIDS.

     Mark A. Kay, a professor of pediatrics and genetics at Stanford University
and president-elect of the American Society of Gene Therapy, said he remains
hopeful that gene therapy will prevail.

    "This is a devastating side effect," he said of the cancers, speaking for
himself and not for the society. "But taking a disease that is pretty much fatal
. . . if you can get a 60 or 70 percent cure rate, you have to balance that
out."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2005


                             212 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 3, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 778 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Is Facing a Crucial Hearing

BYLINE: By GARDINER HARRIS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2

BODY:

   Fifteen years after experiments with human gene therapy began in earnest, a
federal drug advisory panel on Friday will discuss the death of a French child
in one such experiment and why, after so many years of hope, the technology has
been such a disappointment.

    Three major gene therapy trials in the United States have been suspended
pending the outcome of the meeting. Dr. Donald Kohn, the principal investigator
in one of those trials, said, ''I'm going to tell the committee that there is a
significant difference between the French trial and ours.''

     Dr. Kohn, a professor of pediatrics and microbiology at the University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, said that the type of immune
deficiency in his trial's patients was different from that in the French
research and that the genes that were made the target of the therapies were
therefore also different.

    What the Food and Drug Administration wants to know is whether those
differences are significant enough, said the advisory committee's chairman, Dr.
Mahendra S. Rao, a researcher at the National Institute on Aging.

    If there is a concern with gene therapy, Dr. Rao said, ''is it a general
concern, or should it be limited?''

    The French study was once hailed as one of the first breakthroughs in gene
therapy: 10 children suffering from a rare immune disorder were largely cured.
But three of those children have since developed leukemia, and one of the three
has died.

    For years, gene therapy was heralded as a technology that would soon yield
blockbuster drug innovations. The National Institutes of Health issued thousands
of grants to pursue the research, hundreds of patents have been granted on the
technology, and more than 150 biotechnology companies have been created in the
last 15 years to exploit it. In 1997 alone, the peak year, 24 such companies
were created, said Dr. Sheldon Krimsky, a professor at Tufts University.

    Then, in 1999, a teenager, Jesse Gelsinger, died in a gene therapy
experiment conducted by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania. The death
cast a pall over the entire field, and last month the university agreed to pay
the government more than $500,000 to settle fraud allegations related to the
case.

    Gene therapy's disappointing history is mirrored in other medical
technologies once highly promoted, like high-throughput chemical screening and
the decoding of the human genome. Reaping the fruits of such technological
advances is taking much longer than executives in biotechnology and
pharmaceuticals once suggested. As a result, the industries are suffering a
drought of new products and are trying to explain why their laboratories have
burned through so much money in recent years with so little to show for it.

    Many of the companies established since 1990 to pursue gene therapy work
have since shifted to other technologies. Cell Genesys, in South San Francisco,
Calif., once focused entirely on gene therapy, but in 2001 it spun off much such
research into privately held Ceregene, based in San Diego.

    ''We're just a cancer company now,'' said Ina Cu, a Cell Genesys
spokeswoman.

    Despite the problems, gene therapy is still routinely heralded as the next
big thing, and the field's researchers get a bit defensive when discussing the
many problems that have plagued it. But several top researchers agreed in
interviews that much of the early optimism had been wrongheaded and that
marketable cures were years away.

    ''Still, I would like to think that we can solve these problems,'' said Dr.
Katherine High, a professor of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania.

    Dr. High said she was dismayed that so many biotechnology and pharmaceutical
companies had abandoned gene therapy in recent years.

    ''The problem with biotech companies is that they don't have years and years
of money,'' she said. ''They need a product within a few years, and the
timelines involved in bringing cell and gene therapy to fruition are far too
long.''

    Dr. Kohn, the principal researcher in one of the three trials now suspended,
suggested that gene therapy could follow the same path as monoclonal antibodies,
which took nearly 30 years to evolve from discovery to marketed therapies.

    ''This is much more of an academic venture than a commercial one at this
point,'' Dr. Kohn said.

    The lesson of gene therapy, Dr. Krimsky said, is that investors and
journalists should react more skeptically to claims of imminent breakthroughs.

    ''It's always that very simple model that brings in a lot of venture capital
and the hope of a simple cure around the corner,'' he said. ''People tend to
underestimate the complexity of the human body.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2005


                             213 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2005 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     March 2, 2005 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2

LENGTH: 826 words

HEADLINE: ETHICS, SPORTS MAKE STRANGE, TROUBLING MIX

BODY:

   Admittedly, if I write "sports" and "ethics" in the same sentence, you
probably will assume I'm trying to be funny.

    At the very least, you might call it the oxymoron of the day and turn the
page.

    But, everywhere you look, somebody in sports is bumping up against questions
of right and wrong and reacting as if he'd been asked to cure cancer.

    We know, for example, that professional sports are designed to follow the
money and this pursuit is value-free.

    Yet, it's not just the pros. Allegedly amateur sports -- Olympic sports,
college sports -- are trying to separate right from wrong and finding it a
little like learning a foreign language.

    Item: Revered Temple basketball coach John Chaney sends a player out with
orders to goon it up against St. Joseph's, resulting in a season-ending injury
to a St. Joseph's player.

    Item: San Diego general manager Kevin Towers admits he suspected Ken
Caminiti was on steroids in the 1990s, but did nothing about it because the
Padres were winning and fans were flocking to their games.

    Item: Olympic athletes are living in simulated altitude chambers to get the
training benefits of living at altitude without actually living at altitude.

    In each of these cases, the competitive thing to do might not be the right
thing to do. In sports, does this matter? Should it?

    Let's start with Chaney. The man is a legend in college basketball. He also
has temper issues second in the game only to Bobby Knight. Both are among the
handful of active coaches with more than 700 wins, which suggests a connection
between unbridled aggression and success, although gentler souls such as Mike
Krzyzewski and Jim Boeheim are on the list, too.

    Chaney suspended himself for one game before tests revealed that the St.
Joseph's player injured by Temple's goonery has a broken arm and won't play
again this season.

    Temple then extended Chaney's suspension to three games. With criticism
mounting, some of it calling for his head, Chaney announced he would not coach
in the Atlantic 10 tournament. Is this punishment enough, or did Chaney cross
into Woody Hayes territory, from which there is no return?

    In San Diego, Towers became the first baseball official to try a little
honesty on the subject of steroids, admitting to ESPN he looked the other way in
the 1990s. Towers was moved to this admission by Caminiti's death Steroids were
not banned by baseball at the time, but they were illegal.  Officially, baseball
takes the position that it will not investigate past steroids abuse, nor any of
the records set during that period.

    Did a baseball-wide conspiracy of silence permit the widespread abuse of
illegal, potentially dangerous substances because baseball was raking in a lot
of money at the time? Does the success of the players' cartel blocking a testing
program make it right?

    Is Towers the only one in baseball who regrets this? What about people like
Tony La Russa, who defended Jose Canseco from steroids allegations years ago but
now says he suspected Canseco of using? Is it OK in sports to lie if it helps
your team's competitive position?

    Finally, we have Bill Briggs' report in The Denver Post about aspiring
Olympic athletes sleeping in simulated altitude chambers so they can "live" at
altitude and train near sea level in the conditions they will encounter in
Turin, Italy, at the Winter Olympics next year.

    The athletic advantage of living at altitude is your body makes more red
blood cells to supply adequate oxygen to the muscles. When an increased
concentration of red blood cells is accomplished other ways -- through
transfusions or synthetic compounds -- this is known as blood doping, for which
athletes in endurance sports are tested and sometimes banned.

    An altitude chamber simulates conditions you could replicate naturally, but
only by traveling from altitude to sea level every day to train. Even officials
at the World Anti-Doping Agency aren't sure where to draw this line. According
to the story, they will seek advice from a panel of ethicists, which is a phrase
you won't find every day in the sports section.

    People in sports find these questions particularly problematic because the
sporting culture rewards competitiveness and winning to the exclusion of most
other values. Knight, for example, is still employed as a coach because he is
successful, despite pushing the envelope of acceptable behavior throughout his
career.

    Sports' ethical swamp is getting deeper all the time. Gene therapy and other
advances in medical technology promise undetectable means by which to cheat or
enhance performance, depending on your point of view. If you have no hope of
enforcing a ban, is there any point in having one? If not, are sports doomed to
become competitions between laboratories rather than athletes?

    It's a new world, and not that brave, either. Tell you what: Being a jock is
a lot more complicated than it used to be.

NOTES:
Dave Krieger writes for the Rocky Mountain News in Denver.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: George Widman/Associated Press: Should Temple's John Chaney
waved goodbye to college basketball for good?

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2005


                             214 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                            February 27, 2005 Sunday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 1067 words

HEADLINE: PUTTING IT TO THE TEST Players can still find ways to beat drug screen

BYLINE: BY T.J. QUINN DAILY NEWS SPORTS WRITER

BODY:

   SURPRISE, Ariz. - The careers of Kenny Rogers and Mark Teixeira of the Texas
Rangers began on opposite sides of baseball's steroids era.

   Rogers, 40, first pitched for Texas in 1989. Teixeira, 21, took his first
major league at-bat in 2003. Their views on baseball's new steroid program are
as wide apart as their tastes in music.

   "I think everybody embraces (testing)," says Teixeira, 21, the
broad-shouldered Navy brat who hit 38 home runs last season. "The years where
guys were hitting 60 home runs, I don't think we're going to see that again."

   Rogers, who said several years ago he was worried that someday a pitcher will
be killed by an over-inflated slugger's line drive, has little faith that any
testing will clean up the game.

   "They still do whatever they want," he says, shaking his head. "They'll still
be doing it long after I'm out of here."

   After three years of bitter scraps between the commissioner's office and the
Players Association over steroids, baseball begins this season with a tougher
testing program that most in the game say is the answer to their problems. Even
with Jose Canseco's accusations prompting members of Congress to call for a new
round of hearings, Rogers appears to be in the minority within the game itself.
Bud Selig and Barry Bonds alike echo the game's new refrain: give the system a
chance to work. Baseball had a problem; it has dealt with it.

   Within the culture of Major League Baseball, which outdates the modern
Olympic movement by 18 years, the progress from no testing three years ago to
fairly rigid testing now is remarkable, especially considering the power of the
Players Association. Ask a track athlete why they have such stringent testing
and he or she will tell you it's because they don't have a union.

   But outside the game, anti-doping experts and advocates say baseball still
has enormous gaps in its testing program, starting with the fact that there is
no way to test players for the next best thing to steroids: human growth
hormone. The game might be cleaner, they argue, but it is a long way from pure.

   "Track and field has the toughest testing in the world, and the cream of the
crop of our track team was shown to be doping," before the Olympic games last
summer, says Charles Yesalis, a professor of health policy and administration,
and exercise and sport science at Penn State University. "And they say this is
going to end doping in baseball? It's ridiculous."

   HGH, according to players interviewed over the past several years, has been
as common in baseball as steroid use, and as with steroids, improper hGH use can
cause severe health problems. Additional hGH, normally produced in the pituitary
gland, helps builds lean muscle mass, helps muscles recover from strain and
injury more quickly, and makes users feel younger and more energetic. It can
also cause heart, liver and kidney problems, enlarge hands and jaws, cause skin
tags, and while there is no evidence it causes cancer, scientists believe hGH
can cause small, otherwise harmless tumors to grow rapidly. Not to mention that
fact that, like steroids, hGH is illegal without a doctor's prescription.

   The only way to detect hGH is through blood testing, but baseball only tests
players' urine. So while hGH may be on the banned list, it is almost impossible
for a player to be caught using it.

   "It really, really is an outrage and it's an insult to anybody who cares
about cleaning up the game," says Steven Ungerleider, a psychologist and the
author of "Faust's Gold: Inside the East German Doping Machine."

   But even baseball's owners, who pushed the development of a steroid program
after years of ignoring it, did not push for blood testing.

   "You're talking about a whole different level of invasiveness. You're talking
about sticking people with needles," says Rob Manfred, MLB's senior vice
president for business and labor affairs. "We were also told that (urine testing
for hGH) is not that far behind."

   Manfred acknowledges that the current testing system cannot cleanse the game
completely, but he says getting the system that will begin next month -
multiple, year-round, random tests - was a crucial step toward zero tolerance,
Selig's stated goal.

   "Given the nature of the problem, we know we're going to have to be eternally
vigilant to keep up," Manfred says.

   Union officials declined comment through an intermediary, but sources say
union leaders were adamant about limiting tests to urine and that MLB did not
press the issue.

   Even critics who feel baseball's punishments for steroid use are far too
lenient agree that the new system will cut down on abuse. With the amount of
money at stake, however, baseball players are sure to turn to the same sort of
high-tech cheating that Olympic athletes are exploring, Yesalis says. And he
sees no reason why the lords of the game will push for true testing, much less
spend the amount of money needed for true zero tolerance.

   "What they want is plausible deniability," Yesalis says. "It's
self-preservation. This is all calculated in a very Machiavellian way to do
minimal damage to the entertainment value of the sport."

   There are still too many other ways to cheat, he says. Besides stealth
steroids like THG and the recently discovered DMT, there are the rising
technologies of gene therapy and hormone therapy.

   Athletes in several sports have already learned that injecting the hormone
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) into muscles can improve the tissues'
ability to recover. And because it goes directly into the muscle, it cannot be
detected in blood or urine. Experts believe that IGF-1 use has not spread the
way hGH and testosterone have, but they think it's coming.

   Other blood-doping methods like the hormone EPO (erythropoietin), which
increases the number of oxygen-carrying red blood cells, or blood packing -
removing blood and then re-injecting it into the blood stream after the body has
regained its normal levels - can only be detected by a blood test. (Several
players interviewed argue that doping methods that improve endurance are of
little benefit to athletes who play their game in bursts. EPO and blood packing
were first used widely by cyclists.)

   And there are creams and gels like the ones BALCO allegedly provided athletes
that can deliver testosterone to the body in almost undetectable amounts.

   "Testosterone is still out there," Yesalis says. "They're not going to get
caught with that, either."

GRAPHIC: KENNY ROGERS JOSE CANSECO

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2005


                             215 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2005 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Therapy Dropped In U.S. Is Revived in China

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Chinese biotechnology companies have long copied American drugs for use in
their home markets. But one Chinese imitator may now save a novel cancer
treatment from oblivion after it was abandoned by its American developer.

    Shanghai Sunway Biotech, a biotechnology company in Shanghai, has licensed
worldwide rights to the therapy from Onyx Pharmaceuticals, based in Emeryville,
Calif., people at both companies said.

     It is a sign that China is plowing ahead in certain areas of medicine that
are regarded more cautiously in the United States.

    The therapy uses a virus that has been genetically modified to attack cancer
cells but avoid normal cells. The treatment, called Onyx-015, elicited great
interest among cancer researchers a few years ago when it showed the ability to
shrink tumors in midstage clinical trials.

    But there were challenges delivering the therapy to tumors because the
immune system attacks the virus. Some scientists also considered the treatment a
form of gene therapy, a technique that fell into disfavor after the death of a
teenager in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

    Onyx stopped work on the virus treatment in 2003 to devote its money to a
more conventional cancer drug that is now in late stage trials with Bayer, the
German pharmaceutical company. Onyx could not find a partner willing to pay for
further development of the virus therapy.

    Unbeknownst to Onyx, however, Sunway researchers duplicated its approach
after reading a paper published by Onyx scientists in 1996. Sunway has taken the
treatment through clinical trials in China and thinks it is close to winning
approval to sell it for head and neck cancer.

    ''They cloned our work after our paper came out,'' said Frank McCormick,
founder of Onyx and the main inventor of the technology. He said Onyx had known
nothing about Sunway's activities all these years.

    Onyx's technology was not protected by patents in China because the company
had not applied for them. But Sunway now says it wants to develop and sell the
treatment in countries where Onyx does have patents, including the United
States.

    So Sunway has licensed the rights, according to Dr. McCormick and to Hu
Fang, the president of Sunway. Dr. Hu said his company was paying $1 million up
front, and might pay up to $10 million more if the drug won approval in the
United States and Europe, plus royalties on sales. A spokeswoman for Onyx
confirmed that an agreement had been reached but would not provide financial
details.

    ''They weren't fazed by the negative publicity around gene therapy in the
U.S.,'' said Dr. McCormick, who is now director of the cancer center at the
University of California, San Francisco. ''They just had a different attitude.''

    The first and only approval of a gene therapy by any regulatory agency in
the world happened in China in 2003.

    That therapy, developed by SiBiono GeneTech, based in Shenzhen, uses a virus
to deliver to tumors a gene called p53 that helps kill cancerous cells.
SiBiono's approach is very similar to one being tested in late stage clinical
trials by Introgen, a company in Austin, Tex.

    Even if the Onyx therapy wins approval in China, Sunway will need to conduct
clinical trials in the United States to get approval in this country and to
conform to tougher American manufacturing standards.

    Dr. Hu said his company had made some improvements to the Onyx therapy to
make it more effective. Dr. McCormick agreed, and said he was happy his work had
been imitated. ''I was a bit shocked at first,'' he said. ''But since we haven't
been able to find anyone in the U.S. to support the project, it's better than
having it die on the vine. Over all, I'm actually delighted.''

    He said he expected to go to China soon to celebrate the first approval
anywhere of the therapy he invented.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 26, 2005

CORRECTION:

   An article in Business Day yesterday about the acquisition of a cancer
treatment by Shanghai Sunway Biotech gave an outdated location in some editions
for the headquarters of Onyx Pharmaceuticals, which developed the therapy. It is
in Emeryville, Calif., not Richmond.


LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2005


                             216 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          February 23, 2005 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1867 words

HEADLINE: Moving Stem Cells Front and Center

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

DATELINE: IRVINE, Calif.

BODY:

   Hans S. Keirstead might be the Pied Piper of stem cells  and not just because
he makes rats walk. He also helped lure Californians to the polls last fall to
approve spending $3 billion of the state's money on embryonic stem cell research
over the next decade. But he has critics who worry that he may be leading their
new field too far, too soon into uncharted territory.

    Dr. Keirstead, an assistant professor at the University of California campus
here, has been making paralyzed rats walk again, using a treatment based on
human embryonic stem cells. Next year he and his corporate partner, Geron, plan
to try treating people who have recent spinal cord injuries, in what would
almost certainly be the first human trial of any therapy derived from such
cells.

     ''You've got a patient community out there that is in desperate need,'' Dr.
Keirstead said in an interview. ''If the treatment is safe, let's get it out
there and try it.''

    And to those who argue that it is too soon to test his technique on humans,
he has an answer. ''There will always be people who say slow down, slow down,''
he said. ''I guarantee you none of them have relatives in wheelchairs.''

    With his gung-ho attitude, the good looks of a surfer and a compelling story
to tell, Dr. Keirstead, 37, emerged as one of the leading scientific voices
behind the movement that persuaded California voters last November to approve a
measure to sidestep federal funding restrictions on stem cell research. His
supporters included people with spinal cord injuries, most notably Christopher
Reeve, the wheelchair-bound actor who taped a campaign ad citing Dr. Keirstead's
research just before he died in October.

    But for all of Dr. Keirstead's fans and backers, a number of researchers in
California and elsewhere say the scientific validity of his work has not been
proved and the technique might not be ready for testing in people. A failure in
the first high-profile human test could dash some of the hope spawned by the
passage of the California ballot measure.

    ''A lot of things make rats better,'' said Jerry Silver, a neuroscientist at
Case Western Reserve University, who argued that Dr. Keirstead should test his
treatment in dogs or monkeys first. ''You can't announce you are going into
humans because you've gotten good results in rats.''

    Mark H. Tuszynski, a professor and director of the center for neural repair
at the University of California, San Diego, echoed that view. ''I think the jury
is still out,'' he said, ''on whether this is a useful approach.'' Dr.
Tuszynski, co-founder of a company trying to use gene therapy to treat
neurological diseases, said he would prefer to see ''more compelling evidence''
from Dr. Keirstead's work before human testing.

    The new California stem cell research board that was set up after passage of
last fall's ballot measure, Proposition 71, is still organizing itself and
figuring out how to begin awarding public grants to scientists. But Dr.
Keirstead has been able to speed forward, fueled by money from Geron, a
California biotechnology company, which is eager to demonstrate to investors
that practical use of stem cells is not a distant dream.

    Because embryonic stem cells can form any other kind of cell in the body,
scientists envision using them to replace cells and tissues that have been
damaged by disease or injury.

    The Bush administration has restricted federally funded research to certain
colonies of stem cells, pointing out that creating additional such cells
involves the destruction of human embryos.

    But proponents of the research argue that the early embryos have no feeling
or consciousness and that most of them used in research are left over from
fertility clinics and are destined to be discarded anyway.

    California's ballot measure was propelled by people with diseases and their
families and backed by big campaign contributions by some wealthy businessmen.

    Robert N. Klein, a Palo Alto real estate developer who has a son with
diabetes, helped draft the ballot initiative and put his money behind the vote
effort. After passage he was named chairman of the board overseeing distribution
of the $3 billion.

    Mr. Klein said it was ''extremely welcome'' that, under Dr. Keirstead,
embryonic stem cell therapy was moving toward clinical trials. He said the
public needed to know in advance, however, that as with many new therapies, the
first trial is not expected to succeed. ''It may take several years, or many
years, to refine,'' he said.

    Dr. Keirstead's work was a rallying point during the Proposition 71
campaign; he gave 14 speeches to various civic, political and business groups to
whom he showed a video of his rat research.

    In it, an untreated rat struggled to pull itself along the ground using its
forelimbs as its paralyzed hind legs, tail and belly scraped along the ground. A
rat treated with Dr. Keirstead's cells was then shown moving its hind legs,
though not perfectly, and keeping its tail in the air.

    ''Stem cells have already cured paralysis in animals,'' Mr. Reeve, the
actor, said in the commercial he filmed, which was broadcast after his death. He
urged voters to ''stand up for those who can't.''

    But some spinal cord researchers criticized Dr. Keirstead for having shown
his video for three years but not publishing his work with rats in a
peer-reviewed journal that would allow experts to truly evaluate it.

    Dr. Keirstead said he was in the process of publishing his results with
rats, but that he had wanted to do other tests before publishing. He expects to
release further results well before starting clinical trials next year. He said,
though, that showing the video before publication, even at the risk of annoying
fellow scientists, was important to give patients hope.

    ''I've had people call me up and say, 'I'm about to commit suicide, do you
have anything to stop me?''' he said. ''People don't realize how close we are.''

    Indeed, during a two-hour interview in Dr. Keirstead's cramped office here,
his phone rang several times with calls from injured people, some volunteering
to be guinea pigs in any study he conducts.

    John W. McDonald, director of the international spinal cord injury and
paralysis center at the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, said ''to date,
not enough has been shown'' by Dr. Keirstead and Geron to allow federal
regulators to authorize a clinical trial. Even so, he said Dr. Keirstead was
being unfairly criticized.

    ''Scientists aren't too kind to other scientists' receiving too much
attention,'' said Dr. McDonald, who himself received notice for therapy that
restored some minor movement and sensation in Mr. Reeve. ''I think that's what
you're seeing.''

    Dr. Keirstead's optimism has won him praise from people with spinal cord
injuries and their families.

    ''He cares about patients intensely; it's not just a job for him,'' said Don
C. Reed, a retired schoolteacher and Proposition 71 advocate from Fremont,
Calif., whose son, Roman, was paralyzed in a college football accident 10 years
ago.

    ''I held in my hand a rat that had walked again after being paralyzed,'' Mr.
Reed said, ''and this with my son sitting there in his wheelchair.''

    For all their promise, stem cells could pose dangers if not carefully
controlled. Scientists do not envision implanting raw stem cells into patients
because the cells might turn into undesirable types of tissues. The idea,
instead, is to turn embryonic stem cells into the desired type of cell, such as
heart cells or liver cells, in the laboratory and then transplant these more
specialized cells.

    Dr. Keirstead and other scientists in his laboratory figured out how to turn
embryonic stem cells into a nearly pure population of brain cells called
oligodendrocytes, which form the insulation around neurons. Without this
insulation, the neurons cannot easily carry the signals that tell muscles to
move or relay sensations to the brain.

    They described the work in a paper published by the journal Glia in
November. ''This is the first report of getting oligodendrocytes in the numbers
they did and the purity they did,'' said Dr. Mahendra Rao, a stem cell
researcher at the National Institute on Aging who has also tried to make
oligodendrocytes.

    But it remains unclear how much of a difference this will make to people
with spinal cord injuries. People lose movement and sensation mainly because the
nerves themselves -- the wires -- are cut or damaged. Simply restoring the
insulation will not help repair a broken wire.

    But Dr. Keirstead said that some neurons remain intact after an injury but
lose their insulation, called myelin. So, in theory, restoring the myelin to
those neurons could help restore at least some movement or sensation. Such a
treatment, he said, would have to be given within days of the injury; otherwise,
the formation of scar tissue would probably render the treatment ineffective.

    Dr. Keirstead, who was raised in Canada, received his doctorate from the
University of British Columbia and won an award for the country's best
zoology-related thesis in 1995. He helped start a company in Vancouver, Neuro
Therapeutics, to develop spinal cord injury treatments based on that work, which
did not involve stem cells. But the company ran out of money. Dr. Keirstead came
to Irvine in 2000 to join the Reeve-Irvine Research Center on spinal cord
injuries. It was set up by Mr. Reeve and Joan Irvine Smith, a philanthropist and
member of the family for whom Irvine is named.

    He started his second company, Ability Biomedical, with another University
of California, Irvine, faculty member to treat multiple sclerosis. More
successful than his first venture, it was sold last summer to Medarex, a
publicly traded biotechnology company, for $4.7 million up front and possibly
$3.6 million later.

    To work with embryonic stem cells, Dr. Keirstead turned to Geron, the Menlo
Park, Calif., company that had financed the research leading to the original
isolation of human embryonic stem cells at the University of Wisconsin in 1998
and that controls some of the fundamental patent rights in the field.

    Thomas B. Okarma, Geron's president, said next year's trial of Dr.
Keirstead's approach would mainly check for safety. The oligodendrocytes would
be inserted into the spinal columns of patients at the same time they have an
operation that is common after spinal cord injury and is aimed at preventing
further damage.

    Dr. Okarma denied that the trial was premature or risky, but noted that
Geron would have to apply to the Food and Drug Administration next year and
receive approval before beginning the trial. Asked about the criticism from
others, he responded: ''There's a lot of jealousy. What can I tell you? This is
the hottest thing in medicine.''

    Geron is providing about $500,000 a year to Dr. Keirstead's lab. As long as
that continues, Dr. Keirstead said that he did not need any grants from the
Proposition 71 ballot measure he helped pass and that he might not even have the
capacity to use the money. ''There's only so much I can do,'' he said.

    But then he stopped and thought again, before saying that state money would
be welcome. ''Research goes as fast as the dollars,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hans S. Keirstead helped lure Californians to the polls last
fall to approve spending $3 billion of the state's money on embryonic stem cell
research over the next decade. (Photo by Damian Dovarganes/Associated Press)(pg.
C1)
 Embryonic stem cells at the Reeve-Irvine Research Center are prepared for
researchers. The cells can form any other kind of cell in the body. (Photo by
Jamie Rector for The New York Times)(pg. C10)Chart: ''Cells by
Design''Scientists have developed a way to chemically manipulate human embryonic
stem cells to become oligodendrocytes, a type of brain cell that forms the
insulation around the neurons that carry signals telling muscles to move or
relay sensations to the brain.DAYS 1-10Making brain cellsHuman embryonic stem
cells are fed a chemical mixture that promotes only the growth of brain cells.
All other types of cells die off.DAYS 11-42Promoting the oligodendrocyteThe
chemicals further promote the growth of a specific type of brain cell, the
oligodendrocyte. All other types of brain cells die off.DAY 35Preparing to take
a lookA sample of the developing oligodendrocytes is removed and placed in an
imaging chamber for future examination.DAY 42Final look and transplantationWhen
it has been determined from the sample that the oligodendrocytes have developed
properly, the remaining cells are transplanted directly into the animal or
frozen for future use.Diagram highlighting embryonic stem cells, non-brain
cells, brain cells and other types of brain cells.(Source by Hans S. Keirstead,
Ph.D., University of California, Irvine)(pg. C1)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2005


                             217 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 22, 2005 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 92 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
IN BRIEF / Los Angeles County / LOS ANGELES;
USC Scientist Freed on Bail in Sex Case

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:

   A prominent geneticist facing child-molestation charges in Los Angeles and
Maryland posted bond and was released from jail Monday, according to the Los
Angeles County Sheriff's Department.

   William French Anderson, 68, was released shortly after 5 a.m. on bond.

   On Friday, a court commissioner set Anderson's bail at $1 million in the
Maryland case. Before his arrest Wednesday on the Maryland warrant, Anderson had
been free on $600,000 bail in a pending Los Angeles County case.

   Anderson is on leave as the director of the Gene Therapy Laboratories at USC.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: ACCUSED: William French Anderson appears at an extradition
hearing in Los Angeles on Friday.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Walt Mancini Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2005


                             218 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            February 20, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: HIGH PROFILE

LENGTH: 735 words

HEADLINE: LIFELONG HEALTH As boomers age, curing Alzheimer's imperative

BYLINE: Dr. DAVID Lipschitz

BODY:

   Alzheimer's disease is the fourth leading cause of death in the United
States. Abnormalities are present in the brain at least 20 years before symptoms
appear in this illness, which gradually destroys brain cells called neurons.

   Priorities for research and treatment include developing strategies for early
detection, long before the illness becomes symptomatic, to understand how
Alzheimer's can be prevented and to find a cure. In the last few weeks a number
of seminal reports have appeared indicating that progress is being made on all
three fronts.

   At the moment the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease cannot be made with
certainty during life. Only at autopsy can specific pathologic features be
identified in the brain. Diagnosis is made by the symptoms that include gradual
loss of short-term memory and no evidence of any other disease that affects
memory.

   Imaging studies of the brain are helpful but never totally conclusive. Any
report that purports to make the diagnosis with absolute certainty receives a
great deal of attention in both the national press and the medical community.

   Recently, researchers at Northwestern University identified a protein called
amyloidbeta-derived diffusable ligand in the spinal fluid of 15 patients with
Alzheimer's disease. The protein was not found in 15 subjects who did not have
the disease. This is a very sensitive test and if true may allow the detection
of at-risk individuals many years before the disease becomes symptomatic.
Unfortunately, similar tests have made claims only to fizzle out as more
patients were studied.

   Early detection is important as it is quite clear that the key to curing
Alzheimer's will be to intervene many years before symptoms appear in order to
prevent excessive destruction of brain cells. More and more research indicates
that curative treatment will eventually become available.

   A recent report published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences showed that gene therapy aborted the progression of Alzheimer's disease
in mice.

   Gene delivery of a protein called apolipoprotein E2 (APOE2) prevented the
deposition of a protein called beta amyloid precursor protein that leads to the
damage of brain cells. Most people with Alzheimer's disease have a variant of
APO-E2, called APO-E4, that is less able to clear abnormal proteins from the
brain. Novel drug therapy, gene therapy and the use of vaccines are all
approaches that offer the hope of a cure.

   While we cannot affect the genetic and familial factors that lead to
Alzheimer's disease, we now know that everything that increases the risk of
heart disease also increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease. This includes lack
of exercise, high fat diet, high cholesterol, elevated homocysteine,
hypertension and diabetes.

   Last week an intriguing report published in the Journal Neurology showed that
people who tend to worry or are under a great deal of stress have a much higher
risk of Alzheimer's disease in later life. The exact mechanism whereby stress
leads to Alzheimer's disease remains unclear, but is probably caused by
stress-induced elevation of hormones that damage the areas of the brain
responsible for behavior and memory.

   For all of us this research emphasizes that a commitment to lifelong health
and happiness will prevent virtually every major illness afflicting us,
including Alzheimer's. This particularly applies to anyone who has more than one
family member with the disease.

   As the 70 million baby boomers approach old age, addressing the prevention,
early detection and curative treatment of Alzheimer's disease becomes more
critical. I am a great admirer and supporter of the legendary Frank Broyles, the
athletic director of the University of Arkansas.

   Because he has been touched so closely by this disease he has become a
tireless advocate for more research and more rapid availability of promising
therapies for those afflicted with this devastating illness.

   I would hope that in the coming years we will approach a cure for Alzheimer's
with the same vigor and investment as we have to find a cure for cancer and
HIV/AIDS. This illness causes incredible suffering for families touched by this
disease, and only a cure will prevent an inevitable national crisis in coming
years as the 85 year olds triple in number with half suffering from Alzheimer's.

   Readers can contact Dr. David at: askdrdavid@msn.com This article was
published 2/20/2005

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2005


                             219 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2005 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                            February 20, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: U-M breakthrough restores hearing to the deaf;
Research on guinea pigs uses gene therapy to grow the inner ear's auditory hair
cells.

BYLINE: Maureen Feighan

BODY:

   ANN ARBOR -- University of Michigan scientists have discovered how to restore
hearing in deafened adult guinea pigs, a medical breakthrough that could lead to
help for millions of Americans with acquired hearing loss.

   After 11 years of research, scientists at U-M's medical school were able to
use gene therapy to grow hair cells in deafened guinea pigs, which is
significant because guinea pigs, like humans, are mammals.

   Hair cells, which get their name from the microscopic hair-like projections
that grow from each cell, are sensory cells found in part of the inner ear. Once
damaged through infection, aging or other factors, auditory hair cells can't
pick up sound waves to help send messages to the brain, and hearing is impaired.

   Yehoash Raphael, an associate professor of otolaryngology at U-M's Kresge
Hearing Research Institute, who directed the study, said restoring hearing loss
in humans is still years off, but the results of the guinea pig study reflect a
major step forward. The results were published last week in the journal Nature
Medicine.

   "For now, it just gives more hope," said Raphael, who has been working on
this type of research for more than 20 years. "It's a breakthrough that shows
for the first time that hearing can be restored."

   Nan Asher of Ypsilanti is encouraged by the findings. Born with a genetic
defect that has left her legally deaf , Asher doesn't think the research will
help her in her lifetime but is still excited about the possibilities.

   "As technology emerges, we're going to see fewer and fewer deaf people," said
Asher, program manager of the Michigan Association for Deaf, Hearing and Speech
Services, a nonprofit advocacy group.

   But not everyone will embrace the study's findings, said Gretchen Coleman,
principal of the Detroit Day School for the Deaf. The school has roughly 80
students, all of whom are deaf, from southern Wayne County.

   "Among the Deaf community, deafness is not viewed as a disability," she said.
"It's viewed as a culture for the most part. They have a language, and thus have
a culture. It's not viewed as a disability."

   A Houston researcher first identified the gene that generates hair cells in
fruit flies in 1998. The gene is present in all animals but is usually active
only during embryonic development. During that time, some cells in the ear are
converted into hair cells, while others are considered supporting cells where
the gene isn't present.

   U-M scientists converted some of those supporting cells into hair cells by
surgically inserting a corrective gene with a virus into the left ears of 10
deafened guinea pigs. Eight weeks later, they found new auditory hair cells in
the animals' ears.

   About the research

   U-M scientists were able to restore hearing in deafened guinea pigs by
regenerating auditory hair cells, which play a key role in the hearing process.
There are no plans for clinical trials yet, but for information about current
research, visit

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2005


                             220 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: Sex Abuse Charges Expected For Geneticist a Second Time

BYLINE: By NICK MADIGAN

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 17

BODY:

   A pioneering geneticist, William French Anderson, is expected to be arraigned
here on Friday morning on charges that he sexually abused a young boy in
Maryland two decades ago.

    It was the second such arrest for Dr. Anderson in less than a year.

    The authorities plan to ask that bail for Dr. Anderson, widely known as the
father of gene therapy, be set at $4 million under the premise that he is a
fugitive from justice, said Sandi Gibbons, a spokeswoman for the district
attorney's office.

    Dr. Anderson, 68, the director of the Gene Therapy Laboratories at the
University of Southern California's Keck School of Medicine, was arrested on
Wednesday on charges of sexual assault, child abuse and ''unnatural and
perverted sexual practices'' in the Maryland case and was being held until the
status of his bail is resolved.

    He was arrested in July in a case involving a girl who is now 17 years old,
to whom he had been teaching karate at his home in San Marino, near Pasadena,
from 1997 to 2001; last month, Dr. Anderson was indicted on five counts of
committing a lewd act upon a child and one count of continuing sexual abuse of a
child under 14.

    Dr. Anderson, who pleaded not guilty, was freed on $600,000 bail and was
awaiting trial in that case when he was picked up on the Maryland charges.
Because of the new charges, the authorities here plan to ask a judge in a
hearing on Tuesday to revoke Dr. Anderson's bail in the California case.

    The Maryland charges stemmed from acts Dr. Anderson was said to have
committed in his home in Bethesda, Md., between late 1983, when the boy was 12,
and early fall 1985. Dr. Anderson, a martial arts expert who at the time was a
researcher at the National Institutes of Health, was teaching the boy tae kwon
do.

    Douglas F. Gansler, the state attorney in Montgomery County, Md., who is
prosecuting the earlier case, said in a telephone interview on Thursday that the
accuser, now 34, had said that Dr. Anderson began abusing him sexually during
the second of their weekly tae kwon do sessions in Dr. Anderson's home.

    Mr. Gansler said that investigators in Maryland had recently set up a
''phone sting'' in which the man confronted Dr. Anderson.

    Dr. Anderson, who did not know he was being recorded, ''stated on several
occasions that he didn't remember, or has repressed any memories, of the two of
them engaging'' in sex acts, according to documents provided by court officials
in Rockville, Md.

    Dr. Anderson was dubbed the ''father of gene therapy'' after he led the
first human gene therapy trial in 1990, in which a hereditary disease in the
immune system of a 4-year-old girl was cured.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                             221 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: Viral-based therapy no longer an option;
Mom considers German treatment for son's cancer

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Hope has faded for an experimental gene therapy treatment in Cincinnati for a
14-year-old boy with incurable cancer.

   Recent imaging tests revealed that the tumor in Jordan Aron's head is not
responding to new cancer drugs. Dr. Timothy Cripe of Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center had hoped the drugs would keep Jordan's cancer at bay
until the doctor obtained funding and regulatory approval for the experimental
treatment.

   Tests showed the tumor by Jordan's jaw and temple is still growing. Cripe
says he believes a genetically modified herpes virus has potential to kill
cancer cells in children. But human testing now appears too far down the road to
help Jordan.

   Viral-based therapies for cancer are being tested in patients, but the
National Institutes of Health has rejected Cripe's applications for funding and
approval.

   Cripe took on Jordan as a patient in the fall, after doctors in Cleveland and
elsewhere said they could not cure his cancer. The teen from Boardman, a suburb
of Youngstown, was diagnosed two years ago with rhabdomyosarcoma, an aggressive
soft-tissue cancer. He has suffered several relapses.

   Jordan's mother, Wendy Aron, said Thursday she is not giving up.

   She mentioned a clinical trial in Germany that uses a genetically engineered
virus.

   "I'll take Jordan there," Aron said. "I want to get the virus and I don't
care where I have to go to get it."

   She is also considering another surgery, which would be Jordan's fourth.

   Cripe had acknowledged that the chances of gene therapy benefiting Jordan
were remote, but he was compelled to try.

   Aron praised Cripe for trying to help Jordan.

   But she said she suspected the hospital had pressured him to back off.

   Hospital officials had reacted negatively to some recent news reports of
Jordan's plight, fearing the reports might generate criticism that the family
was being exploited.

   A hospital official said privacy regulations precluded her from commenting on
why Cincinnati Children's no longer will pursue experimental therapy for Jordan.

   Aron had volunteered to help Cripe raise private money for a clinical trial.
A fund set up by CancerFree Kids, a small nonprofit based near Cincinnati, has
collected $5,000 since a Plain Dealer feature about Jordan two weeks ago.

   Ellen Flannery, executive director of CancerFree Kids, said the Jordan Fund
will continue to collect money for Cripe's research.

   The organization will give out $40,000 in research grants this year, she
said.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: hspector@plaind.com, 216-999-4543

GRAPHIC: DALE OMORI THE PLAIN DEALER Jordan Aron, 14, pictured with his mother,
Wendy, in their Boardman home, suffers from an incurable cancer. They had hoped
an experimental gene therapy treatment would help.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                             222 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 18, 2005 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A02

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: Genetics Expert Charged With Molestation in Md.;
1980s Case Covers Time Scientist Worked at NIH

BYLINE: Fredrick Kunkle, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    A pioneering genetic scientist who formerly worked at the National
Institutes of Health has been charged by Montgomery County authorities with
molesting a 12-year-old Silver Spring boy 20 years ago.

    W. French Anderson, 68, who became known in the United States as the father
of gene therapy, was arrested Wednesday at his home in San Marino, Calif., on
charges of abusing the boy between September 1983 and September 1985.

    The victim, now 34, came forward with the allegations after he learned that
Anderson had been charged last summer with molesting the teenage daughter of a
colleague at the University of Southern California, where he headed the school's
Gene Therapy Laboratories, authorities said. Anderson, who has a fifth-degree
black belt in taekwondo, befriended both children while teaching them martial
arts and engaged in sexual activity with them during private taekwondo classes
in his home, authorities said. The claims were made years after the alleged acts
occurred.

    "It's not unusual in cases involving child abuse for people to come forward
as adults for the first time regarding the allegations," Montgomery County
State's Attorney Douglas F. Gansler said yesterday. "What often can happen is
another person comes forward, and that will bring other victims out of the
woodwork."

    Anderson was held without bail yesterday at the inmate reception center in
Los Angeles pending court hearings on the new charges,  according to Los Angeles
County sheriff's deputies.

    Anderson's attorney, Barry Tarlow, did not return a call seeking comment.

    Anderson, a Tulsa native educated at Harvard and Cambridge universities, was
a leader in the effort to treat disease by removing, genetically modifying and
reimplanting cells in patients' bodies. He joined the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute in July 1965, headed the first gene therapy experiment in the
United States in 1990 and took over the Gene Therapy Laboratories at USC after
leaving the NIH in September 1992. His wife, Kathryn, whom he met while they
were studying medicine at Cambridge, retired in July as chief of surgery at
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. The couple, who married in 1961, have no
children.

    "People used to call me a preacher's son," Anderson told The Washington Post
Magazine in a 1991 profile, "because I didn't curse. I didn't smoke. I didn't
drink. I wasn't interested in sex. I was only interested in science."

    In July, Anderson was charged by California authorities for allegedly
abusing a girl during martial arts classes in his home over a nearly five-year
period beginning in January 1997 when the girl was 10 years old. He was placed
on administrative leave by USC after his arrest and remained free on $600,000
bail.

    The alleged Maryland victim learned of Anderson's arrest from a family
friend who had read about it, and he approached Montgomery County authorities in
September, Montgomery police spokeswoman Lucille Baur said.

    The man told police that Anderson was an assistant instructor at the
National AAU Taekwondo Union martial arts facility in Silver Spring when the
victim attended the school, authorities said. Anderson then began offering
private tutoring sessions at his home on Melody Lane in Bethesda, police said.

    Documents filed in District Court in Rockville say Anderson gave the boy
alcohol, showed him pornography and performed sex acts with him. On one
occasion, the doctor obtained a sample of the boy's sperm and showed it to him
under a microscope, the court documents say.

    In an effort to corroborate the charges, investigators said, the victim was
asked to contact Anderson by telephone while the call was being recorded. Court
documents say Anderson told the victim that he did not remember or had repressed
memories of sexual activity and urged the victim to tell police that nothing
happened.

    Anderson was charged with child abuse, second- and third-degree sex offenses
and unnatural and perverted sex practices.

    Staff writer Katherine Shaver and researcher Meg Smith contributed to this
report.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2005


                             223 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 17, 2005 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 418 words

HEADLINE: Scientist Held in Sex Case;
Already charged with abusing a girl, the USC geneticist is accused of molesting
a boy earlier.

BYLINE: Richard Winton and Eric Malnic, Times Staff Writers

BODY:

   William French Anderson, the renowned geneticist indicted last month on
charges of molesting the young daughter of a colleague at USC, was arrested
Wednesday at his home in San Marino on suspicion of molesting a boy years ago in
Maryland.

   Douglas Friend Gansler, a state attorney in Montgomery County, Md., said
Anderson had been charged with abusing the boy between September 1983, when the
alleged victim was 12 years old, and September 1985.

   Gansler said the molestations occurred at Anderson's home in Bethesda, where
the Harvard-trained geneticist, then a top researcher at the National Institutes
of Health and a martial arts expert, was instructing the boy in taekwondo.

   "During the sessions, Anderson plied the boy with alcohol and showed him
magazines with [pictures of] naked women," Gansler said.

   The alleged victim's family recently contacted police in Maryland, Gansler
said. He added that investigators then recorded a telephone conversation during
which the purported victim confronted Anderson with his allegations. Officials
did not disclose any details of the conversation.

   Anderson, 68, was charged Tuesday in Maryland with child abuse, sexual
assault and "unnatural and perverted sex practices." An arrest warrant was
issued, and he was taken into custody by Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies
Wednesday and booked at the Temple City sheriff's station.

   In the California case, Anderson had been training the alleged victim in
karate at his San Marino home. Founder of the Gene Therapy Laboratories at USC,
he is accused of molesting the girl, now 17, from 1997 to 2001.

   In that case, Anderson was indicted on one count of continuous sexual abuse
of a child under 14 and five counts of a lewd act upon a child. He pleaded not
guilty to all six counts. His preliminary hearing is today.

   After that indictment, Anderson e-mailed friends at USC, saying, "I have not
done the things I am charged with."

   The university has placed him on administrative leave.

   Anderson was dubbed the father of gene therapy after a team he led in 1990
cured a hereditary disease of the immune system in a 4-year-old girl. The child
was infused with a missing gene and with white cells that had been removed from
her blood. It was the first time that the therapy was successful in a human
being.

   Anderson's achievement guaranteed him a place in medical history, but it also
made him a lightning rod in the controversy over the ethics of gene
manipulation. He reportedly received several death threats because of his work.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2005


                             224 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           February 17, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: MANDEVILLE PICAYUNE; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Medical family trees may hold keys to longer life;
Get health data, genealogists urged

BYLINE: By Amy Althans, Contributing writer

BODY:

   Mandeville resident Paula Gregory will present information on the importance
of documenting family medical history while doing genealogy research at a
special meeting of the St. Tammany Genealogy Society at the Covington Library on
Tuesday at 7 p.m.

   Gregory, an associate professor in the department of genetics at the
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center in New Orleans, will discuss
the importance of taking genealogy research a step further by documenting known
health conditions of family members presently living as well as those who have
died.

   In 1993, Gregory started the genetics education office of the National
Institute for Human Genome Research as a national extension of her work at the
University of Michigan. She also now works with biology classes at Covington and
Mandeville high schools while teaching at LSU and continuing her research in the
area of cancer genetics education and gene therapy education.

   At the public meeting, Gregory will demonstrate the value of building a
database of medical information while documenting family histories.

   "There is a big push right now for primary care physicians and their patients
to have a better understanding of their family medical tree," she said. "Since
genealogists are already gathering information about their families, they should
also ask living family members about family health issues."

   Gregory shares her own experience about osteoporosis based on her family
history. After consulting with her primary care physician and screening for bone
density, she found that she did indeed have early signs of osteoporosis.

   Tests one year later after a change in medication proved the value of early
detection by indicating normal bone density.

   Documenting a family's medical history is like filling in the blanks for your
family doctor. "The idea is to take that information and use it for your own
health and for your children and grandchildren," she said.

   Gregory works to demystify genetics by helping audiences see the benefits of
knowing how genes play a part in the family history. She tells audiences that
although the words sound complicated, the fact is that all families have this
information that may not be in their medical charts.

   "Geneticists are interested in longevity," she said, adding that there is a
considerable connection between genetics, environment and behavior. "We are as
interested in learning why some people live to be 100 as why others have heart
attacks at an early age."

   Another aspect for genealogists to consider is that death certificates
indicate the cause of death but not any health conditions a person might have
had. "An aunt may have died in a car wreck but that doesn't tell us that she
also had diabetes," Gregory said.

   St. Tammany Genealogy Society vice president Rob Noles of Mandeville is
well-versed on the use of DNA and genetics to document genealogy research.

   "It is really becoming a big part of genealogy research," he said. "Most of
our illnesses are because of our genes and not the environment, although the
environment does play a part."

   Although this is a special evening meeting, monthly meetings of the St.
Tammany Genealogy Society are normally held on the second Tuesday of each month
at 1:30 p.m. All meetings are free and open to the public. For more information,
check out the society's Web site at www.StTammanyGS.org.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2005


                             225 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           February 17, 2005 Thursday

SECTION: COVINGTON PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Medical family trees may hold keys to longer life;
Get health data, genealogists urged

BYLINE: By Amy Althans, Contributing writer

BODY:

   Mandeville resident Paula Gregory will present information on the importance
of documenting family medical history while doing genealogy research at a
special meeting of the St. Tammany Genealogy Society at the Covington Library on
Tuesday at 7 p.m.

   Gregory, an associate professor in the department of genetics at the
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center in New Orleans, will discuss
the importance of taking genealogy research a step further by documenting known
health conditions of family members presently living as well as those who have
died.

   In 1993, Gregory started the genetics education office of the National
Institute for Human Genome Research as a national extension of her work at the
University of Michigan. She also now works with biology classes at Covington and
Mandeville high schools while teaching at LSU and continuing her research in the
area of cancer genetics education and gene therapy education.

   At the public meeting, Gregory will demonstrate the value of building a
database of medical information while documenting family histories.

   "There is a big push right now for primary care physicians and their patients
to have a better understanding of their family medical tree," she said. "Since
genealogists are already gathering information about their families, they should
also ask living family members about family health issues."

   Gregory shares her own experience about osteoporosis based on her family
history. After consulting with her primary care physician and screening for bone
density, she found that she did indeed have early signs of osteoporosis.

   Tests one year later after a change in medication proved the value of early
detection by indicating normal bone density.

   Documenting a family's medical history is like filling in the blanks for your
family doctor. "The idea is to take that information and use it for your own
health and for your children and grandchildren," she said.

   Gregory works to demystify genetics by helping audiences see the benefits of
knowing how genes play a part in the family history. She tells audiences that
although the words sound complicated, the fact is that all families have this
information that may not be in their medical charts.

   "Geneticists are interested in longevity," she said, adding that there is a
considerable connection between genetics, environment and behavior. "We are as
interested in learning why some people live to be 100 as why others have heart
attacks at an early age."

   Another aspect for genealogists to consider is that death certificates
indicate the cause of death but not any health conditions a person might have
had. "An aunt may have died in a car wreck but that doesn't tell us that she
also had diabetes," Gregory said.

   St. Tammany Genealogy Society vice president Rob Noles of Mandeville is
well-versed on the use of DNA and genetics to document genealogy research.

   "It is really becoming a big part of genealogy research," he said. "Most of
our illnesses are because of our genes and not the environment, although the
environment does play a part."

   Although this is a special evening meeting, monthly meetings of the St.
Tammany Genealogy Society are normally held on the second Tuesday of each month
at 1:30 p.m. All meetings are free and open to the public. For more information,
check out the society's Web site at www.StTammanyGS.org.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2005


                             226 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                               STATEWIDE EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Medical Frontiers; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: WEBSITES CAN GIVE ALCOHOLICS NEW INSIGHTS

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Websites that help people assess whether they are alcoholics can be helpful
in changing harmful drinking behavior, researchers report in the February issue
of Alcoholism: Clinical & Experimental Research.

   The websites mimic methods that successful counselors employ during
face-to-face encounters with problem drinkers, according to a series of reports
originally presented last June at a meeting of the Research Society on
Alcoholism. The sites offer questionnaires about drinking habits, give feedback
in a nonjudgmental manner and offer several options for people who want to
change their drinking habits. Computer counseling has the extra benefit of
anonymity, said Scott Walters, symposium organizer and assistant professor of
behavioral sciences at the University of Texas School of Public Health.

   ``It's a way to save face, and drinkers can begin to look at their drinking
in a private and nonjudgmental way,'' Walters said.

   Among websites that offer such informal counseling services are Drinker's
Check-up at www.drinkers checkup.com, E-Chug at www.e-chug .com and
MyStudentBody.com at www.mystudentbody.com.

   A few surveys of users of the websites in general have shown a decrease in
consumption and harmful behavior due to alcohol use.

   Some websites charge fees after an initial screening.

   Stem Cell Side Effects

   Stem cell transplantation, which holds the promise of recovery from spinal
cord injuries, can increase pain for some patients.

   However, Swedish researchers report in the current issue of the journal
Nature Neuroscience that by using treated stem cells, they can prevent the
condition known as allodynia, in which ordinary stimulus becomes excruciatingly
painful.

   The researchers used gene therapy to introduce the gene neurogenin2 into
neural stem cells before implanting them into one group of rats. Unlike the rats
that received untreated neural stem cells, the rats receiving the engineered
stem cells did not exhibit signs of pain when exposed to cold and pressure.

   Both groups of rats did recover some motor function after the operation.

   The scientists believe that neurogenin2 prevents the transplanted neural
cells from developing abnormal growth of axons -- structures of central nervous
system cells that can transmit pain signals.

   The authors said the study confirms that stem cell therapy might be helpful
in treating spinal cord injuries but also carries the risk of side effects,
which must be considered before human trials begin.

   Stillbirth Link Debunked

   Despite some published reports, women who have given birth by caesarean
section are not at higher risk of giving birth to a stillborn child, researchers
at Yale University and Columbia University reported Saturday.

   The survey of 250,000 women showed no increased risk of stillbirth among
those who had caesarean deliveries.

   A British study of 16,000 women previously suggested a link between
stillbirth and Caesareans deliveries.

   Risks do increase in women who have had a prior stillbirth, who smoke, are
over 35, are substance abusers or have underlying medical conditions such as
diabetes.

   The researchers reported their findings at the Society for Maternal Fetal
Medicine meeting in Reno, Nev.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                             227 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 15, 2005 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Science Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1025 words

HEADLINE: With Genetic Mapping, Cats' Mysteries Will Be Unraveled

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS BAKALAR

BODY:

   Genetically speaking, every dog has already had its day. In 2003, a standard
poodle named Shadow became the first canine to have his genome mapped, and in
2004 a boxer, Tasha, became the second.

    Now scientists are turning their attention to the genome of the domestic
cat, and it is Cinnamon's turn to donate a blood sample.

     Cinnamon is not just any cat. She comes from a carefully bred colony at the
University of Missouri, and her lineage can be traced back for decades.

    Scientists therefore know exactly what they are getting when they look at
her DNA.

    Researchers hope to have the cat genome mapped by the end of the year --
perhaps as soon as this summer -- and when the job is done, humans will be the
ones to benefit.

    Americans own (or serve) more than 60 million cats, spend over $4 billion a
year on cat food and are so dedicated to feline health care that their
veterinarians have identified more than 250 genetic diseases and hundreds of
infectious agents that afflict them.

    But the genome will usher in a world of knowledge with immediate practical
application, not only for veterinarians and cat owners, but for geneticists,
zoologists and conservationists as well.

    When the National Human Genome Research Institute, part of the National
Institutes of Health, chose the cat as one of the select group of species to
have their genomes mapped, it conferred no small honor. It will cost $5.5
million to do the job, said a spokesman for the health institutes, and though
the project will produce a map that is far less detailed than that of the human
genome, scientists firmly believe it is worth every penny.

    The sequencing is being carried out under contract with Agencourt Bioscience
Corporation, a biotechnology firm in Beverly, Mass., which was started five
years ago by scientists originally involved in the Human Genome Project.

    The cat genome is large, and even though automated equipment is used at
every step, sequencing it is labor intensive; more than 100 people are involved
in one way or another in the project.

    The raw material -- Cinnamon's DNA -- is delivered to Agencourt by the
N.I.H. Then the work begins, essentially a process of chopping up the DNA into
tiny usable pieces in a process called library construction, and then putting it
all back together to create the map. Producing a usable first draft sequence
takes about nine months.

    The Cat Genome Project was announced along with plans to sequence the
genomes of eight other mammals: the elephant, the orangutan, the shrew, the
hedgehog, the guinea pig, the tenrec, the armadillo and the rabbit.

    Each new genome map adds something to the understanding of the human genome,
but the cat was chosen, among other reasons, for its importance as a medical
model in studying human disease.

    ''The genes on the cat chromosome and the human chromosome correspond to
each other like two strings of beads made of different colors,'' said Dr.
Stephen J. O'Brien, chief of the Laboratory of Genomic Diversity of the National
Cancer Institute, adding that cats have ''the same genes, one after another,
strung together across every chromosome.''

    This resemblance means that many of the cat's genetic diseases are inherited
exactly the same way as genetic illnesses in humans. Diabetes, hemophilia and
lupus, for example, have precise genetic homologues in cats.

    Cat retroviruses, like those that cause feline leukemia and feline sarcoma,
although slightly different in their gene structure from the human versions,
produce lesions that look almost identical to human cancers. Perhaps even more
significant, feline immunodeficiency virus, or F.I.V., resembles H.I.V. so
closely that it follows the same progression that, untreated, leads to the
wasting syndrome of AIDS in humans. It is the only known naturally occurring
AIDS syndrome in any nonhuman species, and provides a perfect model for studying
the progression of the disease.

    Cats also get feline versions of many other human infectious diseases,
including rotavirus, poxvirus, herpes, Q-fever, chlamydiosis and dozens more. On
top of that, they are resistant to anthrax infection, a fact of considerable
interest to scientists. Once the genome is mapped, said Dr. O'Brien, ''research
on feline stem cells will blossom, along with gene therapy applications.''

    Zoologists and wildlife managers are just as eager as medical researchers to
start using the completed cat genome.

    The domestic cat is the only one of the 37 species in its family that is not
either threatened or endangered. Yet despite their rapidly shrinking territory,
and their limited genetic diversity within species, wild cats endure on every
continent except Australia and Antarctica, at the top of the food chain wherever
they live.

    ''The free-ranging species are survivors,'' Dr. O'Brien said. ''Cheetahs,
for example, get infected with F.I.V., but they don't get sick,'' though no one
knows why.

    On the other hand, wild cats can become infected for reasons that are just
as mysterious. This happened in 1994 when the canine distemper virus, which
normally infects only dogs, suddenly jumped to lions. Wildlife managers watched,
appalled, as the virus swept through the population, killing one-third of the
lions in the Serengeti ecosystem in only nine months.

    Zoologists want to know what explains these evolved genetic defenses and
susceptibilities. The genomes of the domestic cat and its wild relatives are
almost identical, and the genetic information developed for the domestic cat
will apply widely to all the species in its genus.

    ''The full genome,'' Dr. O'Brien said, ''will empower people with tools to
discover innate disease defenses, recognize pathogens and other threats and
assess the present status and future of these species.''

    Cats were probably first domesticated about 6,000 years ago, making them
much newer guests in the human household than dogs or barnyard animals, which
have lived with humans for almost twice as long. Yet they are the domestic
animal closest to our hearts in more ways than one.

    ''At least from a genomic perspective,'' Dr. O'Brien said, ''cats share a
striking ancient affinity with humankind.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Scientists will use a sample of Cinnamon's blood to map the cat
genome. (Photo by Agencourt Bioscience Corporation)

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2005


                             228 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 14, 2005, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: New tests give hope to the deaf;
Researchers able to restore hearing of guinea pigs with gene therapy

SOURCE: LOS ANGELES TIMES

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II

BODY:

   Michigan researchers have restored hearing in deaf mammals for the first
time, a feat that represents a major step toward the treatment of the 27 million
Americans with acquired hearing loss.

   By inserting a corrective gene with a virus, the team induced the formation
of new cochlear hair cells - the key intermediates in converting sound waves
into electrical impulses - in the ears of artificially deafened adult guinea
pigs.

   They later demonstrated that the animals responded to sounds, according to
the study published today in the journal Nature Medicine.

   "A lot of the techniques would fairly easily translate into a clinical
setting" for use in humans, said neuroscientist Matthew Kelley of the National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, who was not involved in
the research.

   The key to the generation of new hair cells is a gene called Atoh1, first
discovered in fruit flies in 1998 by geneticist Huda Zoghbi of the Baylor
College of Medicine. Variants of the gene have since been discovered in almost
all species of animals.

   During fetal development, the gene converts some cells in the ear into hair
cells. In other ear cells, called supporting cells, its activity is suppressed.

   Researchers showed that, working in laboratory dishes, the gene could convert
supporting cells into hair cells.

   Two years ago, Yehoash Raphael and Kohei Kawamoto of the University of
Michigan Medical School reported that inserting the gene into supporting cells
in live guinea pigs produced thousands of hair cells.

   "Everybody in the field was amazed that this worked," Kelley said.  "We
thought it was going to be really hard and that it would require a whole lot of
genes."

   But in those experiments, the researchers did not deafen the animals first.

   "Truly, I was not sure it was going to work, and I didn't see the point of
going through all the extra steps to deafen them," Raphael said.

   This time they did, using toxic chemicals to kill the hair cells in both ears
of 10 guinea pigs. Microscopic images taken three days later confirmed that all
the hair cells had been destroyed.

   On the fourth day, they used gene therapy with a viral vector to insert the
Atoh1 gene into the guinea pigs' left ears. Within two months, new hair cells
had appeared in the treated ears, but not in the untreated right ears.

    . . .

    HELP FOR HEARING

    Human hearing: Humans have about 16,000 hair cells that convert sound waves
into nerve impulses.

    Deafness: The cells are easily damaged by loud noises, aging, infections and
certain medications. Once damaged, they cannot regenerate on their own.


LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2005


                             229 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            February 14, 2005 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
In a First, Hearing Loss Is Reversed in Deaf Mammals

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   For the first time, researchers have restored hearing in deaf mammals, a feat
that represents a major step toward the treatment of the 27 million Americans
with acquired hearing loss.

   By inserting a corrective gene with a virus, the team induced the formation
of cochlear hair cells -- the key intermediaries in converting sound waves into
electrical impulses -- in the ears of artificially deafened adult guinea pigs.

   They later demonstrated that the animals responded to sounds, according to a
study to be published today in the journal Nature Medicine.

   "A lot of the techniques would fairly easily translate into a clinical
setting" for use in humans, said neuroscientist Matthew W. Kelley of the
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, who was not
involved in the research.

   Humans have about 16,000 hair cells in the cochlea of each ear, where they
convert sound waves into nerve impulses. The cells are easily damaged by loud
noises, aging, infections and certain medications. Once damaged, they cannot
regenerate on their own.

   The key to the generation of hair cells is a gene called Atoh1, first
discovered in fruit flies in 1998 by Huda Y. Zoghbi of Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston. Variants of the gene have since been discovered in almost
all species of animals.

   During fetal development, the gene converts some cells in the ear into hair
cells. In other ear cells, called supporting cells, its activity is suppressed.

   Researchers, working in laboratory dishes, quickly showed that the gene could
convert supporting cells into hair cells.

   Two years ago, Yehoash Raphael and Kohei Kawamoto of the University of
Michigan Medical School reported that inserting the gene into supporting cells
in live guinea pigs produced thousands of new hair cells.

   "Everybody in the field was amazed that this worked," Kelley said. "We
thought it was going to be really hard, and that it would require a whole lot of
genes."

   But in those experiments, the researchers did not deafen the animals first.

   "Truly, I was not sure it was going to work, and I didn't see the point of
going through all the extra steps to deafen them," Raphael said.

   This time they did, using toxic chemicals to kill the hair cells in the ears
of 10 guinea pigs. Microscopic images taken three days later confirmed that all
the hair cells had been destroyed.

   On the fourth day, they used gene therapy to insert the Atoh1 gene into the
guinea pigs' left ears. Within two months, new hair cells had appeared in the
treated ears but not in the untreated right ears.

   To determine whether the new hair cells were actually functional, the team
used tests of auditory brainstem response to measure the guinea pigs' ability to
hear. In effect, they observed increases in brain activity when they exposed the
animals to noises.

   "The bottom line is, their hearing gets better, and that is a very big step,"
Kelley said.

   Raphael and his colleagues are now trying to determine how good the restored
hearing is. To indicate whether the guinea pigs can hear and how well, they are
working with a psychologist who is an expert at training animals to display
various behaviors.

   They are trying to determine, for example, whether the animals can
differentiate between loud and soft sounds, and between different frequencies.

   They are also studying animals that have been deafened by other means, older
animals, and animals that have been deaf for longer periods before the start of
treatment. If the treatment were eventually used in humans, Raphael said, most
of the potential recipients would have been deaf for a long time before seeking
treatment.

   Even if all these experiments are successful, experts said, the required
studies for safety and efficacy mean that it will be the better part of a
decade, at least, before the technique can be tried in humans.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2005


                             230 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 13, 2005 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A09

LENGTH: 839 words

HEADLINE: Quest to Cure ALS Gets Personal;
Neurologist Researching Lou Gehrig's Disease Becomes a Patient

BYLINE: Paul Elias, Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

    The shocking self-diagnosis dawned slowly but inevitably on Richard Olney, a
top neurologist who dedicated his career to helping those afflicted with the
fatal Lou Gehrig's disease.

    Three surgeries to relieve a compressed disk in his back didn't solve the
weakness that started in his right knee and spread to both legs. When his arms
started to fail, he knew he was in the grips of a neurological disorder. Then
his worst fears were realized: He had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis -- Lou
Gehrig's disease.

    "I expected to live into my eighties like my parents did," said Olney,
struggling to get his words out through an amplifier resting on his lap in his
motorized wheelchair at the University of California at San Francisco. "But I've
done more in my 56 years than most people have done in their whole life. I can't
complain too much."

    Olney resigned last year as head of the university's renowned ALS center,
which he had  founded in 1993, turning it over to his protege, Cathy
Lomen-Hoerth. But he's not giving up his struggle against the disease, which
mystifies experts as much today as it did when New York Yankees slugger Lou
Gehrig died of it in 1941.

    He has signed on as the first human guinea pig in a trial of two drugs that
slowed the disease's progress in mice, and he is also using the time he has left
to raise awareness and money to combat ALS.

    Olney was famous for spending countless hours counseling patients, and that
spirit lives on at the ALS center, where Lomen-Hoerth said she tries to summon
the same soothing words and advice as she attends to her own patients -- who now
include Olney.

    UCSF has set up a fund in Olney's name, and he intends to continue his
campaign -- doing interviews and agreeing to stay in the public eye -- until his
strength gives out. Olney's health has rapidly declined since the disease was
diagnosed in June.

    "He spent his life trying to make a difference in this disease," his wife of
30 years, Paula, said as Olney slowly worked his legs in UCSF's specialized gym.

   Some 30,000 Americans  have ALS, a small number compared with other brain
diseases. But that is because ALS typically kills quickly, often within a year
or two of diagnosis. (Astrophysicist Stephen J. Hawking, whose case was
diagnosed 40 years ago, is an exception.)

    About 10,000 new cases are diagnosed every year. And although about 10
percent of the cases have genetic roots, it is not known how the other 90
percent occur. The disease isn't contagious, so Olney did not get it from a
patient.

    With ALS, only the brain cells that control muscles die. The intellect
remains intact even as the disease immobilizes the victim's body.

    "That's the internal horror for all of us working in ALS and who know Rick,"
said Jeffrey Rothstein, a Johns Hopkins University ALS researcher who spoke at a
December symposium held in Olney's honor. "ALS and pancreatic cancer are
probably the two worst diseases you can have."

    There's no effective treatment for ALS. The one drug approved by federal
regulators extends life by a few months for some.

    Rothstein is among a handful of researchers developing possible treatments
using gene therapy. Later this year, he and his colleagues hope to test in
humans a common virus they have engineered to carry a gene that produces a
growth factor directly to the brain and spinal cord. This technique
significantly extended the lives of ALS-afflicted mice. Rothstein and others
also hope to turn stem cells into replacement brain cells.

    The technologies seem promising, but breakthroughs will probably come too
late for Olney. He knows this and has made peace with it.

    Such bravery keeps everyone around him going, Olney's wife says. Still, to
say these past months have been terrible for the Olney family is to do insult to
just how bad it has been.

    Olney's mother died last month. His mother-in-law succumbed to cancer under
his roof last summer, while he was remodeling his home to add a wheelchair ramp
and other equipment he would soon need.

    More than anyone, Olney knew the kind of storm that was brewing. He bought a
bed that moves his body every 15 minutes. Now, his wife -- a nurse -- doesn't
have to get up every hour to turn him over.

    Still, other, smaller indignities have piled up for the Olneys as Richard
has become trapped inside an increasingly useless body. Even his decades of work
helping others navigate the health care bureaucracy hasn't saved him from
insurance hassles.

    A cherished family painting Olney's mother shipped  before she died was
badly damaged in transit, pitting Paula Olney in a Catch-22 bureaucratic battle
with the shipping company to make good.

    "I'm so mad at God," Paula said, spitting out a bitter laugh, when asked
whether religion played any coping role. "How can he be so mean? This is such a
royal shaft."

    She pauses for a second, gathers her composure. The one-task-at-a-time
coping mechanism that helps them get through the day kicks back in.

    She sighs.

    "All I want to do is get the painting fixed before he dies."

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2005


                             231 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                           February 12, 2005 Saturday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: Lawmaker seeks OK for therapy to help teen

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   U.S. Rep. Ted Strickland will ask the National Institutes of Health to
support an experimental gene therapy procedure in hope of saving a 14-year-old
boy with incurable cancer.

   The congressman is backing the efforts of Dr. Timothy Cripe of Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center to clinically test a virus that is
genetically engineered to attack cancer cells.

   Cripe hopes to enroll Jordan Aron of suburban Youngstown in a clinical trial.
Jordan was diagnosed two years ago with rhabdomyosarcoma, an aggressive
childhood cancer. After he suffered several relapses, doctors at the Cleveland
Clinic and St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., told
Jordan's parents his cancer could not be cured.

   Cripe's efforts to test the modified virus on patients stalled after he lost
sponsorship from a drug company. The NIH has turned down three requests from
Cripe, who had applied to the federal agency for financial assistance and
regulatory approval.

   He said he needs at least $1.7 million to start a clinical trial.

   Researchers say past failures in gene therapy experiments, including the
death of a teen at the University of Pennsylvania, have made it difficult to
move novel therapies from lab to clinic.

   Cripe is planning to resubmit an application March 1 to the NIH's National
Gene Vector Laboratories, which helps researchers develop therapeutic viruses.

   Strickland, a Lucasville Democrat, said Thursday that he will write a letter
to the NIH supporting the application. Wendy Aron, Jordan's mother, had visited
the congressman's district office in Boardman asking for help.

   Experts say a cure is unlikely in a phase I clinical trial, which aims to
establish safety and proper dosing of a new therapeutic. Cripe and Wendy Aron
say it is Jordan's only hope.

   Strickland said safety concerns should not rule out experimentation in
life-or-death cases.

   "I think people who face desperate circumstances should have remedies that
have risks attached to them," he said.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: hspector@plaind.com, 216-999-4543

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2005


                             232 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 10, 2005 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
$1 Million to Be Paid Over Teen's Death in Gene Therapy Study

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE:  PHILADELPHIA

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania and the Children's National Medical Center
have agreed to pay a total of more than $1 million to settle fraud allegations
related to the death of a teenager during a gene therapy experiment.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson died on his fourth day in the study in 1999.

   The teen had suffered from an inherited disorder that blocks the body from
properly processing nitrogen. Researchers had hoped to cure him by injecting him
with a modified virus carrying a gene that could replace the medications and
special diet that had been controlling his condition.

   The Food and Drug Administration concluded that the injection killed him.

   After the death, Gelsinger's family said the teen had been misled about the
experiment's potential risks.

   Federal prosecutors alleged in a civil complaint that researchers should have
discontinued the experiment once they realized it had unacceptable side effects.
They also claimed that researchers had submitted reports to the government
misrepresenting the study's findings.

   Under the settlement, the university will pay the government $517,496. The
Children's National Medical Center will pay $514,622.

   The two institutions have maintained that Gelsinger's death was unforeseen
and that he was properly enrolled in the study based on the best scientific
information available at the time. Neither institution was required to
acknowledge any wrongdoing as part of the settlement.

   Gelsinger family attorney Alan Milstein said the family was "extremely
disappointed" because the agreement did not require the public release of all
documents in the case.

   Releasing the documents would ensure that "real changes could be made in the
way human research is conducted in this country," he said.

   Penn officials said in a statement that in the five years since Gelsinger's
death, they had overhauled their rules for clinical research on human subjects.

   "Out of this tragedy has come a renewed national effort to protect the safety
of those who help to advance new treatments and cures through clinical
research," the statement said.

   Three researchers -- Dr. James M. Wilson, Dr. Mark Batshaw and Dr. Steven
Raper -- also will have restrictions placed on their work. Under the settlement
they do not admit any wrongdoing.

   The settlement requires that Wilson wait until 2010 before again leading
research on humans. He has been barred from involvement in such studies since
2000.

   Batshaw and Raper face lesser restrictions.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005


                             233 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 10, 2005 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 113 words

HEADLINE: National Briefing  Mid-Atlantic: Pennsylvania: Settlement Is Reached
In Fatal Experiment

BYLINE: AP

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania and the Children's National Medical Center
have agreed to pay more than $1 million to settle fraud accusations related to
the death of an 18-year-old during a gene therapy experiment. The teenager,
Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, who had an inherited disorder that blocks the body
from processing nitrogen properly, died on his fourth day in the study in 1999.
Researchers had hoped to cure him by injecting him with a modified virus
carrying a gene that could replace the medications and special diet that had
been controlling his condition. The Food and Drug Administration concluded that
the injection killed him, and the government filed a civil case.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005


                             234 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                    FEBRUARY 10, 2005 Thursday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Hospitals, docs settle with feds in gene-therapy death

BYLINE: JIM SMITH smithjm@phillynews.com

BODY:

   The tragic death in 1999 of 18-year old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene therapy
study at the University of Pennsylvania may have led to reforms that could save
other lives, federal authorities believe.

   Without admitting any wrongdoing in the period leading up to Gelsinger's
death, Penn, Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C. and three
scientists yesterday reached a settlement with the federal government.

   The settlement requires the two institutions to each pay more than $500,000
to the government to settle civil fraud claims in connection with the deadly
gene therapy study.

   It also requires Penn, Children's National and the scientists to ensure that
future studies comply with federal regulations.

   Restrictions, largely monitored by other scientists and independent research
organizations, also have been placed on the individual scientists for periods
ranging from three to five years, at their own cost.

   U.S. Attorney Patrick L. Meehan, the area's top federal lawman, announced the
settlement yesterday in Philadelphia.

   The three scientists are Drs. James Wilson and Steven Raper, of Penn, and
Mark Batshaw, of Children's National.

   Jesse Gelsinger, of Tucson, Ariz., died in September 1999, four days after
undergoing gene therapy at Penn in hopes of curing a liver disorder.

   His was the first gene therapy death in the nation.

   His family later settled a civil case against Penn and other defendants for
an undisclosed sum, reportedly $10 million.

   Meehan said the settlement with the government requires Penn to make
"important changes in the conduct and monitoring of clinical research on human
participants."

   "We hope that these settlements will now serve as a model for similar
research nationwide," added Meehan.

   In a statement issued yesterday, Penn said it began making the changes
shortly after Gelsinger died.

   The changes include "mandatory training of investigators and staff coupled
with a comprehensive internal monitoring program for research involving
volunteers."

   "It's a new way of doing business," said Assistant U.S. Attorney David
Hoffman, the case prosecutor.

   Without the settlements, Hoffman said the government was prepared to sue for
alleged civil fraud in connection with the submission of grant applications,
progress reports and annual reports on the gene therapy study.

   Gelsinger also wasn't properly informed of prior test results as part of the
"informed consent" process, Hoffman contends.

   The gene therapy study was funded by grants from the National Institute of
Health and the Food and Drug Administration. *

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2005


                             235 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                   FEBRUARY 10, 2005 Thursday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1734 words

HEADLINE: Penn to pay $517,000 in gene therapy death;
3 doctors face research restrictions

BYLINE: Susan FitzGerald and Virginia A. Smith INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   More than five years after the death of a teenager in a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, federal law enforcement officials
yesterday announced a $517,000 settlement with Penn and said research
restrictions would be placed on three doctors involved in the case.

   The U.S. Department of Justice said that before the September 1999 death of
Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., false statements and claims were made to
federal regulators about the gene therapy trial, including the misrepresenting
of information that would have halted the experiment.

   Gelsinger's death was the first caused by gene therapy and greatly slowed a
burgeoning field of medicine that seemed to hold great promise for treating and
even curing dozens of diseases. But so far, success has been limited.

   The case raised questions of whether scientists had acted too quickly to move
gene therapy experiments from animals into people, and whether patient
volunteers were fully informed about the risks of unproven therapies.

   In the settlement announced yesterday by U.S. Attorney Patrick L. Meehan, the
government said that James M. Wilson, the Penn researcher who headed the gene
therapy trial, would have restrictions placed on his human research for five
years, but that he would not be barred from doing research on people.

   The government said Wilson would not be allowed to lead any trials regulated
by the Food and Drug Administration for five years, and for three years must
have a designated monitor for any human research.

   The government also said Wilson must be retrained in how to conduct trials
and cannot do more than one human study at a time. Wilson also will be required
to have a monitor for animal research that could influence the safety of human
research.

   Wilson, 49, has not been involved in human research since January 2000,
according to the government. He was considered one of the brightest stars in the
gene therapy field when Gelsinger died after being infused with a batch of
viruses genetically engineered to deliver genes to correct a liver disorder.

   In its settlement, the government placed three-year research restrictions,
including some monitoring, on Steven E. Raper, a Penn gastrointestinal surgeon,
and on Mark L. Batshaw, chief academic officer at Children's National Medical
Center in Washington, who also helped conduct the trial.

   The medical center agreed to pay the government $514,000 to settle the case.
That payment, with Penn's, is double the amount of federal funding that the
researchers received for the gene therapy trial, the government said.

   Jesse Gelsinger's father, Paul Gelsinger of Tucson, yesterday criticized the
settlement, saying there was no "public accountability of what happened here."

   Paul Gelsinger wanted the government to demand a public apology from Wilson
and order the release of all documents in the case. "These doctors were blinded
by the money and blinded by the prestige of what they were doing, and they lost
their perspective," he said.

   Gelsinger, who settled a suit against Wilson, Penn and others in 2000, also
had hoped for an FDA apology. "The FDA was caught flat-footed, and they know it
by what happened to Jesse," said Gelsinger, vice president of an advocacy group,
Citizens for Responsible Care and Research.

   The government said that before Jesse Gelsinger's participation, "the study
had produced toxicities in humans that should have resulted in termination, but
the study continued."

   It said that patient consent forms did not disclose all possible dangers.

   Under the settlement, Penn, Children's National Medical Center, and the three
researchers did not admit to the government's allegations and contended "that
their conduct was at all times lawful and appropriate."

   "Reaching this agreement means that I can continue to devote myself fully and
without restriction to my laboratory research and that I may conduct clinical
research when it would be appropriate for scientific advancement," Wilson said
in a written statement yesterday.

   As part of the settlement, Wilson will publish a "lessons learned" article,
and the Gelsinger family has the right to add comments.

   Penn spokeswoman Lori Doyle said the university would allow Wilson to return
to human research.

   "As this investigation closes, we reaffirm our commitment to the safe conduct
of research, strengthening our resolve to continue to set the highest standards
possible in this important area," Penn said in a statement.

   Children's National Medical Center said in a statement that Batshaw had
learned from his role in the gene therapy experiment, and that he and the
hospital had conducted themselves properly.

   Batshaw, the former physician in chief at Children's Seashore House in
Philadelphia, is a leading authority on the liver disorder targeted by the gene
therapy experiment, a condition called ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency, which causes a dangerous buildup of ammonia in the body. The disease
is treated with diet and drugs, but the hope was that gene therapy could provide
a long-lasting fix.

   Gelsinger, who had a mild form of OTC, died Sept. 17, 1999, from what doctors
believe was a massive revolt by his immune system against the disarmed cold
viruses used to shuttle the corrective genes into his liver.

   After Gelsinger's death, the FDA ordered Penn to halt all the gene therapy
experiments at its Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which Wilson directed. An
FDA investigation into the Gelsinger case found that researchers recruited
patients who may have been too sick to participate; underreported side effects;
and kept FDA regulators and university monitors in the dark about critical
changes in the study.

   The FDA notified Wilson in November 2000 that it was moving to permanently
bar him from human research.

   Wilson was also criticized for potential conflicts of interest because he was
the founder of a biotechnology firm set up to take gene therapy from the
laboratory to the marketplace. His company, Genova Inc., provided about a
quarter of the budget for Penn's gene therapy institute. When Genova was sold in
2000 to Seattle-based Targeted Genetics Corp., Wilson was to receive one million
shares, then worth about $13.5 million.

   In the years since Jesse Gelsinger died, the nation's top medical schools
have instituted tough conflict-of-interest guidelines requiring researchers to
disclose any financial interest they have in patient studies.

   Penn, among its other reforms, started an Office of Human Research to help
ensure patients' safety.

   The National Institutes of Health, which this year will spend about $8.7
billion on research, including gene therapy, has increased the
independent-oversight and reporting requirements for all clinical trials and has
improved language guidelines for patient consent forms.

   Wilson came to Penn in 1993 to lead the university's push into gene therapy.
At the time of Gelsinger's death, the gene institute was overseeing eight
trials.

   Wilson stepped down in 2002 as director of the institute, which is now
defunct, and concentrates on teaching and laboratory and animal research.

   He is working on developing new viral "vectors," which shuttle corrective
genes into the body. He is also working on the development of vaccines against
HIV, SARS and Ebola virus.

   Penn, which has three gene trials under way, is not as heavily vested in gene
therapy as it once was.

   "I still believe that the wise scientific view is that this is a field with
great potential," said Glen Gaulton, Penn's vice dean for research and research
training. "But . . . it has to be very carefully controlled, so it progresses
slowly."

   Katherine A. High, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy, said
the Gelsinger case caused researchers to slow down out of concern that "there
are things maybe we haven't anticipated in the animal data."

   High, a gene therapy researcher in hemophilia at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, has done research with Wilson.

   Amy Patterson, director of the office of biotechnology activities at the
National Institutes, sees the slowdown as a sign that the gene therapy field has
matured. "Gone are the days of a lot of hype," she said. "Now there's a focus on
careful monitoring and careful science."

   Contact staff writer Susan FitzGerald at 215-854-2780 or
sfitzgerald@phillynews.com.

   Online: Read a release about the terms of the settlement at
http://go.philly.com/genetherapy

   Gene Therapy Trials at Penn

   1999

   Sept. 13: Jesse Gelsinger, gets a gene therapy treatment at Penn.

   Sept. 17: Jesse Gelsinger dies.

   Sept. 30: The Penn trial involving 18 patients is halted.

   2000

   Jan. 21: Federal regulators shut down all gene therapy trials at Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy, saying that it lacks proper systems to
guarantee patient safety.

   March 7: Federal regulators announce new measures aimed at better protecting
patients in human gene therapy experiments.

   May 24: Penn says it will dramatically restructure its gene therapy
institute, putting trials under individual investigators in other departments.

   July 12: Federal regulators move on to cite the institute's animal laboratory
with a laundry list of violations.

   Sept. 18: Gelsinger's family sues Penn and others. The case is quickly
settled.

   2001

   Jan. 26: Penn scientists say they have discovered what triggered the massive
immune-system response that killed Gelsinger: the protein coat of the disarmed
cold virus, known as adenovirus, used to shuttle new genes into Gelsinger's
liver.

   2002

   April 20: Wilson steps down as director of Penn's gene therapy institute.

   Settlement Terms

   The government said false statements and claims were made about the gene
therapy experiment. No parties admit guilt.

   PENN will pay $517,496 to settle the case and will provide mandatory training
for all clinical investigators.

   WILSON will not lead FDA-regulated trials until 2010, will do training, and
will be monitored in his human research for three years. He will write a
"lessons learned" journal article, including a statement from the Gelsinger
family.

   Family Reaction

   "We wanted accountability. We wanted admission of responsibility for Jesse's
death, apologies from all parties and open access to all documents. We received
none of those things." Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
Jesse Gelsinger, above, died Sept. 17, 1999.
MICHAEL BRYANT, Staff Photographer
James M. Wilson, left, headed the gene trial.
DAVIS SANDERS, Special to The Inquirer
Paul Gelsinger, father of Jesse Gelsinger, sits on his son's motorcycle and
talks with Penn scientist James Wilson in a photograph from November 1999, just
two months after Jesse Gelsinger's death.
Mark L. Batshaw of Washington faces research restrictions.
Steven E. Raper of Penn also faces restrictions.
CHART
Gene Therapy Trials - The number of gene therapy trials registered with the
National Institutes of Health peaked in 1999, when Jesse Gelsinger died. (The
Philadelphia Inquirer)
Gene Therapy Trials at Penn

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2005


                             236 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 10, 2005 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A03

LENGTH: 525 words

HEADLINE: U.S., Researchers Reach Deal in '99 Gene Therapy Case

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The Justice Department yesterday reached civil settlements with the
physician-researchers who oversaw a 1999 gene therapy experiment that resulted
in the death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger.

   The government had alleged that the research team, led by University of
Pennsylvania gene researcher James M. Wilson, had failed in numerous ways to
protect patients who volunteered for the experiment, which sought to treat a
rare disease by providing them with new genes.

   Among the alleged lapses were repeated failures to halt the experiment when
serious toxicities first arose; failure to fully disclose the study's dangers in
informed-consent documents; and statements falsely suggesting that earlier
patients in the study had benefited from the treatment.

   Under the terms of the settlement, Wilson and his  major collaborators --
Steven E. Raper of Penn and Mark L. Batshaw of Children's National Medical
Center in Washington -- do not admit any wrongdoing. The university and
Children's, which have since strengthened their research oversight, will pay
fines of $517,496 and $514,622, respectively.

   The settlement also requires that Wilson wait until 2010 before again leading
research on humans. He has been barred from involvement in such studies since
2000. In the meantime, he must  undergo training and education relating to
research on human subjects; do his work with enhanced oversight and monitoring;
and lecture on and write an article on "lessons learned."

   Batshaw and Raper face lesser restrictions.

   Gelsinger was 18 when, on Sept. 17, 1999, he became the first person known to
die as a direct result of being treated with gene therapy, a still experimental
approach to curing diseases.

   When the death was  reported that month, Wilson said the fatal reaction was a
surprise. He also denied any financial conflict of interest with regard to the
experiment.

   But investigations by The Washington Post and by the Food and Drug
Administration during the following months revealed multiple scientific and
ethical lapses that undermined those assertions.  Among them were unreported
deaths of monkeys given similar treatments; the failure to inform the FDA, as
required, when patients became so ill from the treatment that, according to FDA
rules, the study should have been suspended; and Wilson's failure to disclose
that a company in which he had a strong financial interest stood to profit if
the treatment was  successful.

    It also came to light that under the study guidelines, Gelsinger was too
sick to get the treatment but was treated anyway.

   After Gelsinger's death, several changes in federal and institutional rules
governing human research were enacted -- a result that his father, Paul
Gelsinger, said yesterday was some consolation. But the government's decision
not to pursue criminal charges or impose stricter penalties was disappointing,
he said.

    "I wanted some accountability, and that's not going to happen," said
Gelsinger, who was reached by telephone.

   In a short  statement released by the university, Wilson neither mentioned
Gelsinger nor expressed remorse, but said he looks  forward to continuing his
research.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005


                             237 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 9, 2005 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A02

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: British to Clone Human Embryos for Stem Cells

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Ian Wilmut, who oversaw the creation of Dolly the sheep, the world's first
cloned mammal, was granted a license yesterday by British regulators to create
cloned human embryos for research.

   It is the second such license granted by the British government in the past
six months and parallels similar recent government actions in Korea and China --
a trend that has some American scientists concerned that the United States is
losing its lead in one of the fastest-paced specialties in biomedical research.

   It is illegal to create cloned human embryos with federal money in the United
States. A few U.S. scientists have recently said they intend to do so with
private money, and California voters recently passed a measure to finance human
embryo cloning and related research with state grants. But congressional
conservatives, bolstered by recent election gains, are gearing up for a renewed
attempt to ban such experiments, casting a chill on the field domestically.

   Wilmut, of the Roslin Institute in Scotland, emphasized that his team will
destroy the cloned embryos within 14 days of their creation and that none will
be allowed to grow into a fetus. The goal, he said, is to grow the embryos as
sources of stem cells, which may hold key secrets about the underpinnings of
various diseases.

   "Once the stem cells are removed for cell culture, the remaining cells will
be destroyed," Wilmut said in a prepared statement. "The embryonic stem cells
that we derive in this way will only be used for research into motor neuron
disease," specifically amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease.

   The plan is to make embryos that are clones, or genetic replicas, of patients
with a family history of Lou Gehrig's -- a disease whose genetic roots remain
largely unknown. Those embryos will be made by taking a single cell from a
patient -- such as a skin cell -- and fusing it with a human egg whose own DNA
has been removed. When stimulated with electricity or chemicals, the fused cells
grow into an embryo genetically identical to the patient.

   Once extracted from those embryos, the stem cells will be treated in a way
that forces them to mature into motor neurons -- the kind of nerves that connect
the brain and spinal cord to muscles and that mysteriously degenerate in Lou
Gehrig's patients.

   The experiments will allow the team to watch the ill-fated neurons develop
and make connections with others in laboratory dishes, providing an
unprecedented view of a disease unfolding at its earliest stages. Wilmut and his
colleagues -- Paul de Sousa of Roslin and Christopher Shaw of Kings College in
London -- also intend to test various experimental drugs on the cultured neurons
to get a quick sense of which ones may be worth pursuing in human studies.

   Experiments involving embryos are regulated in the United Kingdom by a
government body called the Human Fertilization and Embryo Authority. It granted
its first license to clone human embryos in August, giving the green light to
Alison Murdoch of the University of Newcastle. As of late last year, that team
had not succeeded in creating a living colony of stem cells from cloned embryos.

   Murdoch and Wilmut are restricted by the terms of their licenses to using
poor-quality eggs that were not fertilized during infertility treatments -- a
compromise the government imposed to address ethical concerns about the use of
healthy human eggs in experiments.

   In 2004, researchers in South Korea became the first to derive stem cells
from a cloned human embryo, and teams in China have reported similar successes.

   News of the licensure decision in England triggered polarized responses in
the United States.

   "Bravo for the British," said Robert Lanza, vice president for medical and
scientific development at Advanced Cell Technology, a company based in
Worcester, Mass, that pursues stem cell therapies. "It's nice to know some
countries are keeping religion and science separate."

   Richard Doerflinger, director of abortion-opposition activities for the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops, saw things differently.

   "Biologically these embryos will be the twin brothers or sisters of current
patients and will be created only to be destroyed for research," he said.
"You're deliberately bringing developing humans into the world with the disease
so you can harvest their cells and study them."

   Wilmut said he was optimistic that the experiments would lead to therapies
for the incurable disease, but he also warned against hyping the stem cell
approach.

   "We believe we can give hope," he said in an interview, "but new treatments
will be a number of years away."

CORRECTION-DATE: March 3, 2005

CORRECTION:

    A Feb. 9 article incorrectly referred to Richard Doerflinger of the U.S.
Conference of Catholic Bishops as the organization's director of
abortion-opposition activities. Doerflinger's title is deputy director of
pro-life activities.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2005


                             238 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2005 The Oregonian
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            February 7, 2005 Monday
                                SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1019 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS LOOK TO HEAD OFF GENE DOPING BEFORE IT STARTS

BYLINE: RACHEL BACHMAN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: So far, no test can detect the manipulation, which has far-reaching
implications for sports

   For decades, doping in sports has been a mismatched race: the drug-taking
athletes and their agents sprinting in front, sports' governing bodies and their
tests lagging behind.

   The new threat to competitive sports is not a drug. It does not leave
evidence in the bloodstream or urine. Yet it has created super-muscular mice in
lab tests and has athletes and coaches salivating over its potential.

   It is called gene doping, and it could offer athletes an undetectable way to
get ahead.

   The difference this time around is that almost no athletes, if any, have
tried the technique. For once, anti-doping advocates seem to have a head start
on the cheats.

   Today, a few leading researchers will convene at the World Anti-Doping Agency
in Montreal to attack the issue of testing for gene doping, the practice of
introducing specific genes into the body to stimulate muscle growth, metabolism
or endurance.

   On Friday morning, Portland State will play host to a panel discussion on
human genetic enhancement featuring one of the world's leading authorities on
the subject, Dr. Theodore Friedmann. Discussion organizer Gene Fowler, a
geneticist at Oregon Health & Science University, said he hopes the discussion
will further a national conversation on the implications of genetic manipulation
for athletic gain.

   Friedmann, director of the Program in Gene Therapy at UC San Diego, said
society already has accepted treatments such as mood-lifting drugs and plastic
surgery.

   "So the question of course is: If you can improve a human being's performance
in many ways with drugs, why not with genes?" Friedmann said. "What is the
scientific or ethical or policy difference between the two? That, a lot of
people are struggling with."

   What is gene doping?

   Gene transfer involves the delivery of synthetic genes into human cells,
where they become indistinguishable from a person's DNA. Once installed, the
genes can slow muscle atrophy, speed up the body's metabolism or augment the
muscles helpful for certain activities. One study, for instance, produced
genetically altered "marathon mice" able to run an hour longer than unmodified
mice.

   Studies of gene transfer, focusing on its therapeutic potential against
diabetes, muscular dystrophy and other genetically based ailments, have been
around for decades. But in recent years, they have produced dramatic successes.

   Those results have tantalized athletes, who always have thirsted for the next
big advantage.

   H. Lee Sweeney, a physiologist at the University of Pennsylvania, and his
partners treated mice with a synthetic gene that made their muscles grow 15
percent to 30 percent larger than normal, even though the mice were sedentary.
No sooner had Sweeney announced his study results than he was fielding phone
calls from athletes and coaches, he told the Los Angeles Times.

   One high school football coach asked whether Sweeney could inject his players
with the gene that had bulked up the mice.

   The risks

   Human trials in gene therapy have produced mixed results. In 1999,
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died suddenly after undergoing experimental gene
therapy for a metabolic disorder. Although gene therapy successfully has treated
children with the immune-system failure called "bubble-boy disease," it also has
misfired, causing leukemia.

   The danger is that unlike drug therapies, it is difficult to turn off gene
therapy. Once the genes are in the body, they are there to stay.

   "That really again emphasizes the fact that you don't use these tools
frivolously, for anything other than serious disease, and not for tampering with
enhancement kinds of goals," Friedmann said.

   The challenges

   Gene doping is on WADA's list of prohibited substances and methods yet it
remains an irresistible idea to many athletes.

   "Another problem is that the money required to do such work, set up a
laboratory and go in this direction, is not enormous and by athletic standards
is absolute chicken feed," Friedmann said. "So if I were really a rogue and
intent on doing this and evading all the relevant oversight mechanisms, I could
do sort of a ham-fisted, bad job of it.

   "But to do it well and rigorously and carefully and safely in athletes, I
could not."

   Another scheduled panelist for the PSU forum, Maxwell Mehlman, said the
threat of gene doping is another example of sports' losing battle against
humans' attempts to gain an athletic advantage. Mehlman, a professor of
biomedical ethics at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, said catching
doping athletes grows more difficult with each leap in technology.

   "At some point, I think we really have to rethink, 'Is it worth it?' "
Mehlman said. "Ultimately, is it worth it to continue to have the pleasure of
watching people target-practice with muzzleloaders? Or is it time to just say,
'Well, it's just too hard because we can't tell the difference between
muzzleloaders and automatic machine guns anymore without a great deal of too
much effort. So we'll just have shooting.' "

   The future

   Lance Deal, a 1996 Olympic silver medalist in the hammer throw and an
assistant track and field coach at Oregon, said he considers athletes
manipulating themselves to be cheating.

   "If they decided to find something that would cure my defect in my ear so I
could hear on one side . . . yeah. Sure," Deal said. "But that's so I can hear
my daughter. That's not so I can get a silver medal in the Olympics."

   Yet as Sweeney wrote in his story in the July issue of Scientific American,
the 2004 Athens games might have been the last Olympic games without genetically
enhanced athletes.

   Friedmann, the leader of WADA's gene doping panel, said he is confident that
effective, manageable testing methods can be found. But when asked for the
worst-case scenario for gene doping in sports, Friedmann invoked the scandal
involving the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative, implicated in the doping of
numerous high-profile athletes.

   Gene doping, Friedmann said, "is a genetic equivalent of BALCO. It can
happen."

   Rachel Bachman: 503-221-4373; rachelbachman@news.oregonian.com

GRAPHIC: Graphics -- Sidebar/FORUM ON GENE DOPING When: 8:30-11 a.m. Friday. To
attend the 8 a.m. light breakfast, RSVP to 503-725-5642. Where: Room 228,
Multicultural Center, Portland State's Smith Student Union Panelists: Theodore
Friedmann, director, Program in Gene Therapy, UC San Diego; Mari Holden, 2000
Olympic silver medalist, cycling time trial; Maxwell Mehlman, professor of
biomedical ethics, Case Western Reserve University. Entrance: Free and open to
the public.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2005


                             239 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    February 06, 2005, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1709 words

HEADLINE: Planning, funding separate Bayou City from biotech cities;
Houston playing catch-up to regions with a big head start

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER

BODY:

   C.D. "Andy" Anderson recalls seeing few familiar faces among the 10,000
visitors to the world's largest biotechnology conference four years ago in San
Diego.

   That's not to say the strangers were unfriendly. Atlanta officials courted
Anderson, the co-founder of a successful Houston biotech company, Synthecon,
offering tax and real estate incentives to lure him to their city. Although he
declined, the longtime Houston resident says he was disheartened that his
hometown had skipped the conference, missing a chance to signal its interest in
biotechnology.

   "Heck, we were Houston's representation," said the blunt-spoken Anderson, now
retired, of the 2001 BIO conference.

   "If Houston is going to participate in this business, they can't wait for it
to come to them. They're going to have to go out and grab it."

   But the opportunity for Houston to grab its share of the biotechnology
industry may have come and gone.

   In the last 25 years, the biotech industry has matured across the country
from a handful of startups to $ 40 billion in annual revenue. Partly because of
bad luck and partly because of poor organization, Houston is well behind several
U.S. metro areas, say Anderson, some economists and the city's medical leaders.

   Biotechnology companies generally try to capitalize on two key scientific
breakthroughs: the ability to identify and target molecular causes of disease
and the unlocking of human DNA.

   Synthecon sells a "bioreactor," a spinoff from NASA, that cultures a host of
different cells and tissues for laboratory study. Many biotech companies create
machines that further genetic research.  Others develop drugs: In the last 10
years the industry has introduced more than 160 medicines treating conditions
such as cancer and arthritis.

   The industry is enticing to communities because it's mostly environmentally
benign, it creates high-paying jobs and, because it is heavily reliant on basic
research, it attracts federal research funding. Competition has been intense to
become biotech's Silicon Valley.

    Success not a given

    With the Texas Medical Center and its esteemed research institutions,
success with biotechnology would seem a natural fit for Houston.

   Yet a recent Brookings Institution report on biotechnology in the nation's 51
largest metropolitan areas did not list Houston among the country's nine leading
regions. Instead, Houston ranked above average in research activity but well
below average in commercialization.

   "The research institutions that we have in Houston are extremely strong,"
said Dr. C. Thomas Caskey, chairman of the board at Lexicon Genetics, one of the
Houston area's most successful biotech companies. "Out of this research comes
many novel, new ideas. But the transformation of those ideas into companies
needs focus."

   Anderson thinks he knows why Houston ranked as it did.

   Biotechnology requires smart people with good ideas, venture capital to
transform those ideas into a product, and knowledge of the drug- and
medical-device-approval processes to get those products to market.

   In the last 25 years, other communities have subsidized specialized lab space
for new companies; granted land for research parks; and invested in support
staff to help academics put together business plans, identify funding sources
and commercialize their ideas.  These efforts build a nucleus of commercial
biotechnology activity that, in turn, attracts substantial venture capital
funding.

   Houston, Anderson says, has done very little of this, placing its
economic-development bets on sports.

   "While Houston built three major domed stadiums and a trolley between them,
such biotech centers as Seattle and Atlanta have sprung up and grown into
powerhouses," he said.

    Developing industry cluster

    For the region to begin to catch the biotechnology leaders, the industry
must be viewed as critical to a city, much like a baseball team or symphony,
said Dr. Ward Casscells, vice president for biotechnology at the University of
Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

   Casscells knows firsthand the difficulty involved in developing biotechnology
here.

   In late 1999, he founded a company, Volcano Therapeutics, with UT-Houston's
president, James Willerson, and a cardiologist, Dr.  Morteza Naghavi. Volcano
creates medical devices to diagnose and treat plaque buildup in arteries.

   After an unsuccessful search for a local management team and speaking with
more than two dozen venture capital firms, one agreed to provide funding if
Volcano moved to California, near the firm.  It did, and today Volcano posts $
60 million in annual revenue, Casscells said.

   "Unfortunately, though it had Houston roots, it's not a Houston company
anymore," he said. "It's a pity."

   Casscells said he thinks the lack of nearby biotechnology companies hurt
efforts to keep Volcano here. About 90 percent of companies fail, so if an
executive or researcher takes a job and the technology flops, it's important to
have other job options in the same community.

   The development of a biotechnology cluster requires this networking and
critical mass, said Dr. John Mendelsohn, president of the University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center. He witnessed it firsthand in San Diego in the late
1970s and early 1980s.

   Mendelsohn led the cancer research department at the University of California
at San Diego, where the founder of one of the world's first biotech companies,
Hybritech, worked. The company, created in 1978, was sold less than a decade
later to Eli Lilly & Co. for $ 400 million.

   "That was a real bellwether," Mendelsohn said. "The idea became clear that
you could make a lot of money by starting a biotech company if you had something
good."

   After the sale, Hybritech alumni created new bioscience companies in the San
Diego region, started venture capital funds with their money or went to work for
other biotech companies, Mendelsohn said.

   A similar phenomenon happened with Biogen in Boston and Genentech in San
Francisco.

   "I watched a cross-feeding occur in the late 1970s and the early 1980s,"
Mendelsohn said. "That's a 25-year head start, but I don't see Houston as a
hopeless situation at all. We've just got a late start."

   It's no accident, then, that Boston, San Francisco and San Diego are the
leading centers of biotechnology today.

   In 2001, each had more than 30 companies with at least 100 employees. At the
same point, according to the Institute for Biotechnology Information, Houston
had five such companies.

   The Houston area does have several large genetic companies - Lexicon has more
than 700 employees - but it has yet to grow a company that rivals the largest
biotech companies.

   "If Genentech had been in Houston, I think that we'd be having a completely
different conversation today," said Jacqueline Northcut Waugh, president and
chief executive of BioHouston, an organization created to increase Houston's
biotechnology competitiveness.

   "I call them the home-run companies because they can do everything to put you
on the map."

   Waugh said Houston had representation at BIO 2001 but admits it was just part
of a small Texas booth. She said the city will have a much larger presence at
this year's BIO, in Philadelphia in June.

    Research funding's role

    The Brookings study published in 2002 also emphasized the importance of
creating a cluster to ignite a biotechnology industry.

   In the 1990s, study co-author Joseph Cortright said, the nine regions
identified as biotechnology leaders increased their share of activity even as
their overall share of federal research funding declined because the money was
spread more widely.

   Before 1980, 61 percent of new biotech firms were created in these nine
markets. In the 1990s, Cortright found that 77 percent of biotech companies were
created in those markets.

   It's not hard to see why, he said. About 92 percent of biotechnology venture
capital was spent in the nine markets during the 1990s.

   "These few centers account for a bigger share of biotechnology now than they
did a decade ago," said Cortright, vice president of Impresa Inc., a Portland,
Ore.-based economics consulting firm. "We take that as very strong evidence that
your chances of succeeding are better if you're in a place where there are a lot
of other biotech companies. So do venture capital companies.

   "Houston is probably about 30 years too late."

    Signs of hope

    Waugh agrees that much of the growth has been in the other stronger regions
but disagrees that Houston is too far behind to become a biotech capital.

   Because of the Texas Medical Center and its large patient base to study and
test genetic therapies, and the state's growing share of federal research
funding, Waugh thinks Texas can be the exception to Cortright's conclusion.

   She noted the biotechnology industry in Houston has grown 19 percent a year,
about the same as California a decade ago.

   Other hopeful signs abound. Plans were recently renewed for a biotech
research park near the Texas Medical Center after it was scrapped in 2001
because of a lack of political consensus. Now the project will be led by the UT
system and use public and private money.

   Mayor Bill White and the new Greater Houston Partnership chairman, Jodie
Jiles, have also expressed interest in helping the biotech community, Waugh
said.

   And Gov. Rick Perry has proposed creating an emerging-technology fund that
would allocate $ 300 million to encourage universities to collaborate, match
federal research grants and attract research programs to the area. However, life
sciences is just one of six technologies the program is slated to support.
Others include computers and nanotechnology.

   If Houston has an opportunity to increase its biotechnology stature,
Casscells and other scientists say, nanotechnology - the science of building
very small materials on the atomic scale - may provide the opening.

   With Rice University, Houston has one of the world's leading institutions for
nanotechnology research and funding. And because the commercialization of
nanotechnology is at the stage biotech was about two decades ago, scientists say
it's not too late.


GRAPHIC: Photo: 1. CRITIC: C.D. "Andy" Anderson, the retired founder of Houston
biotech company Synthecon, says the city has done very little to nurture growth
in his industry, instead placing its economic-development bets on sports (p.
14); Graph: 2. MISSING THE BIOTECH BONANZA (p. 14); 1. BRETT COOMER: CHRONICLE,
2. ROBERT DIBRELL: CHRONICLE, Source: The Brookings Institution

NOTES: eric.berger@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2005


                             240 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            February 6, 2005 Sunday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1463 words

HEADLINE: Awaiting a cancer cure;
Mother's last hope is experimental gene therapy for her son

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   The tangerine-sized tumor pushing out from Jordan Aron's jaw hides the
reddish-pink scar from his third and most recent cancer surgery.

   In July, doctors cut a flap from beneath the 14-year-old's right upper jaw to
his chin. They took out a tumor and a piece of jaw, repairing the latter with
bone from the boy's fibula.

   The cancer roared back in a matter of months, just as it did before.

   Jordan didn't understand what it meant when they said two years ago he had
rhabdomyosarcoma, a fast-growing childhood cancer.

   "I thought it was like a cold or something," he said, sitting at the edge of
his bed on another day of missed school in Boardman, a Youngstown suburb.

   He speaks in a low, fragile voice. "I didn't think it would last this long."

   In October, doctors at the Cleveland Clinic and at St. Jude's Children's
Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn., where he underwent experimental
chemotherapy, told Jordan's parents his cancer was incurable.

   The next step was comfort care, then hospice.

   Wendy Aron, Jordan's 46-year-old mother, said no.

   "I can't give up," she said. "They [doctors] try their best, but it's not an
exact science. They're not God."

   She is fighting for an experimental gene therapy treatment at Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center. Aron knows her son doesn't have much time.
But she finds her desperation counts for little when it comes to moving such a
new and unproven therapy from lab to clinic.

   Cancer researchers are in early stages of human testing of common viruses
genetically engineered to infiltrate and kill cancer cells.

   Designer viruses might one day cure tumors that don't respond to chemotherapy
or radiation.

   Dr. Timothy Cripe, a cancer specialist at Cincinnati Children's, hopes to
study an altered form of the herpes simplex virus in pediatric cancer patients.

   In experiments in lab mice, the virus obliterates malignant tumors, according
to Cripe's latest research published online by the journal Cancer Gene Therapy.

   Success in animals doesn't necessarily translate to humans.

   But Cripe says the herpes virus appears particularly suited for
rhabdomyosarcoma, which in most children responds to conventional cancer
treatment.

   Aron begged the doctor to inject the virus into Jordan's tumor.

   Cripe is at least $1.7 million and several regulatory hurdles away from human
testing. He has found that winning financial support and government clearance is
tricky business.

   Drug companies have pulled back in the once-booming arena of gene therapy.

   Cripe lost sponsorship from a California biopharmaceutical company and has
been turned down three times by various offices of the National Institutes of
Health, the federal agency that charts the course for biomedical research.

   Scientists say moving promising gene therapies forward is hampered by
problems of the 1990s, including the death of an 18-year-old in a questionable
trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The government set up more layers of red tape with an eye toward patient
safety, and researchers say federal grants are tougher to come by.

   Fewer proposed clinical trials are going before an NIH advisory board.

   The panel reviewed 173 protocols from 2002 to 2004, a 25 percent drop from
the previous three years.

   "An enormous amount of money was spent on trials that were not successful, so
now there's a backlash," said Dr. Mark Kay, head of human gene therapy at
Stanford University. Kay said that even with industry support, it took him four
years to test a hemophilia treatment in eight patients.

   The medical journal Clinical Cancer Research devoted a recent editorial to
the sluggish pace of moving innovations to clinical trial. "We need to
streamline the cascade of reviews and approvals required for initiating new
protocols. . . . " the journal said.

   Dr. Kenneth Tanabe of Massachusetts General Hospital won project support from
the NIH several years ago to test the same virus that Cripe is using, in
patients with liver cancer. But delays producing the virus under the government
program have stalled his clinical trial.

   "We should have it in three months," said Tanabe. "If you would have asked me
a year ago, I would have said the same thing. If you asked me a year before
that, I would have said the same thing."

   The cost of manufacturing a clinical-grade virus to Food and Drug
Administration standards - just to conduct a safety trial in a few patients -
can easily exceed $1 million.

   The NIH, in some cases, assumes production costs for researchers who lack
industry support.

   An NIH committee that reviewed Cripe's application said his preliminary data
was encouraging. But reviewers wrote that Cripe's experience with gene therapy
and the data from his studies fell short.

   After the sponsoring drug company pulled out, Cripe found another virus. Dr.
Antonio Chiocca, an Ohio State University brain cancer specialist and chairman
of neurosurgery, holds the patent. But Cripe is on his own to manufacture the
modified herpes virus.

   Chiocca said clinical trials have shown viral therapies are safe.

   "The main problem right now is concern over gene therapy," Chiocca said,
referring to hoops researchers must jump through. "The second problem is no
interest from pharmaceutical companies."

   Dr. Kenneth Cornetta of the NIH's National Gene Vector Laboratories said it's
too early to say whether heightened standards for clinical trials are paying
off.

   "We made these changes and now it's time to see, are we protecting patients?"
Cornetta said.

   Cripe responded point by point to the Gene Vector Laboratories' rejection of
his application. He says he is ready to test the virus, called RRP450, in the
first patients.

   Explaining the holdup in a letter to Wendy Aron, Cripe wrote: "The project
apparently does not rank as high enough priority for government funding. The
company does not want to try such a new therapy in children or in such rare
types of cancers that aren't a big 'market' for them."

   Aron told Cripe she would help raise the money.

   In Boardman, where she grew up, Aron sent out fund-raising letters in
December. Response around town has been strong. A local Presbyterian church is
planning a bowlathon, and the family's synagogue is hosting a spaghetti dinner.

   Cripe set up a charitable fund to help pay for a clinical trial.

   The doctor is trying to buy Jordan time with new cancer drugs that are FDA
approved for adults but unproven in children. The drugs include an antibody
designed to inhibit blood vessels that feed tumors.

   Most Tuesdays, Aron, her husband, George, and Jordan drive four hours to
Cincinnati for treatment.

   Cripe said he was scolded by a previous doctor of Jordan's, who believed the
boy should be receiving end-of-life comfort care at home.

   "I've thought a lot about this," Cripe said in an interview. "I do think it's
important to offer hope. I don't think it's false hope. You never know if the
thing that's going to help a patient is right around the corner."

   During a treatment session in mid-January, Jordan eased off his size-10
Reeboks and slid onto a hospital bed. A nurse hooked up an IV drip to a
surgically implanted port in his chest.

   Cripe told Jordan's parents he didn't know if the cancer was still growing or
whether accumulating fluid was making the tumor larger. The malignancy protrudes
from his jaw and temple. An MRI scheduled this week will tell Cripe what is
happening.

   "The last MRI, there was a huge amount of fluid in there," Cripe told the
couple.

   "Let's just leave it at that," Wendy Aron said, not wishing to discuss the
other possibility.

   Cripe is consulting with surgeons in New York, Baltimore, Pittsburgh and Los
Angeles about another operation for Jordan. The risks would be high, requiring
doctors to remove his jaw and graft a new internal carotid artery.

   "It's a big deal and I'm nervous about it," Cripe said.

   Jordan is pale and dropping weight. His mother rides him about not eating,
drinking or getting out enough. She insisted on a recent afternoon that he go
with her to pick up Jordan's younger sister at school.

   Jordan grimaced. He said he was tired.

   Another afternoon, after barely touching his tuna melt and fries, he sat
quietly in a comfortable chair, wearing an Old Navy fleece that seemed oversized
on his 95-pound frame.

   His mother talked. "I'm just not going to give up on him," she said, before
shifting the conversation to her frustration. "What's going on here? People
raising money to help doctors fight disease? Why isn't there enough money for
that? Why?"

   Jordan looked down at Angel, the family Malti-Poo perched on his lap. He
gently twirled her fur between his fingers, saying nothing.

   A fund has been established to help pay for Dr. Timothy Cripe's clinical
trial: CancerFree Kids/Jordan Fund, P.O. Box 575, Loveland, Ohio 45140 To reach
this Plain Dealer reporter: hspector@plaind.com, 216-999-4543

   The following fields overflowed:

   BYLINE = Story by Harlan Spector Photographs by Dale Omori The Plain Dealer

GRAPHIC: Photographs by Dale Omori The Plain Dealer / Jordan Aron, 14, recovers
in his bedroom in Boardman, outside Youngstown, from a chemotherapy session in
Cincinnati.
DALE OMORI THE PLAIN DEALER At Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, a
nurse prepares to infuse antibodies to fight Jordan's cancer into a surgically
implanted port in his chest. Jordan's parents and Dr. Timothy Cripe hope to beat
back Jordan's cancer while Cripe seeks financing and regulatory approval for a
gene therapy trial.
DALE OMORI THE PLAIN DEALER Dr. Timothy Cripe examines Jordan during a recent
treatment session in Cincinnati. "It looks like it's growing a little more,"
Cripe told Jordan's parents about the tumor.
DALE OMORI THE PLAIN DEALER Dr. Timothy Cripe talks to George and Wendy Aron
about seeking another surgery for Jordan, possibly in Pittsburgh. Removing the
tumor would be a risky operation.
PHOTOGRAPHS BY DALE OMORI THE PLAIN DEALER At Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, a nurse prepares to infuse antibodies to fight Jordan's cancer
into a surgically implanted port in his chest. Jordan's parents and Dr. Timothy
Cripe hope the treatment will beat back his cancer while Cripe seeks financing
and regulatory approval for a gene therapy trial. Dr. Timothy Cripe examines
Jordan during a recent treatment session in Cincinnati. "It looks like it's
growing a little more," Cripe told Jordan's parents about the tumor. Dr. Timothy
Cripe talks to George and Wendy Aron about seeking another surgery for Jordan,
possibly in Pittsburgh. Removing the tumor would be a risky operation.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2005


                             241 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2005 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            February 6, 2005 Sunday
                               THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: Neurologist is diagnosed with disease he fought

BYLINE: BY PAUL ELIAS The Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   The shocking self-diagnosis dawned slowly but inevitably on Dr. Richard
Olney, a top neurologist who dedicated his career to helping those afflicted
with the fatal Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Three surgeries to relieve a compressed disk in his back didn't solve the
weakness that started in his right knee and spread to both legs. When his arms
started to fail, he knew he was in the grips of a neurological disorder. Then
his worst fears were realized: He had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

   "I expected to live into my 80s like my parents did," said Olney, struggling
to get his words out through an amplifier resting on his lap in his motorized
wheelchair at the University of California at San Francisco. "But I've done more
in my 56 years than most people have done in their whole life. I can't complain
too much."

   Olney resigned last year as head of the university's renowned ALS center,
which he'd founded in 1993, turning it over to his protégé Dr. Cathy
Lomen-Hoerth. But he's not giving up his struggle against the disease, which
mystifies experts today as much as it did when New York Yankee slugger Lou
Gehrig died of it in 1941.

   Olney has signed on as the first human subject in a trial of two drugs that
slowed the disease's progress in mice, and he's also using the time he has left
to raise awareness and money to combat ALS.

   Olney was famous for spending countless hours counseling patients, and that
spirit lives on at the ALS center. Lomen-Hoerth said she tries to summon the
same soothing words and advice as she attends to her own patients, who now
include Olney.

   UCSF has set up a fund in Olney's name and he intends to continue his public
campaigning until his strength gives out. Olney's health has rapidly declined
since he was diagnosed in June.

   The latest technologies seem promising, but breakthroughs will probably come
too late for Olney. He knows this, and has made peace with it.

   "In the last few months, I haven't felt very sad," he said.

   "He spent his life trying to make a difference in this disease," his wife of
30 years, Paula, said as Olney slowly worked his legs in UCSF's specialized gym.
"If this is the way it has to be done . . . we'll keep doing this until Rick no
longer can. It's what he wants to do."

   ===

   He spent his life trying to make a difference in this disease. If this is the
way it has to be done . . . well keep doing this until Rick no longer can. Its
what he wants to do. Paula Olney, wife of ALS researcher Dr. Richard Olney

   Neurologist is diagnosed with the disease he fought

   THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Dr. Richard Olney, a researcher of Lou Gehrigs disease
at the University of California at San Francisco, does upper body ergometry. Hes
been diagnosed with ALS and has volunteered to be the first human to test two
experimental drugs.

   BY PAUL ELIAS The Associated Press SAN FRANCISCO --

   The shocking self-diagnosis dawned slowly but inevitably on Dr. Richard
Olney, a top neurologist who dedicated his career to helping those afflicted
with the fatal Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Three surgeries to relieve a compressed disk in his back didnt solve the
weakness that started in his right knee and spread to both legs. When his arms
started to fail, he knew he was in the grips of a neurological disorder. Then
his worst fears were realized: He had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

   "I expected to live into my 80's like my parents did," said Olney, struggling
to get his words out through an amplifier resting on his lap in his motorized
wheelchair at the University of California at San Francisco. "But I've done more
in my 56 years than most people have done in their whole life. I can't complain
too much."

   Olney resigned last year as head of the university's renowned ALS center,
which hed founded in 1993, turning it over to his protégé Dr. Cathy
Lomen-Hoerth. But he's not giving up his struggle against the disease, which
mystifies experts today as much as it did when New York Yankee slugger Lou
Gehrig died of it in 1941.

   Olney has signed on as the first human subject in a trial of two drugs that
slowed the diseases progress in mice, and hes also using the time he has left to
raise awareness and money to combat ALS.

   Olney was famous for spending countless hours counseling patients, and that
spirit lives on at the ALS center. Lomen-Hoerth said she tries to summon the
same soothing words and advice as she attends to her own patients, who now
include Olney.

   UCSF has set up a fund in Olney's name and he intends to continue his public
campaigning until his strength gives out. Olney's health has rapidly declined
since he was diagnosed in June.

   "He spent his life trying to make a difference in this disease," his wife of
30 years, Paula, said as Olney slowly worked his legs in UCSFs specialized gym.
"If this is the way it has to be done . . . well keep doing this until Rick no
longer can. It's what he wants to do."

   Some 30,000 Americans currently have ALS, a small number when compared to
other brain diseases. But that's because ALS typically kills quickly, often
within a year or two after diagnosis. (Astrophysicist Stephen Hawking, who was
diagnosed with the disease 40 years ago, is a notable exception.)

   About 10,000 new cases are diagnosed every year. And while about 10 percent
of the cases have genetic roots, its not known how the other 90 percent occur.
The disease isnt contagious, so Olney didn't get it from one of his patients.

   With ALS, only the brain cells that control muscles die. The intellect
remains intact even as the disease immobilizes the victim's body.

   "That's the internal horror for all of us working in ALS and who know Rick,"
said Jeffrey Rothstein, a Johns Hopkins University ALS researcher who spoke at a
December symposium held in Olney's honor. "ALS and pancreatic cancer are
probably the two worst diseases you can have."

   There's no real treatment for ALS. The one drug approved by federal
regulators extends life by a few months for some. Rothstein is among a handful
of researchers developing possible treatments using gene therapy. Later this
year, he and his colleagues hope to test in humans a common virus theyve
engineered to carry a gene that produces a growth factor directly to the brain
and spinal cord. This technique significantly extended the lives of
ALS-afflicted mice. Rothstein and others also hope to turn stem cells into
replacement brain cells.

   The latest technologies seem promising, but breakthroughs will probably come
too late for Olney. He knows this, and has made peace with it.

   "In the last few months, I haven't felt very sad," he said.

NOTES:  Note: A shorter version of this article appeared in the FIVE STAR LIFT
Edition, page A05.

GRAPHIC: photo
 Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS -  Dr. Richard Olney, a researcher of Lou
Gehrig's disease at the University of California at San Francisco, has
volunteered to be the first human to test two experimental drugs.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2005


                             242 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 3, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 826 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFS

BODY:

   Oil prices decline on supply   Crude oil futures fell below $47 a barrel as
the U.S. government's latest petroleum report showed an unexpected rise in
gasoline inventories and a surprising decline in the nation's oil supply.

   While the drop in crude supplies had placed some upward pressure on prices,
traders said momentum was reversed by forecasts calling for warmer weather.

   The benchmark crude oil contract for March delivery fell 43 cents, to settle
at $46.69 per barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.

   Brent crude fell 81 cents, to settle at $44.01 a barrel on the International
Petroleum Exchange.

    Ex-WorldCom directors' deal breaks down

   A deal in which 10 former WorldCom directors would personally pay $18 million
of a $54 million settlement to compensate investors over the company's plunge
into bankruptcy will be withdrawn, plaintiffs said yesterday.

    New York State Comptroller Alan Hevesi, the lead plaintiff, announced the
plaintiffs were pulling out of the deal after U.S. District Judge Denise Cote
struck down a key component of the agreement yesterday.

    Harrah's profit doubles

   Profit more than doubled in the fourth quarter for Harrah's Entertainment as
the world's largest gambling company beat Wall Street expectations, despite a
lengthy strike in Atlantic City.

   For the three months ending Dec. 31, Harrah's earned nearly $77 million, or
68 cents per share, up from $35.4 million, or 32 cents a share, a year ago.

   Fourth-quarter results included contributions from the three Horseshoe
casinos that Harrah's bought last year and the sale of properties in Illinois
and Mississippi.

   Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had predicted earnings of 66 cents a
share.

   GE pulls out of Iran

   General Electric, which has been accused of collecting "blood money" by doing
business in Iran, will stop accepting any new orders for business in the
country, company officials said.

   The move by the world's largest company by market value comes just days after
another conglomerate, Halliburton, announced the company will wind down its
operations in Iran.

   "We're seeing a turnaround by a number of U.S. companies operating in Iran,"
said Dan Katz, chief counsel to U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J).

   Government assumes pensions for US Airways

   The federal Pension Benefit Guaranty Corp. formally assumed responsibility
for three pension plans terminated by bankrupt US Airways that provide benefits
to more than 51,000 workers and retirees.

   The PBGC estimates the cost of administering the canceled plans will be $2.3
billion. That is in addition to a $726 million claim in 2003, when US Airways
terminated the pension plan for its pilots.

   The $3 billion collective cost of the terminated pension plans at US Airways
is second only to Bethlehem Steel ($3.7 billion) in terms of the liability it
imposed on the PBGC.

   Fiat, GM wrestle over auto unit

   Fiat said it failed to settle with General Motors about an option to force
the U.S. giant to buy its ailing auto unit, raising the prospect of a legal
battle.

    The announcement came at the end of a period of mediation that began Dec.
16, with Fiat stating it can now force GM to buy Fiat - a contention GM
disputes. It was bad news for Fiat, analysts say, as it creates uncertainty and
blocks the company from moving ahead with turnaround plans.

   In a statement, the Turin-based auto maker said the option - part of a 2000
agreement that says the Italian company has the right to sell its car business
to GM - could be exercised from Wednesday until July 24, 2010.

    Scrushy subordinate testifies

   With earnings sagging at HealthSouth, then-chief executive Richard Scrushy
ordered aides to continue a huge fraud because he planned to sell $100 million
in stock and "didn't want to get sued," a former finance chief testified.

   The ex-chief financial officer, Bill Owens, also described Scrushy as a
master salesman who ruled with fear and intimidation that was great enough to
make others go along with a scam prosecutors have described as a $2.7 billion
earnings overstatement.

   And finally . . .

     CVS, the nation's biggest drug store chain, said its earnings rose 12.2
percent in the fourth quarter as sales increased nearly 20 percent, driven by
its July acquisition of part of the Eckerd drug store chain. . . .  Allstate,
the nation's second-largest personal lines insurer, said fourth-quarter earnings
rose 50.1 percent, due in part to a 58 percent boost in Allstate Protection's
overall underwriting income.. . Shares of  Alnylam Pharmaceuticals rose as much
as 7 percent after an investment bank upgraded the stock, saying the company has
reduced the risk associated with RNA-based gene therapies and is likely to lead
the development of such therapies going forward. . . .   Blockbuster said it has
bid more than $1.3 billion, or $14.50 a share, for Hollywood Entertainment. The
offer, for $11.50 in cash and $3 a share of Blockbuster Class A stock, will
begin tomorrow, Blockbuster said. - Star-Ledger wire services

GRAPHIC: 1. A report showing a rise in gas inventories put pressure on oil
prices.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             243 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            January 30, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ARTS & SOCIETY; The Argument; Pg. 8E

LENGTH: 1238 words

HEADLINE: TIME PIECES;
Pop culture references can render a work outdated before it's published -- but
good novelists can use a historical moment to enhance a wider theme.

BYLINE: Joan Mellen, Special to the Sun

BODY:

   Serious fiction supposedly avoids gratuitous pop references certain to be
incomprehensible to readers 50 years hence, whether to gangsta rap or Britney
Spears. Topical touchstones may comfort the reader with the pleasures of the
familiar, but they earn, it is assumed, no place in art.

   No writer depends upon the topical more than Tom Wolfe. Enlisting what has by
now become his modus operandi, Wolfe peppers his current best seller, I Am
Charlotte Simmons, with faddish buzz words like "globalization." His college
basketball coaches search for "the Great White Hope" ("another Larry Bird,
another Jerry West, another Pistol Pete Maravich").

   Mired in pop, Wolfe's book takes on an aura of deja vu. Upon publication, it
seemed already out of date, like a basketball player arriving a fraction too
late to make the play. Wolfe's gluttonous surfeit of the ephemeral makes the
case against the topical.

   Yet topical references have been found in fiction since Don Quixote.
Cervantes inveighs against novelists who launch a "jumble" of "bits and pieces"
of historical reality, even as he refers to a recent war between Spain and
Turkey, in which he took part and was injured, and to long-forgotten operas of
the early 17th century. He even mentions the name of a living Zaragoza theater
manager.

   The dense social reality of Balzac includes the name of an actual Paris chief
of police; in Madame Bovary, Flaubert refers to the Lyon river flooding in 1840
and to an actual award ceremony for the local peasants, witnessed by Emma and
her lover, Rudolph. Tolstoy in Anna Karenina includes heated disputes over the
Russo-Turkish war of 1877 where Vronsky meets his fate. Hard truths soar outside
of time, but the incidentally topical, shorthand for an epoch, is an
indispensable tool of fiction.

   Among young novelists today, Jonathan Lethem has embraced the topical. With
Dickens' Bleak House as his admitted model, Lethem assumed the risk of including
documentary material that might date The Fortress of Solitude. "I wanted to
bring a time capsule to the book," Lethem has remarked, arguing that the
multiplicity of popular references created texture. The "time capsule" made the
book harder to read for people from outside New York City or in foreign
countries. Yet only with these pop references could he bring "a world back to
life."

   As foreshadowing

   In the hands of a master such as Cuban author Guillermo Cabrera Infante, pop
references demand equal time with the ostensibly serious issues of Communism,
civil rights and the fate of Cuba. Three Trapped Tigers is rich in specifics,
including old-time American movie stars from "Beddy" Davis, John Garfield and
Ronald Colman to Nina Foch and Alice Faye. The putative distinction between high
art and popular fiction dissolves as the "Sierra" refers not only to the place
where the guerrilleros are amassed, but also to B. Traven's and John Huston's
The Treasure of Sierra Madre as well as to a Havana nightclub. The topical
offers a surreptitious means of asserting the writer's freedom in a society
about to be submerged in repression, the political foreshadowing that colors
this entire novel.

   Sometimes the topical is rooted in the story itself, as in Margaret Drabble's
recent novel, The Red Queen: A Transcultural Tragi-comedy. The misfortunes of an
18th-century Korean crown princess can be navigated, Drabble shows, only with
the aid of 21st-century concepts: postnatal depression, multiculturalism,
anorexia, obsessive compulsive disorders, diseases of the immune system, and
paranoid schizophrenia. Timelessness is of no benefit to storytelling. Only the
landscape we know, from Amazon.com to global harmony and gene therapy, can
illuminate the narratives of the past.

   The risk for a novelist occurs when the entire work resides in the topical,
as in T.C. Boyle's The Inner Circle, the story of Dr. Alfred Kinsey as told by
one of his victim-investigators. Topicality here becomes not a mere background
of pop references, although some of these are present, from the Lone Ranger to
the Chiquita Banana jingle. Rather, the topical enters the foreground. Boyle's
novel examines how cultural premises, topical and seemingly faddish in one
historical epoch, can become wisdom in another. Meanwhile in the midst of a
discussion among his assistants of Midway, Guadal-canal, the atomic bomb or the
latest scrap drive, Kinsey demands that they turn their attention away from the
ephemeral to his obsessive quest for scientific data about sexual behavior, for
truths residing outside of time.

   As smokescreen

   Philip Roth's latest novel, The Plot Against America, approaches topicality
obliquely. Seemingly a speculation about how America would have been affected
had Charles Lindbergh been elected president in 1940, The Plot Against America
becomes an allegory of the coming of fascism to America in the early 21st
century. Despite Roth's disclaimer in The New York Times that his novel is not
"a roman a clef to the present moment in America," it is exactly that until
nearly the end. As D.H. Lawrence wrote: "Never trust the artist. Trust the tale.
The proper function of a critic is to save the tale from the artist who created
it."

   Correspondences with the Bush regime in The Plot Against America are glaring.
An Office of American Absorption is much like those ersatz government agencies
of the new century. Lindbergh was elected "in a fair and free election," Roth
observes ironically, referring to the 2000 general election with its attendant
voting ambiguities. Roth's "Homestead 42" is too close to "Homeland Security"
for his disclaimer not to have been made tongue in cheek. His depiction of the
collusion of major corporations, such as Metropolitan Life, with the
government's plan in his novel to relocate the Jews in their employ, parallels
the present government's incestuous relationship with big business.

   Roth's Walter Winchell, Lindbergh's electoral opponent, is silent and passive
about "Homestead 42," as were the Democrats in relation to the Patriot Act and
to such appointments as those of John Ashcroft and Porter Goss, among others.
The corporations, Winchell does point out, will be "rewarded in giveaway tax
breaks by Lindbergh's Republican henchmen in the next pro-greed Congress."
Meanwhile "religious intolerance emanat[es] from the White House." We are in the
presence of parody.

   Roth's exposure of the creeping fascism of the Patriot Act and Homeland
Security's outreach into private lives may account for the failure of The Plot
Against America even to be nominated for a National Book Award. Another glaring
omission was Russell Banks' brilliant The Darling with its exposure of the
institutionalized corruption of America's ally, Liberia.

   That the topical is dangerous points to its necessity. As they perceptively
eviscerate received wisdom, politically topical novels by authors as powerful as
Roth and Banks challenge complacency. Unlike Tom Wolfe, they invoke the topical
in the service of wider themes, rather than, as Wolfe does, allowing pop
references to stand as ends in themselves. They share with Balzac and Stendhal
the understanding that the novelist's responsibility is to engage the historical
moment of the reader's own time. They herald that the novel today, far from
languishing in eclipse, remains an arena for courage and moral commitment.

   Joan Mellen teaches in the graduate program in creative writing at Temple
University in Philadelphia.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION(S)
 SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2005


                             244 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                           January 27, 2005 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: THERSDAY; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: CASTING OUCH On screen, at least, these celebs get to seem smart

BYLINE: BY BEN WIDDICOMBE

BODY:

   Take a pretty young actor, add black-rimmed glasses, and you have an instant
intellectual. Now that Pam Anderson's new TV show "Stacked" is set in a
bookstore/coffee shop and Tara Reid's got a breakthrough role as an academic
with a photographic memory, we revisit some of our favorite B-list brainiacs.

   TARA REID

   The movie: "Alone in the Dark"

   The character: Brilliant anthropologist Aline Cedrac

   You know she's smart because: She carries a clipboard and has her hair in a
bun.

   Movie FEAR: Evil demons, back from ancient times, are going to destroy the
world.

   Real-life FEAR: A life of partying in the public spotlight is going to
destroy her image. "I don't want to be the drunk girl," said Tara once.

   RYAN PHILLIPPE

   THE MOVIE: "Cruel Intentions"

   The character: Preppy brainiac Sebastian Valmont

   You know he's smart because: He wears a smoking jacket and glasses while
reading big leather-bound books.

   MOVIE QUOTE: "I'm sick of sleeping with these insipid Manhattan

   debutantes. Nothing shocks them anymore."

   REAL-LIFE QUOTE: (to wife Reese Witherspoon while presenting an Academy
Award) "You open it. You make more money than I do."

   DENISE RICHARDS

   THE MOVIE: "The World Is Not Enough"

   THE CHARACTER: Nuclear physicist Dr. Christmas Jones

   YOU KNOW SHE'S SMART BECAUSE: She wears a business suit with her hair pulled
back.

   IN THE MOVIE: James Bond: "What do I need to defuse a nuclear bomb?"
Christmas Jones: "Me."

   IN REAL LIFE: Was a high-school cheerleader nicknamed "Fluffy Girl"; posed
for Playboy and People, naked and with newborn baby, respectively.

   SAFFRON BURROWS

   The movie: "Deep Blue Sea"

   The character: Marine biologist Dr. Susan McCallister

   You know she's smart because: She wears a white lab coat.

   Movie quote: "Their brains weren't large enough to harvest sufficient amounts
of the protein complex.

   So we violated the Harvard Compact. Gemini used gene therapies to increase
their brain mass ... as a side effect the sharks got smarter."

   And then: The sharks chase her around the lab in her wet underwear.

GRAPHIC: COLUMBIA PICTURES/ZUMA PRESS SHARP SHOOT: Ryan Phillippe has all
"Intentions" of appearing apt, while Tara Reid (top photo) sports specs and a
clipboard to suggest she's bright in "Dark." DOWN TO A SCIENCE: Saffron Burrows
plays a biologist in "Sea," while Denise Richards (top) is a doctor who defuses
in "World."

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 2005


                             245 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2005 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 26, 2005 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: Los Angeles;
Grand Jury Indicts USC Gene Researcher in Molestation Case

BYLINE: Richard Winton, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Indictments were unsealed Tuesday accusing William French Anderson, the
father of gene therapy and founder of an internationally acclaimed research
institute at USC, of six charges of child molestation involving the young
daughter of a colleague.

   Anderson, 68, pleaded not guilty in Los Angeles County Superior Court to
charges that he sexually molested the girl, now 17, between 1997 and 2001, when
she was between 10 and 14 years old.

   Deputy Dist. Atty. Cathryn Brougham said the investigation is ongoing.

   "We suspect he has other victims out there," Brougham said Tuesday.

   If convicted, Anderson could be sentenced to a maximum of 32 years in prison.

   By indicting Anderson with a grand jury on one count of continuous sexual
abuse of a child under 14 and five counts of a lewd act upon a child,
prosecutors eliminated the need for a hearing in Pasadena Superior Court to
determine whether there is enough evidence to require him to stand trial.

   "It has been several months, and there still hadn't been a preliminary
hearing, and there wasn't any indication the defense wanted a preliminary
hearing anytime soon," Brougham said. "Such delays don't help the victim. This
will also help protect the minor's privacy."

   Barry Tarlow, Anderson's attorney, did not return calls Tuesday. In an e-mail
to colleagues last year, Anderson denied wrongdoing.

   Anderson, a martial arts expert, taught karate to the girl in his San Marino
home, prosecutors said. Last spring, the girl talked to a counselor.

   The counselor contacted county social services personnel, and they contacted
authorities.

   L.A. County sheriff's detectives eventually taped a conversation between the
accuser and Anderson that the girl initiated under the department's direction.
She wore a concealed transmitter, and detectives heard the conversation, sources
familiar with the investigation said.

   Jon Weiner, a University of Southern California spokesman, said Anderson
would remain on administrative leave at his home and continues to be barred from
campus.

   Anderson was director of the Gene Therapy Laboratories at the USC Keck School
of Medicine. He has been dubbed the "father of gene therapy" after a team he led
in 1990 cured a hereditary disease of the immune system in a 4-year-old girl.

   The child was infused with white cells that had been removed from her blood
and supplied with a missing gene. It was the first time that gene therapy was
successful in a human.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: William French Anderson, 68, denies charges.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2005


                             246 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2005 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   January 22, 2005, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1 Metfront

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: Main challenge to research: money;
DNA pioneer says government's wide disbursement of funding hurts genetic studies

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER

BODY:

   James Watson, appropriately wearing a red tie embossed with DNA's
characteristic double helix, had a quick answer when asked about the biggest
challenge facing today's researchers.

   "Money," said Watson, 76, who is arguably the world's most famous living
biologist.

   Watson, who along with Francis Crick discovered the structure of DNA half a
century ago, visited Houston briefly Friday for a private speaking engagement
and a tour of Baylor College of Medicine's Human Genome Sequencing Center.

   Today the impact of the double helix's discovery can be seen all over: in the
growing biotechnology industry, in the pursuit of gene therapy to treat
illnesses, and in efforts to solve crimes with DNA evidence.

   Yet, since scientists finalized a map of the 25,000 genes contained in human
DNA two years ago, not enough has been done to capitalize on the treasure trove
of information, Watson said.

   Biomedical researchers hope the information contained in genes, the basic
blueprint for life, will help them design better treatments.  So far, for most
diseases and especially the most common ones, finding new medicine based on
genetic information has been tough slogging.

   Watson said that's because the current system, including the leading source
of federal health funding, the National Institutes of Health, has spread its
finances too widely.

   "It's hard to get a grant for more than $ 500,000 today," Watson said.

   "If you want to work on autism and can only get $ 500,000, I'd tell you just
to give it up. If we're going to do this, we had better think Texas-style. You
need a sort of we'll-get-to-the-moon attitude, that money isn't an obstacle."

   Watson, of course, should know. Not only did he help discover the structure
of DNA in 1953, in the early 1990s he became the director of the NIH component
of the $ 3 billion Human Genome Project.

   He, Crick and Maurice Wilkins shared the 1962 Nobel Prize for medicine. With
the passing of Crick and Wilkins in the past year, Watson now stands alone as
someone who many biologists consider the founding father of modern medical
research.

   "Jim Watson is an icon, an extraordinary individual and extremely
influential," said Richard Gibbs, director of Baylor's sequencing center. "His
visit is a celebration of our good fortune to be so close and well-known to
him."

   Watson praised the sequencing center, which helped decode the human genome
and has led to several other projects, including mapping the rat's genome last
year. The center has received more than $ 270 million in federal funding since
it was created in 1996.

   "This is very impressive," said Watson, who is chancellor of Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory in New York. "When I walk through, my chief feeling is
jealousy."

   Watson's current interests include studying the genetics of mental illness,
such as autism and schizophrenia. Using a technique developed by researchers at
his lab, it is now easier to screen not only for genes and mutations, but small
deletions in the genetic code, which may also contribute to the disease.


GRAPHIC: Photo: BIOLOGIST'S VISIT: James Watson, co-discoverer of the DNA
structure in 1953, tours the Baylor College of Medicine's Human Genome
Sequencing Center after a private speaking engagement Friday.

NOTES: eric.berger@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2005


                             247 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2005 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            January 21, 2005 Friday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BYLINE: From staff reports, The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   ECONOMY

   2004 gas increase: 27% in Cleveland

   Energy costs in the Cleveland area fell 0.9 percent in December, the Bureau
of Labor Statistics reports. Regional Commissioner Jay Mousa attributed the
decline to a 5.7 percent drop in the gasoline index. Despite the one-month
retreat, though, gasoline prices were up 26.9 percent from December 2003. And
energy costs overall rose 16.4 percent during the year. That followed gains of
7.1 percent in 2002 and 12.5 percent in 2003. The cost of groceries rose 1.4
percent in December from a month earlier. For the year, grocery costs were up
2.6 percent.

   BIOTECHNOLOGY

   Copernicus receives research grant

   A Cystic Fibrosis Foundation affiliate has given Copernicus Therapeutics Inc.
$750,000 to support the Cleveland company's research into gene therapy for the
lung disorder. The grant from Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics Inc. is an
extension of an earlier $280,000 grant. The money will allow Copernicus to start
a second phase of patient testing in conjunction with University Hospitals of
Cleveland, Case Western Reserve University and Children's Hospital of Denver.

   BANKS

   KeyCorp dividend up to 32.5 cents

   KeyCorp increased its quarterly cash dividend to 32.5 cents per common share,
from 31 cents. It's payable March 15 to shareholders of record on March 1. This
is the 40th consecutive year of dividend increases for the Cleveland-based bank.

   SALVAGE

   Copart purchases Strongsville site

   Copart Inc. has acquired a 16-acre salvage facility in Strongsville. Terms
were not disclosed. The Fairfield, Calif., company already operates a 22-acre
site in Northfield, and has 108 facilities throughout the United States and
Canada. Chief Executive Willis Johnson said the Strongsville site will ease
pressure on its existing operations in Northeast Ohio, which are experiencing
strong demand. Copart helps insurers and others process and sell salvage
vehicles through auctions. Salvage vehicles are either those deemed a total loss
by insurers or businesses, or recovered stolen vehicles for which an insurance
settlement has already been made.

   REAL ESTATE

   Forest City to offer notes

   Forest City Enterprises Inc. said it plans to offer $150 million of 6.5
percent senior notes in a public offering that is expected to close Tuesday. The
Cleveland real estate developer said it plans to use money from the sale to
repay debt under its $450 million credit facility and for general purposes.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2005


                             248 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            January 16, 2005 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1637 words

HEADLINE: Gene doping looms as next sports edge;
Boost at cellular level is all but undetectable

BYLINE: Kevin Van Valkenburg, SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Sometime in the near future, an athlete might walk into a lab and ask for an
injection that, with the prick of the needle, will bring a world of possibility.
Take this and hit home runs like Barry Bonds, the athlete would be told. Take it
and fly around the track like Marion Jones.

   This might sound like another story about steroids, back in the headlines
after baseball announced Thursday that it was adopting a stricter testing policy
amid calls for reform, but it's not. The topic is genetic doping.

   Because it uses DNA to stimulate or block natural chemicals - chemicals that
make changes within the body at the cellular level - it won't show up in a blood
or urine test.

   With billions of dollars at stake every year in sports and the lure of fame
stronger than ever, gene doping is expected to be the next major issue for
sports to confront. Experts in the field of genetic research predict it could
happen in five or 10 years. Or sooner.

   "I don't think it would surprise any of us if tomorrow we picked up a
newspaper and saw that [an athlete] had died of a stroke after getting involved
with gene therapy," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, director of the gene therapy
program at the University of California at San Diego. He is considered by many
to be the world's leading authority in the field.

   Genetic doping has the potential to make a mockery of what is currently
considered fair athletic competition.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency has formed a panel to study the issue and come
up with methods for detection. The panel of scientists, led by Friedmann, will
meet for the first time next month.

   "There's no firm evidence right now that people are using genetic
manipulation to enhance performance," he said, "but there have been a number of
studies done with animals like mice and rats that suggest that such a thing can
be done."

   Gene therapy isn't a new concept by any means. Over the past 30 years,
scientists have been making numerous breakthroughs. In recent years, techniques
have been developed in rats in which a synthetic version of the gene that
produces insulin-like growth factor 1, or IGF-1, can be used to spur muscle
growth or repair at the cellular level.

   IGF-1 normally occurs naturally in cells, and when it's injected directly
into the muscles, it has little effect. But scientists at the University of
Pennsylvania, led by Dr. Lee Sweeney, have developed a technique in which the
gene can be carried into cells using a harmless virus.

   There the gene fuses with the cell's DNA and causes the body to produce more
IGF-1, a protein that helps rebuild muscles when they deteriorate.

   In other studies, scientists have used similar techniques to block a protein,
myostatin, that limits muscle building in the body. With myostatin blocked, lab
mice in studies developed twice the normal muscle mass. Such results have given
hope to people with diseases such as muscular dystrophy, in which muscles can't
repair themselves as fast as they deteriorate.

   So far, IGF-1 hasn't been studied in any human clinical trials, but Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals recently conducted the first human clinical trial with a
myostatin inhibitor.

   Calls from athletes

   What worries both scientists and anti-doping officials is the potential for
abuse in the name of athletics, Friedmann said. And because the technology is so
new, no one knows what adverse effects gene transfer might have on humans.
Already there are fears that cancer could be one of the long-term side effects.

   "It's very dangerous, very early in the development, and highly
experimental," Friedmann said. "The people doing these studies have already been
getting calls, many, many times from the athletes themselves, asking if there is
the opportunity to use these techniques now. So there is interest. And as long
as you have interest, money and rogues [scientists without ethics or oversight],
there is going to be action."

   Especially when you consider that the science involved isn't that complex.

   "It's very standard, first-year college biology methods involved," Friedmann
said.

   Dr. Steven Ungerleider, a prominent sports psychologist and the author of
Faust Gold: Inside the East German Doping Machine, said that as long as the
science is out there, athletes will be willing to abuse it.

   And while Ungerleider says he believes it's unlikely there will be another
situation like what happened in the 1970s and 1980s in East Germany - where the
government was behind a doping scandal and cover-up that involved nearly 10,000
athletes - there are plenty of scientists working independently, with little or
no oversight, on the next phase of performance enhancement.

   "I think we're already there," Ungerleider said. "I think athletes are most
likely going to be ahead of the curve. There is always going to be rogue
scientists out there on the Internet, wild and loose and fancy-free."

   Difficult to detect

   Part of what will probably make genetic doping appealing to athletes is the
difficulty of detection. In the case of IGF-1, because the synthetic gene
activates natural chemicals that repair and build muscles, evidence of doping
would be difficult to find. Detection might involve a magnetic resonance imaging
scan or muscle biopsies, which would require inserting a large needle into the
muscle.

   "You would need muscle biopsies done relatively close to competition," said
Dr. Steven Roth, a professor of kinesiology at the University of Maryland. "How
many athletes are going to agree to that? It's not feasible.

   "Some of the genes might be produced by a different muscle. Different muscles
process proteins differently. So these anti-doping agencies would need to know
ahead of time what gene they were looking for in order to know what to test.
That's definitely an advantage for the bad guys."

   "It's going to cost 10 times as much to test for [genetic doping] than it
costs to test for steroids," Ungerleider said. "And the technology is going to
be hard to come by."

   The issue of testing becomes even more complex because it crosses borders and
requires cooperation from numerous authorities to be viable and credible. John
Hoberman, the author of several books on athletic doping, including the
forthcoming Testosterone Dreams, said that doping-control officers who travel
around the globe to test athletes are often greeted by violence.

   A global problem

   "I know stories of one doping officer who was attacked by a mob in the
street," said Hoberman, a professor of Germanic languages at the University of
Texas. "The whole issue of doping is extremely more complicated than it's made
out to be. ... It's a global problem that's going to require a global solution."

   Hoberman also said that, eventually, society must come to terms with what
exactly is performance enhancement and what level is acceptable.

   "Athletic doping right now is taking place in a society where an entire range
of performance-enhancing drugs have become ordinary," Hoberman said. "The
president and the attorney general aren't out there saying that Botox is an
outrage and Viagra is an outrage, and so there is a huge disconnect between how
athletes are required to be drug-free and ordinary citizens are not. That's one
of the prime reasons we have such a hard time working out the politics of doping
control."

   Testing encounters yet another obstacle, given that some athletes are born
with natural genetic mutations that give them a competitive advantage. In 1999,
doctors in Germany detected one such mutation in a boy whose myostatin gene was
affected. At age 4, the boy had twice the muscle mass of children his age.

   The hormone erythropoietin, or EPO, is also an example. EPO occurs naturally
in the body, boosting red blood cell production that allows the blood to carry
more oxygen, increasing endurance. A synthetic version of the hormone has been
popular for years with cyclists - and is believed to have caused the deaths of
several competitors - but it has been detectable only for the past five years.

   But the tests aren't 100 percent accurate, and the synthetic hormone can be
detected only if a test is administered within six days of EPO use. As a result,
doping officials look for clues like the percentage of red cells in the
bloodstream. An athlete with a naturally occurring high percentage of red blood
cells might appear to be guilty, when in reality, he might just be genetically
blessed.

   "Some people who naturally have a high EPO level simply can't compete in a
sport like cycling," said Dr. Elisabeth McNally, a cardiologist at the
University of Chicago and one of the leading researchers of degenerative muscle
diseases. "It's the same with women who naturally produce high levels of
testosterone. They're out of luck."

   Roth, of Maryland, said someone could theoretically use gene therapy to force
the body to boost EPO production. It's even possible, Roth said, that EPO, which
is produced mostly in the kidneys, could be made elsewhere in the body with the
right genetic formula.

   Some scientists feel it's possible that as gene therapy techniques advance,
and if they are eventually proved to be safe, the practice could become accepted
by both society and within the sporting world.

   Friedmann, also chairman of the National Institutes of Health Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee that oversees all gene therapy trials in the United States,
said genetic doping might force society to address the larger question of what
sports should really be about.

   "A lot of us grew up with the very romantic view of sports," he said.
"Athletics is such an important part of society because it's about
accomplishment against physical odds. Doping in general poses the questions of,
`What is sport? What do we want sport to be? Do we want it to be about athletic
achievement or about pharmacology?'

   "We can all sit here and glorify a few more home runs, and it's terrific, but
it's not sport any longer."

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2005


                             249 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            January 16, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1204 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFING BOOK;
News and views from the Louisiana Capitol

BODY:

   TOP OF THE NEWS

   Applications for home health program surprise officials

   Wirth Building to be razed for gene therapy research center

   Blanco to host candlelight vigil for lost children

   AROUND THE CAPITOL

   No place like home

   A new program that provides home-care services as an alternative to nursing
homes for the elderly and disabled has proven far more popular than state
officials expected. When a court settlement required the Department of Health
and Hospitals to provide personal-care attendants as a new entitlement under
Medicaid in January 2004, the agency was expecting about 2,300 applications. But
by Dec. 31, the agency had received 7,165 requests for services. More than half
the applicants were deemed eligible, and 2,943 people were receiving services by
the end of last month. To meet the demand, the health department expanded its
contract with Affiliated Computer Services, a Dallas firm that operates a call
center and conducts in-home screening of applicants to determine whether their
incomes and medical conditions qualify them for the program. Medicaid Director
Ben Bearden said the new contract is valued at $9.6 million, up from $6 million,
and will provide 20 new local jobs because ACS is moving its call center from
Tallahassee, Fla., to Baton Rouge. The home-care program is available to
Medicaid-eligible people age 65 and older and to disabled people 21 or older who
otherwise would qualify for nursing homes. Recipients can get as many as 56
hours per week of help with daily tasks such as cooking and grooming. Gross
monthly income cannot exceed $567, and available resources cannot exceed $2,000.

   For what it's Wirth

   A joint administration-legislative committee has approved a request to use
$1.8 million to demolish the Wirth Building at 1441 Canal St., a New Orleans
site that has been tapped to house a gene therapy research center and a
scientific laboratory. The state's Interim Emergency Board, which approves
emergency spending between legislative sessions, signed off on a request from
officials of Gov. Kathleen Blanco's administration and New Orleans lawmakers to
raze the structure. The money was to be used to gut the interior of the
structure, owned by Louisiana State University, and to renovate it for the labs
and research center. But once workers got into the building, it was determined
that the renovated structure "could not support the new use," Jerry Jones,
director of the governor's Office of Facility Planning, told the panel. "We have
called it the Wirth-less building for some time," Jones said, adding that the
$1.8 million approved by the Legislature in 2002 for the project should be
enough to finance demolition. Project officials said about $700,000 has been
spent already, mainly on asbestos removal. They said the asbestos would have to
be removed whether the structure was demolished or gutted and renovated.

   In memory

   For the second year in a row, Gov. Kathleen Blanco and her husband, Raymond
Blanco, will host a candlelight vigil on the front steps of the state Capitol to
honor families that have lost a child. The date of the event commemorates what
would have been the 28th birthday of the Blancos' sixth child, Benedict Andrew,
who died Jan. 2, 1997, in an industrial accident. "Surviving the loss of a child
is one of the most difficult challenges anyone can face in life," the governor
said in a prepared statement. "On this special day we will join together to lift
one another up and honor the lives of all those that have gone before us,
especially our children." All who have lost children and the general public are
invited to the ceremony Thursday at 5 p.m. The Blancos extended a personal
invitation to the families and friends of Louisiana soldiers who have died in
Iraq and Afghanistan.

   Rural matters

   Gov. Kathleen Blanco's Office of Rural Development and the Police Jury
Association of Louisiana will co-host the second annual Rural Economic
Development Conference Feb. 2 and 3 at the University Center on the campus of
Southeastern Louisiana University in Hammond. The theme of the conference will
be "Technology: The Back Road to Rural Louisiana." A preconference series of
workshops will be Feb. 1. Some of the workshop sessions will be identifying and
developing economic development and technology needs in rural areas, industry
diversification, and infrastructure development in rural areas, said Blanco
spokeswoman Denise Bottcher. Blanco is scheduled to address the conference Feb.
3. Blanco said it is "critically important that we keep our rural communities at
the forefront of economic discussions. . . . Assessing the high- and low-tech
capabilities of our rural communities is an important step in strengthening our
rural areas and reviving Louisiana's economy." Details are available by calling
the Governor's Office on Rural Development at (225) 342-1618 or online at
www.gov.state.la.us.

   POLITICALLY SPEAKING

   A tough year

   In his swan-song speech to party loyalists last week, former state Democratic
Chairman Mike Skinner said one of the major blows to the party's chances in the
November elections was a decision by Democratic presidential nominee Sen. John
Kerry to end campaigning in Louisiana weeks before the election. "That decision
to pull out of Louisiana . . . hurt us," Skinner told the Democratic State
Central Committee as he stepped down as party chairman. "The next election
(cycle) must be different." Louisiana Republicans captured their first U.S.
Senate seat in modern times when David Vitter defeated three major Democrats in
the Nov. 2 primary. The GOP also gained a congressional seat in the Lafayette
area and picked up another in northeast Louisiana when U.S. Rep. Rodney
Alexander switched from the Democratic Party to the GOP at qualifying. The
Democrats picked up the 3rd Congressional District seat that had been held for
24 years by Billy Tauzin, R-Chackbay. "The party had some great successes and
some bitter losses," Skinner said. "We will survive." Skinner said he was
stepping down to pursue other business and professional duties. The committee
unanimously elected Jim Bernhard, chief executive officer of the Fortune 500
Shaw Group of Baton Rouge, to replace Skinner.

   INFORMATION PLEASE

   STAYING IN TOUCH

   To contact lawmakers:

   -- Senate: (225) 342-2040; fax: (225) 342-0617

   -- House: (225) 342-6945; fax: (225) 342-8336

   TRACKING BILLS

   Citizens can find the Louisiana legislative home page on the Internet at
www.legis.state.la.us. Information on legislators, committee assignments,
schedules and bills is available, as well as information on services for people
with disabilities.

   SCHEDULE

   The Legislature is scheduled to convene April 25 for a regular fiscal
session.

   QUOTABLE

   "It kind of takes me by surprise, but I love it."

   Gov. KATHLEEN BLANCO on her staff's efforts to assemble most of her
Cabinet-level officials, key lawmakers and members of the business and labor
communities to a news conference commemorating her first year in office.

   "It was not to be, and that was a very bitter pill to swallow."

   Former state Democratic Party Chairman MIKE SKINNER of Lafayette, referring
to the Democrats losing a U.S. Senate seat when Republican David Vitter captured
the seat held for 18 years by Democrat John Breaux.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2005


                             250 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 14, 2005 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: Codey's stem cell plan is an investment in hope

BYLINE: JORDANA HOLOVACH

BODY:

   Acting Gov. Richard Codey used his State of the State address to call for New
Jersey to become one of the true pioneers in the advancement of stem cell
research. He did so emboldened by a tremendous victory in California, where
voters recently passed Proposition 71, a ballot initiative that allocates up to
$350 million a year in state bonds over the next 10 years specifically to fund
stem cell research.

   Codey's bold plan would invest $150 million toward construction of the Stem
Cell Institute of New Jersey, a one-of-a-kind facility in New Brunswick that
would immediately make New Jersey one of the premier locations for scientific
discovery in the world. In addition, his plan calls for voters to approve $230
million more in state bonds for advancing stem cell research and technology in
New Jersey.

   Perhaps more important, Codey's proposal would provide millions of Americans,
whose lives may depend on the scientific breakthroughs stem cell research
offers, with something money can never buy: hope. Now New Jersey has a chance to
offer even more hope to those like my son, Jacob, who are suffering from a host
of deadly diseases, including Parkinson's, diabetes and cancer.

    Initiatives like these are what fuel me in my effort to keep my son alive. I
was told by Jacob's doctor that he would die in his first decade of life from
Canavan disease, a rare neurological genetic disease for which there is no cure.
Because of an enzyme deficiency, the white matter in the brains of Canavan
children is devastatingly affected. The children cannot sit, crawl, walk or say
a single word. Eventually they go blind, develop seizures, lose their ability to
swallow and become too weak to fight off illness. Death soon follows.

   I have chosen not to accept this death sentence. Instead, I founded Jacob's
Cure to increase awareness and find a cure for Canavan through aggressive
fund-raising, lobbying and education. Since 1994, we have raised almost $2.5
million for research, gene therapy, the creation of animal models, and
approaches in pharmacological, enzymatic and especially neural stem cell
transplantation. Much more still has to be done.

   For years, however, politics seems to have gotten in the way of progress.
Despite the support of three former presidents, more than 260 members of
Congress on both sides of the political spectrum, 48 Nobel laureates and
millions of citizens who agree that stem cell research holds great promise,
President Bush - under increasing pressure from competing constituencies -
compromised to the detriment of the research community.

   In August 2001, he announced that research on the existing stem cell lines
would receive financing from the National Institutes of Health, but no new lines
could be created with government money. This decision severely limited the
resources available to scientists and doctors. As too often is the case, special
interest groups were deeply involved in the debate, clouding for many a process
that merits a sincere and honest exchange of ideas.

   Initially, the re-election of Bush and the further rightward shift of
Congress marked a sad day for advocates of stem cell research. But the voters of
California changed the mood, and now New Jersey may soon follow suit to push
this movement forward. These two states can together take control of one of the
most hotly contested political topics in this country. To ignore this movement
is to ignore the voices that too often are silenced by the devastating illnesses
that affect them. While California brightened the flickering light at the end of
the tunnel for all of us, New Jersey can now make it shine even more brightly.

   We are doing a great injustice to our loved ones and our future if we allow
ourselves to be scared off by the unknown. Imagine what our world would be like
if Alexander Fleming, John Sheehan and Andrew Moyer had not invented penicillin.
Today, illnesses such as pneumonia, strep throat, meningitis and rheumatic fever
are easily treated, but in the days before this miracle drug they developed,
thousands of children died each year from these diseases.

   Stem cells hold the promise of being the penicillin of the 21st century.
Indeed, a team of researchers at Cooper Hospital and Robert Wood Johnson Medical
Center in New Jersey, headed by Paola Leone, already has found data suggesting
that stem cells have reversed the effects in demyelinated animals and have had
an even greater impact when injected in the brains of animals already treated
with the same gene therapy as the Canavan children. Leone and other scientists
in New Jersey already are taking major steps forward. Their work offers us a
glimpse at the possibilities and cures to which sufficient funding could lead.
This gives me and all of us at Jacob's Cure great hope.

    This hope is something the New Jersey Legislature should invest in today.
Its willingness to support and fully fund stem cell research may make it
possible for me to one day see my son talk and walk and live the life he so
deserves and wants to live. It will allow the same dream of a brighter day to
live inside the minds of countless people facing these deadly diseases and in
those who care for them. We must fight for that day.

   Jordana Holovach lives in Harrison, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             251 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2005 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           January 13, 2005 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: CENTER STAGE

BYLINE: PETER FILICHIA, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Say hello, Frank   Jamie Farr has injured his knee, so he has to say so long
to "Say Goodnight Gracie," the Rupert Holmes play booked for the New Jersey
Performing Arts Center in Newark next month.

    The play's producers, though, have a worthy replacement in Frank Gorshin. He
originated the role and played it on Broadway for nearly a year.

    Gorshin, once the maniacal Riddler in the "Batman" TV series, plays Oscar
winner George Burns, who tells of his adventures with his wife, Gracie Allen,
through their years in vaudeville and television.

   "Say Goodnight, Gracie" plays Feb. 4-6 at the New Jersey Performing Arts
Center, 1 Center St., Newark. Performances are Friday at 1:30 and 8 p.m.,
Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m., and Sunday at 3 p.m. Tickets are $12- $58. Call (888)
GO-NJPAC (466-5722) or visit www.njpac.org.

    Luna's lineup

    Will one of the plays being read at Luna Stage's Annual New Moon Play
Reading Series be produced at the theater next year?

   It could happen. Last January, Ian Walker's "A Beautiful Home for the
Incurable" was read, and it will be fully produced at the Montclair theater in
March.

    Here's the lineup for this year's series:

     "Spilling Stuff and Breaking Things" by Ben Clawson. Four school bus
drivers take a bus on a drunken excursion. (Thursday, Jan. 20 at 8 p.m.)

     "Last Meals" by Laura Henry. Culinary arts meets the death penalty.
(Saturday, Jan. 22 at 8 p.m. and Sunday, Jan. 23 at 2 p.m.)

     "Three Days in April" by Matthew Lopez. Two slaves care for their wounded
former master. (Thursday, Jan. 27 at 8 p.m.)

     "A Perfect Wedding" by Mayo Simon. Aliens invade a wedding. (Saturday, Jan.
29 at 8 p.m. and Sunday, Jan. 30 at 2 p.m.)

    Luna Stage Company is at 695 Bloomfield Ave., Montclair. Readings are free,
though a $5 donation is suggested. Call (973) 744-3309 or visit
www.lunastage.org.

     Tender 'Touch'

    Mary Fengar Gail read an article on gene therapy, and immediately started
writing.

    "Once I saw that genes maybe could pass talents from parents to children,"
she says, "I thought of someone passing talents just through a gesture."

    Hence, "Touch of Rapture," the 42-year-old playwright's new "comic parable,"
which is having its world premiere at New Jersey Repertory Company in Long
Branch.

    In the play, Quince is an art dealer. His wife Clovis, a sculptor with
cancer, asks him as she nears death, "Won't you take my hand?"

    The request is not only because she needs to hold onto him for strength, but
also so she can pass along her gift. Says Gail, "He knows immediately; years
before, he accidentally slashed the tendons of his hands, and they haven't felt
well - until now."

    What Quince does with the gift is the crux of the play.

    "Some people create for the sake of creation," says Gail, "while some sell
what's created. Businesses are very different from art aesthetics."

    Gail, who lives in California, mentions she would most like to receive such
a gift from Deepak Chopra. "I really believe that he can heal," she says.

    "Touch of Rapture" plays tonight through Feb. 20 at New Jersey Repertory
Company, 179 Broadway, Long Branch. Performances are Thursdays-Saturdays at 8
p.m. and Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets are $20 for previews this afternoon at 2 and
tonight and tomorrow at 8. Opening night on Saturday is $35. All other
performances are $30. Call (732) 229-3166 or visit www.njrep.org. - Peter
Filichia

   Peter Filichia writes about New Jersey theater for The Star-Ledger. He can be
reached at (973) 392-5995 or pfilichia@starledger.com.

GRAPHIC: 1. Frank Gorshin as George Burns remembers Gracie.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                             252 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2005 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                              The Courier-Journal

                   January 11, 2005 Tuesday metro Met Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Series; Losing Charles;
WHAT'S BEING DONE?; Scientists see efforts as 'extremely' encouraging

SERIES: LOSING CHARLES= A FAMILY COPES WITH ALZHEIMERS

BYLINE: UNGAR LAURA, lungar@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   Byline: Laura Ungar

   Source: The Courier-Journal

   Scientists are making strides in the fight against Alzheimer's, improving
their understanding of the devastating brain disease and searching for new drug
treatments.

   "I'm extremely encouraged right now," said David Morgan, director of the
Alzheimer's Disease Research Laboratory at the University of South Florida .

   Morgan pointed to 10 different approaches to dealing with Alzheimer's that
are close to or in clinical testing, including anti-inflammatory drugs,
estrogen-related therapies and immunotherapy. Other approaches, such as gene
therapy, are also in the works, but are not as far along , Morgan said.

   In a promising development last year , researchers said an experimental
vaccine to treat Alzheimer's seemed to slow memory decline. A study suggested
that the treated group did better on memory tests than a control group. Even
though research was stopped in early 2002 because some participants developed
brain inflammation, the results were an encouraging sign for using the immune
system to attack Alzheimer's.

   Two distinguishing traits of Alzheimer's are amyloid plaques, clumps of
protein fragments outside of the brain's nerve cells, and "tangles," strands of
another protein inside brain cells.

   Current medications - such as Aricept or Exelon - do not halt the disease .
"The drugs we have now are really just treating the symptoms," Morgan said.

   New treatments are being designed to affect the disease at its source - by
blocking amyloid production, for example.

   In the past 10 or 15 years , scientists have made "lots of headway" in
understanding and treating Alzheimer's, said Dr. Charles Smith, director of the
clinical core at the University of Kentucky's Alzheimer's Disease Research
Center. "But we've got a long way to go."

   At UK's research center, in the Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Smith and
others are studying the progression of the disease by following people with
Alzheimer's and normal volunteers. Study participants donate their brains when
they die.

   Dr. Michal Hetman, meanwhile, recently received a three-year, $240,000 grant
from the Alzheimer's Association for his research at the University of
Louisville, which may help suggest new targets for developing drugs to modify
the disease.

   While these scientists work, the number of people with Alzheimer's threatens
to rise significantly as the population ages.

   The Alzheimer's Association is working to pass legislation, named after late
President Ronald Reagan, that would increase spending for Alzheimer's research,
provide more help for caregivers and increase public education about reducing
the risk of developing the disease.

   The association is also urging people to make healthy changes in their lives
that could reduce their risk of getting Alzheimer's, such as exercising and
controlling their weight and cholesterol .

   Morgan said there's probably no nutritional magic bullet that will prevent
Alzheimer's. But "maintaining a good, healthy diet is obviously going to help us
in a variety of diseases."

   Foster Burba, 80, of Louisville said he is glad researchers are looking for
answers for the disease that afflicts his 78-year-old wife, Winifred - even
though she probably won't benefit .

   "But perhaps I will," Burba said. "And perhaps my children and grandchildren
will."

GRAPHIC: Public Broadcasting System via The Associated Press; A chemical
compound created by a team at the University of Pittsburgh bonds to plaque
inside the living brain of an Alzheimer's patient.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2005


                             253 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2005 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 10, 2005 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; E05 , START-UP A Weekly Look at the Region's Newest
Companies

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: Intronn Aims to Cure Diseases by Repairing Genetic Defects

BYLINE: Michael S. Rosenwald, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The scientists working in Intronn's labs are trying to mend nature's
mistakes.

   If the work is successful, they will trick mutated genes into working
properly, potentially treating hemophilia, increasing the body's "good"
cholesterol or providing therapies for genetic diseases.

   So far, that's a big if. Gaithersburg-based Intronn is one of several dozen
biotech start-ups in the Interstate 270 technology corridor, mixed in among
larger, revenue-producing firms such as Digene Corp., its neighbor across the
street.

    Intronn has about 15 employees. It has raised about $15 million and plans to
soon ask venture capitalists for $3 million more to help move the research into
human testing, possibly next year.

   Intronn, formed eight years ago in North Carolina by two scientists, hired
Gaithersburg resident Gerard J. McGarrity, a biotechnology industry veteran, in
September 2000. He was the company's fourth employee.

   To bring  the company closer to his home and network of biotech associates,
McGarrity said, he moved Intronn to a technology incbator in Maryland in January
2002. Intronn left the incubator little more than a year later for its current
home.

   The company works with genes, the bridge in the genetic process that starts
with DNA. Genes make RNA, which in turn produce proteins, the foundation of
cells and organs. Sometimes genes go haywire, resulting in proteins that can
cause disease.

   In conventional gene therapy, still in the experimental phase, normal genes
are grown in labs and infused into the body to replace bad ones. The process is
tricky, in part because the good genes can regrow in unintended places.

   Instead of inserting new genes into the body, Intronn is working on what
McGarrity calls "genetic Wite-Out." Using its patented molecules, he said,
Intronn can splice correct instructions into RNA to repair the genetic defect.

   "We can retype in our own message," McGarrity said. "We go into what's
mutated and splice in the correct message."

   But Intronn is at least several years from selling therapies based on the
research. So far, the technology has spawned publication of 25 research papers
in influential journals such as Nature Biotechnology and the Journal of Clinical
Investigation.

   Intronn's hemophilia program is the furthest along, and McGarrity said he
hopes initial human testing can begin next year. Two other treatment programs
are not as mature -- one for Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency, a hereditary
disease that causes liver and lung disease, and another aimed at increasing the
body's HDL cholesterol.

   Though it is one of Intronn's least-developed areas of focus, McGarrity said
the cholesterol program has attracted significant interest from drug companies
because treatments for cholesterol can generate billions of dollars in revenue.

   He said he has been working with several large companies to form a
partnership but declined to identify them. Asked how close he was to signing
such a deal, McGarrity said: "You never want to say 'close' because some of
these companies move at a geological pace."

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2005


                             254 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2005 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             January 9, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1648 words

HEADLINE: N.O. biotech lab stuck in neutral;
Unsafe building, bureaucracy are among obstacles

BYLINE: By Rebecca Mowbray, Business writer

BODY:

   Two-and-a-half years ago, the Louisiana Legislature appropriated millions of
dollars to start three biotech laboratories and business incubators around the
state.

   Today, two of the projects, in Baton Rouge and Shreveport, are under
construction, recruiting tenants and are expected to open this summer.

   But the largest and most extensive of the facilities, the New Orleans
BioInnovation Center Inc., has gotten bogged down in bureaucracy. And the Canal
Street building that was slated to house the lab has been deemed structurally
unsound and must be razed, further delaying a project that is supposed to be the
cornerstone of the city's burgeoning medical district.

   Aaron Miscenich, executive director of the BioInnovation Center, a
state-funded, joint project of the Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center and Tulane University Health Sciences Center, said the Wirth Building,
1441 Canal St., is unfit for new development.

   "All along we thought it could be renovated," said Miscenich, who was hired
in October, long after the Wirth building saga began. "After some exhaustive
work, we've come to the conclusion that it's not structurally feasible to house
the BioInnovation Center."

   He added, "We probably spent a little bit more time than we should have to do
this."

   The Wirth Building is named for German immigrant Charles Wirth, who owned a
real estate company and a brewery. Wirth also loaned money to his future
son-in-law, Alvin A. Baumer Sr., who used the money to start Baumer Foods Inc.,
a local company that bottles hot sauces and other private-label condiments.

   The BioInnovation Center now plans to ask the city for permission to demolish
the yellow building and construct a facility in its place. The Mayor's Office of
Communications says the vacant, three-story building is not historically
significant, but the BioInnovation Center must apply for permission from the
planning board and the City Council to tear it down.

   The BioInnovation Center is now testing the site's foundation to determine
whether it can be used to support the new building, Miscenich said. The group
already has building plans, designed by Lockwood Greene architects, said Mary
Ella Sanders, a physician who is vice chancellor for clinical affairs at the LSU
Health Sciences Center New Orleans and chairwoman of the BioInnovation Center
board. The group also has hired a project management firm, Adams PMC, but has
not selected a construction company.

   LSU owns the Wirth building and leases it to the BioInnovation Center,
Miscenich said. He hopes construction can be completed within 12 to 18 months.

   Sanders said her group does not plan to ask the state for more money for the
project.

   "We are highly committed to staying within our budget," Sanders said. The
problems with the building "are not going to derail the project."

   In the meantime, business leaders and economic development-minded public
officials are disappointed at the snail's pace of the project. When the enabling
legislation was passed in 2002, then-Secretary of Economic Development Don
Hutchinson said the New Orleans project would be announcing tenant companies in
fall of 2002 and open a year later.

   Mark Drennen, chief executive officer of Greater New Orleans Inc., worked on
securing appropriations for the project when he was commissioner of
administration for former Gov. Mike Foster. Drennen said he's concerned about
the pace of the BioInnovation project.

   "We had a lot of concerns about trying to use the Wirth building to begin
with. In fact, internally, we used to call it the Wirthless building," Drennen
said. "It's certainly a concern that it's taken this long. When there's a delay,
there's always someone else trying to get the money."

   Drennen said about $31 million was appropriated from several sources for the
New Orleans project.

   Drennen said it is his understanding that after all the delays and studies of
the Wirth building, if the project proceeds as it is designed, it will be
overbudget.

   Tommy Kurtz, vice president of economic development at GNO Inc., said having
the lab space at the BioInnovation Center is essential to recruiting life
sciences technology companies to the New Orleans area. Kurtz says he's got two
companies that are looking at New Orleans but that without lab facilities it's a
hard sell.

   "Without that piece of infrastructure, we're going to miss the boat," Kurtz
said. "We don't have our act together down here."

   To help get things moving, GNO Inc. and the Mayor's Office of Economic
Development, now headed by Hutchinson, jointly have hired the Dallas consulting
firm Ramp Development Inc. to search for the best ways to structure the
Louisiana Biomedical Research and Development Park, the formal name for the
medical district. The medical district is bounded by Canal, Poydras and Galvez
streets and Loyola Avenue.

   After the consulting firm reports its findings, GNO Inc. and the city may
propose legislation to create a governing authority in the medical district to
coordinate all economic development projects such as the BioInnovation Center,
the Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium Inc. and the Louisiana Cancer
Research Consortium of New Orleans. They'd also like to create a dedicated
financial stream for the medical district, a step that has proven critical in
Shreveport.

   Hutchinson said he's not worried about the delays, and said Miscenich's hire
is a significant step toward getting the project moving.

   "Because it's such a technical and sophisticated area, we'd rather be slow
and do it right," Hutchinson said. Miscenich "has experience in this area and
will be able to get this thing back on track and moving forward relatively
quickly."

   Cumbersome project

   Since the Legislature appropriated the money two-and-a-half years ago, the
New Orleans project has been plagued by the realities of trying to coordinate
the efforts of two large and bureaucratic universities, one public and one
private, in a loosely organized medical district with a distracting number of
projects under way.

   "The process has been complex, with many stakeholders," Sanders said.

   Through a spokeswoman, Alan Miller, senior vice president of health sciences
at Tulane and vice chairman of the BioInnovation Center board, deferred comment
to LSU.

   Whenever it gets built, the New Orleans facility will have a
60,000-square-foot "wet lab" similar to those under construction in Baton Rouge
and Shreveport: a facility with life sciences lab equipment and office space
where start-up companies can turn research into businesses and create jobs for
the state.

   Companies will rent office space and get assistance with developing business
plans, raising capital and growing the company. Miscenich, who teaches business
planning classes at Tulane's Freeman School of Business, will run the wet lab.

   Unlike the other new facilities in Baton Rouge and Shreveport, the New
Orleans project also will have a 75,000-square-foot Good Manufacturing Practice
lab, an official term for a laboratory that is fit to produce materials for
human use. The GMP lab will house the Gene Therapy Consortium, a project of
Tulane and the LSU Health Sciences Centers in New Orleans and Shreveport. The
gene therapy project will manufacture adult stem cell lines for experiments.

   But in a spat of competition between the LSU medical campuses during the
building delays, the coveted GMP portion of the project nearly was derailed when
the Gene Therapy Consortium considered going to Shreveport.

   Dennis Lower, vice president of planning and development for the Biomedical
Research Foundation of Northwest Louisiana, which is developing the Shreveport
incubator, said Shreveport was not trying to steal the New Orleans project.

   When Shreveport's Biomedical Research Foundation unexpectedly found itself
with a large available laboratory facility because a client went bankrupt, a
board member of the Gene Therapy Consortium asked whether Shreveport might be a
suitable site to house the gene project instead of New Orleans. At the Gene
Therapy board member's request, Lower said, Shreveport did a feasibility study
and determined that its facility was indeed suitable.

   But in September, the Gene Therapy board voted against the change in plans.
"For a variety of reasons, the board determined that the building wasn't
suitable," Lower said. "That's fine, we were just responding to a request."

   Unique challenges

   Meanwhile, the other two incubator projects are rolling along and have even
secured federal grants to supplement the initial $10 million state
appropriations.

   Baton Rouge's incubator, the 60,000-square-foot, $12 million Louisiana
Emerging Technology Center, is under construction and is expected to be
completed by July. Its new director, Arthur Cooper, said he is interviewing
prospective tenants now and that he thinks most of them will spring from
projects at nearby LSU and Southern University.

   In Shreveport, the $12.25 million BioSpace1 also is under construction and is
expected to open in August, adding to Shreveport's other network of life science
incubators and labs, said Lower, who also is director of InterTech Science Park
in Shreveport.

   Sanders said the New Orleans project can't be compared with the others
because the GMP lab makes the New Orleans project significantly larger, and
because New Orleans tried everything it could to renovate an old Canal Street
building rather than embark on new construction. The buildings in Baton Rouge
and Shreveport are new construction.

   Coordinating the efforts of LSU and Tulane on the incubator, plus Tulane and
two campuses of LSU on the Gene Therapy project at the GMP, has brought
additional challenges, Sanders said.

   "When you begin to blend two different governances, two different strategic
plans, two different institutions, that is a level of complexity that Shreveport
didn't need to deal with," she said.

   . . . . . . .

   Rebecca Mowbray can be reached at rmowbray@timespicayune.com or (504)
826-3417.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY ELIOT KAMENITZ
Plans to turn the vacant Wirth Building, 1441 Canal St., into a high-tech,
job-generating biomedical research center have hit a variety of snags since the
project got its initial funding from the Legislature in 2002. [1409379]

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2005


                             255 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2005 The Columbus Dispatch

                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                 January 5, 2005 Wednesday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 02C

LENGTH: 50 words

HEADLINE: LOCAL SCENE

BYLINE: Compiled Susan Grote, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   * Mike Fazende has joined Fahlgren Advertising as executive creative
director.

   * Jerry R. Mendell, professor of neurology, pediatrics and pathology, Ohio
State University, has been appointed director of the Columbus Children's
Research Institute Center for Gene Therapy at Children's Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2005


                             256 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             January 3, 2005 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients sign up for gene therapy;
Doctors in study will inject DNA to try to grow blood vessels

BYLINE: Jim Ritter

BODY:

   Doctors haven't been able to fix Joseph De Pretto's ailing heart.

   They've done two bypass surgeries and a balloon angioplasty,  implanted a
pacemaker/defibrillator and prescribed all sorts of  drugs. Yet, De Pretto still
suffers debilitating fatigue and  shortness of breath.

   So, De Pretto has volunteered for a study of a dramatically  different
treatment -- gene therapy.

   Doctors will inject DNA that, it's hoped, will jump-start the  growth of new
blood vessels in heart muscle starved for blood and  oxygen.

   Researchers will enroll 404 patients at 30 centers, including Rush
University Medical Center and Midwest Heart Foundation, where De  Pretto is a
patient.

   In conventional therapy, a surgeon tries to fix the heart. In gene  therapy,
the heart is supposed to heal itself.

   "This is a new horizon," said Dr. Lawrence Barr of the Heart  Foundation.

   It's too early to say whether it will work, but De Pretto is  optimistic.

   "I'm hoping I can get back to a halfway normal life," he said.

   A 'piece of cake'

   In the therapy, a doctor inserts a thin tube in an artery in the  groin area.
The catheter snakes up to the heart, and a tiny needle  injects snippets of DNA
into heart muscle.

   The DNA, it's hoped, will direct cells to produce a protein called  VEGF-2.
This "growth factor" protein acts as a master switch to  begin the growth of new
blood vessels.

   The procedure takes less than an hour.

   "Piece of cake," said James Yerkes, who recently participated in  the trial
at Rush University. He hopes it will work. Despite a  triple bypass, two stents
and four angioplasties, Yerkes said he  still suffers frequent angina pain "that
feels like someone has  grabbed your heart and squeezed it."

   In the trial, 75 percent of the patients will receive VEGF-2 in  small,
medium or large doses, and 25 percent will get a placebo.  The trial is funded
by Corautus Genetics, which licensed the DNA  technology.

   There's a theoretical risk the VEGF-2 gene could migrate from the  heart
muscle and promote blood vessel growth where it's not wanted,  such as in
tumors. Therefore, patients must be free of cancer and  diabetic retinopathy, a
vision-threatening condition caused by  excess blood vessel growth in the eye.

   The trial is limited to patients who suffer debilitating angina or  shortness
of breath and have not responded to other treatments. At  least 150,000 such
patients are diagnosed each year in the United  States. If the trial succeeds,
doctors also might try gene therapy  for less-severe heart conditions, said Dr.
David Faxon, University  of Chicago chief of cardiology.

   Small studies show promise

   In earlier heart studies, researchers tested several types of gene  therapy.

   For example, they've tried other genes that code for different  blood vessel
growth factors. They've used an inactivated cold virus  to deliver the gene. And
they've injected growth factor genes  during open heart surgery.

   A few small studies have shown promise. But researchers were  disappointed by
results from a large study, in which the gene for  the growth factor FGF-4 was
dripped into coronary arteries.

   The latest study, the largest of its kind, will help determine  whether gene
therapy ever moves beyond the experimental stage.

   "If this doesn't work, it's back to the drawing board," said Rush
cardiologist Dr. Gary Schaer.

GRAPHIC: Joseph De Pretto, who has had two bypasses, an angioplasty, has an
implanted pacemaker/defibrillator and takes all sorts of drugs, will take part
in the study. Keith Hale

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2005


                             257 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     JANUARY 3, 2005 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 2589 words

HEADLINE: 10 to watch

BYLINE: Stacey Burling, Marie McCullough, Tom Avril, Susan Fitzgerald, Dawn
Fallik, Virginia A. Smith and Marian Uhlman

BODY:

   Our region is known for the many who work here to solve medical challenges,
from low-tech efforts aimed at helping people get healthier to cutting-edge
research that may make robotic surgery and stem-cell treatment as common to
healing as antibiotics. Here are The Inquirer's picks on projects to watch in
2005.

   Zebrafish research

   In a small room in a dreary Thomas Jefferson University office building,
Steven Farber extols the scientific virtues of zebrafish. His lab has 500 tanks
stacked floor to ceiling, filled with 10,000 of the little striped creatures.

   Farber, a Cherry Hill native with a doctorate in molecular neurobiology, uses
zebrafish to study genetics, stem cells, digestion and medicines as well as to
introduce children to the wonders of science. His work may one day help people
with cancer, diabetes and obesity-related diseases.

   Zebrafish, Farber says, are cheap, reproduce like crazy, have almost the same
genome as humans, and are transparent when they're babies. Scientists can put
them under a microscope, watch their hearts beat, and see blood cells move
through their tiny vessels. No mouse can compete.

   Farber, 41, feeds genetically altered zebrafish cholesterol or proteins that
glow in the dark, then watches as the marked materials move through their
bodies. If a gene mutation changes the way the fish's body works, it likely will
have the same effect in people, he says.

   "We're really using the fish as a model to understand human disease," he
says.

   This year, he hopes to publish an interesting discovery: a "fat free" gene
that affects the body's ability to absorb cholesterol. Farber is also using the
fish to study how stem cells migrate within an embryo, research with
implications for cancer because malignant cells also migrate while finding a
spot to form a tumor.

   - Stacey Burling

   Preventing AIDS

   From her tiny Huntingdon Valley-based company, Anne-Marie Corner, 43, is
overseeing the final development of Savvy, a contraceptive gel that prevents
most sexually transmitted diseases - including AIDS.

   Talk about a blockbuster new drug.

   Savvy, projected to be on the market in about two years, is the leader in a
global competition to develop a vaginal microbicide. But 15 years ago, when a
fresh-faced biochemistry major-turned-entrepreneur began pitching the product in
her lilting Welsh accent, even AIDS activists were blase.

   "They were like, 'Oh, please. We'll have an AIDS vaccine in three years,' "
she says.

   Corner left Wales in 1984 so her husband could go to graduate school at the
University of Pennsylvania (where he is now a professor). She got a job in the
lab of Daniel Malamud, the Penn biochemist who discovered Savvy's
microbe-murdering molecule.

   Five years later, equipped with an MBA from Penn's Wharton School, Corner
became president and chief executive officer of Biosyn Inc., which she and
Malamud founded to create a product nobody was interested in. The next step was
to raise $30 million from equity investments, grants and contracts.

   Final human testing of Savvy is now under way in the United States, Ghana and
Nigeria. And this fall, Corner sold the rights to Savvy to Cellegy
Pharmaceuticals, a well-established California biotech company.

   Sometimes, Corner said, her 9-year-old daughter complains about not having a
stay-at-home mom. But daughter Chloe, 12, understands; after watching a
heart-wrenching TV report about an African boy who died of AIDS, Chloe turned to
her mother.

   "She said, 'I'm glad you do what you do.' "

   - Marie McCullough

   A West Nile hunch

   In 1999, when Americans suddenly started contracting the West Nile virus that
once was found mainly in birds, there was a logical conclusion:

   The insects must be biting infected birds and then biting people. But
researchers were puzzled, as most mosquitoes bite either birds or mammals, not
both.

   Dina M. Fonseca, a geneticist at Philadelphia's Academy of Natural Sciences,
thinks one way the disease is transmitted is by a hybrid version of two mosquito
species - one that bites birds, the other mostly mammals. Using DNA analysis,
her research team identified the two otherwise indistinguishable species, common
in Europe, and the hybrid, which is prevalent in the United States.

   Her results, published in Science, prompted a backlash from some experts who
questioned whether the hybrids truly behave differently.

   Fonseca, 40, is sticking to her theory and conducting follow-up studies with
all three types of mosquitoes.

   "Mosquitoes are quite interesting flying hypodermic needles with information
on them," Fonseca says.

   A native of Portugal, she was working for the Smithsonian Institution when
her paper was published in March. Now she's finishing a paper on the origin of
mosquitoes that transmit avian malaria in Hawaii, where dozens of bird species
are endangered.

   Hawaiian mosquitoes have long been presumed to originate from the U.S.
mainland. Fonseca can't say much publicly now, but, she hints, the powerful tool
of DNA may once again yield a surprising answer.

   - Tom Avril

   Breast cancer

   Britton Chance is the winner of prizes ranging from an Olympic gold medal to
the National Medal of Science, a Renaissance man with pioneering discoveries in
biomedical optics. At 91, he still rides his bike to work and hones the sailing
skills that earned him the gold in 1952.

   Banu Onaral was a toddler in her native Turkey that year. Now, at 55, she is
an engineer who combines ivory-tower and entrepreneurial brilliance to create
new tools for sensing, imaging and manipulating brain waves, blood flow, and
other biological signals.

   These two - Chance, a professor emeritus at University of Pennsylvania, and
Onaral, director of Drexel University's School of Biomedical Science,
Engineering and Health Systems - have joined forces to develop something every
woman could use: a battery-operated breast-cancer screening device.

   The pocket-size optical scanner uses near-infrared light to detect variations
in the breast's blood supply that occur when a tumor grows.

   The scanner would supplement, not replace, mammographic X-rays; it would
enable women to check in the privacy of their homes for potential problems that
warrant further testing. Many women now skip routine mammograms because the
breast-squishing exams are unpleasant.

   "I shouldn't say this, but they call it 'the slammer,' " Chance chuckled.

   He had already invested three years in the prototype device when he teamed in
2001 with Onaral, who oversees 11 research laboratories.

   "I say to my students, all of us combined cannot beat him," Onaral says.
"He's very sharp, extremely innovative. And he's also very competitive. He's
really our mastermind."

   Last summer, her own drive was fueled by the loss of a close friend to breast
cancer. She realizes that getting government approval of the scanner will take
millions of dollars and at least five more years of testing.

   But she is already looking ahead, eager to tap the vast potential of the
near-infrared technology - to measure healing after stroke, brain activity, and
even to explore memory.

   "We already can use it in surgery to monitor the level of consciousness," she
says.

   - M.McC.

   Robots in the O.R.

   Y. Joseph Woo is working toward the day when cardiac surgery is routinely
done robotically through keyhole incisions, when heart valves are grown from a
patient's cells, and when ailing hearts are programmed to create new blood
vessels and stronger muscle.

   On one front, Woo, a University of Pennsylvania cardiothoracic surgeon, is
getting close. Using robotic tools, he is doing bypass surgery through tiny, 1
1/2-inch incisions.

   He negotiates such tight spaces with miniature cameras and robotic tools he
manipulates from a console about 10 feet away from the operating table.

   As director of Penn's Minimally Invasive and Robotic Cardiac Surgery Program,
Woo, 37, is emblematic of a new breed of surgeons who foresee how the scalpel
will be complemented by new tools such as gene therapy and molecular-targeted
treatments.

   One goal is to figure out a way to grow a heart valve in the lab using a
patient's own cells. The patient would then have minimally invasive, robotic
surgery to replace a faulty valve with a fresh one.

   "That would be the ultimate combination of molecular and cellular biology,
physiology and surgery," Woo says.

   - Susan Fitzgerald

   Stem-cell dreams

   One day, Wise Young believes, there will be no begging for a blood drive.
Instead, there will be centers where different blood types will grow, ready for
the next patient who needs them.

   As founding director of the Center for Collaborative Neuroscience at Rutgers
University, Young is heading New Jersey's drive to secure a place in the
stem-cell funding race.

   Stem cells are the building blocks of the body; some become liver cells,
others heart cells, others nerve cells. Scientists hope stem cells could be used
to heal everything from a diseased liver to a broken back.

   By using stem cells from embryonic and neonatal rats, Young is transplanting
the cells into rats with injured brain, spinal cords and muscles, to see if the
cells regenerate the damaged tissues.

   But Young's first aim is to simply get the stem cells to reproduce - an aim
shared at large by the stem-cell institute he works at.

   "We've been focusing on using umbilical cord blood and growing the stem cells
in large quantities, so that they can be used to treat many people," he said.
But it's hard to control which tissue the stem-cell form would take.

   Young hopes that a new consortium with Pennsylvania and Delaware will help
stem-cell research and cultivate new funding sources.

   He says more than two dozen animal experiments, using stem cell therapies,
have enabled the animals to walk again, and this year, he will attend an
international meeting in Hong Kong to help decide which one is the best.

   "I'm hoping that in three or four years we'll have effective therapies tested
in people."

   - Dawn Fallik

   Equal treatment

   Growing up in West Philadelphia, Vanessa Northington Gamble was told
repeatedly by her mother and grandmother that, although they were poor, her
future was bright.

   You will be someone, they told her, maybe even a doctor!

   Today, Gamble, 51 - a graduate of Philadelphia High School for Girls,
Hampshire College, and the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine - is
both a physician and a medical historian.

   She has become one of the nation's leading voices on racial and ethnic
disparities in American health care. She was the first African American woman
granted tenure at the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine.

   She also served as chair of President Clinton's Tuskegee Syphilis Study
Legacy Committee, which pushed for - and won - a presidential apology in 1997 to
five elderly survivors of that ill-fated federal government experiment. For 40
years, 399 black men from Tuskegee, Ala., were left untreated for syphilis so
researchers could observe their symptoms.

   Word of the Tuskegee study, which leaked out in 1972, was the spark that
ignited her interest in medicine.

   Last July, Gamble returned to those Tuskegee roots. She became director of
the National Center for Bioethics in Research and Health Care at Tuskegee
University. The center is dedicated to health-care issues that affect African
Americans and other minorities.

   - Virginia A. Smith

   Keeping kids safe

   By this time next year, Fred Clark and Paul Offit hope to see two decades of
work finally go from vision to vaccine.

   The two doctors - Clark is a veterinarian and Offit is chief of infectious
disease at Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania - started working on a rotavirus
vaccine in 1980. The disease affects mostly infants, causing nonstop vomiting
and diarrhea, and it kills more than 600,000 children, mostly in developing
countries, due to dehydration.

   The vaccine is given by mouth at two months, four months and six months. It
just finished the final phase of trials, which were paid for by Merck & Co. More
than 70,000 infants were in the trial, Offit said.

   "It's a great killer of children in which there was no vaccine available,"
Clark said. The two co-own the patent for the vaccine, but said much of the
money will go to Children's Hospital and Merck.

   The new vaccine will be different from the one sold by Wyeth in 1998, which
was recalled because it was linked to a sometimes-fatal intestinal disorder. The
Wyeth vaccine included a strain of the monkey rotavirus, Offit said, while the
new vaccine is based on human and cow strains, which do not produce similar
reactions.

   The duo will apply for approval this year with the Food and Drug
Administration.

   "When we see a vaccine being given to a child, that'll really be the great
moment," Offit said.

   - D.F.

   Better diets

   Long before obesity became an epidemic in the United States, Shiriki
Kumanyika had been studying ways to improve people's diets and their physical
activity.

   The solution will not come in a pill, says the University of Pennsylvania
epidemiology professor. Or in a fad diet. Or from an ivory tower.

   She says the answers - and many will be needed - will arise from the input of
churches, schools and other neighborhood groups.

   "The community has to take the lead," says Kumanyika, 59, who has served on
the U.S. Dietary Guidelines Committees, the National Institutes of Health
Clinical Obesity Research Panel, and the World Health Organization's Expert
Panel on Diet, Nutrition and Chronic Diseases.

   This year, Kumanyika will be testing ideas by developing projects in
Philadelphia through the federally funded Center of Excellence in Partnerships
for Community Outreach, Research on Health Disparities and Training, or EXPORT.
She directs the center, whose partners are Penn and Cheyney University.

   Kumanyika says one project will examine how billboards relate to a
community's health in three cities, including Philadelphia.

   - Marian Uhlman

   Quality of care

   Risa Lavizzo-Mourey launches her third year as president of the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation with a major effort to address health-care quality.

   "It is very hard to find someone in casual conversation who had an encounter
with the health-care system where they didn't have some concern about quality,"
said Lavizzo-Mourey, 50, an internist, who directed Penn's Institute on Aging
before joining the foundation in 2001 as a senior vice president.

   The Princeton-based foundation, the nation's largest health-care
philanthropy, gives away several hundred million dollars a year, and will focus
on three major goals involving health-care quality: To better the working
environment for hospital nurses, improve outpatient care for chronically ill
patients, and reduce health-care disparities among racial and ethnic groups.

   She said the foundation would commit about 25 percent of its grants to the
effort.

   "All of us like to envision a health-care system that delivers the right care
as you need it," said Lavizzo-Mourey, who was deputy administrator of the
federal Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. "This is not a one-year
agenda."

   She said the quality effort reminds her of an African proverb: Disease and
disasters come and go like rain, but health is like the sun that illuminates the
entire village.

   "It gives me the sense that we can pursue the mission of the foundation that
will improve the health and health care of the people in this country," she
said. "We can pursue the sun."

   - M.U.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
Shiriki Kumanyika has worked to improve diets.
Risa Lavizzo-Mourey leads the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Vanessa Northington Gamble works on disparities in health care.
PETER TOBIA, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Researcher Paul Offit is helping to create a rotavirus vaccine.
APRIL SAUL, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Y. Joseph Woo, a cardiothoracic surgeon at the University of Pennsylvania, is
using robotics to do heart surgery through tiny incisions. He looks forward to a
day when the practice is routine.
DAVID M WARREN, Inquirer Suburban Staff
Wise Young of Rutgers University is working to grow stem cells in large
quantities.
REBECCA BARGER, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Zebrafish are Steven Farber's life in his lab at Thomas Jefferson University,
where he uses 10,000 of the fish to study genetics, stem cells and more.
HINDA SCHUMAN, Inquirer Suburban Photographer
Anne-Marie Corner's firm is developing a contraceptive that prevents most
sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS.
BONNIE WELLER, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Banu Onaral (left) and Britton Chance joined forces to develop a handheld
scanner for breast cancer.
APRIL SAUL, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Dina M. Fonseca, a geneticist at the Academy of Natural Sciences, is following
through on her theory about the transmission of West Nile virus to humans: She
thinks a hybrid of two types of mosquitoes is to blame.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2005


                             258 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2005 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     January 3, 2005, Monday, Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS INSIDER; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1833 words

HEADLINE: Many pathways to the future;
Boston Scientific Corp. saw some ups and downs in 2004. But the company's CEO,
Jim Tobin, is looking ahead - and that matters to Minnesota.

BYLINE: Janet Moore; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Imagine being a CEO and sitting on a pile of cash - somewhere in the
neighborhood of $1 billion. A picture of Jim Tobin, who heads Boston Scientific
Corp., might very well come to mind.

        Now Tobin and his management team must peer into their medical
technology crystal ball and try to figure: What's the next blockbuster device?

        Tobin certainly has a few ideas, as the Natick, Mass.-based company
moves to broaden its product line beyond stents, catheters and other devices
used in less-invasive medical procedures. Last summer, the company weathered a
series of embarrassing recalls of nearly 100,000 heart stents, most of them its
drug-coated Taxus. Taxus is made in Maple Grove and Ireland.

        In an interview late last year, the affable Tobin touched on the recall,
but he seemed much more interested in discussing the 25-year-old company's
future.

        These plans will have long-lasting implications in Minnesota, where the
company (formerly SciMed Life Systems) employs 3,564 people. That number is
expected to grow 4,149 employees by the start of 2006, partly because of a new
$60 million research and development facility under construction here.

        Q - So where are you going from here?

        It took us 24 years to get to $3.5 billion [in annual sales] and one
year to get to $5.5 billion. We're generating cash to the tune of a half a
billion dollars a quarter - maybe more than that - numbers that most companies
only imagine or dream about.

        It gives us the opportunity to invest in our future. We used to spend
$200 million a year on research and development. Next year we will spend $650
million. That's a big deal.

        We have been investing roughly $600 million a year, where we are buying
intellectual property rights, technology, development projects in process.
Occasionally, we find a product that's already approved or just about to be
approved and we buy it as a product line. These days, everyone's bought all that
stuff, so you end up buying things that are still a year or two away from the
market.

        We can't really spend more than that a year because that's all there is
to buy. It's a supply-and-demand kind of thing.

        Q - A lot of companies in Minnesota would like to speak with you on that
front.

        I'm not saying that there aren't a lot of sellers. (Laughs) It's stuff
worth buying that's the issue.

        Q - When is Liberte [the next version of Taxus] launching?

        Outside of the U.S. it'll be [2005]. The U.S. will be '06.

        Q - What's your second priority?

        A really latent, unmet need is the closure market. Everytime you do an
angioplasty, you make a hole, you've got to close it. For 20 years, closing it
[involved] manual compression ... then people started coming out with closure
systems, some are suture-based, some are staple-based. Most of them leave
something in the vessel, which is not optimal.

        We've got an approach which is focused ultrasound. The device is about
the size of a computer mouse, and you hold it over the hole, and it ... locates
the hole, and [then] sends focused ultrasound heat to ... seal off the hole in
20 seconds. It's being done for us by an outside company. If they succeed, we
buy them [Therus Corp., a privately held company in Seattle].

        Q - What else?

        We have a big franchise in endoscopy. ... When you think of endoscopy,
you have the colonoscope, which is basically a camera system, that lets you look
up there to see if you have polyps or not.

        If you do, we make the tools that run up the center [of the colonoscope]
that will take biopsies and snip out what you want to get rid of. ... We've come
up with a design for a disposable version. It's flexible and smaller.

        Q - Anything else?

        Triple A [abdominal aortic aneurysm, an abnormal ballooning of the
abdominal portion of the aorta, the major artery from the heart] devices.
Medtronic has one, Guidant used to, before it got pulled off the market. There
are four or five [devices], none of them are as good as they need to be. ... I
think we're going to have a really good triple A device. If I'm right about
that, it's another home run.

        Q - Go on.

        There's a lot of talk these days about carotid procedures. If you're
going to mess around here [points to neck], you want downstream filtration,
because you don't want particles to go here [points to brain]. We already have
that, we're on our second generation, and we'll have a third- and
fourth-generation [device]. We're also working on two versions of the stent
itself.

         We won't be first, but we'll advance the ball.

        Q - Tell me about Advanced Bionics.

        We bought them in June. Their spinal cord stimulator [for lower back
pain] competes with Medtronic. ... There hasn't been a lot of innovation in this
space. [Advanced Bionics] also has a thing [that is] the size of the last inch
of a pencil - it's half battery, half pulse generation. You implant it up
against the occipital nerve and you turn it on, and it basically blocks
migraines. That's a big market.

        Q - What about treatments like gene therapy, cell therapy, which have
the potential to regenerate dead muscle or tissue? Will they put device
companies out of business?

        No. ... You've got two classes of patients today who are poorly
addressed by drugs or devices. Those are angio patients, who experience crushing
pain when they're walking up stairs. And there's congestive heart failure
patients, where they've had a heart attack, part of the heart has died and the
rest of the heart tries to make up for it. It gets progressively worse until
eventually you can't go on. ...

        So there's a huge theoretical market for repairing the heart
biologically, as opposed to mechanically. In theory, it could be addressed by
stem cell therapy, by gene therapy and by two or three other technologies. We -
the industry - know about 2 percent of the biology to confidently predict that
these problems can be solved.

        But every once in a while you get lucky, and you happen to know the
right 2 percent. So you have to keep trying. ... We like what we're doing in
this space, but the odds that we're going to succeed are very low.

        Q - Why did you choose to expand in Minnesota?

        That's easy. There are in Minnesota pools of talented people who have
experience in device companies. More so than any other place on the planet. It
comes down to people. That's where the talent pool is. My uncle used to tell me,
"Go duck hunting where the ducks are."

        Q - Do you have anything to say about the Medinol ruling?

        [The previous day, a federal judge ruled in a longstanding legal battle
that Boston Scientific violated an agreement with stent partner Medinol Ltd. and
acted in bad faith when it set up a secret stent-making operation in Ireland
called Project Independence, this before Tobin's tenure. The judge also threw
out Medinol's allegations that Boston Scientific should be prosecuted on
racketeering charges and that its chief executives should be held personally
responsible for the misappropriation of trade secrets.]

        I think we came out OK on that whole thing. It's good that the
individuals are out of the case. It's good that the judge sees it as a contract
dispute. ... it's disappointing that he didn't see it our way on Project
Independence, but the damages of Project Independence are diminishingly small,
if any. It looks to me that [the judge] would really like us to settle this.
[Laughs.]

        Q - I suppose the Taxus recalls were a nightmare for you.

        We basically pulled the product back and replenished the U.S. market in
48 hours. But it took weeks for the press to give up on it.

        Q - What was the Food and Drug Administration's role in all of it?

        We identified the problem, we went to [the FDA] and said, "Here's what
we need to do," and they said, "OK." We continued to investigate and found
problems, we did the second recall. They agreed with that and felt we had taken
the right steps.

        Then we screwed up in the execution and had to do a third [recall], and
that raised their eyebrows some.

        We said, "We're not trying to hide it, we're not trying to kid
ourselves. We were getting to the root of the problem." [Eventually] we could
both see that the rate of complaints and the problems were diminishing week by
week.

        Janet Moore is at      jmmoore@startribune.com.

   A year of deals for Boston Scientific

        This year was particularly busy for Boston Scientific Corp. in terms of
investment in new technology and in the companies developing that technology.
It's a trend that is likely to continue in 2005. Here's a sampling of Boston
Scientific's deals in 2004:

        Feb. 18: An equity investment with an option to buy Endoscopic
Technologies Inc. aimed at developing less-invasive surgical tools to treat
heart arrhythmias.

        Feb. 20: An equity investment with an option to buy Cameron Health Inc.,
San Clemente, Calif., which makes a next-generation implantable defibrillator
for the heart.

        April 7: Acquires Precision Vascular Systems Inc., West Valley City,
Utah, for undisclosed terms. Precision Vascular makes guidewires and
microcatheters to access the brain, the heart and other areas.

        June 1: Buys Advanced Bionics Corp., Valencia, Calif., for an initial
payment of $740 million, plus future payments tied to performance milestones.
Advanced Bionics has developed implantable microelectronics for treating
neurological disorders.

        Aug. 10: Made a "significant" investment in Northstar Neuroscience Inc.,
Seattle, which is developing a neurostimulation system for neurological diseases
and disorders, with the initial focus on stroke patients.

        Dec. 16: Agrees to buy Advanced Stent Technologies Inc., Pleasanton,
Calif., for an undisclosed amount. AST has been developing stent and stent
delivery systems designed for bifurcated vessels.

        Nov. 16: Makes an equity investment in REVA Medical Inc., San Diego,
which is developing a bioresorbable drug-coated stent.

        Boston Scientific Corp.

        Based: Natick, Mass., with its cardiovascular division in Maple Grove

        Employment in Minnesota (in Maple Grove and Plymouth): Jan. 1, 2003
(pre-Taxus): 2,118; Jan. 1, 2004: 3,251; Current employment: 3,564; projected
for Jan. 1, 2006: 4,149.#

        Status of $60 million expansion in Maple Grove: Two-story,
142,000-square-foot facility designed primarily for research and development,
especially new product development. Will accommodate 500-plus employees.
Occupancy expected to begin in the third quarter of 2005.

        Annual revenue: $3.5 billion

        Annual earnings: $472 million

        Sources: Boston Scientific Corp., Star Tribune research

        # Figures include full-time and temporary employees, but not sales
staff.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2005


                             259 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2005 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             January 2, 2005 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1244 words

HEADLINE: New weapons target deadly brain cancer;
Drugs, chemotherapy buy time for patients with glioblastoma

BYLINE: Lori Rackl

BODY:

   In the 33 years since President Richard M. Nixon launched the  nation's "war
on cancer," medical advances have turned a diagnosis  once tantamount to a death
sentence into an increasingly survivable  disease.

   Some cancers, though, have proven far more powerful than others.  Among the
worst: glioblastoma multiforme, or GBM. It's one of the  most common and most
aggressive of the 100 or so types of brain  cancers, claiming 125,000 lives a
year nationwide. Among its  better-known victims: Chicago sportscaster Tim
Weigel.

   In 1975, survival typically was only about seven months. A quarter  century
later, it was about the same, according to the most recent  federal data. Just 3
percent of people struck by glioblastoma  typically live as long as five years.

   But now "there's reason to be optimistic," said Dr. Maciej Lesniak,  director
of neurosurgical oncology at the University of Chicago  Medical Center. Here's
why:

   *Several novel approaches to treating glioblastoma are in clinical  trials.
These include a new "smart" drug and a targeted  drug-delivery method that
recently became available in a study  involving three Chicago hospitals.

   *The chemotherapy drug Temodar appears promising as a tool to buy  GBM
patients time.

   *And a new test can help doctors pinpoint which patients will  benefit from
Temodar.

   "There's no good time to have a GBM, but I'd certainly rather have  a GBM now
than at any other time," said Dr. Richard Byrne, a brain  surgeon at Rush
University Medical Center.

   Glioblastoma's tumors are a surgeon's nightmare -- irregularly  shaped, with
poorly defined borders. And renegade cancer cells  often hide beyond the main
tumor.

   "These are incredibly stubborn tumors to fight," said Dr. Glenn  Lesser, an
oncologist at Wake Forest University in North Carolina.

   Scientists are slowly chipping away at the obstacles to treating
glioblastomas. "We now have new therapies for glioblastoma that we  couldn't
offer patients 10 years ago," Lesniak said, "and there are  more clinical trials
in brain tumors than there have ever been  before."

   So far, though, "that really has not yet translated into better  outcomes for
patients." Lesser said.

   'We're getting better at it'

   The National Cancer Institute reports 63 ongoing clinical trials in
glioblastoma alone. One involves a drug from Lake Forest-based  NeoPharm being
tested at hospitals, including three in Chicago --  Rush, Northwestern and the
University of Chicago. Known as  IL13-PE38QQR, it's a "smart drug" that zeroes
in on cancer cells --  while sparing normal brain cells -- after the tumor is
surgically  removed.

   "Previous studies with this drug have shown that it was safe and  that there
were some very dramatic responses in terms of  eliminating residual tumor in the
brain and prolonging patient  life," said Byrne, lead investigator for the study
at Rush.

   Catheters are passed through the skull and into the brain, then a  pump
slowly pushes the drug solution through the tiny tubes. This  lets the
medication bypass the blood-brain barrier, a tight-knit  layer of cells that
protects the brain from chemicals and viruses  in the bloodstream. The problem
for brain-cancer patients: The  barrier can keep out drugs that kill cancers
elsewhere in the body.

   "Trying to get drugs to brain tumors has been a major obstacle,"  Lesniak
said. "But we're getting better at it."

   Surgeons can now implant dime-size chemotherapeutic wafers in tumor
cavities. As these Gliadel wafers dissolve over several weeks, they  release a
cancer-fighting drug. The drug's approval in 1996 marked  the first new
treatment for malignant brain tumors in 23 years,  Lesniak said.

   "It buys you another two to three months, at best," he said. "But  two or
three months can make a tremendous difference. It can mean  seeing a daughter
get married or a grandchild be born."

   Bigger role for chemo

   John Crocilla of Wood Dale had wafers implanted in August 2003,  after Byrne
operated on his glioblastoma -- a word Crocilla hadn't  heard till his doctor
explained that it's what caused numbness and  tingling on his left side.

   When Crocilla was diagnosed, his doctor at the time gave him three  months to
live. Crocilla and his wife, Paula, sought out  experimental treatment at Rush
combining the drug thalidomide and  chemo, hoping to buy more time for the
father of two sons, ages 5  and 18. Crocilla died Dec. 15 at age 48.

   "The doctor gave him three months, and he had 16," Paula Crocilla  said. "We
had more time with him because of the treatment."

   Chemotherapy is playing a bigger role in treating glioblastoma,  which long
was fought with surgery and radiation. At an American  Society of Clinical
Oncology meeting in June, researchers shared  results of a study that looked at
standard therapy for glioblastoma  with or without the early use of the
chemotherapy drug Temodar.  After two years, 26 percent of patients who got low
doses of the  capsule Temodar for several weeks at the start of treatment were
alive, compared with 10 percent who got the usual care.

   Doctors now can figure out which patients stand to gain from  Temodar using a
test that tells whether a key gene is switched off  or on. If it's active, the
drug had little effect. In those with  the silent gene, the chance of living two
years after treatment was  an encouraging 46 percent.

   Making the old new

   A hallmark of GBM is that the tumor often returns. When it does, it  can be
too damaging to normal tissue to endure more radiation.  That's where a device
called GliaSite comes in. Approved by the FDA  for brain cancer in 2001, it uses
a balloon catheter filled with  liquid radiation to deliver the therapy right to
the tumor.

   "The major benefit . . . is that a high dose of radiation may be  given
directly to the tumor site, while minimizing the amount of  healthy brain tissue
exposed to radiation," said Dr. John Chang,  medical director of radiation
oncology at Lutheran General Cancer  Care Center in Park Ridge.

   Lutheran began using GliaSite last year. The hospital also now has  an
intra-operative MRI, letting surgeons scan the brain during  surgery, not just
before. This can give a better idea of a tumor's  boundaries. Intra-operative
MRIs are more valuable with other brain  tumors, but some GBM patients benefit,
said Dr. John Ruge, a  Lutheran General neurosurgeon. "If my family member has a
glioblastoma and needs a complete resection, they're not going  anyplace that
doesn't have this," Ruge said.

   Other promising leads

   Gene therapy also is a hot area of research, said Dr. Jan Buckner,  chairman
of medical oncology at Mayo Clinic. "We're developing a  modified measles virus
that changes the DNA of the virus so it only  enters brain tumor cells," Buckner
said. "Once it's in the cell, it  basically gives the brain tumor measles and
kills those cells."

   A U. of C. team has wrapped up research on genetically altering a  cold
virus, aiming it at GBM and blood vessels that feed it. If  animal studies go
well, Lesniak hopes to begin tests on humans as  early as this year.

   While these tactics hold promise, Buckner doesn't think there's one  magic
bullet.

   But each improvement matters to people like Paula Crocilla, who's  convinced
that ongoing research added a precious few months to her  husband's short life.
That's why she wanted to return the favor.

   "I agreed to have them remove John's brain tumor, and it's going to  be used
for cancer research," Crocilla said. "Hopefully one day,  John will contribute
to finding a cure."

GRAPHIC: John Crocilla of Wood Dale is shown with his wife, Paula, and son
Russell, 5, in August. John Crocilla died Dec. 15 at age 48. He had undergone
treatment for a brain cancer called glioblastoma multiforme, or GBM, with small
drug wafers implanted in his tumor cavities. Jon Sall

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2005


                             260 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                           December 30, 2004 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS HALT ANTHRAX QUICKLY IN TEST ON MICE

BYLINE: BY DEREK ROSE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   RESEARCHERS AT New York's Weill Cornell Medical College have successfully
immunized mice against anthrax in just hours, far faster than traditional
techniques.

   The scientists used gene therapy to instruct the immune systems of 10 mice to
produce anthrax antibodies.

   All 10 survived what was expected to be a lethal dose of anthrax, while mice
in a control group died.

   "If you're a mouse, we can protect you," said lead researcher Dr. Ronald
Crystal, chairman of Weill Cornell's department of genetic medicine.

   While human testing is still at least 18 months away, the technique may offer
a quick protection against biological warfare.

   The soldiers in the Army's current anthrax vaccination program don't develop
anthrax antibodies for weeks, and are only considered fully immunized after 18
months - far too long to wait in the event of an anthrax attack.

   The mice treated with gene therapy developed antibodies in just 12 hours,
although their immunization wore off within 10 to 15 days, Crystal said.

   A series of anthrax-laced letters mailed in 2001 killed five people and
sickened 13. Some 33,000 people were treated with antibiotics for possible
exposure to the biological attack, which Crystal predicted would not be the
last.

   "It's really not difficult to do," he said of bioterror. "I think it's
something that's going to happen eventually." drose@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2004


                             261 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  December 22, 2004, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2043 words

HEADLINE: Why heart attacks run in families: Genetics

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

BODY:
For years, the Steffensen family of Buffalo Center, Iowa, blamed heaping
helpings of what they call "good old Iowa farm cooking" for a more distressing
family tradition: heart attacks.

   Don Steffensen's heart nearly quit while he was duck hunting with friends
when he was 62. When his doctors learned that he and eight of his 11 siblings
had heart problems, they recruited the family for a landmark genetic analysis.
Their two-year study shifted some of the blame for the family's misfortune from
meat, potatoes and gravy to a faulty gene.

   "They're hard-wired to have a heart attack," says Eric Topol of the Cleveland
Clinic, who led the team that identified the abnormality.


   The good news is that more healthful living can literally change a person's
genetic destiny by staving off a gene's ill effects for years, maybe even
decades.

   "Everyone right now is pretty doggone glad we did it, I can tell you,"
Steffensen says of the family's participation in the research. "It enlightened
us. It wasn't just the food."

   The Cleveland Clinic study is just one of several worldwide devoted to
teasing out why heart attacks run in families and how to prevent them.
Geneticists at the Icelandic company deCode, for instance, have identified a
different genetic cause of heart attacks that may be remedied with a drug now in
human trials.

   Unlike the Steffensen study, which aimed to identify a gene in one family
that may be implicated in heart attacks in the general population, Icelandic
researchers carried out a painstaking genetic analysis of a large population.
They used hundreds of heart attack patients and family members in Iceland to
look for any genes that might be related to heart attacks.

   The analysis, made possible by the company's countrywide access to genetic
information, identified the FLAP gene, which appears to double a person's heart
disease risk.

   "The genetic factors we're working on are dramatically different than the
ones Eric Topol is working on," says deCode CEO Kari Stefansson. "We're working
on heart attacks as a public health problem."

   It would be a mistake to pin all the blame for heart disease on genetics,
Topol cautions.

   Unlike so-called single-gene disorders such as cystic fibrosis and sickle
cell anemia, heart attacks result from a mix of genetic factors and behaviors.
No medicine can counter the long-term cumulative effects of a sedentary
lifestyle, smoking and a high-salt, high-fat diet. That's why doctors place so
much emphasis on eliminating risk factors and controlling diabetes.

   For the Steffensens and others like them, the benefit of knowing that they
are vulnerable to heart attacks comes not from having a medicine that can lower
their risk, but from a test result that permits them to be proactive and live a
heart-healthy life.

   "We might not be able to eliminate the risk, but we should be able to
forestall it," Topol says. "We can change natural history."

   For Steffensen's son, Mark, 38, who has a high-pressure job in New York's
financial district and is the father of two young children, it's a comforting
notion. He eats healthful food and exercises.

   Knowing that his two children, Zoe, 4, and Ian, 11/2, may share Dad's genetic
susceptibility, Steffensen has all but eliminated visits to McDonald's --"Sure,
we go once in a while. It's a treat for the kids" -- and has begun to think
about prevention.

   "Will I have my kids tested?" he says. "The answer to that is yes."

   Steffensens' genes studied

   The Cleveland Clinic's foray into the heart disease genetics, a project
called Gene Quest, began in the mid-'90s. Don Steffensen volunteered in 2002.
During one of his routine visits for advanced cardiac care, his wife overheard
doctors talking about their genetic research. "My wife said, 'You'd better talk
to them about getting into this thing,' " Steffensen says.

   Steffensen told his family's history, beginning with his father, Arthur
Steffensen, who died at 45, slumped behind the wheel of the car after a
father-son church dinner. With Topol's approval, he began recruiting relatives.

   Topol's team identified a defective gene on chromosome 15, one of the 23
chromosome pairs that govern every aspect of human biology. The gene, called
MEF2A, is believed to be involved in artery maintenance and repair. Researchers
found 26 people in Steffensen's 240-member family who inherited the flawed gene
and were more prone to develop blocked arteries.

   The discovery also might help people outside the Steffensen family circle. An
ongoing search of 10,000 samples in the Cleveland Clinic's gene bank has found
that errors in MEF2A may account for 1% to 2% of the heart disease in the
general population, making it twice as common as the genes for breast cancer,
BrCA 1, and familial high cholesterol.

   "We've now found four different mutations in different spots in the same
gene," Topol says. "They very much resemble the Steffensen family, even though
the mutations aren't the same. If it wasn't for the Steffensen family, we
wouldn't have discovered these other people."

    Many genes involved

   Although it has been apparent for centuries that heart disease runs in
families, only in the last few years have researchers had the tools to focus on
the genetic origin of heart attacks.

   The hunt for heart attack genes is urgent because roughly half of the million
people who die of cardiovascular disease each year suffer heart attacks. Nearly
half of all men and a third of women will have a heart attack sometime after age
40, and one-third of those who survive one heart attack will have another.

   Yet each case is unique, resulting from a different blend of risk factors.
And, teasing out the genetic basis for heart attacks won't be simple because
genes don't act in a vacuum. They're influenced by behavior and environment.
Scientists already have linked well over 250 genes to other forms of heart
disease, several leading to treatments.

   A University of Utah team, for instance, identified more than 300 variants of
a gene that makes a receptor for LDL, or bad cholesterol. One person in 500 has
a variant that produces a flawed receptor, which allows bad cholesterol to build
up. People who inherit this variant from each parent develop the condition known
as familial hypercholesterolemia and may have heart attacks in childhood. It was
this high risk that drove the development of statin drugs.

   Genes also determine whether a person will benefit from a low-salt diet,
whether a person's arteries are coated with a non-stick protein and whether the
body can produce enough so-called good cholesterol to clear the bad stuff from
the bloodstream.

   So far, no drugs are capable of dispelling the perfect cardiovascular storm
that is a heart attack. Even statins, such as Lipitor, which help restore
blood-fat levels to more normal levels, prevent only about 10% of deadly
cardiovascular events. That means doctors must prescribe statins to 100 people
to prevent 10 heart attacks.

   "That's dumb medicine," Topol says. "You'd like to get 50 of a hundred
benefiting from this expensive, life-long medicine. Genetics can help us do
that."

   One thing genetic medicine can't do is correct the Steffensens' abnormality.
Because the defect is found in a gene that helps produce proteins vital for cell
function, it is too basic a defect to repair without gene therapy, which is the
fix of the future but impossible now.

   Experimental drug on way

   But a heart attack medicine may soon be on the way. It's the drug identified
by deCode in Iceland. Dubbed DG 031, the drug blocks the effects of FLAP, a gene
that promotes inflammation in the coronary arteries. It has been linked with 30%
of the heart attack risk in the populations of Iceland and the United Kingdom
and somewhat less in the USA.

   "This is a huge step toward realizing the promise of genetic medicine," says
CEO Stefansson, whose firm carried out the genetic study, identified a potential
target for therapy and found a drug that, at least in theory, should work. "For
those of us in the genomics world, this is a historic event."

   FLAP ramps up production of inflammatory chemicals called leukotrienes, which
also are involved in allergies and asthma.

   Research has shown that inflamed fatty deposits in arteries are more likely
to burst, sending debris and blood clots coursing toward vessels nourishing the
heart.

   Because of the link to allergies and asthma, drug firm Bayer began studying
potential leukotriene blockers. One experimental drug that proved ineffective
against asthma may become the first drug to treat a specific defect that leads
to heart attacks. Stefansson says deCode licensed the experimental drug from
Bayer a year ago. Early tests show it's safe.

   DeCode also has found a second heart attack gene that promotes inflammation.
Company scientists are trying to find compounds that might block that gene's
effects. What researchers don't yet know is whether either drug can prevent the
onset of heart attacks and prolong survival.

   If so, Stefansson says, it might be possible to achieve more than simply
lowering a person's risk of heart attack. It might be possible to provide a
level of protection now found only in a handful of people who are genetically
blessed.

   However, few researchers can claim the broad canvas that favors deCode. Other
scientists, including Ulrich Broeckel at the Medical College of Wisconsin,
Elizabeth Hauser at Duke University and Steven Hunt of the University of Utah,
are searching for heart attack genes in smaller populations.

   Broeckel's study of 1,000 families in Germany has led his Wisconsin team to
believe that they're zeroing in on a suspect gene on chromosome 14. Hauser's
team at Duke has narrowed its search to chromosome 3.

   Hunt and his colleagues at the University of Utah, who identified the genes
for familial high cholesterol, are about to launch a 25-year follow-up on 2,500
of the 10,000 people in that study, looking for heart attack and other heart
disease genes.

   Targeted medicine

   Their task won't be easy. That's because heart attacks are probably caused by
multiple genes with relatively small effects. Researchers will have to study
large populations and exploit every advance in genetic analysis and computing
power to make sense of the new information.

   "You can imagine that any time some defective gene causes an abnormality in
blood pressure regulation, you're going to have five other systems kick in and
try to correct it until the system can't compensate any more," Hunt says.

   That's also why lifestyle is so important, he says, citing as proof the
family differences in age of onset of heart disease.

   "In one family, an early Mormon pioneer had the gene (for familial high
cholesterol) and lived to 81," he says. "Later generations were getting heart
attacks in their 40s. In every generation, it got earlier and earlier, even
though they had the same gene."

   Topol says the ability to test for a heart attack gene already has provided
him with an opportunity to intervene in this cycle. In effect, he says, it has
enabled him to practice a whole new brand of medicine.

   "I never dreamed that it would be possible to tell someone like Mark
Steffensen that he carried a gene that was going to give him heart disease, and
then say, 'I think we need to work with you, your wife and your kids.'

   "It's targeted medicine. We might not be able to get everyone to keep their
weight low, eat a healthy diet and exercise, but what if we could focus on
people who really need to?"



   Learning about heart disease

   If you have a history of heart disease in your family, researchers urge you
to contact your doctor for an examination and to discuss your options. For more
information:

   * National Society of Genetic Counselors: www.nsgc.org.

   * A family history risk- assessment site developed by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention and launched by the U.S. Surgeon General:
www.hhs.gov/familyhistory.

   * The American Heart Association: www.americanheart.org.

   * Cleveland Clinic's Heart Center Resource Line: 1-866-289-6911. (When
prompted, select "Items in the news.") Or visit www.clevelandclinic.org/
heartcenter.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Jim A. Heemstra
for USA TODAY; Getting an early start: Mark Steffensen, who carries a gene that
increases his risk of heart attack, has started teaching his children, Zoe, 4,
and Ian, 18 months, about healthful living, including limiting fast food. <>High
risk: Don Steffensen, who was 62 when he had a heart attack, and his 240-member
family took part in the landmark study.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2004


                             262 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            December 20, 2004 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Features Desk; Part F; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2340 words

HEADLINE: Sharper minds

BYLINE: Melissa Healy, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   It would be hard to imagine improving on the intelligence of computer
engineer Bjoern Stenger, a doctoral candidate at Cambridge University. Yet for
several hours, a pill seemed to make him even brainier.

   Participating in a research project, Stenger downed a green gelatin cap
containing a drug called modafinil. Within an hour, his attention sharpened. So
did his memory. He aced a series of mental-agility tests. If his brainpower
would normally rate a 10, the drug raised it to 15, he said.

   "I was quite focused," said Stenger. "It was also kind of fun."

   The age of smart drugs is dawning. Modafinil is just one in an array of
brain-boosting medications -- some already on pharmacy shelves and others in
development -- that promise an era of sharper thinking through chemistry.

   These drugs may change the way we think. And by doing so, they may change who
we are.

   Long-haul truckers and Air Force pilots have long popped amphetamines to ward
off drowsiness. Generations of college students have swallowed over-the-counter
caffeine tablets to get through all-nighters. But such stimulants provide only a
temporary edge, and their effect is broad and blunt -- they boost the brain by
juicing the entire nervous system.

   The new mind-enhancing drugs, in contrast, hold the potential for more
powerful, more targeted and more lasting improvements in mental acuity. Some of
the most promising have reached the stage of testing in human subjects and could
become available in the next decade, brain scientists say.

   "It's not a question of 'if' anymore. It's just a matter of time," said
geneticist Tim Tully, a researcher at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long
Island, N.Y., and developer of a compound called HT-0712, which has shown
promise as a memory enhancer. The drug soon will be tested in human subjects.

   The new brain boosters stem in part from research to develop treatments for
Alzheimer's disease, spinal cord injuries, schizophrenia and other conditions.
But they also reflect rapid advances in understanding the processes of learning
and memory in healthy people.

   *

   Developing research

   In the last two decades, scientists have made important discoveries about
which regions of the brain perform specific functions and how those regions work
together to absorb, store and retrieve information. Researchers also have begun
to grasp how and where neurotransmitters are manufactured and which ones help
perform which mental tasks.

   "There are things cooking here that couldn't have been done one to two
decades ago," said James L. McGaugh, director of UC Irvine's Center for the
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory.

   Research has gotten further stimulus from a deep-pocketed investor -- the
U.S. military, which is looking for ways to help pilots and soldiers stay sharp
under the stress and exhaustion of combat.

   The potential market for cognitive enhancers has never been bigger, or more
receptive.

   An estimated 77 million members of the baby boom generation will turn 50 in
the next 10 years, joining 11 million who have already passed the half-century
mark -- a stage at which memory and speed of response show noticeable decline.

   Modafinil, the drug that whetted Stenger's powers of concentration, is used
to treat narcolepsy and other sleep disorders. It is one of three prescription
medications on the market that have been shown to enhance certain mental powers.

   The other two are methylphenidate, marketed under the name Ritalin as a
remedy for attention deficit disorder, and donepezil, prescribed for patients
with Alzheimer's.

   Studies have shown that these drugs can produce significant mental gains in
normal, healthy subjects. None of the three has been approved for that purpose.
Nevertheless, a growing number of healthy Americans are taking them to get a
mental edge.

   Some obtain the medications from doctors who write prescriptions for
"off-label" uses not approved by the Food and Drug Administration -- a practice
both legal and common. Others buy the drugs through unregulated Internet
pharmacies.

   Cambridge University psychologist Barbara Sahakian considers modafinil
(marketed commercially under the name Provigil) especially intriguing. Its
developers aren't sure exactly how it keeps drowsiness at bay. But even in
healthy people, the medication appears to deliver measurable improvements with
few side effects.

   In a series of experiments in 2001, Sahakian and colleagues found that in
games that test mental skill, subjects who took a 200-milligram dose of
modafinil paid closer attention and used information more effectively than
subjects given a sugar pill.

   Confronted with conflicting demands, the people on modafinil moved more
smoothly from one task to the next and adjusted their strategies of play with
greater agility. In short, they worked smarter and were better at multi-tasking.

   "In my mind, it may be the first real smart drug," Sahakian said. "A lot of
people will probably take modafinil. I suspect they do already."

   Donepezil, sold under the name Aricept, also has been found to boost the
brain function of healthy people. The drug increases the concentration of a
neurotransmitter called acetylcholine, boosting the power of certain electrical
transmissions between brain cells.

   In a 2002 study, 18 pilots with an average age of 52 were put through seven
training flights in a simulator and taught a complex set of piloting skills over
30 days. Half took a low dose of donepezil; the other half took a placebo. At
month's end, all were tested on the skills they had learned.

   The pilots on donepezil retained more of the skills than those who took the
placebo. On the most challenging parts of the test, an emergency drill and a
landing sequence, their performance was notably superior, according to results
of the study published in the journal Neurology.

   *

   Botox for the mind?

   Some scientists predict that the development of even more-effective
brain-enhancing drugs will usher in an age of "cosmetic neurology."

   "If people can gain a millimeter, they're going to want to take it," said
Jerome Yesavage, director of Stanford University's Aging Clinical Research
Center and an author of the donepezil study.

   Judy Illes, a psychologist at Stanford's Center for Biomedical Ethics, said
mind-enhancing medicine could become "as ordinary as a cup of coffee." This
could be good for society, helping people learn faster and retain more, she
said.

   But it also raises questions: Will the rich get smarter while the poor fall
further behind? (Drugs such as modafinil can cost as much as $6 per dose.)

   Will people feel compelled to use the medications to keep up in school or in
the workplace? In a world where mental function can be tweaked with a pill, will
our notion of "normal intelligence" be changed forever?

   Mirk Mirkin of Sherman Oaks, 77, a retired marketing manager, would like to
regain a bit of his old intellectual nimbleness. A member of Mensa, a society
for people with IQs in the top two percentile of the nation, Mirkin is bothered
by what he laughingly calls "senior moments," such as when a name stubbornly
eludes him.

   If a pill could halt the march of forgetfulness without uncomfortable side
effects, he would probably take it, Mirkin said.

   Mirkin, who proctors tests for admission into Mensa, said he would not object
if younger people took such pills to pump up their mental muscle for the test.
"If they physically can handle it and want it bad enough, why not?"

   Many college and graduate students want an edge bad enough to take Ritalin,
even if they do not suffer from attention deficit disorder.

   At campuses, test sites and, increasingly, workplaces across the country,
people are popping "vitamin R." Some users persuade a doctor to prescribe it;
others get it from friends who have been diagnosed with attention deficit
disorder.

   The growing demand for Ritalin, which can be addictive, has prompted the U.S.
Drug Enforcement Administration to classify it as a "drug of concern."

   On the Internet chat board of the Student Doctor Network, college students
preparing for medical school admission tests frequently discuss the benefits of
taking Ritalin or similar drugs on exam day.

   Some students think they have no choice. "You figure you're being compared to
people who are on Ritalin," said one Los Angeles student who frequents the site
and recently asked a relative to supply the drug. "I just figured it would be
more fair if you're on the same level."

   Eventually, ambitious parents will start giving mind-enhancing pills to their
children, said McGaugh, the UC Irvine neurobiologist.

   "If there is a drug which is safe and effective and not too expensive for
enhancing memory in normal adults, why not normal children?" he said. "After
all, they're going to school, and what's more important than education of the
young? And what would be more important than giving them a little chemical
edge?"

   Defense Department scientists are pursuing just such an advantage for U.S.
combat forces. The Pentagon spends $20 million per year exploring ways to
"expand available memory" and build "sleep-resistant circuitry" in the brain.

   Among its aims: to develop stimulants capable of keeping soldiers awake,
alert and effective for as long as seven days straight. The armed forces have
taken leading roles in testing modafinil and donepezil as performance enhancers
for pilots and soldiers.

   On the horizon are other potential smart drugs, each operating on different
systems in the brain. If they progress through tests of safety and
effectiveness, the first of them could be available as early as 2008. (See
"What's on the horizon?" at right).

   Three companies are among the leading contenders in the race to develop drugs
for memory and cognitive performance: Memory Pharmaceuticals Corp. of Montvale,
N.J.; Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Irvine; and Helicon Therapeutics Inc.,
founded by Tully, the geneticist at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.

   All the new smart drugs are being developed as treatments for recognized
illnesses such as Alzheimer's -- a requirement for FDA approval. But the drug
that will make a company and its stockholders rich will be the one that treats a
disorder that until recently was not seen as an illness at all --
"age-associated memory impairment," the mild but progressive forgetfulness that
afflicts us all as we get older.

   *

   The risks involved

   Neuroscientists say two factors could prevent Americans from succumbing
completely to the seductions of smart pills. First, their performance may not
live up to expectations. Second, they could have side effects, some of them
difficult to predict.

   "There's no free lunch," said Tully. Consumers will have to consider what
level of discomfort or risk they're willing to accept in exchange for sharper
recall or enhanced powers of concentration.

   The side effect that most neuroscientists fear is not physical discomfort,
but subtle mental change. Over time, a memory-enhancing drug might cause people
to remember too much detail, cluttering the brain.

   Similarly, a drug that sharpens attention might cause users to focus too
intently on a particular task, failing to shift their attention in response to
new developments.

   In short, someone who notices or remembers everything may end up
understanding nothing.

   "The brain was designed by evolution over the millennia to be well-adapted
because of the lives we lead," said Martha Farah, a psychologist at the
University of Pennsylvania. "Our lives are better served by being able to focus
on the essential information than being able to remember every little detail....
We meddle with these designs at our peril."

   Despite such qualms, Farah is drawn to the idea that a mind enriched by a
life of experience might not have to lose the speed of recall it enjoyed in its
youth.

   "To have the wisdom of age and the memory of a young person? That'd be a very
good combination."

   *

   What's on the horizon?

   Smart drugs will probably emerge from among medications developed for
impairments of the brain and nervous system, including depression and
schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis, stroke and spinal
cord injury. Here are a few under development:

   Ampakines

   * Are designed to amplify the strength of electrical signals between brain
cells.

   * Could be the first of the new generation of cognitive enhancers to come to
market; developed by Cortex Pharmaceuticals Inc., which has launched human
trials.

   * One is being tested by the Pentagon as an antidote for sleep deprivation.

   * Boosted cognitive function of healthy Swedish medical students in a 1997
study.

   Mem compounds

   * Are designed to strengthen consolidation of long-term memory -- key to
learning new skills.

   * Are under development by Memory Pharmaceuticals Corp., which has begun
human testing on three separate Mem compounds as treatment for Alzheimer's
disease, mild cognitive impairment and depression.

   * In early animal studies, one Mem compound appeared to restore the maze
recall of middle-aged rats to youthful levels.

   * Could come to market by 2008.

   HT-0712

   * Is designed to speed and strengthen the process by which short-term
memories are committed to long-term storage.

   * Is under development by Helicon Therapeutics Inc., which plans to move from
animal testing to trials on humans soon.

   * Shows particular promise as a drug to aid in the rehabilitation of stroke
victims and to counter the effects of age-associated memory impairment.

   Gene therapy

   * Genetically engineered cells are implanted deep inside the cortex, acting
as a miniature biological pump that secretes nerve growth factor (NGF), a
naturally occurring protein in all vertebrates.

   * Nerve growth factor revitalizes brain cells that atrophy and shrink as
their host's age advances.

   * Biotechnology company Ceregene Inc. has launched early tests of the gene
therapy on human subjects suffering from the early stages of Alzheimer's
disease, in hopes of slowing its progress.

   * UC San Diego neuroscientist Mark Tuszynski, who designed the NGF-secreting
pump, reported in 2000 that aged monkeys who got the implanted cells showed an
almost complete restoration of normal cell function and size.

CORRECTION-DATE: December 21, 2004

CORRECTION:

   Brain-boosting drugs -- An article on drugs that enhance mental performance
in Monday's Health section said James L. McGaugh was director of the Center for
the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory at UC Irvine. He is the former director.
Dr. Michael Rugg is the director.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER: PAUL WEARING For The Times PHOTO:
GRAY AREA NO MORE: James L. McGaugh, director of the Center for the Neurobiology
of Learning and Memory at UC Irvine, says the advancement of drugs that sharpen
mental acuity has grown by leaps and bounds in recent years.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Robert Lachman Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2004


                             263 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    DECEMBER 20, 2004, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1267 words

HEADLINE: Testing plan called 'limited step forward';

Experts call baseball program anything but a cure-all

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Ron Kroichick

BODY:
As Major League Baseball and the Players Association inch toward a stronger
drug-testing policy, anti-doping experts caution against viewing a new program
as a remedy that will eliminate the use of steroids and other illegal
performance-enhancing drugs.

    The two sides are holding talks amid a trail of lofty rhetoric, from
Commissioner Bud Selig's vow of "zero tolerance" for steroids to the union's
uncommon willingness to reopen the collective bargaining agreement, which runs
through 2006. Selig has said he hopes to enact a drug-testing policy similar to
the one used in the minor leagues.

    Even if that program is instituted, anti-doping experts say it will hardly
cleanse baseball of its widely publicized problem.

    "It would be a very limited step forward," said Dr. Olivier Rabin, science
director for the World Anti-Doping Agency.

    Rabin and other authorities on performance-enhancing drugs contacted by The
Chronicle expressed skepticism about baseball's effort to combat their use.

    Many questioned Selig's commitment, partly because he and other baseball
officials seem preoccupied with steroids. And as illuminated in the BALCO
scandal, cheaters, and their clandestine chemists, often remain one step ahead
of testers.

    Today's major league program tests only for anabolic steroids -- not human
growth hormone, amphetamines or diuretics and masking agents. The minor league
program does list HGH and diuretics/masking agents among its prohibited
substances.

    Rabin said steroids are clearly "only one of many substances" used to
enhance performance in baseball.

    "People should realize it's extremely rare for an athlete to take one doping
substance," he said. "It's usually a cocktail of substances. They usually use a
method to hide the intake of a drug."

    Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor and longtime expert on doping in
sports, referred to the "huge myth" that drug testing automatically wipes out
usage. Even the most rigorous testing programs have loopholes through which
athletes can maneuver.

    Yesalis noted that most track and field athletes entangled in the BALCO case
passed numerous drug tests before they eventually confessed to using illegal
substances or were implicated by others. The scandal erupted only because track
coach Trevor Graham provided the syringe that led to the discovery of the
designer steroid THG.

    Olympic sports have the strongest drug-testing program, run by WADA
internationally and the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) in this country.
Athletes are subject to frequent unannounced, year-round testing -- covering a
long list of banned substances -- and the first positive test brings a minimum
two-year suspension.

    Major league baseball players, by contrast, were tested once during the
season in 2004, with a follow-up test five to seven days later. They were tested
only for steroids and they were not subject to a one-year suspension until their
fifth positive test.

    The minor league program calls for four unannounced tests per year,
including the offseason. The list of prohibited substances includes ephedrine,
human growth hormone, EPO and diuretics and masking agents. Still, a player is
not subject to a one-year suspension until his fourth positive test; a fifth
positive test brings permanent suspension.

    Peter Ambrose, professor of clinical pharmacy at UCSF and a drug-testing
crew chief with the NCAA, acknowledged the limitations of any testing program.
He finds a glimmer of optimism in the locker-room climate a more stringent
baseball policy might create.

    "Even if they put in a strong program, will it stop drug use? No," Ambrose
said. "But it can decrease use. If people know they're going to be tested and
think they might be caught, they'll think twice before using.

    "Drug testing also seeks to eliminate pressure. If some of your teammates
are using, the thinking sometimes is you have to do it for the team. So having a
good drug-testing plan might help alleviate some of that peer pressure."

    The pressure on organizations such as WADA now rests in finding ways to keep
pace with designer steroids. BALCO founder Victor Conte, in his interview with
"20/20" on Dec. 3, talked of the ease with which athletes avoid detection on
drug tests. Conte also mentioned new designer drugs flying under the testing
radar, concocted even since the BALCO scandal broke.

    Rabin said WADA now asks its chemists to put themselves in dopers' shoes and
try to think of ways they could create new substances.

    That gives Olympic sports a fighting chance of catching athletes using
performance-enhancing drugs. But as long as baseball operates its own
drug-testing program, experts say, questions will persist.

    "You've got the fox guarding the chicken coop," Ambrose said. "If I'm a team
owner and I have this one terrific athlete and he's making a lot of money for
me, why do I want to stop him? I'm not forcing him to do that (use
performance-enhancing drugs) and there's no impetus for me to make him stop."

    Dr. Gary Wadler, a professor of medicine at New York University, helped WADA
formulate its extensive list of prohibited substances. Wadler said it took 600
hours to compile the list, reflecting the organization's commitment to tackling
the problem.

    "The Olympic movement realized the burden of doping was threatening the very
spirit of sports as we know it," Wadler said. "They realized they didn't belong
in the doping business, and that gave rise to the formation of WADA and USADA.
...

    "So why don't professional sports leagues learn from the history of the
Olympic movement and get out of the drug business? Why don't they contract it
out so the issues can be addressed?"

    One way to gauge the significance of baseball's new program: Simply check
out the list of banned drugs. All the experts contacted by The Chronicle said
baseball needs to address the problems of human growth hormone and amphetamines.

    Several former major-leaguers have characterized amphetamine use as rampant,
stretching back many years. Ken Caminiti, a onetime National League Most
Valuable Player who died earlier this year of a drug overdose, told Sports
Illustrated two years ago that only "one or two guys" per team play without
taking stimulants.

    As The Chronicle reported on Dec. 2, a review of New York Yankees star Jason
Giambi's grand-jury testimony showed that he acknowledged injecting himself with
human growth hormone in 2003. Yesalis, the Penn State professor, finds it hard
to believe Giambi is the only major-leaguer who has used HGH.

    The first tests for HGH were conducted on 300 athletes at the Athens
Olympics, according to Wadler. The window of detection is only about 72 hours,
while the benefits of the drug last much longer. Rabin said WADA is trying to
refine the HGH test so it can detect the drug's presence for weeks or months,
not days.

    Scientists also brace for the arrival of gene doping in sports. Wadler
participated in a conference on gene therapy in 2002, resulting in research
projects funded by WADA and USADA. He said the conference helped make gene
scientists aware of possible misuses of drugs intended for medicinal purposes.

    "Gene therapy will clearly be an issue over the next 10 years," Wadler said.
"When you can put a substance in a muscle -- and it goes only in the muscle,
nowhere else in the body -- how are you going to find out about that?"

    That's the perpetual challenge in the anti-doping fight -- staying ahead of
those athletes who are willing to stretch into new frontiers to gain an edge.

   E-mail Ron Kroichick at rkroichick@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), (1) Jason Giambi acknowledged injecting himself with human
growth hormone in 2003. / Peter Muhly / Reuters, (2) Bud Selig has vowed a "zero
tolerance" stance for steroids from Major League Baseball. / Gerald Herbert /
Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2004


                             264 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                   DECEMBER 18, 2004, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BAY AREA; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 2753 words

HEADLINE: Profiles of the patient advocates

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writers

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Carl T. Hall

BODY:
The 10 patient advocates who took a seat Friday on the board directing
California's high-profile venture in stem-cell research are a largely unknown
collection of doctors, fund-raisers and active members of disease lobby groups
-- seasoned with a bit of Hollywood glamour.

    The new crop of policy makers was sworn in at the first meeting of the
Independent Citizens Oversight Committee, which will serve as the board of
directors for the new California Institute for Regenerative Medicine.

    The 29-member board, made up of the patient advocates and 19 other members
drawn mostly from academic and biotech circles, will decide how to spend the $3
billion in taxpayer-backed research and facilities bonds authorized by
Proposition 71.

    Some of the patient advocates are active in disease groups with financial
ties to medical companies. Others are employed by institutions with a direct
stake in stem-cell science. Most of the patient advocates are little known
outside their particular circles of health interests or local communities.

    Here's a closer look at their backgrounds and goals:

    -- Now that Dr. Phyllis Preciado is on the board overseeing one of the
largest medical research efforts in state history, she's a little embarrassed
that she tried to blow off the guy behind it all.

    In the fall, Preciado got a call from Robert Klein, the Silicon Valley real
estate developer, asking her to meet. Preciado was known for her innovative work
treating Hispanics at diabetes clinics in Fresno. Preciado didn't know it, but
Klein, whose 14-year-old son is diabetic, wanted to enlist her in the stem-cell
initiative campaign he had masterminded.

    She was not inclined to meet. She was "fed up" with rich people calling her
up, "picking my brain" for ideas about how to deliver better care for diabetics
and then never hearing from them again. Preciado agreed to talk only if Klein
would pay her $150 an hour.

    "I didn't know who he was. Later, I was kicking myself," says Preciado, who
was impressed with Klein and volunteered to promote his initiative in her
community.

    Preciado, 48, says she's "still surprised" that she was picked to sit on the
Independent Citizens Oversight Committee. "I don't have connections to the rich
and powerful. I'm still paying off student loans. I'm just a home girl from East
San Jose."

    The granddaughter of Mexican immigrants, Preciado was a registered nurse for
15 years before deciding, at age 37, to go to medical school. Long before that,
she'd been drawn to the care and treatment of diabetes, largely because of what
it had done to her family.

    Preciado's grandmother, a Mexican immigrant who worked in the fields, died
of the disease. Her mother also has it. First at Oakland's Highland Hospital and
now in Fresno, Preciado has helped establish programs aimed at bringing teams of
doctors and other specialists to improve the care and treatment of diabetes in
minority patients. Her next goal is to develop a clinic for Native Americans.

    Preciado was appointed to represent type 2 diabetes concerns.

    -- Sherry Lansing, 60, of Los Angeles, was appointed as a cancer research
advocate, having founded a nonprofit fund-raising group, Stop Cancer, after her
mother died 20 years ago of ovarian cancer. She chairs the cancer group's board
of directors.

    A former president of 20th Century Fox, Lansing was one of the first women
to reach the top tiers of Hollywood management. She and producer Stanley Jaffe
founded Jaffe/Lansing Productions, which produced "Fatal Attraction," nominated
for a Best Picture Oscar in 1987. She has been chairwoman of the Motion Picture
Group of Paramount Pictures since 1992 and also serves as a member of the UC
Board of Regents.

    Lansing's nonprofit supports early-career researchers at UCLA, the
University of Southern California and City of Hope, all of which can be expected
to pursue Prop. 71 stem-cell projects. However, she said, "I have absolutely no
allegiances whatever. I've never met with a drug company in my life."

    -- In medical school at the University of Minnesota, diabetes was treated as
just one of many potential diseases of the body's endocrine system. It wasn't
until Dr. Francisco Prieto began seeing patients at an inner-city clinic in
Tucson that he saw the reality of diabetes.

    "Everyone had it. It was overwhelming," Prieto said. "It was obvious we
weren't doing a very good job caring for these people" -- most of whom were
Hispanic or Native American. "In spite of our efforts, the results were
frequently disastrous."

    That experience -- and the fact that his brother and uncle died of
complications from the disease -- motivated Prieto to learn as much as he could
about diabetes and get good at helping his patients manage it. Today, Prieto,
50, not only treats diabetics as a family physician at Sutter Medical Group in
Elk Grove, but as president of the local chapter of the American Diabetics
Association, he spends a lot of time educating other doctors about standards of
care.

    An avid cyclist, he also organizes the annual "Tour de Cure" 100-kilometer
bike race in the Sacramento area, which raises money for ADA programs.

    Prieto was appointed as a type 1 diabetes advocate.

    -- Joan Samuelson, 54, of Healdsburg was appointed as an advocate of people
with Parkinson's disease. Trained as a lawyer, she was diagnosed with
Parkinson's in 1987. In 1991, she started a national group called the
Parkinson's Action Network, which she serves as president. She also is a
director of the Parkinson's Institute, a Sunnyvale nonprofit that conducts
research on movement disorders.

    Samuelson has earned wide respect among medical researchers and policy
makers for doing her homework.

    The Parkinson's Action Network accepts substantial donations from medical
companies, including Medtronic Inc., maker of brain-stimulator devices used in
some Parkinson's cases. "Inevitably, to do our job well requires partnerships
with the academic medical community and industry," Samuelson said. "We need to
work together, and we also need to exercise independent judgment."

    -- Dr. Janet Wright describes herself as "a country doctor," but her
influence extends well beyond her small cardiology practice at Enloe Medical
Center in Chico.

    For years, Wright, 51, has worked with the American College of Cardiology to
acquaint state and federal legislators, government officials and insurance
companies with the needs of heart patients. This year, she will start a
five-year term on the board of trustees of ACC.

    Her top concern isn't that heart disease needs better treatments, which stem
cell research might someday provide. In a sense her concern is the opposite: the
health care system hasn't kept up with advances in treatment.

    "We're victims of our own success," Wright says. "We've converted heart
disease from a suddenly fatal condition into something that is chronic,
requiring daily care."

    Wright, a native of Arkansas, completed medical school at the University of
Tennessee and did her residency at San Francisco General Hospital. She's been
treating patients in Chico for the past 19 years.

    Wright was appointed as an advocate for a heart disease group.

    -- David Serrano Sewell, 34, was appointed to a slot reserved for an
advocate of people with multiple sclerosis or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

    He is a deputy in the San Francisco city attorney's office, assigned to the
Port of San Francisco. He was diagnosed with MS three years ago, during his last
year of law school at Golden Gate University in San Francisco.

    "It is a life-changing experience, without a doubt," he said, but added that
treatment so far had stabilized his condition. "You can't let these things stop
you."

    Almost immediately after the diagnosis, Serrano Sewell took on an active
role in the Northern California chapter of the National MS Society, which
recommended his appointment.

    In his volunteer role, Serrano Sewell has been part of the nonprofit group's
government-relations committee. Money raised by local MS chapters is forwarded
to the national headquarters, where a peer-review process has been set up to
award grants. Serrano Sewell has played no part in determining which research to
finance.

    -- If stem cell treatments were available today, Dr. Leon Thal would be on a
short list of doctors ready to test them in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

    Thal oversees a group of 80 clinics around the country that test promising
Alzheimer's drugs. Mostly, they are drugs that major drug companies aren't
interested in, that don't have strong patent protection or that are being
developed by small biotech companies.

    As chair of the neurosciences department at UC San Diego, Thal also manages
a laboratory looking at gene therapy treatments and runs the Alzheimer's disease
clinic at UCSD. He serves on the board of the San Diego chapter of the
Alzheimer's Association, a patient advocacy group.

    Thal said he "thought long and hard" before accepting a seat on the stem
cell board, in part because being on the board means that Thal could not apply
for stem-cell research grants himself.

    In the end, he decided he "could have a greater positive impact by serving
on the committee than by applying for grants."

    Thal was appointed to fill a slot reserved for a member of an Alzheimer's
disease advocacy group.

    -- Jeff Sheehy, 47, is a longtime member of Survive AIDS.

    He has been HIV-positive since 1985. A native of Waco, Texas, he came out as
a gay man while he was a student at the University of Texas at Austin -- news
that didn't sit well with his parents and led to his move west. Now, Sheehy
works as deputy director for communications of the UCSF AIDS Research Institute,
and serves in a volunteer capacity as Mayor Gavin Newsom's HIV-AIDS adviser.

    Survive AIDS prides itself on accepting no financial support from the drug
companies. Activists who have known Sheehy for years say he can be counted on to
vote his conscience, no matter who that might upset.

    "He's always done the right thing, and I don't expect him to come to that
(stem cell) panel with any agenda other than helping the most people he can with
the best science," said Michael Lauro, a Survive AIDS member.

    He was appointed to represent people with HIV-AIDS.

    -- Jonathan Shestack, 45, was appointed to the slot reserved for advocates
of people with mental health conditions.

    A film producer for Warner Bros. Studios, Shestack and his wife are the
parents of an autistic child. In 1995, they founded a group called Cure Autism
Now, which has become the nation's biggest backer of autism research, having
financed about $20 million worth of research grants.

    Shestack serves as the group's vice president, secretary and treasurer. Out
of a 2004 budget of $7 million, about $550,000 came from organizations including
corporate sponsors such as McNeil Pharmaceuticals and Johnson & Johnson-Merck.
None of the money goes for stem cell research.

    -- Of the 10 patient advocates on the oversight committee, Oswald Steward is
the closest to stem cell research.

    A well-known neuroscientist, Steward was appointed director of UC Irvine's
newly created Reeve-Irvine Research Center for Spinal Cord Injury a few years
ago.

    Steward recruited a young scientist from Britain, Hans Kierstead, whose
experiments have demonstrated that stem cells can develop into nervous system
cells that might be used to repair spinal cord damage. The center, named after
actor Christopher Reeve, expects to begin safety trials in patients in 2006.
Steward says he would recuse himself if the oversight committee ever is deciding
on grant applications involving his center.

    Steward has become an advocate for people with spinal cord injury largely
through his relationship with actor Reeve, who died in October.

    "What Chris did, when he talked to any scientist, is to really hold our feet
to the fire and ask 'when,' " Steward said. "It used to be that when I made a
significant discovery, the first thing I'd think is, cool, where can I publish
this? Now I think, how can we move this into the clinic as quickly as possible?"

    Steward, 56, was to represent patients with spinal cord injury.

   ------------------------------------------------

   ------------------------------------------------------

    Oversight panel

    In addition to the chairman, vice chair and "patient advocates," there are
17 other members of the Independent Citizen's Oversight Committee:.

    UC medical school representatives

    Dr. Clair Pomeroy, vice chancellor of UC Davis and dean of UC Davis School
of Medicine. Pomeroy is an infectious diseases expert. Appointed by UC Davis
Chancellor Larry N. Vanderhoef.

    Dr. Gerald S. Levey, vice chancellor of UCLA and dean of UCLA Geffen School
of Medicine. Levey, an internist and endocrinologist, has specialized in the
study of the thyroid gland and the heart.

    Susan V. Bryant, dean of UC Irvine School of Biological Sciences and
Cicerone professor of development/cell biology. Bryant holds a Ph.D. from the
University of London. She has specialized in limb regeneration.

    Dr. Edward W. Holmes, dean of UC San Diego School of Medicine and vice
chancellor of UC San Diego. An expert in molecular medicine, Holmes is also a
leader in developing programs to train physician-scientists.

    Dr. David Kessler, dean of UCSF School of Medicine and vice chancellor of
UCSF. As commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration from 1990 to 1997,
Kessler placed a high priority on speeding the drug approval process. .

    Life-science company representatives

    Gayle Wilson, member, board of directors for Gilead Sciences Inc., a
biopharmaceutical company. The wife of former Gov. Pete Wilson, Gayle Wilson
also sits on the board of trustees of the California Institute of Technology.

    Dr. Ted Love, president and CEO, Nuvelo Inc., a Sunnyvale-based
biopharmaceutical company. Love has a medical degree from Yale Medical School.

    Tina Nova, president and CEO, Genoptix Inc., which specializes in optical
technologies for cellular analysis. Nova led the scientific team that developed
the prostate specific antigen (PSA) test for the detection of prostate cancer.

    Michael Goldberg, member, board of directors, Genomic Health, and trustee,
National Childhood Cancer Foundation. Redwood City-based Genomic Health develops
technology that helps select the best cancer treatment for a patient based on
that person's genetic profile. Goldberg is the managing director of Jasper
Capital, a private investment company..

    Other universities, research institutions

    Dr. Keith Black, director, Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute, and
director of neurosurgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. Black's research has
focused on several aspects of brain tumors and ways to open the blood-brain
barrier.

    Dr. Brian Henderson, dean, Keck School of Medicine at the University of
Southern California. An authority in cancer epidemiology, his focus is the
connection between environmental and genetic factors in the development,
treatment and prevention of a variety of cancers.

    Dr. Phillip Pizzo, dean, Stanford Medical School. Before coming to Stanford
in 2001, Pizzo was physician in chief of Children's Hospital in Boston and chair
of the pediatrics department at Harvard Medical School.

    Dr. John C. Reed, president, Burnham Institute. Reed, who is credited with
having written more articles on cell death in the last six years than any other
scientist, founded and directed the nonprofit institute's program on cell death
research.

    Richard Murphy, president, Salk Institute of Biological Sciences. Murphy's
research has focused on neurotrophins, which are proteins that promote the
growth and survival of nerve cells and appear to play a role in memory.

    Robert Birgeneau, chancellor, UC Berkeley. A highly regarded physicist,
Birgeneau was president of the University of Toronto before coming to UC
Berkeley this year.

    David Baltimore, president, California Institute of Technology. Baltimore
was awarded the Nobel Prize for Medicine for his work in virology and has helped
develop national policy on DNA research and AIDS issues.

    Dr. Michael Friedman, president and CEO, City of Hope. Friedman was
previously a senior vice president at Pharmacia Corp., has served as acting
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration and was an associate professor
and director of the Clinical Research Program for hematology and oncology at
UCSF.


CORRECTION-DATE: December 30, 2004

CORRECTION:
A story on Dec. 18 profiling the 10 patient advocates named to the new
California stem-cell oversight committee misstated the year when San Francisco
AIDS patient advocate Jeff Sheehy was diagnosed with HIV. Sheehy has been
HIV-positive since 1997. (12/30/04, P. A2)

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (3), David Serrano Sewell was appointed as an advocate of people
with multiple sclerosis or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. He is a deputy in the
San Francisco city attorney's office, assigned to the port. / Carlos Avila
Gonzalez / The Chronicle, (2) Joan Samuelson was appointed as an advocate of
people with Parkinson's disease. She started the Parkinson's Action Network. /
John O'hara / The Chronicle, (3) Jeff Sheehy is a longtime member of Survive
AIDS. HIV-positive since 1985, he serves as Mayor Gavin Newsom's HIV-AIDS
adviser. / Eric Luse / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2004


                             265 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           December 14, 2004 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1774 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
Stem Cell Post Likely to Go to Klein ;
The man who led the Prop. 71 campaign receives three of the four nominations to
be chairman of the state's new research institute.

BYLINE: Megan Garvey, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Bob Klein, a Palo Alto real estate developer who has no scientific background
but who ran the multimillion-dollar Proposition 71 campaign, appeared Monday to
have a near-lock on the powerful job of running the state's $3-billion stem cell
institute.

   With Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamante and Controller
Steve Westly each nominating Klein to head the voter-approved California
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, he went from front-runner to almost certain
choice when the board of directors meets for the first time Friday.

   A fourth and final nomination is expected. Treasurer Phil Angelides, who must
also name a candidate for chairperson, is expected to announce his choice today,
a day after the deadline written into the legislation. Angelides was a key early
supporter of the ballot measure.

   Whoever is chosen will immediately take on one of the highest-profile
positions in the controversial field of embryonic stem cell research. A
27-member board of directors -- with some still to be named -- is scheduled to
elect the chairperson and vice chairperson Friday in San Francisco at the launch
of the new state agency. The agency will distribute $300 million a year for the
next decade.

   Though Schwarzenegger and others praised Klein for bringing the stem cell
project to fruition, some scientists and medical ethicists questioned whether
someone with no technical training is the right choice to run a program of such
scale and importance.

   Moreover, others said they were troubled that there may be only one nominee
to lead the effort.

   Jeff Sheehy, who is representing the AIDS/HIV community on the board, said he
had hoped to have a number of candidates who could present different visions of
how the agency should move forward. He said that with debate now unlikely, "the
whole thing is starting to feel railroaded."

   "I think there should be more than one choice," said Sheehy, Sen. John
Burton's sole appointment to the board and deputy director for communications
for UC San Francisco's AIDS Research Institute. "I think that that's terrible
public process," he said. "They've done a great thing in getting this this far
but they can ruin the whole thing by not being open now."

   Marcy Darnovsky, who supports such research but opposed the initiative
because of oversight concerns, said the heavy bias toward Klein was troubling.

   "We're setting up an echo chamber here where we're only going to hear from
people who agree with each other," said Darnovsky, associate executive director
of the Center for Genetics and Society in Oakland.

   Aides to Schwarzenegger declined Monday to talk about whether the governor
vetted other candidates for the chairmanship, saying the process was private.

   Bustamante's spokesman, Stephen Green, said the lieutenant governor
considered a number of people, some of whom asked not to be nominated, citing
time constraints and public disclosure requirements.

   In any case, Green said Bustamante had a long-standing relationship with
Klein and believed "he had earned the right to be the chair."

   Klein, 59, a Stanford Law School graduate, became an advocate for the
research after his now-14-year-old son was diagnosed with insulin-dependent
diabetes three years ago. He has described California's investment as a
"substitute national program" to take the place of funding for basic scientific
research into embryonic stem cells that the Bush administration has strictly
limited.

   Amy Comstock, executive director of the Parkinson's Action Network, praised
Klein, saying that "throughout his career, and most recently as chairman of the
Proposition 71 campaign, Mr. Klein has demonstrated an understanding of the
politics of science."

   "I could not imagine a more qualified individual to become chairman of the
Independent Citizens Oversight Committee," Comstock said in a statement.

   Klein has said he wants to have the first grants to researchers by May,
setting up an aggressive timeframe for determining the ethical and scientific
guidelines for the new institute.

   His resume matches the requirements for the institute's chair that he wrote
into the legislation, including a background as a patient advocate in California
and a knowledge of bonds, which will be sold to pay for the research at a cost
to taxpayers of about $6 billion over the 30-year course of the loan.

   Bustamante nominated Dr. Frank E. Staggers Sr. to be vice chairman. Staggers
is a former president of both the California Medical Assn. and the National
Medical Assn.

   In addition to agreeing on Klein, both Schwarzenegger and Westly nominated
Dr. Edward Penhoet, a co-founder of biotech giant Chiron Corp. and current
president of the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, to be second in command.

   "I would hope that the 27 appointed members would vote to endorse my and Ed
Penhoet's candidacies," Klein said in a statement Monday. "Ed and I believe that
the chair/vice chair team that we would form, if elected, would bring a great
combination of experience, education and commitment to the institute in the
fields of patient advocacy, law, finance, business management, therapy
development, public medicine, government relations and medical science."

   Schwarzenegger, who came out in favor of Proposition 71 late in the campaign,
cited Klein's "passion for pursuing and furthering stem cell research" and
Penhoet's "tremendous experience and wisdom as a researcher and scientist" as a
powerful combination that would serve the state well.

   But others raised questions about whether Klein's success as a campaigner
would translate well into the leadership of an institute that will be closely
scrutinized.

   "I think that from the way that the campaign was conducted ... the people who
were funding the ballot initiative often didn't have scruples in how ... they
were portraying the promise of the technology," said Stuart Newman, a professor
of cell biology and anatomy at the New York Medical College and a fellow at the
Chicago-based Institute of Biotechnology and the Human Future. "You want the
public to be able to trust what is being said. Scientists know that what science
consists of is not only promise but limitations."

   Embryonic stem cells are created in the early days of development, and can
become cells of any type. Many scientists believe they have great promise for
treating diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's disease and insulin-dependent
diabetes.

   But research using embryonic stem cells requires destruction of embryos, and
remains politically and ethically controversial.

   In addition to broad responsibilities for managing the institute, the
chairperson will sit on the working groups responsible for scientific and
medical accountability, research facilities and funding. An institute president
also will be hired, someone Klein has said he envisions will be found through a
national search and who will serve as the day-to-day chief scientist and chief
executive.

   Some people who have followed the push for California to invest heavily in
embryonic stem cell research -- the largest state effort in basic scientific
research to date -- said they had hoped to see a trained scientist take the
helm. One model cited was the National Institutes of Health, where appointees
are often leaders in the scientific fields they oversee.

   If the chairperson is not a scientist, it will be important to have a strong
scientific advisor to handle that portion of the workload, said Theodore
Friedmann, director of UC San Diego's gene therapy program.

   "The whole thing will really will hinge on the quality of the science that
this institute can generate," said Friedmann, who served on the state's cloning
commission. "That means getting the very best people to push and drive and
evaluate the science. But I think it can benefit from an industry point of view
-- a sense of get-it-doneness -- too."

   *

   Appointees to stem cell oversight panel

   Here are the appointees so far to the Independent Citizens Oversight
Committee, which will govern the state's $3-billion embryonic stem cell research
effort. The 27 appointees will elect a chairman and vice chairman, filling the
final two positions Friday.

   Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger:

   * Keith L. Black, director of the Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute and
director of neurosurgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

   * Brian E. Henderson, dean of USC's Keck School of Medicine

   * Oswald Steward, chairman and director of the Christopher Reeve-Irvine
Research Center for Spinal Cord Injury at UC Irvine

   * Leon J. Thal, chairman of the Department of Neurosciences at UC San Diego
and director of its Alzheimer's Disease Research Center

   * Gayle Wilson, the wife of former Gov. Pete Wilson, sits on corporate boards
including Gilead Sciences Inc., a biopharmaceutical company

   Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamante:

   * Josephine Phyllis Preciado, executive director of the Diabetes Resource
Network, Fresno Collaborative, UC San Francisco; and executive director of the
Latino Center for Medical Education and Research, Fresno

   * Tina S. Nova, president and chief executive of Genoptix Inc. in San Diego

   * Richard Murphy, chief executive officer of the Salk Institute for
Biological Studies

   * Robert J. Birgeneau, chancellor of UC Berkeley

   * David Serrano-Sewell, deputy city attorney for San Francisco

   Treasurer Phil Angelides:

   Five still to be named.

   Controller Steve Westly:

   * Ted W. Love, president, chief executive and director of Nuvelo Inc., a
biopharmaceutical company based in Sunnyvale

   * Joan Samuelson, founder and president of the nonprofit Parkinson's Action
Network

   * Philip Pizzo, dean of Stanford Medical School

   * John C. Reed, chief executive of the Burnham Institute

   * Sherry Lansing, chairwoman and chief executive of Paramount Pictures'
Motion Picture Group

   Assembly Speaker Fabian Nunez:

   * John Hein, executive director of the national advocacy organization
Communities for Quality Education

   Former Senate President Pro Tem John Burton:

   * Jeff Sheehy, deputy director for communications at UC San Francisco, AIDS
Research Institute

   Appointees of the chancellors of UC campuses with medical schools:

   * Susan V. Bryant, dean of the UC Irvine School of Biological Sciences and
professor of development/cell biology

   * Edward W. Holmes, dean of the UC San Diego School of Medicine and vice
chancellor of UC San Diego Health Services

   * David Kessler, dean of the UC San Francisco School of Medicine and former
head of the Food and Drug Administration

   * Gerald S. Levey, vice chancellor of UCLA Medical Sciences and dean of the
medical school

   * Claire Pomeroy, dean of the UC Davis School of Medicine and vice chancellor
of UC Davis Human Health Services

   Sources: Associated Press and Times staff writer Megan Garvey

   Los Angeles Times

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: NOMINATION: Terry Freeman, left, hugs Bob Klein after
Proposition 71 passed on election night. Klein, a real estate developer, became
interested in stem cell research after his son developed diabetes.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Gary Friedman Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2004


                             266 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 14, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Science Desk; SIDE EFFECTS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 755 words

HEADLINE: If I Only Had a Voice: A Humble Wish Upon a Drumstick

BYLINE: By JAMES GORMAN

BODY:

   Now that the chicken genome is done, I'm hoping we'll learn why chickens
can't sing.

    I learned the good news about the genome from several reports in last week's
issue of Nature announcing, with some fanfare, that the DNA that makes a chicken
a chicken had been sequenced. Actually, it was the wild chicken they sequenced,
also known as the red jungle fowl -- Gallus gallus.

     This was the big story in Nature. But the issue also had a report on song
in the white-crowned sparrow. Nowhere, in either paper, was it mentioned that
chickens can't sing. That crucial fact, and all it implies, is what I bring to
this discussion. I'll explain later.

    First, let's be clear on one thing. The chicken genome is no joke, even if
one of the images that accompanies all the data is of a chicken that I'm pretty
sure is about to cross the road.

    Chickens are serious business. Billions of them are consumed each year in
this country alone. Vaccines are made in chicken eggs. Avian flu spreads through
chicken flocks. An understanding of chicken genetics could help chicken breeders
come up with different traits in chickens, like multiple drumsticks or no heads.

    Not to mention that chickens play a mean game of tick-tack-toe, even though
they are at a considerable evolutionary distance from humans, who invented
tick-tack-toe. (This is anecdotal information and not officially approved by the
International Chicken Genome Sequencing Consortium, which is a real group.)

    I don't want to get too heavily into the details of the individual
nucleotides. I find that, as a rule, genomes are best considered from a
distance. Suffice it to say that the chicken genome has got to be different from
the genome of the white-crowned sparrow because that bird produces a somewhat
musical birdsong, and chickens, although they may not know it, can't really
carry a tune.

    They crow, squawk and cluck. Someone who really loved chickens might say
they sing. But then I once dated a girl who thought I could sing. As another,
more discerning girlfriend pointed out later, love can be deaf as well as blind.

    Researchers at the University of Utah, who published their work on sparrows
in Nature, did not claim tunefulness for their subjects. They said the sparrows
build up complex songs from smaller parts, much the way humans learn and
reproduce language. Still, it sounds better than chicken song.

    That's chicken song, not ''chicken songs.'' There are actually some passable
chicken songs. There's the great chicken spelling song with the rousing
conclusion, ''C-H-I-C-K-E-N, That is the way to spell chicken.'' And one can't
forget the ''Chicken Cordon Blues'' by the great Steve Goodman, author of ''City
of New Orleans'' and other songs not about poultry.

    In fact, I myself have written what I think is a pretty good chicken song.
But I can't, or shouldn't, sing it. I do sing it, of course, but because I can't
carry a tune, I am sometimes told to stop singing, and that's where chicken
genomics can come to the rescue.

    Here's the idea: No chickens can sing. Some humans can sing. All
white-crowned sparrows can sing. We already have two of the needed genomes. If
we could get one more, we, or rather they, could compare genomes and find the
tune gene. We could even sequence the genome of a more musical bird like the
wood thrush.

    Then, if we could just get gene therapy off the ground, I would be able to
bring the world my new chicken song, in my own melodic voice. If I grow a few
feathers as well, that would be a small price to pay.

    This plan might seem self-serving, but let's be honest. No one in this whole
genome business is working on behalf of the chickens. We're studying their
genomes because we like to eat them, because there are a lot of them around and
because we might be able to find out something about our own genetic makeup.

    So how big a leap is it from the health and well-being of all humanity to my
being able to carry a tune? Not that big, from where I stand, waiting in the
wings with my guitar.

    In a way I'm actually being selfless. My song is very sympathetic to the
plight of chickens in the modern world. It chronicles the fate of a young
free-range chicken that the singer discovers wrapped all in plastic as cold as
the clay. (It is sung to the tune of ''Streets of Laredo.'')

    It's a sad song. And like the original, it doesn't end well. I think I'm not
giving too much away if I say that one verse begins, ''So heat the pan slowly,
and make the aioli.''

    I'd be happy to sing the rest of it, if only I could carry a tune.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The DNA-sequenced red jungle fowl: aka Gallus gallus, aka muse.
(Photo by Bill Payne/Michigan State University via Associated Press)

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2004


                             267 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            December 12, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: HARAHAN PICAYUNE; along the river; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 479 words

HEADLINE: Little Farms shares title in football

BYLINE: By Liz Ehrhardt

BODY:

   The Little Farms 13-and-under tackle football team, the Pirates, recently
captured the 2004 East Bank championship.

   Playground supervisor Barry McGuinness said the team defeated the Jefferson
Mustangs, 30-6. Little Farms, Jefferson and Pontiff each had the same record of
6-1 to share the title of regular season co-champions.

   Team members for the East Bank champions from Little Farms Playground in
River Ridge are Sean Bryant, John Downer, Josh Ferguson, Luke Fisette, Chad
Guidry, Cory Guidry, Chris Gulliot, Ryan Harmon, Ryan Hodgins, Lucian Jacob,
Carvin Johnson, Neal Lavin, Ryan Lowe, Kyle Meariman, Ryan Menkiewicz, Alex
Nash, Sean Paul, Shelby Ratliff, Taylor Roussel, Michael Schilling, Troy
Tillinghast, Antoine Williams, Derain Williams and Harry Zylicz. Coaches are Jay
Pichon, Barry McGuinness, Joey Guzzardi and Henry Mullet.

   . . . . . . .

   Harahan resident Alma Dunlap announced that the Colonial Garden Club will
hold its Christmas luncheon Monday at 11:30 a.m. at Ralph's On The Park, 900
City Park Ave., New Orleans.

   Club President Rosemary Autin will welcome members and their guests. The
invocation will be given by Gloria Lee, and Philanthropy Chairwoman Peggy St. Pe
will report on the club's gift to the St. Rita Food Pantry.

   The winners of the club's recent Christmas door contest will be announced at
this luncheon. Chairwomen for the event are Marie Noya and Joy Palazola.

   For more information about the Colonial Garden Club, call 737-9697.

   . . . . . . .

   A Christmas concert is being held on Dec. 19 from 2 to 4 p.m. at St. Agnes
Church, 3310 Jefferson Highway, Jefferson.

   The Jefferson Symphony Chorus, under the direction of Louise La Bruyere, will
perform. The cost is $10 per person, $5 for children, students and senior
citizens. During the performance, there will be an audience sing-along. Tickets
are available only at the door. Proceeds will benefit the St. Agnes Church and
choir.

   For more information, call 833-3366 or 833-4118.

   . . . . . . .

   Congratulations to John Curtis High School science teacher Cathy Boucvalt,
who was one of 14 teachers from across Louisiana selected to participate in the
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center School of Medicine department
of genetics and genomics workshop for teachers in August.

   The workshop was sponsored by the Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium
to help educators bring better knowledge of genetics to the classroom. Guest
speakers discussed DNA forensics, genomic technology, molecular pathology, DNA
diagnostics, cancer genetics and genetic counseling.

   Boucvalt said she is excited about the opportunity to have Dr. Paula Gregory,
a professor at LSU School of Medicine, help the students set up a DNA lab at
Curtis in the near future.

   . . . . . . .

   If you have information about the Harahan and River Ridge area, call Liz
Ehrhardt at 738-9476. You can also send e-mail to lizehr@yahoo.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2004


                             268 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 10, 2004 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Panetta won't be stem cell board pick;
Local biotech exec withdraws name

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The head of San Diego's biotechnology industry organization was set to accept
an appointment yesterday to the state oversight committee that will dole out $3
billion in stem cell research grants, but he suddenly withdrew his name.

   Lt. Gov. Cruz Bustamante was to have announced the appointment of Biocom
president Joe Panetta as one of four representatives of the commercial life
sciences industry on the 29-member committee. A news conference was scheduled at
Biocom's University Towne Centre headquarters.

   But Panetta told Bustamante's office that after contemplating the
appointment, he decided he didn't want it. He asked that his name be withdrawn.

   "I don't think I'm the appropriate person for the appointment," Panetta said.
"If I go on that commission I'd have to recuse myself from voting on anything
that involves any funding in San Diego, because 95 percent of the companies are
Biocom members."

   The stem cell proposition voters approved last month requires that the
industry appointees be from California life sciences commercial entities not
actively engaged in embryonic stem cells, but that have a background in
successful therapies. The proposition states that the people can be company
executives or board members.

   Panetta's resume was among many sent to Bustamante's office for consideration
as a committee appointment, said Steve Green, a Bustamante spokesman.

   There was some question as to whether Panetta fit the requirements. Before
joining Biocom, Panetta spent 10 years as an executive at the agricultural
biotech Mycogen, not a company that produces human therapies.

   Panetta said he discussed his qualifications with Bustamante on Wednesday
night after returning to California from a trip. Panetta felt he fit the
requirements.

   Besides running Biocom, Panetta has served for two years on the board of San
Diego-based Gene Therapy Systems, a privately held biotech.

   Panetta also serves on Biocom's political action committee, but both he and
Green said that would not have interfered with his holding the oversight
committee post.

   The Biocom PAC did not give any financial support to the Proposition 71
campaign, said April Bailey, a Biocom employee and treasurer of the PAC.

   Panetta said he ultimately decided he could do more good for the San Diego
region's biotech community by working outside the oversight committee.

   "I have serious concerns about ensuring that this money is fairly allocated
and it is done in a way that has a rigorous review process that meets the
responsibility that is going to be placed on the commission by the taxpayers of
California," he said. "It's an enormous concern and one of the reasons I
withdrew my name."

   Panetta said that when he first heard about Proposition 71, he was against it
because he did not like the idea of placing $3 billion "in the hands of a group
here in California to duplicate what goes on at the National Institute of
Health, which has been around for 50 or 60 years."

   The NIH typically provides the majority of the funding for scientific
research in the United States.

   Proposition 71 evolved after President Bush's 2001 decision to place limits
on the embryonic stem cells that could be used for research funded by the
federal government. Scientists said those limits severely curtailed research.

   Panetta said he eventually decided to support Proposition 71 because he
thought it was a worthy cause that the biotech industry needed to support.
Biocom ultimately endorsed the initiative.

   Panetta said he continues to have financial concerns about the initiative and
is now also concerned by the process being used to appoint people to the
oversight committee. For instance, requiring the industry representative to have
experience with a successful therapy is very limiting since the majority of
biotech companies have never produced one, he said.

   "That could exclude good people," Panetta said.

   Panetta would have been the 11th person appointed to the 29-member oversight
committee.

   One new appointment to the committee was made yesterday. State Controller
Steve Westly selected Sherry Lansing, chairman of Paramount Pictures' Motion
Picture Group and the head of Stop Cancer, a nonprofit volunteer organization
that raises funds for scientists on the cutting edge of cancer. She also is a
University of California regent.

   "Sherry Lansing brings an outstanding record of leadership, public service
and advocacy for cancer victims to this post," Westly said. "As one of the
world's top executives, she will bring tough business, management and oversight
skills to this committee."

   The initiative requires the state's governor and constitutional officers to
appoint 27 members by Sunday and nominate two others who will serve as the
committee's chairman and vice chairman. The 27 committee members then must vote
to elect a chairman at their first meeting, scheduled for Dec. 17 at the
University of California San Francisco.

   Terri Somers: (619) 293-2028; terri.somers@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Joe Panetta is president of the biotechnology industry
group Biocom.; PHOTOBY: File photo

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2004


                             269 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 09, 2004, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 724 words

HEADLINE: Drug called best choice in breast cancer battle;
Arimidex shown more effective than industry standard

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN

BODY:

   A newer breast cancer drug that outperforms industry-standard tamoxifen
should replace it as first-line therapy for postmenopausal patients, according
to a new international study.

   The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and other researchers
reported Wednesday that women who took Arimidex were less likely to have their
breast cancer come back, less likely to have it spread and less likely to have
serious side effects.

   "I hope with this new data doctors start using Arimidex as their new first
choice," said Dr. Aman Buzdar, a professor in M.D.  Anderson's department of
breast medical oncology and the lead investigator for the North American portion
of the study. "It's the better drug."

   Buzdar, who presented the research Wednesday at the San Antonio Breast Cancer
symposium, said he thought "the days of tamoxifen are gone." The findings of the
study were also published online by the British medical journal The Lancet.

   Tamoxifen, which revolutionized breast cancer treatment when it came out
three decades ago, is taken by about three-quarters of postmenopausal women with
breast cancer. The drug, which blunts estrogen's ability to fuel cancer growth,
cuts in half the risk cancer will recur.

   But the five-year study of more than 9,000 patients in 21 countries found
Arimidex cut the risk of recurrence by 70 to 80 percent. In addition, women
taking it had less bleeding and fewer blood clots, strokes and uterine cancers.

   Arimidex, made by AstraZeneca, is one of a new class of breast cancer drugs
called aromatase inhibitors (the others are Pfizer's Aromasin and Novartis AG's
Femara). They work by preventing estrogen from being made in the first place.

   The study included women who had cancer diagnoses that had not spread to the
lymph nodes and that had been treated with surgery.  The women were divided into
three groups - those who took tamoxifen, those who took Arimidex and those who
took both. Three years into the study, the last group was disbanded because
treatment showed no benefit.

   The benefits for those on Arimidex versus tamoxifen included a 10 percent
increase in the number of patients who remained disease-free; a 20 percent
increase in the overall time until there was a recurrence; a 40 percent
reduction in the spread of the cancer to the other breast; and a 14 percent
reduction in the spread of the cancer to other sites in the body.

   The study didn't show significant improvement in overall survival rates, even
though 13 percent fewer cancer deaths occurred among Arimidex users (a number
Buzdar said could have resulted from chance). Doctors said women in the study
had such early-stage cancers that more time is needed to determine if one drug
had better survival rates.

   Arimidex only works on women whose breast cancer is
hormone-receptor-positive, which amounts to about three-quarters of breast
cancers. The other type is estrogen-receptor-negative.

   In another promising breast cancer development at the San Antonio conference,
M.D. Anderson researchers reported that a gene therapy reduced tumor size an
average of nearly 80 percent in advance of surgery.

   The therapy, known as Advexin, is injected directly into the tumor site.
Researchers found evidence it replaced damaged tumor-suppressing p53 genes with
healthy genes, and produced beneficial and possibly sustained local immune
responses in the patients tested.

   In the study, 12 patients with inoperable Stage 3B cancer who had injections
followed by chemotherapy had their tumors shrink significantly.

   The result meant many of the patients could have a lumpectomy (removal only
of the tumor) instead of a mastectomy (removal of the breast). The study also
found that tumors in lymph nodes decreased in size.

   The World Health Organization says 1.2 million people will develop breast
cancer this year. In the United States, 40,000 will die of it.





   IN COMPARISON


   The report : Doctors are reporting that a new breast cancer drug, Arimidex,
outperforms the tried-and-true tamoxifen at preventing recurrence in older
women.


   The results: Arimidex might be able to prevent up to 80 percent of the most
common tumors that occur in women after menopause.


   The bottom line : Some cancer specialists predict Arimidex will become a more
standard form of treatment.


   Source: The Associated Press

GRAPHIC: Graph: IN COMPARISON (p. 9, TEXT); The Associated Press

NOTES: todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2004


                             270 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 8, 2004, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2196 words

HEADLINE: Drug-free sports might be thing of the past

BYLINE: Tom Weir

BODY:
With the BALCO steroids investigation making it clearer than ever that athletes
have million-dollar incentives to cheat and that renegade scientists are
available to help them beat drug tests, some experts doubt sports ever will be
drug-free.

   "I think the genie is out of the bottle and off to the next country," says
Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor of health policies who co-authored The
Steroids Game.

   Yesalis also questions whether the American public is truly outraged enough
to help force a drug cleanup in sports. While a USA TODAY/Gallup/CNN Poll in
2004 found 91% support testing baseball players for steroids, Yesalis says fans
haven't leveraged that conviction at the stadium turnstiles. He notes that even
during the 2004 baseball season, which was clouded with rumors of steroid use by
such top sluggers as Barry Bonds, Jason Giambi and Gary Sheffield, Major League
Baseball set an attendance record.


   "I haven't seen anything that shows me the customers really care," Yesalis
says. "Baseball just had a stellar financial year, and if your IQ was at or near
room temperature you didn't need to hear Jason Giambi's testimony (from a
California grand jury) to know these guys are using drugs."

   Yesalis also doubts athletes will cease to explore ways to chemically enhance
their performances, particularly with surveys showing that more than 1 million
adolescents already have tried steroids.

   "I've been around this for a quarter of a century, and I just don't see any
reason to be optimistic," Yesalis says. "I earn my living with the scientific
method and I'm proud of being a scientist, but I've learned that if it looks
like a duck and walks like a duck and quacks, you've got a duck."

   Yesalis, 58, says the outrage seems to be highest among men in his generation
who grew up watching baseball when it still was considered the national pastime,
people who share his view that today's players "couldn't carry the jockstrap" of
such '40s, '50s and '60s baseball icons as Ted Williams, Mickey Mantle and
Willie Mays.

   But, for younger fans, he says, "If you view sports as entertainment, why
would you draw a distinction (between athletes who do and don't use drugs)?
Using the drugs makes the athletes more entertaining. The ball goes out of the
park more often."

   And, predicts Yesalis, the worst abuses of drugs in sports are yet to come,
at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. "I think they're going to make designer
drugs," Yesalis says of China, which has had a BALCO-like history of cheating.

   Drug makers are ahead

   The drug-makers seem to stay well ahead of those in charge of testing. The
designer steroid, THG, allegedly distributed by the Bay Area Laboratory
Co-Operative, was undetectable until track coach Trevor Graham submitted a
syringe of it to American drug-testing authorities.

   "Without the syringe, we wouldn't have known about THG," says Gary Wadler, a
New York researcher who is a member of the World Anti-Doping Agency, which tests
athletes, particularly in Olympic sports. "It never would have been found out
had somebody not delivered the product."

   Adds Wadler: "The fact it happened with one (synthetic steroid that was
previously undetectable) indicates to me there are others. Whether it's one, 10
or 20, no one knows."

   But although many in sports say performance-enhancing drugs are here to stay,
Wadler is among those who hold out hope for a cleaner future. That optimism was
buoyed by the 2004 Olympics in Athens, where 24 drug cheats were caught, a
record for the Summer Games.

   One key, Wadler says, will be for U.S. pro sports leagues to follow the
Olympic model, and turn the drug-policing business over to independent agencies
such as WADA and the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, which tests U.S. Olympians.

   With more designer drugs anticipated, and with gene therapy soon expected to
be capable of creating explosive muscle growth in humans, Wadler says
professional leagues are "ill-equipped to deal with any of those things."

   "What I'm suggesting is that MLB get out of the anti-doping business and that
all professional sports should realize this is getting increasingly complex and
will get more complex as more drugs come into play, including gene therapy,"
Wadler says.

   In the wake of leaked grand jury testimony from the BALCO investigation
apparently confirming Bonds, Giambi and Sheffield have used steroids or other
performance-enhancing drugs, the MLB Players Association is discussing new
testing measures this week during meetings in Phoenix.

   Union head Don Fehr said Tuesday he has been authorized by the players to
attempt to reach an agreement with owners on a tougher steroid-testing policy.

   For those who doubt athletes are pursuing science-driven advantages more than
ever, consider the decision of Se-Jin Lee, a molecular biologist at Johns
Hopkins University in Baltimore. For eight years he has researched how to
manipulate a gene in a way that would increase muscle growth, in hopes of
helping those suffering from degenerative diseases such as muscular dystrophy,
cancer and AIDS. Lab rats have quadrupled their muscle mass, and Lee says it's
possible there soon will be a human application.

   But, says Lee, he's decided to quit discussing the specifics of this
potential scientific advance.

   "I get all kinds of letters and e-mails from individuals interested in
getting information on where the technology stands, for the purpose of trying to
exploit it for themselves," Lee says. "Unfortunately, there's this intense focus
on the possible application in sports. It's getting to the point to where it's
becoming a detriment to the development of this technology."

   Lee adds that he's a big baseball fan and can name the starting lineup of the
1968 St. Louis Cardinals. But when Bonds gets ready to pass all-time home run
leader Hank Aaron for the career record, Lee doesn't plan to pay close
attention.

   Why? "Because of the fact that athletes probably have used inappropriate ways
to get at these records, I think in this case it's virtually meaningless," Lee
says.

   Why is anyone shocked?

   As perhaps the most prolific chronicler of recent sports and pop culture
history, David Wallechinsky -- author of the Book of Lists and The Complete Book
of the Summer Olympics -- is a little perplexed that anyone is shocked by the
BALCO revelations about baseball.

   Go back, Wallechinsky says, to the summer of 1998, when America was agog as
Mark McGwire hit the once-unthinkable total of 70 home runs to break Roger
Maris' 1961 record of 61 in a season.

   Wallechinsky remembers updating a passage in his Olympic book that summer, on
1996 shot put gold medalist Randy Barnes, who had just been banned for life from
track and field. Barnes had been caught using androstenedione, a steroid
precursor that increases the body's ability to produce testosterone. McGwire,
amid his epic season, also was discovered to be taking andro, which had yet to
be outlawed by baseball.

   "Randy Barnes, he got a lifetime ban for it," Wallechinsky says. "McGwire got
millions of dollars and became an American hero, and he was taking the same
drug.  . . .  Personally, I felt a little furious. It was obvious that all these
sluggers were taking steroids."

   The problem, Wallechinsky says, "is people want their heroes. They don't want
a drug scandal. They want to look the other way."

   Baseball looked away, says Wallechinsky, and perhaps understandably. He notes
that the sports that have caught and cracked down on their drug cheats have not
prospered from showing integrity. After a wave of suspensions by Olympic
weightlifting officials in the mid-1990s, says Wallechinsky, "People thought the
sport was dirtier than ever."

   U.S. track suffered in the same manner last year, when much of the first wave
of BALCO-related allegations focused on Marion Jones, whose five Olympic medals
in 2000 were put under review Tuesday by the International Olympic Committee.

   Given the ramifications of drug scandals, Wallechinsky says, "I can
understand why baseball reacts the way it does."

   MLB Commissioner Bud Selig has complained that drug testing can't be
toughened without consent from the players association. Fehr's defense cites
concerns about privacy and confidentiality.

   That, contends Hall of Fame pitcher Jim Palmer, is a disagreement both sides
have found tremendously convenient in the wake of 1998's "Year of the Home Run,"
which undid much of the fan anger and economic damage caused by baseball's
1994-95 work stoppage.

   "Don Fehr should look in the mirror," Palmer says. "Bud Selig should look in
the mirror. These guys allowed this to happen. Nobody wanted to know why
somebody who usually hit 48 home runs was hitting 65, 66, whatever, in a season.
Everybody was blinded."

   But now baseball has its best opportunity to begin a meaningful drug-testing
program, Palmer says. "Could there be a better time to do it?" he asks.

   Acting now also might ease fan and media suspicions that Bonds' pursuit of
Aaron's career home run record has been fueled by steroids.

   Baseball historian Bill James, whose statistical analyses are must-reading
for fantasy leaguers and who holds the title of senior baseball operations
adviser for the curse-busting World Series champion Boston Red Sox, says the
home run barrage that reinvigorated baseball is in danger of being forever
discounted.

   "I think it's most likely that future historians will look back and put what
happened in this era aside," James says. "Because so many records were broken by
wide margins, it probably will just be regarded as funny numbers."

   When Aaron broke Babe Ruth's previous career record of 714 home runs, it was
the sports-page equivalent of landing on the moon. James won't predict what the
atmosphere will be like if Bonds hits 53 more homers to pass Aaron's 755, but
says, "There's just a lot more controversy, and less admiration."

   Contributing: Mel Antonen



   Four who admitted to using steroids or performance-enhancing drugs

    * Kelli White: In March 2003, the American sprinter asked BALCO founder
Victor Conte for a full-scale drug program -- the designer steroid THG known as
"the clear," endurance-boosting erythropoietin (EPO) and a
testosterone/epitestosterone cream.

   White told USA TODAY's Dick Patrick that within two weeks she felt the impact
of the drugs. "You could run harder, longer," she said. "If the workout was four
200s really, really fast, they wouldn't seem as hard as before. You could cut
the rest down from five minutes to three. That's a big difference."

   White also developed large muscles, a raspy voice, plus acne.

   "I had to compromise my integrity, my value system," said White, who accepted
a two-year ban from competition. "I knew it was so wrong."

    * Jason Giambi: The New York Yankee admitted in grand jury testimony,
according to the San Francisco Chronicle, that he knowingly used steroids and
human growth hormone (HGH). The HGH was taken "subcutaneous . . . so like you
would pinch the fat on your stomach" and inject the substance just below the
skin, Giambi testified.

   Giambi explained he met Greg Anderson -- Barry Bonds' personal trainer and
one of four men indicted in the BALCO case -- in November 2002. "So I started to
ask him: "Hey, what are the things you're doing with Barry? He's an incredible
player. I want to still be able to work out at that age and keep playing,' "

   The Yankees are looking for a way to void the rest of Giambi's guaranteed
contract, worth $82 million over the next four years.

    * Ken Caminiti: The former National League Most Valuable Player, who
admitted using steroids during his playing career, died Oct. 10 at age 41 of a
drug overdose.

   In 2002, he told Sports Illustrated he had used steroids his 1996 MVP season,
when he hit .326 with 40 home runs and 130 RBI.

   "It's no secret what's going on in baseball," he told the magazine. "At least
half the guys are using (steroids). They talk about it. They joke about it with
each other. . . . I don't want to hurt fellow teammates or fellow friends. But
I've got nothing to hide."

   Caminiti, who struggled with cocaine and alcohol abuse during and after his
playing career, later backed off those statements. "When I said 'half,' I lied.
I can honestly say that," Caminiti said. "I didn't mean to say that."

   * Jose Canseco: When he retired in May, 2002, the former All-Star who
finished his career with 462 home runs claimed 85% percent of major league
players were taking steroids.

   "There would be no baseball left if they drug-tested everyone today," Canseco
said during an interview with Fox Sports Net that year.

   "It's completely restructured the game as we know it," he said. "That's why
guys are hitting 50 or 60 or 75 home runs."

   In meetings with potential book publishers in 2002, Canseco admitted he used
steroids while he was playing, according to his literary agent, Ronald Laitsch.

   Canseco repeatedly has answered questions about steroids by telling people to
read his book (due out May 2005) in which he says he will "name names."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, Karl Gelles, USA TODAY(Photo Illustration); PHOTOS,
color, USA TODAY, Reuters; PHOTO, b/w, Todd Plitt, USA TODAY; PHOTO, b/w, Steve
Nesius, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Carlos Antonio Rios, AP; PHOTO, b/w, Fred Prouser,
Reuters; Kelli White<>Jason Giambi<>Ken Caminiti<>Jose Canseco

LOAD-DATE: December 08, 2004


                             271 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            December 6, 2004 Monday

SECTION: EDITORIALS; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: Let voters decide on stem cell research initiative in Illinois

BYLINE: Editorials

BODY:

   Shortly before he died this fall, actor Christopher Reeve told  Oprah he
believed he would walk again one day . The actor had  become paralyzed from the
neck down, his spinal cord severed, after  a devastating riding accident in
1995. Reeve was an enthusiastic  advocate of human embryonic stem cell research.
He believed that in  the future stem cells could repair his spinal injury and
cure other  immutable illnesses.

   Reeve, an impassioned liberal, was joined in his advocacy from some  unlikely
quarters. Former first lady Nancy Reagan endorsed the  study of human embryonic
stem cells after watching her husband  waste away from Alzheimer's; California
Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger,  another good Republican, promoted a referendum in
his state to  spend $3 billion over a decade on this kind of research. His move
defied the efforts of President Bush to curb further human stem  cell
investigations, and it was passed enthusiastically by  Californians in November.
The state's ballot measure, Proposition  71, will set up the California
Institute for Regenerative Medicine,  the largest single funder of stem cell
research in the United  States.

   Now Illinois Comptroller Dan Hynes wants to copy Schwarzenegger's
initiative. He believes there is much quiet support in Illinois  beyond
opponents who say the research is unethical and immoral  because it requires the
use of human embryos gleaned from in-vitro  fertilization clinics.

   Hynes and his medical supporters underline that research could aid  sufferers
of juvenile diabetes, Parkinson's and other degenerative  diseases. Even though
Illinois senators -- many of them worried  about their pro-life constituencies
-- recently refused to pass a  measure to sanction private funding of stem cell
research, Hynes  refuses to let this dissuade him. He wants state legislators to
simply let the people vote on the issue in a statewide referendum  in 2006.

   Hynes also has a novel idea for funding the research: taxing  elective
cosmetic surgery procedures such as botox injections, brow  lifts and breast
enhancements, to fund a $1 billion bond issue. He  says cosmetic procedures
(other than plastic surgery that is a  medical necessity) are a luxury and rely
on the medical  infrastructure -- particularly if something goes wrong. We pay
tax  on wine and cigarettes, why not on collagen injections?  Particularly for
such a sound cause. Hynes' goal is to set up an  institute similar to
California's to spend $1 billion over 10  years. It would likely look at ways to
repair organs such as the  heart, the pancreas, the liver; to use gene therapy
to cure  diseases such as cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia, and to  repair
spinal cord injury. We think Hynes' idea is a shrewd and  cost-efficient way to
help millions of Illinoisans while promoting  our state as a medical high-tech
center. Christopher Reeve would  have smiled.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2004


                             272 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2004 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                            December 5, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 846 words

HEADLINE: Woman has HOPE for a cure;
Bloomfield Hills resident's group embraces research project to conquer muscular
dystrophy.

BYLINE: Darren A. Nichols

BODY:

   BLOOMFIELD HILLS -- About 12 years ago, a radio show gave Betsy Erwin a sense
of hope that a cure could be found for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   For the previous two years, many doctors had not been optimistic about a cure
for the disease, the most common and severe form of muscular dystrophy. Her son,
Jed, was diagnosed with it when he was 3.

   While listening to the radio show, Erwin heard Dr. Jeffrey Chamberlain, a
researcher at the University of Michigan at the time, talk about his efforts to
find a cure for the disease.

   That's when she and several Metro Detroit families decided to found Harmonize
for Hope to help raise funds for Chamberlain's research.

   "It's more about the feeling of hope than feeling hopeless," Erwin said.
"It's just a grass-roots effort to make a difference that could impact children
worldwide.

   "We were not thinking that it would benefit our son, but we were hoping it
would benefit families coming after us who are afflicted with the disease."

   Muscular dystrophy weakens the muscles and is most common in boys, affecting
1 in 3,500 worldwide. Children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy show early signs
of muscle weakness and begin walking relatively late and have problems climbing
stairs.

   In 70 percent of the cases, the mother of the affected child is a carrier of
the disease. There is no cure.

   Since its founding, Harmonize for Hope has raised more than $500,000 to help
fund research in gene therapy treatment for muscular dystrophy. The group holds
community charity events and concerts and solicits corporate and foundation
support.

   All proceeds support Chamberlain's research efforts. His research center at
the University of Washington is one of the leading institutions in the world.

   Chamberlain said the funding allows him to stay on the cutting edge on
research for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. He said he couldn't pinpoint where he
would be without the funding, but said his research is about two years ahead of
schedule.

   Because he does not have to raise funds as much, Chamberlain said he can
focus on his research, unlike others in his field. Most large institutions do
not provide funding for research, he said.

   Harmonize for Hope is now selling silicone bracelets similar to the yellow
"LIVESTRONG" ones cyclist Lance Armstrong uses to raise money for cancer
awareness. The bracelets are expected to raise about $6 million to benefit the
Lance Armstrong Foundation. More than 20 million people have bought them.

   Made at the same Nike factory as Armstrong's bracelets, Harmonize for Hope's
version, in blue, is inscribed with the word "HOPE." The bracelets, which went
on sale in October, have received a huge response in the Metro Detroit area and
nationally, Erwin said. The group has sold more than 12,000. It started with an
order of 2,000. The bracelets sell for $3.

   The bracelet sales are expected to dramatically increase with the launch of a
Harmonize for Hope Web site this week, Erwin said.

   "We are selling bracelets like crazy," she said. "We have gone well beyond
our original expectations. We recognize it's a fad, but kids (ages) 5 to 25 want
to wear them. It's just very heartwarming."

   The bracelets' popularity among teens, who are emulating sports celebrities
who wear several versions of the wristbands, has allowed them to get involved
with Harmonize for Hope. Several of Jed's closest friends have decided to sell
some of the bracelets.

   Perry Holmes, a neighbor of Jed's, said he decided to help sell some of the
bracelets because it gives him a feeling of doing something worthwhile.

   "It's fun and great to know everyone is having fun doing it," said Holmes,
15, a freshman at Cranbrook-Kingswood High School. Although this is his first
time helping out, he has attended several of the other fund-raisers, Holmes
said.

   "It's just the feeling that you're doing a good thing. And it's cool because
a lot of people like the bracelets we're selling. The research is really
progressing, and it's nice to see that it's going to a nice place. It's
important to me and it feels good to help out."

   Erwin said it's good to know that young people are getting involved in the
effort.

   "Everyone can make a difference," Erwin said. "Everyone can be a part of the
cure. It's an opportunity to think about the disease in a much more positive
way. It's been such a positive experience because the kids have embraced it.
It's been neat for all of us to see."

   Betsy Erwin

   Residence: Bloomfield Hills

   What: Founded Harmonize for Hope in 1993.

   Mission: The organization raises funds for research into Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, the most common and severe form of the disease. Since October, it has
been selling blue, silicone bracelets with the word "HOPE" inscribed. The
organization has raised more than $500,000.

   To order bracelets: Go to harmonizeforhope.org. Ten bracelets can be
purchased for $30. There are additional costs for shipping and handling.
Proceeds go toward the Chamberlain lab at the University of Washington. All
donations are tax deductible.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2004


                             273 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           December 4, 2004 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Sports; D11 , SALLY JENKINS

LENGTH: 1390 words

HEADLINE: The First Item in a Pandora's Box of Moral Ambiguities

BYLINE: Sally Jenkins

BODY:

     Sports doping has now entered the pantheon of modern monsters, along with
bird flu and mold. It's another vague, creeping, futuristic ill with no clear
origin or cure. We don't even know how afraid of it we should be. All we know is
that we want to punish Jason Giambi and Barry Bonds for it.

   We have a picture of what natural athletes should look like in our minds, and
they shouldn't look like a Macy's Day Parade balloon with a human face. It's
viscerally upsetting to look at photos of Giambi and Bonds, next to stories
detailing their admissions of steroid use before a grand jury. They're the image
of our swollen, exploding times, their grossly distended and fatly egregious
necks spilling over collars that won't button properly.

   But visceral outrage is not a basis for making policy. We will now proceed to
hurl Giambi and Bonds into the blender of Bad People in Sports, but while that's
satisfying to our mob mentality, it doesn't help anything. We have to sort out
our repulsions and the other complexities of feeling provoked by Bonds and
Giambi, because we have to ask some questions no one is asking about doping.
Otherwise, we'll never solve it.

   And we had better solve it because something far more morally challenging
than steroids is coming, and it's called gene therapy. One day, sooner rather
than later, doctors will be able to significantly change human physiology in a
lasting way. Already researchers in a Pennsylvania lab have created muscled
"mighty mice" -- and already they have had overtures from athletes and trainers
wanting to know more about it.

    We should start with this question: What do we really mean by the
"performance enhancement" and where do we draw the line between noble striving
and dirty immoral striving?

    For example, why is it that when athletes take nutritional supplements it's
considered dedicated training, but taking something synthetic is considered
cheating? What's the difference between using a steroid to build muscles to hit
a baseball farther -- and using fiberglass poles in the pole vault? Why do we
vilify one and call the other progress? Aren't they both performance enhancing?
Aren't they both synthetic?

    Doping is a vast, subtle and multifaceted problem that contains thousands of
substances, each  of them with different implications about health, law, ethics
and science. But instead of hammering out  terms and definitions, we tend to
discuss doping with a capital 'D' as a large, single problem with a single
answer. Too few people are willing to do thorough, difficult philosophical
thinking because it's such an exhausting and sometimes ambiguous topic.

   One person who's attempting to do so is Thomas Murray, president of the
Hastings Center -- a nonpartisan research institute that explores emerging
questions in bioethics -- and the chair of an ethics advisory panel for the
World Anti-Doping Agency. Murray regularly forces himself to stare hard at
indistinct subjects, and to split hairs no one else wants to examine. I called
and asked if I was right to have some nagging questions in the periphery of my
brain, or if I'm just another weak-minded moral equivocator. He responded that
there are plenty of questions to be asked. "There've been many missteps in the
effort to control substance abuse, and it's difficult to think clearly about
it," he says.

   "You have to think about each of the ways in which people are trying to
enhance," adds Murray. "And the question you have to put to each of the
technologies is, does this make the sport admirable or beautiful, is it neutral,
or does it in fact in some ways amplify, or does it diminish the sport?"

    The answer isn't always clear, at least not to me. Why are blood
transfusions illegal in cycling and yet altitude training, which has a similar
effect and may also be hazardous to one's health, is not? Caffeine was once
banned as a performance enhancer. It no longer is. Why? Because scientists
decided it was actually performance diminishing. Ephedra. It's an herb. It
apparently killed pitcher Steve Bechler at the age of 23. A Rand Corporation
study of ephedra concluded that there's no scientific proof it enhances the
performance of athletes. There is simply not enough  evidence on the subject. So
what do we do with it?

    Is there an ethical distinction between an anabolic steroid and EPO? While a
steroid has some benefit in and of itself, it  enhances performance because it
allows an athlete to work harder. He or she can spend more time in the weight
room, lifting heavier weights, and recover faster, but  the athlete still has to
do the work. EPO, on the other hand, acts to enhance the creation of red blood
cells whether the athlete does anything or not. Is one worse than the other?

    Is our chief interest in banning a substance that it potentially distorts a
game, or is our chief interest the health of athletes? Or both?

    To make matters more confusing, "the scientific evidence is not crystal
clear" on some so-called performance enhancers, Murray says. To this day we
don't know a great deal about the side effects of steroids. "For one thing, it
would be immoral to conduct a well-controlled study where you administer
steroids," says Murray. "So that it makes it tough to get reliable info."

    Instead, we have to rely on what Murray calls "second best methods" to study
doping questions. Which means that we are judging and penalizing athletes based
on these second best methods, too. And perhaps using some dicey testing methods
to boot.

    Which brings us to this question: Why do we reserve our harshest judgment
and punishment, sometimes lifetime bans, for athletes when in most cases the
athlete is just the pressured human result of a whole system of coaches,
trainers, scientists and others who are creating new drugs and urging their use?

    What should we do about the athlete who may have doped for awhile and then
repented, and is now clean? Or the athlete who took a substance unknowingly, as
Bonds apparently contends? What about athletes who play in the pharmacological
gray zone, using borderline substances because they're trying to compete with
aggressive cheaters? Do we prosecute athletes retroactively for substances that
aren't strictly illegal but may be declared so in the future, when we don't
prosecute people who drank liquor at 18 before we raised the drinking age to 21?

    Athletes explore physical extremes, that's what they do. They're in the
business of extracting every last particle of effort and excellence from their
bodies. To talk to them about the dangers of performance enhancement is to
naively employ what Murray calls "the you'll put-your-eye-out argument." It
doesn't deter a 10-year-old from playing with a BB gun to tell them they could
get hurt. So you think a football player who gets hit by 300-pound linemen is
going to decline to take a steroid because it might injure his health? Or a
downhill skier? "You want to tell someone who straps boards to his feet and goes
down a mountain at 70 mph, that you might hurt yourself?" Murray says. "That's
called paternalism. And for young athletes it has no moral force."

    Here's another reason our anti-doping righteousness lacks moral force: We
will proceed to vilify Giambi and Bonds, but we certainly bought tickets to
their home run races. We've been going to the ballpark in record numbers. We
crave excellence, applaud achievement, and we disparage athletes, even in Little
League, who don't seem to pursue excellence remorselessly as lazy or
undedicated. But when someone pulls back the curtain and reveals how these
things were achieved, we're alternately confused, repulsed or angry. In a word,
we're unclear. And with gene therapy on the horizon, it's only going to get more
hazy.

    "It's really about the meaning we attach to sports," Murray says. "I foresee
two possible future worlds for athletes. One is a future absolutely dominated by
what I call the 'performance principle.' The idea that you wring every last
possible fraction of performance out of an athlete by any and all means
available. The alternative future and the one I still have hope for, but don't
underestimate the difficulty of preserving, is one where we still find meaning
in great performances as an alchemy of two factors, natural talents or abilities
and virtues."

    He's not at all sure how it will turn out.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2004


                             274 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 02, 2004, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: California dreamin' ;
Houston must protect its growing stem cell research base from the lure of West
Coast billions and politically imposed restraints.

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   PRIOR to the passage of a $ 3 billion stem cell research initiative in
California last month, the institutions of Houston's Texas Medical Center seemed
guaranteed a pre-eminent position in the research field some feel will
revolutionize medicine. Now the lure of all that Golden State seed money might
draw research talent away from the Texas Gulf Coast.

   The ability of stem cells to transform themselves into the building blocks of
human organs has scientists excited about their potential to cure disease.
Restrictions on federal funding for research using fetal stem cells, prompted by
ethical and religious concerns, propelled the California vote to provide an
alternate pool of state money. Although embryonic stem cell research funded by
private and other non-federal sources remains unrestricted, federal grants
provide the fuel that drives much research. Innovators and scientists tend to
follow the money, and nowhere is the pot of stem cell gold so beckoning as it is
in California.

   "We're very concerned about losing research scientists who are interested in
stem cell biology and medicine to California," comments Dr. James Willerson, a
cardiologist and stem cell researcher. He's also the president-elect of the
Texas Heart Institute and president of the University of Texas Health Science
Center in Houston.

   As Willerson notes, Houston has produced groundbreaking research in the stem
cell field, including the only FDA-approved trial that treated patients
suffering heart failure with their own stem cells derived from bone marrow.
Willerson doesn't believe Texas can come up with billions of research dollars,
but he's optimistic that ways can be found to keep Houston in the forefront of
stem cell research.

   He hopes to combine various pools of non-federal funding "to create a stem
cell center here that will rival anybody's anywhere. But we have a disadvantage
right now, a $ 3 billion disadvantage."

   Dr. Malcolm Brenner, director of the Shell Center for Gene Therapy at Baylor
College of Medicine, says much will depend on how the California money is spent.
Concern is mounting that a few politically connected individuals in industry and
academe will manage to grab a large share of the California money and dictate
how it will be used. If that happens, Brenner predicts, established scientists
in the field will not be attracted there.

   What the city and state don't need is any more politically motivated efforts
to tie the hands of our best and brightest medical researchers. Such an
ill-considered attempt occurred in the last Texas legislative session, when a
bill was introduced aimed at banning reproductive cloning but that also targeted
therapeutic cloning research and would have mandated stringent prison terms and
fines for researchers who violated the law. Fortunately, the bill was not
enacted.

   Brenner notes that freedom to conduct research is as essential as funding.
The dean of the graduate school of Baylor College of Medicine, Dr. William
Brinkley, is more pointed. "Either our legislators don't understand the
tremendous benefits to health this could provide, or they are just simply
narrow-minded and stubborn."

   To counter the pull of California's stem cell gold rush, Houston's
entrepreneurs and philanthropists need to step forward and ante up the dollars
to make sure the city remains a player in this exploding field. At the same
time, the politicians should step back and allow our scientists to explore it.


TYPE: Editorial Opinion

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2004


                             275 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 30, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1113 words

HEADLINE: Bacteria Enlisted For New Trials On Dental Health

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Can genetically engineered bacteria prevent tooth decay? A small
biotechnology company is about to take the first step toward answering that
question.

    The company, Oragenics, is expected to announce today that it has received
permission from the Food and Drug Administration to conduct the first clinical
trial in which genetically modified bacteria will be put into people's mouths.

    The new bacteria, which are genetically neutered so they do not make the
acid that eats away at teeth, would be designed to replace the acid-producing
bacteria already present in most mouths.

    ''The idea is simply to use good bacteria to fight bad bacteria,'' said
Jeffrey D. Hillman, the chief scientific officer at Oragenics, based in Alachua,
Fla.

    Dr. Hillman says that if it all works as planned, people might eventually
receive a single painless five-minute treatment, in which a dentist would rub
the bacteria on their teeth, and be protected from cavities for life.

    There is still a long way to go to prove the treatment's effectiveness,
however. The first trial, which the company said it hoped to start as soon as
January, will be a small test of safety, not effectiveness in fighting cavities.

    Still, even getting to this point has been a challenge. Dr. Hillman has been
working on this therapy for 25 years and first applied to the F.D.A. for
permission to begin a clinical trial in 1998. The agency, the company said, has
demanded change upon change to make sure the modified bacteria would not run
amok, cause undesirable changes in the mouth, or revert to a cavity-producing
form.

    To win approval, Oragenics has agreed that the 15 volunteers in the first
trial will not even have teeth -- they will have dentures. That way, if
something unexpected happens, the dentures can be plopped into bleach to
exterminate the microbes, which mainly stick to teeth.

    ''The F.D.A. has its failsafe,'' said Chuck Soponis, the chief executive of
Oragenics. A spokeswoman for the F.D.A. said the agency was not allowed to
discuss clinical trials under its purview.

    Oragenics's approach, which it calls replacement therapy, is part of a
broader movement to view tooth decay as an infectious disease, probably the
world's most common one.

    Currently, cavities are ''basically treated as a surgical problem rather
than an infection problem,'' said Martin Taubman, head of the department of
immunology at the Forsyth Institute in Boston, a private dental research
organization.

    Dr. Taubman is working on a vaccine that he envisions will one day be
sprayed in the nostrils of one-year-old children to protect them from the
cavity-causing microbe.

    Planet Biotechnology of Hayward, Calif., is using genetically engineered
plants to make antibodies that could neutralize the bacteria.

    There are hundreds of species of bacteria in people's mouths, but scientists
say that one, Streptococcus mutans, accounts for most tooth decay.

    This strain is adept at clinging to teeth and lives on sugar, producing as a
waste product lactic acid, which eats away at the minerals in teeth. Most young
children get S. mutans from close contact with their mothers when their teeth
start appearing.

    The replacement therapy is approach is not unlike adding good bacteria to
yogurt in the hopes of combating bad bacteria in the digestive tract.

    To make his anticavity bacteria, Dr. Hillman, who is on leave from the
University of Florida, where much of the work was done, removed the gene for
lactic acid production from S. mutans.

    That change killed the bacteria, because they had no way to eliminate their
waste. So he added an extra copy of a gene for alcohol production, allowing the
bacteria to produce extra alcohol as a waste product (though far too little, Dr.
Hillman said, to have any effect on people).

    Another challenge is ensuring that the modified bacteria can fend off their
conventional cousins to remain in the mouth. To create his biotech bug, Dr.
Hillman started with a rare but natural strain, found in about 1 percent of
mouths, which makes an antibiotic that kills other S. mutans strains.

    In tests on rats fed a high-sugar diet, the modified bugs reduced cavities
by half. And the natural antibiotic producing S. mutans strain did displace the
more common strain in two people and persisted in their mouths for 15 years, Dr.
Hillman said.

    Still there are numerous questions. Will the antibiotic kill other bacteria
as well, upsetting the delicate balance of species in the mouth? Will the
genetically engineered bacteria spread to others, such as by kissing?

    To satisfy safety concerns, Oragenics modified the bacteria further to make
them dependent on a certain amino acid that is not usually found in the human
diet. To keep the bacteria alive, participants in the first clinical trial will
have to use a mouthwash containing that amino acid twice a day. The company
plans to eliminate that requirement in the final product.

    In this trial the volunteers will have the bugs spread on their teeth with
cotton swabs, and then be required to eat sugary foods to help the bacteria
colonize. The biotech bacteria will be in their mouths for only seven days
before they eliminate them with an antibacterial mouthwash. The trial will
involve men whose spouses or partners will also be tested to see of the bacteria
has spread. The proposed trial was reviewed in March without major objections by
the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, an advisory arm of the National
Institutes of Health that screens trials involving genetically engineered
organisms, particularly gene therapy tests. Oragenics's treatment does not seem
to have aroused the concern of groups that oppose genetically modified crops.

    Mr. Soponis of Oragenics said that if all goes well with this safety trial
and future trials on effectiveness, the treatment could reach the market by 2009
or 2010.

    Attracting investors and business partners, however, could be difficult.
Fluoride treatments, which strengthen the teeth, have reduced tooth decay
sharply. And Oragenics, a publicly traded company, has only about $4 million in
cash and will need a bigger partner to get its treatment through clinical
trials, Mr. Soponis said.

    Replacement therapy or vaccines probably will not eliminate tooth decay
completely, since there are other bacteria that make acid. And tooth brushing
will still be needed, Dr. Hillman said, if only to fight bad breath and gum
disease.

    ''I would never tell anyone not to brush their teeth,'' Dr. Hillman said.

    But clearly people do not always brush or floss. And that, he said, leaves
room for a treatment that would allow people to sit back and let genetically
engineered bacteria do all the work.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At top, the teeth of a rat on a high sugar diet. The teeth in
the bottom panel have received therapy. (pg. C7)

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2004


                             276 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 29, 2004, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1403 words

HEADLINE: Cruel irony -- Gehrig's disease expert stricken;

Shocking diagnosis after decades caring for ALS patients

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Writer

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall

BODY:
Dr. Richard Olney first got interested in the neuromuscular disease known as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, when the daughter of his favorite teacher
in junior high school died of it.

    He soon came to regard ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease, as one of
the most compelling -- and justly feared -- disorders of the nervous system. And
so, during 25 years as a neurologist, Olney devoted his career to the care of
ALS patients, founding a specialized clinic at UCSF.

    He resigned as clinic director this summer and has stopped treating all his
patients with ALS. But he has even more reason these days to be interested in
their disease.

    Now, it is his disease.

    In June, Olney, 56, regarded as one of the top ALS clinicians in the
country, was diagnosed with ALS.

    ALS is not contagious. He didn't catch it from close contact with a patient.
It's just a matter of unhappy fortune -- just one more case in one of the
biggest ongoing mysteries of brain research.

    A familial type accounts for a small number of cases, but for the most part
ALS strikes without any warning or previous family history of the disease.
"Ninety to 95 percent of cases just happen at random," Olney said.

    The diagnosis has shocked hundreds of ALS patients and family members
throughout the West who have received care and counseling from Olney at the UCSF
clinic, one of only two in the state and 19 in the country certified as a
regional center by the ALS Association.

    Amid an outpouring of sympathy, the tragedy has focused new attention on
efforts to find a cause and eventually a cure for the invariably fatal disease.

    UCSF has scheduled a research symposium in Olney's honor on Dec. 17,
including presentations by two university colleagues and collaborators, Nobel
laureate Dr. Stanley Prusiner and stem-cell specialist Dr. Arnold Kriegstein.

    Although Olney has concentrated mainly on patient care, he also has
emphasized the need for more research, participating in a number of national
multi-center trials. "We share a fraternity," said Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, a
neurology professor and ALS researcher at Johns Hopkins University, who also is
scheduled to speak at the symposium. "Rick is a highly respected clinical
investigator in the field of ALS. It's a bad enough disease, but for one of your
own colleagues to develop the same disease you're studying. ... Well, I've never
heard of it happening."

    Lifespan measured in years -- or months

    People with ALS typically expect to live about two or three years, perhaps
as long as five years, after diagnosis. Olney's case does not appear to be the
slow-moving kind. He may have only a matter of months.

    That's according to Dr. Cathy Lomen-Hoerth, a UCSF neurologist, who took
over at the ALS clinic when Olney found he no longer could stand up, let alone
muster the strength to conduct neurological exams.

    For years, Lomen-Hoerth was Olney's medical protege. She is his doctor now.

    When advising her patient, Lomen-Hoerth said she often gets the sense of
hearing echoes of his own teaching, which emphasized a comprehensive approach
that may include detailed, hours-long examinations and close consultation with a
diverse team of medical specialists.

    "It still is hard to believe, even now," she said. "You see him getting
worse and so you know it's true. But it's so hard to believe he could actually
get this disease that he has worked so hard to impact over the years."

    Olney, interviewed in his former office and while undergoing his
therapeutic-exercise routine at the hospital, was more matter-of-fact about it.

    He knows the risk numbers for ALS as well as anybody: The lifetime
cumulative risk is about one case per 1,000 people, about the same as multiple
sclerosis. Only about 30,000 people in the United States have ALS, compared with
about 10 times that number with MS, but that's mainly because people with MS
live a lot longer.

    "ALS is really not as rare as you might think," Olney said.

    Given the odds, Olney calculates there should be a case once every five or
10 years among those working on the disease. So he figures a case like his was
overdue. He said he just had a hard time being convinced that he was the one,
saying it just seemed too ironic.

    At first, Olney suspected the instability he began noticing in his right
knee, and later a progressive weakening in both legs, was caused by compression
of a disk in his spinal column. A longtime runner, he thought it might be
related to muscle damage he sustained while training for his fourth marathon.

    But after three surgeries failed to halt the early symptoms, Dr. Robert
Layzer, Olney's colleague in the UCSF neurology department, confirmed that the
culprit was ALS.

    Despite the surgeries, the weakness spread to his arms. Lately it's
noticeably affected his speech. It will, in all likelihood, keep getting worse,
eventually making it difficult even to swallow, or breathe. Then it will end.

    ALS is marked by the degeneration of select nerve cells, originating in the
brain or spinal cord, that drive the muscles. One of its more unsettling
characteristics is that it spares most parts of the brain, including the
cortical neurons that underlie alertness and conscious thought. So patients get
a front-row seat at their own demise.

    The root cause is unknown. No one has found a way to fundamentally alter the
course of the disease. The best that can be achieved from drug treatments,
Lomen-Hoerth said, is to slow it down, and not by much.

    Research now focuses on ways of shoring up the nervous system's defenses,
perhaps by using gene therapy to deliver a nerve growth factor precisely where
it's needed. Lomen-Hoerth, among others, is trying to root out the genetic and
environmental factors that make some people susceptible to ALS, or may cause
some patients to decline more quickly than others.

    "We need a broader, more comprehensive understanding of this," said Graeme
Davis, a UCSF biochemist working on the problem. "We're still at kind of the
basic level now, but the exciting thing is that as more gene candidates are
found these days, the knowledge gap closes."

    'A degree of insight'

    It's not likely to close quickly enough to change the outcome for the UCSF
neurologist. Olney said his long experience working with ALS patients has
helped.

    "It gives me a degree of insight into some of the practical details, how
this affects your life at home and in the community," he said, noting he wasted
no time adding the wheelchair ramps and other equipment he knew he and his
caregivers would need at his home.

    He said his medical training has helped him face death squarely.

    "You have to deal with your own mortality to really be comfortable dealing
with dying people," he said. "So that's made it a lot easier for me."

    His wife, Paula, a dialysis nurse, said it has been harder for her.

    "I've been so emotional, I've been crying for a whole year," she said.

    Olney said he never forgot an encounter early in his career with a young man
dying of stomach cancer, who had the discipline to allow himself but a half hour
every morning of teary emotion, and then devoted the rest of the day to enjoying
life as best he could.

    That's become the strategy in the Olney household, too. The couple's two
adult children, Nick and Amy, have moved back to their Marin home, each taking a
turn caring for their father. Paula Olney said he still orchestrates everything,
adding that they have had much to do, coping with the endless details involved
in "shutting down a career and a life."

    "He's holding up all of us," Paula Olney said. "His disease is progressing
surprisingly fast but he is still positive. He's not angry. He doesn't sit there
like a depressed guy."

    Professional colleagues have been most impressed by Olney's determination to
continue contributing to ALS research, not as a doctor now but as a patient
willing to submit to placebo-controlled clinical trials. That means he may be
given a sugar pill, rather than an actual drug.

    Shortly before his forced retirement, Olney wrote a protocol for such a
clinical trial, a complicated effort that will test two experimental drugs at
the same time, head to head and versus a placebo. Lomen-Hoerth now plans to
direct the effort, and will soon begin enrolling patients.

    Olney said he intends to be the first to sign up.E-mail Carl T. Hall at
chall@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (3), (1) Dr. Richard Olney has been forced to resign as director
of the UCSF clinic he founded to treat ALS., (2) Physical therapist Albert
Seligman helps prevent Dr. Rick Olney's legs from tensing up., (3) Dr. Rick
Olney, watched by son Nick, exercises at UCSF to slow the effects of ALS, which
causes nerve cells that drive the muscles to degenerate.  / Photos by Katy
Raddatz / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2004


                             277 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 28, 2004, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. G2

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: WALDEN BEHAVIORAL CARE

BYLINE: COMPILED BY AMANDA NASTARI AND ANN CHIN

BODY:

   Walden Behavioral Care in Boston, a psychiatric center, has named Dr. P.S.
Kishore to the medical staff. Kishore was medical director at Marathon Acute
Treatment Services and has also taught at Harvard University's Department of
Medicine.


           O'NEILL & ASSOCIATES

      O'Neill and Associates, a government and public relations firm in Boston,
has named Wesley Eberle senior account executive. Eberle was communications
coordinator at Boston 2004 Inc.


      THE MARTINS COS.

      Craig Douglas has been named director of architectural services for The
Martins Cos., a design, construction and real estate firm in Danvers. Douglas
was project manager at Catalano Architects.


      CAMBRIDGE HEALTH ALLIANCE

      Cambridge Health Alliance, a healthcare system that serves Cambridge,
Somerville and Boston's metro-north region, named Steven Cano senior director of
pharmacy and chief pharmacy officer. Cano was a former director of pharmacy at
St. Vincent Hospital in Worcester.

      GMAC REAL ESTATE

      Joe Capriotti has been appointed president and chief executive of GMAC
Real Estate's Eastern Massachusetts Real Estate division, based in Woburn.
Capriotti was executive vice president and general manager of Prudential
California Realty in Orange County, Calif.

      N.E. CRYOGENIC CENTER

      New England Cryogenic Center Inc., the parent company of the New England
Cord Blood Bank Inc. in Newton, named Dawn Sweetser director of marketing.
Sweetser was formerly account director with W. A. Wilde Co.


      IRON MOUNTAIN INC.

      Iron Mountain Inc., a Boston records and information management services
firm, appointed Bob Brennan president, North America. Brennan was chief
executive and chairman of Connected Corp.


      PROFICIENCY

      Trenton H. Brown has been named president and chief executive of
Proficiency, a Marlborough software company. Brown was executive vice president
of worldwide sales and chief operating officer of Rand Worldwide.


      CLEARFOREST CORP.

      ClearForest Corp., a data analytics company in Boston, named Thomas Bogan
to the company's board of directors. Bogan was a venture partner at Greylock.


      TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES

      Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a Cambridge firm specializing in therapies
for rare genetic diseases, made the following appointments: Neil Kirby, senior
vice president; Paul M. Martha , senior vice president and chief medical
officer; Gregory D. Perry , senior vice president and chief financial officer;
Linda H. Pettingell , senior vice president, and Suzanne L. Bruhn , vice
president.


      OPTIANT

      Jonathan Colehower has been named senior vice president at Optiant, a
Boston supply chain design company. Colehower was formerly vice president of
supply chain management at Oracle.


      LAURA TOMASETTI & ASSOCIATES PUBLIC RELATIONS

      Laura Tomasetti & Associates Pubic Relations LLC, a Boston public
relations firm, named Darlene Hollywood vice president and Claire Vail account
supervisor. Previously, Hollywood was public relations manager at The First
Years Inc. and Vail was content manager for the online marketing division of
Bertelsmann Media Group.


      CARITAS ST. ELIZABETH'S MEDICAL CENTER

      Mark C. Clement has been appointed president of Caritas St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center. Clement was formerly president and chief executive of MetroWest
Medical Center.


      UPROMISE

      Upromise Inc., a privately funded Needham service helping families save
for college, named Jean Alexander chief marketing officer. Alexander was
executive vice president at Digitas.


NOTES:
WHO'S WHAT, WHERE

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2004


                             278 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       November 28, 2004, Sunday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1496 words

HEADLINE: Helping one, benefiting all ; Grandparents' donations for S.A. girl
could pay for a cure for juvenile diabetes ; More disease-advocacy groups are
letting their major donors give directly to specific programs or scientists.

BYLINE: Nicole Foy


BODY: The picture hangs prominently in Dr. Timothy Kieffer's research lab. And
every new student or researcher who comes through his door hears the same
speech.

    "This is who we're working for - these are the faces of juvenile diabetes,"
Kieffer tells them, motioning to a collage containing the photograph of a
smiling San Antonio first-grader named Kathryn Vance.

    Although almost 2,000 miles separate the University of British Columbia
scientist and the 6-year-old girl, a new research-funding arrangement has linked
their lives in a relationship her family hopes will help lead to a cure for the
disease affecting her and more than 18 million Americans.

    Through the Juvenile Diabetes and Research Foundation, Kathryn's
grandparents donated half a million dollars to Kieffer's program, aimed at using
gene therapy to convert stem cells - the body's master cells - from the
intestine into life-saving, insulin-producing cells.

    The Vances' connection with Kieffer represents a growing trend in scientific
charitable gift-giving: Increasingly, major donors are funneling money to
individual researchers or specific programs through disease-advocacy
organizations such as the juvenile diabetes foundation and the American Diabetes
Association.

    The arrangements have helped fund nonprofit research during increasingly
lean charitable giving years.

    While some scientists shy away from such direct gifts so they can maintain
their independence, Kieffer says the personalized approach helps remind him that
real people depend on the outcome of his work. If that makes some researchers
uneasy, so be it, he said.

    "It needs to make scientists uncomfortable - it needs to be personal," he
said. "Researchers don't need to seal themselves off in their labs trying to
answer what they think are just interesting questions."

    Specified giving is another tool for organizations that are dealing with
more sophisticated donors seeking a degree of control over their contributions,
said Princess Gamble, development manager for the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, which publishes the journal Science.

    "It is certainly a donor trend to want to give to specific programs in any
genre, be it science, education or others. It's a selling point," she said.
"Increasingly, you have donors who are educated about their giving and they want
to see specific results."

    Donors who feel drawn to directed giving often are seeking more of a
one-on-one relationship with a scientist, said Ann Grey, national manager for
major donor relations at the juvenile diabetes association. Getting regular
updates about a research program and having direct contact with its top
scientist provides a more meaningful experience, she said.

    "It gives them some sense of having some control over something they have no
control over," Grey said.

    Kieffer said the Vances are one of two families who have given "named
grants" to his Type 1, or juvenile, diabetes, program. Their stake in the work
is a motivating force for all involved in his lab's effort. Kathryn's parents
and grandparents have toured his lab in Vancouver and receive research updates.



    "Sure, it's much easier to get a blank check sent to the university with no
strings attached," Kieffer said. "But we need to realize that money didn't just
fall from heaven and we need to be productive. This takes it up a notch."

    Turning point

    The journey that led the Vances to Kieffer, himself a father of three, began
two years ago at a San Antonio food court.

    When Kathryn was 4, she sat for lunch inside a mall and devoured about 20
chicken nuggets. The petite, dark-haired girl also gulped several large cups of
water and was asking for another when her mom's friend said she couldn't help
but notice that something seemed wrong.

    Kathryn's appetite had been up and her constant requests for water - which
often came in the middle of the night - were becoming a bit burdensome. She also
seemed lethargic and irritable. Still, Michele and Jeff Vance chalked up their
daughter's behavior to a typical growth spurt coupled with a recent transition
to a new school.

    But over the next few days, Michele began to think about her daughter's
insatiable appetite and extreme thirst, and how she didn't seem to be gaining
any weight.

    That's when Michele remembered.  Unquenchable thirst. Frequent urination.
Classic symptoms of Type I diabetes, she had learned in dental hygiene school
several years back.

    A quick test at the pediatrician's office confirmed her fears. Kathryn's
blood sugar was at 567 milligrams per deciliter, while it should have stood at
about 70. She'd also lost about 10 percent of her body weight over a few months.



    Kathryn's own immune system was attacking and destroying her
insulin-producing beta cells, resulting in dangerously high levels of blood
glucose.

    In a healthy person, glucose, a form of sugar produced when food is
digested, is used as fuel for energy. Insulin is critical in that process
because it allows glucose to move from the bloodstream to be used by the body's
cells.

    Without complaint, the 4-year-old immediately began daily insulin
injections. Her parents learned how, with a pinprick monitor, to test her blood
sugar levels - sometimes six times a day, sometimes every 15 minutes, depending
on the situation.

    They began closely watching what Kathryn ate, counting and logging the
carbohydrates in each snack and meal to determine the amount of insulin her body
would require.

    Over a year after her diagnosis, Kathryn began an insulin pump that has
replaced the syringe injections. It continuously administers specific increments
of insulin through a small tube inserted under her skin on her back upper hip.



    Now, the Saint Mary's Hall student wears the pump in a pack strapped around
her waist at all times, except while showering or swimming.

    Although the pump has simplified things, the vigilance over Kathryn's
disease never ends. About every two hours after midnight, Michele plods down the
dark hallway to her daughter's bedside. Kathryn, so used to the routine, doesn't
even stir as Michele uses the blood sugar monitor to prick a tiny amount of
blood from her arm.

    On one recent night, to Michele's horror, Kathryn's blood sugar stood at a
dangerously low 37.



    Lately, Michele and Jeff have been frustrated over the erratic nature of
Kathryn's daily readings. But experts warned them early on that even the closest
monitoring of the disease wouldn't mean she'd remain within the normal limits.

    "I don't get so scared anymore, I get mad," Michele says. "I'm a very
black-and-white person. But diabetes is a very gray disease."

    Closing in on a cure

    Since Kathryn's diagnosis, Jeff and Michele, like many families, have leaned
heavily on the diabetes foundation for support and information. The nonprofit is
the leading charitable funder and advocate of Type 1 diabetes research
worldwide.

    The couple was gearing up to attend the local chapter's annual Promise Ball
fund-raising gala earlier this year when Jeff's parents, Louis and Vivian Vance,
took him and Michele by surprise. The elder Vances, part owners of the Bill
Miller Bar-B-Q chain, announced at dinner one night they'd like to donate
$500,000 in Kathryn's name.

    Under the foundation's named grants program, the family decided they wanted
to direct the major donation to a specific juvenile diabetes researcher. The
program provided them with project summaries of several scientists, and
Kieffer's work "leaped off the page" at Jeff.

    By now, the 35-year-old part owner of the Barnacle Bill's Seafood chain knew
enough about his daughter's disease to be able to judge research summaries with
a critical eye.

    "I was looking for something in the realm of a cure and this really struck
me," he says.

    Kieffer has found a way to protect mice from diabetes by giving them a gene
enabling a common gut cell to mimic the normal insulin machinery in the
pancreas. Type 1 diabetes occurs when the immune system destroys
insulin-producing beta cells in the pancreas.

    Kieffer's work has showed that cells in the stomach and upper intestinal
tract that received a gene for human insulin began secreting the hormone in
response to after-meal rises in blood sugar.

    He believes there is a likelihood the same could be done in human diabetics
using gene therapy. Using the pig, a model similar to humans, Kieffer is closing
in on a gene-delivery system that would use viruses to convert gut cells into
insulin producing cells.

    The Vances' donation will help in moving the project into this next major
stage, he says.

    "I can almost taste it," Kieffer says. "Now we need to figure out how we'd
take the process wide-scale so it might one day help all the Kathryns of the
world."

    nfoy@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: PHOTOS BY LISA KRANTZ/STAFF : 1) Kathryn Vance (right) stands in
line with her friend Cali Armstrong to change classes at St. Mary's Hall school
last month. Kathryn, who has Type I diabetes, carries a bag with everything she
needs to test herself and treat any diabetic reactions. ;

    2) As part of their morning routine, Michele Vance checks the blood sugar
level of her daughter Kathryn, 6, while son Hayden, 4, eats breakfast. The check
must be done at least six times a day and sometimes every 15 minutes. ;

    3) Kathryn Vance is as active as any 6-year-old during the day, including
ballet class during her school day at St. Mary's Hall in San Antonio. ;

    4) Classmate Jackson Williams watches as Kathryn puts away her testing
instruments after checking her own blood sugar before lunch. ;

    5) Jeff Vance plays with Kathryn while Michele Vance inputs their daughter's
blood sugar reading before bedtime. ;

    6) Kathryn doesn't let diabetes slow her down, especially while playing on
the backyard trampoline with her brother, Hayden, 4.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2004


                             279 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 26, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2150 words

HEADLINE: Many See Hope In Drug Pulled During Testing

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   With his condition deteriorating from Parkinson's disease last year, Steve
Kaufman gave up making improvements to his home in Algonquin, Ill. ''I couldn't
even hold a nail stable,'' he recalled.

    Earlier this year, after taking an experimental drug in a clinical trial,
Mr. Kaufman built new kitchen cabinets and an outdoor deck. He was so steady he
could walk across a narrow piece of lumber like an Olympic gymnast on the
balance beam.

    The drug, however, is no longer available to Mr. Kaufman or other
Parkinson's patients in clinical trials. In June, its developer, Amgen,
announced that the drug, which is called glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor, or GDNF, had not proved better than a placebo. Two months later, the
company said that safety issues had been discovered and it abruptly ordered all
patients taken off the drug.

    Amgen's move has provoked an outcry from patients who say the company is
robbing them of their only hope. ''It's almost the same thing as a diabetic
losing their insulin,'' said Mr. Kaufman, who is 50 and has had Parkinson's for
10 years.

    The story of Amgen's drug shows the clash between the faith of patients and
the cold logic of science and business. At a time when public debate is focused
on whether unsafe drugs like Vioxx are remaining on the market too long, this
story shows patients who are more than willing to accept risks to get a drug.
Their willingness also raises an ethical question: If a company stops developing
a drug for safety or efficacy reasons, is it obligated to continue supplying it
to patients from its clinical trials?

    A complicating factor in the clinical trials is the nature of Parkinson's, a
disease that chokes off the supply of dopamine, a signaling chemical, in the
brain. Some studies have suggested that mere anticipation of treatment can
induce a patient's brain to produce more dopamine, which alleviates the
symptoms. The patients not only feel better, they are better -- at least for a
time. In fact, some of patients in the GDNF trial who improved the most had
received a placebo.

    Patients and their families have written letters to Amgen, imploring the
company to continue providing the drug. Some of the most poignant have come from
England, where the drug has been tested the longest, since 2001.

    ''To quote a headline that my daughter used in a story she wrote for a
national women's magazine -- GDNF has given me my dad back,'' wrote Stephen
Waite, who had used the drug for more than three years. In a telephone
interview, Mr. Waite, 60, began crying when talking about the loss of the drug.
''I would sign a disclaimer, anything, in order to continue,'' he said.

    Another family told Amgen how the drug allowed their mother to shop, dance
and go on vacation for the first time in three years. ''GDNF deserves more time,
and so does our mother,'' they wrote.

    And Neil Shadwick wrote, ''My whole world collapsed around me,'' when he
learned the drug would be stopped. ''My first thought was I don't want to be a
shaking helpless man at 44.''

    But while Amgen executives say they empathize with the four dozen patients
who have participated in the trials, they also say they cannot keep giving them
a drug that does not work and might be dangerous. ''How can we ethically justify
administering this drug?'' said Roger Perlmutter, executive vice president for
research and development.

    In August, the company's studies found that high doses of the drug damaged
some monkey brains. It also found that a few patients had developed antibodies
against the drug, posing a potential danger.

    Kevin Sharer, the chief executive, called the failed trial a ''tragedy'' and
''the single most disappointing'' one in his 12 years at the company.

    Some of the doctors involved in the clinical trial have criticized Amgen,
saying the trial failed because it was poorly designed, not because GDNF does
not work. ''I don't think there's ever been a trial like this where so many
investigators were so indignant about the way things were handled,'' said
Michael Hutchinson, an associate professor of neurology at New York University
who was involved in the trial.

    Critics also say the safety concerns are not serious. Some even suspect
Amgen is killing the drug because it believes it will not be a big seller. But
Mr. Sharer denied that business considerations were behind the company's
decision, noting that Amgen had spent hundreds of millions of dollars over 10
years on the drug's development.

    GDNF had been considered one of the most promising approaches to a disease
that affects 500,000 to 1.5 million Americans. Parkinson's, marked by severe
tremors and rigidity, stems from the death of brain cells that make dopamine, a
signaling chemical. Existing drugs augment the brain's dopamine supply but do
not stop the death of the brain cells.

    GDNF is one of a class of natural human proteins called nerve growth factors
that can protect brain cells from death and induce them to grow. It has been
shown in animals to spur growth of dopamine-producing cells. ''This is the first
drug that we might have that might influence the course of the disease and
that's why it's important that it not be killed,'' said Richard Penn, a
neurosurgeon at the University of Chicago.

    Amgen obtained GDNF in 1994 when it paid $240 million to acquire Synergen, a
Colorado biotechnology company that made the protein using genetic engineering.
Synergen had tested the drug in monkeys and filmed some dramatic results.

    ''We looked at that movie and said, 'Buy this company,''' Mr. Sharer said.
''Literally.''

    The drawback of GDNF is that it cannot pass from the blood into the brain,
so it cannot be given by injection like other protein drugs. It must be put
directly into the brain.

    Amgen first tested the drug by injecting it into the fluid-filled cavity in
the center of patients' brains. The trial failed and the company abandoned
development in 1999.

    But some academic scientists refused to give up. Steven S. Gill at Frenchay
Hospital in Bristol, England, designed a way to deliver the drug directly to the
part of the brain where it is needed. The procedure requires drilling two holes
in the skull and implanting narrow catheters. The catheters are threaded just
under the skin from the head through the neck and chest to the abdomen, where
two pumps are implanted to deliver the drug to the brain.

    The procedure is surgically cumbersome and raises the risk of infections.
But five patients treated by Dr. Gill all showed improvement. Indeed, a video
that Amgen used to present to investors shows Mr. Waite, before treatment,
barely able to get out of a chair and hobble. After a few months of treatment,
he stands up easily and strides across the room.

    The success in England was followed by a test at the University of Kentucky.
''We had 10 out of 10 patients showing benefit at six months,'' said Don M.
Gash, chairman of anatomy and neurobiology.

    Barbara A. Allen, a schoolteacher from Salyersville, Ky., wrote in a letter
to Amgen that with GDNF, ''I could once again perform simple tasks like folding
towels and buttoning a shirt. I could interact with my family and friends. I
could smile at a stranger.''

    But in both trials, the patients knew they were getting the drug, meaning it
was possible they were experiencing a placebo effect.

    ''There's a long history of dramatic placebo effects in Parkinson's,'' Dr.
Perlmutter of Amgen said. Implants of fetal cells into patients' brains, for
example, were also once hailed as a Parkinson's treatment, he said. But
controlled clinical trials ultimately proved that those implants did not work.

    To control for the placebo effect, Amgen began a 34-patient trial last year
in which all the patients had the pumps and catheters implanted but for the
first six months half got GDNF and the other half saline solution. The results,
announced in June, showed that while the group getting GDNF did somewhat better
than the control group on a scale measuring the severity of symptoms, the
difference in the results was not statistically significant.

    Moreover, said Anthony E. Lang, a neurologist at the University of Toronto
and a trial investigator, ''Many of the patients who believed they were doing
extremely well were on placebo.''

    Amgen says it believes that the striking results in the earlier trials were
probably a placebo effect, too. Yet even Mr. Sharer said he found that
conclusion hard to believe. He recalled that a patient in England, who said GDNF
had restored his ability to paint, had sent him a painting in gratitude. ''Is
that placebo?'' Mr. Sharer asked. ''The data says it is.''

    But several of the scientists say they think the earlier results were too
consistent and long lasting to be placebo effect. Dr. Gill said several patients
in England, who have been off the drug for nearly three months, have not
deteriorated as might have been expected with a placebo effect.

    Dr. Hutchinson said that calling all the results a placebo effect was ''a
slap in the face'' to the patients and to the researchers who had conducted the
earlier trials. He said the drug worked in the latest trial in the sicker
patients, but the effect was masked by less certain results in patients who were
not so ill.

    Dr. Gill said the catheter Amgen used did not deliver the drug as
efficiently as the ones used in England and Kentucky. Also, he said, the dose
Amgen used was at the low end of the various doses used in the English trial, a
dose later shown to be ineffective.

    But Dr. Lang of Toronto said the study was well designed. He also said the
drug was never going to be a big breakthrough anyway, as long as Parkinson's
patients would need brain surgery and pumps.

    In early August, Amgen met with investigators in Chicago and discussed
trying a higher dose. After all, even when it announced the drug had not worked,
Amgen said it had been ''safe and well tolerated'' and that all the placebo
patients had switched to the drug after six months.

    But by the end of August the drug went from safe to dangerous. The company
told trial participants that it had discovered two serious safety issues. It had
approached regulators, who agreed with the company's decision to stop all human
testing by Sept. 1.

    The company said 4 out of 70 monkeys given the drug had suffered damage to
the cerebellum, the area of the brain involved in coordinated movement. Amgen
called this a ''completely new finding never seen before in any of the previous
studies.''

    The second problem was that a handful of patients had developed antibodies
that attacked the drug as if it were a germ. The danger, Amgen said, is that
such antibodies might also attack the patients' own GDNF, with unknown but
possibly harmful effects.

    But the doctors who support the drug said the cerebellum damage was not seen
in people. They said the monkey damage might not have been caused by the drug
and, in any case, the monkeys got a dose several times higher than people got,
even though their brains are less than a 12th the size of human brains.

    They also said that the formation of antibodies was not uncommon with
protein drugs and that so far none of the patients seems to have been harmed.

    To try to determine a path forward, the Michael J. Fox Foundation for
Parkinson's Research held a two-day meeting on the drug in October. Amgen then
met with the investigators on Nov. 11 near its headquarters in Thousand Oaks,
Calif. But sharp disputes persist.

    Amgen said it is willing for now only to provide the drug for laboratory and
animal studies of the safety issues or of better ways to deliver the drug, such
as by gene therapy or cell transplants.

    ''If we can find a path forward, we'll take it,'' Mr. Sharer said. ''We just
don't see one right now.''

    Some doctors and patients want Amgen to license the drug to another company
or a university willing to continue trials. But Mr. Sharer said Amgen could not
do so because it would still be liable if safety problems arose.

    The doctors and patients also want Amgen to provide the drug as a
compassionate gesture to the patients from the clinical trials under rules of
the Food and Drug Administration. Amgen says the drug does not qualify for
compassionate use distribution because it is not under development and has
safety problems. Some of the doctors plan to plead their case to the F.D.A.

    And in an act that is part defiance, part desperation, many patients and
their doctors have refused to shut off the pumps, as Amgen had requested,
because once stopped the pumps might not restart. Saline solution is running
through the pumps to keep them primed and so that any drug still stuck in the
tubes will dribble into the patients' brains.

    Mr. Kaufman in Illinois said after several weeks off the drug, he already
feels his stamina slipping and his shaking becoming more pronounced. ''I don't
think we were given a fair chance,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Kaufman, a Parkinson's disease patient, says he was making
progress with an experimental drug developed by Amgen. (Photo by Peter Thompson
for The New York Times)(pg. C2)

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2004


                             280 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 24, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 2908 words

HEADLINE: Live and let diet;
Eating less may mean a longer life if you can stand the hunger pangs

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   You are what you eat. You aren't if you eat too much.

   Of all the potions and pills, schemes and dreams that claim to possess the
secret of living longer, only one method outside actual genetic manipulation has
been scientifically proven to extend life: It's eating less, a lot less.
Everything else -- from herbal supplements to hormones -- is wishful thinking at
best, life threatening at worst.

   "There is no anti-aging medicine in existence in the world today," says S.
Jay Olshansky, a demographer and biologist at the University of Illinois at
Chicago. "There may be some value to some products, but until they're
thoroughly, scientifically tested, I wouldn't use them."

   Caloric restriction, what advocates and scientists call CR, is the exception.
In numerous studies dating back decades, CR has been shown to significantly
extend the lives of test organisms, sometimes doubling their life spans.

   But CR is no mere diet. It is not simply a matter of skipping the daily
doughnut or swapping out that burger for a salad. For most people, particularly
overfed and overweight Americans, CR constitutes a radical transformation of
lifestyle, a feels-like-starvation diet for the rest of one's extended life.

   "Few of us, I think, would voluntarily forgo a third of our daily calories
for the rest of our lives," notes Dr. David Lipschitz, a professor of geriatrics
at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences and author of "Breaking the
Rules of Aging."

   "We simply don't have the stamina, or the desire, to go hungry all the time."

   Which brings us to the obvious and much more desirable alternative: Why
doesn't somebody invent a pill that would reproduce the life-lengthening effects
of CR but without extreme dieting? In fact, a lot of people are trying to do
just that, though it's proving to be a very tall order. Caloric restriction may
be simple to describe, but how it works turns out to be awfully hard to explain.

   Follow the rats

   The idea of caloric restriction extending life spans isn't new. A Cornell
University nutritionist named Clive M. McCay first tinkered with it in the
1930s, discovering that lab rats on a low-calorie diet lived an average of four
years, compared to three for their freely fed brethren.

   But the possibilities of CR languished until the 1960s when Roy Walford, a
gerontologist at UCLA, repeated McCay's experiments with mice to similar
dramatic effect. A typical lab mouse has a life expectancy of 39 months.
Walford's test mice, eating just 60 percent of their preferred diet, lived up to
56 months -- the equivalent of 165 years for humans.

   But Walford earned the most attention for his work and the potential of CR by
using himself as a guinea pig. For 30 years, Walford subsisted on a daily diet
of no more than 1,600 calories. The average American consumes roughly 2,500
calories per day, most from high-fat, processed foods.

   By comparison, Walford's diet was decidedly Spartan. A typical breakfast
consisted of a protein shake and banana; lunch was a vegetable salad; dinner a
piece of fish or lean meat.

   (Interestingly, Walford got a chance to observe how others fared on his CR
diet in the 1990s while participating in the Biosphere 2 experiment. When plans
to grow their own food went awry, the Biosphereans resorted to an extreme
low-calorie diet that lasted almost two years. Walford later noted that despite
significant weight loss, all eight participants remained in excellent health.)

   The 5-foot-9 Walford weighed just 130 pounds. He told people his goal was to
live to be 120 years old. He died earlier this year of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease, an incurable neurological condition. He was
79, about five years older than the average American male's life expectancy.

   Walford's death, however, has not dimmed enthusiasm for CR. It remains among
the hottest subjects in longevity research. Since Walford's work, caloric
restriction studies have been conducted -- and are being conducted -- on a wide
variety of organisms, from yeast and spiders to fish and dogs. Most of these
studies have reported significantly longer life spans in CR models.

   More profoundly, writes Richard Weindruch, a geriatric researcher at the
University of Wisconsin at Madison, caloric restriction appears to consistently
increase not just the average life span of a subject population, but also the
maximum life span or lifetime of the longest-surviving members of a group or
species. In other words, CR seems to alter some basic process of aging.

   Of course, studies of worms or flies reveal only so much. The big question is
whether CR is effective in humans. Finding out is problematic, not least because
people are already a relatively long-lived species. Getting significant data on
whether CR extends human lives will take years, perhaps decades.

   Nonetheless, the first controlled, large-scale studies of the effects of CR
in humans have begun -- a coordinated effort at the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, the
Pennington Biomedical Research Center in Baton Rouge and Washington University's
School of Medicine in St. Louis.

   In the meantime, researchers are plenty busy trying to figure exactly how CR
boosts life span. Numerous theories have been proffered over the years. Among
them:

   o CR slows the rate of cell division. In the 1960s, UC San Francisco
gerontologist Leonard Hayflick discovered that cells, at least in the
laboratory, appear to contain a finite number of divisions. After a cell divides
50 or so times, it dies. Researchers have speculated that CR slows cellular
metabolism enough that those divisions occur less frequently, effectively
slowing the cell's rate of aging. A reduced rate of cell division might also
help explain why lab animals on low-calorie diets seem to suffer less from
late-life cancers.

   Contrarily, several studies have shown that, at least at the level of
individual cells, CR may slightly boost metabolic rate.

   "There is strong evidence that decreasing cellular metabolism is not involved
in CR-induced life extension," said Edward Masoro, a professor of physiology at
the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.

   o CR lowers glucose or sugar levels in the blood, reducing the accumulation
of sugar on long-lived proteins, an effect that tends to disrupt cellular
functions.

   o CR boosts immunological response and increases levels of protective
hormones. Some scientists have noted that CR seems to work, in part, by alerting
the body that food is scarce. The body responds by slowing its metabolism,
boosting internal efficiencies, releasing energy stores in fat and upping the
production of protective hormones that allow cells to withstand greater stress.

   In roundworms, for example, starvation (or overcrowding) prompts the
microscopic animals to slip into a kind of suspended animation, in effect
shutting down until better times.

   o CR reduces mitochondrial damage. This view currently enjoys the greatest
support, a fact not without some irony since the damage appears to be an
unavoidable consequence of simply being alive. In every cell, there are tiny
factories called mitochondria that convert raw fuel into usable energy. In the
course of doing so, they produce molecules called free radicals as a by-product.

   In modest numbers, free radicals are essential to carrying out necessary
biochemical reactions. But they are highly reactive, oxidizing and destructive.
Bruce Ames, a professor of biochemistry at UC Berkeley, estimates DNA in every
cell in the human body experiences at least 100,000 "hits" or instances of free
radical damage each day. Most of the time, the damage is quickly repaired. But
mitochondria are particularly vulnerable to free radicals. They lack the protein
shield of nuclear DNA and depend largely upon a single enzyme to make all
repairs.

   As people get older, their ability to internally fix free radical damage
diminishes. Repairs go unmade; cellular injury piles up. Eventually, the theory
goes, the accumulated, unfixed damage undermines a cell's ability to work
efficiently, leaving it vulnerable to disease or death.

   Less is more

   Clearly, eating less produces measurable health benefits.

   Scientists at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York have
reported that calorie restricted rats had just one-fourth the body fat of their
freely fed counterparts. That's significant because fat is not simply an inert,
unsightly annoyance. It is an active substance that produces its own hormones
and influences bodily functions. The fatter the rats, the researchers said, the
harder it was for their bodies to efficiently metabolize sugar.

   In addition, blood sugar levels were elevated and insulin sensitivity lowered
-- both factors linked to increased risk of diabetes.

   A human study by John O. Holloszy, a professor of medicine at Washington
University in St. Louis, published earlier this year noted that 18 people who
had been practicing CR for three to 15 years showed dramatically reduced risk of
developing diabetes or clogged arteries.

   "It's very clear that calorie restriction has a powerful, protective effect
against diseases associated with aging," Holloszy said. "We don't know how long
each individual actually will end up living, but they certainly have a much
longer life expectancy than average because they're most likely not going to die
from a heart attack, stroke or diabetes."

   Meanwhile, Mark P. Mattson, a neuroscientist at the National Institute on
Aging in Baltimore, has published several papers reporting improved brain
protection in monkeys fed a reduced-calorie diet. He believes that CR prompts
increased production of proteins and nerve growth factors that shield brain
cells from harm. Other studies suggest that CR may elevate cellular resistance
to diseases like Alzheimer's and reduce age-related deterioration of synapse
transmissions in the hippocampus -- a neural center for emotion and memory.

   Never say diet

   For maximum benefit, experts say people on CR would probably have to reduce
their caloric intake by roughly one-third, from 2,500 calories per day to 1,750
for a moderately active person. Special care would have to be given to make sure
nutritional needs were met. Less active people would eat even fewer calories
each day.

   In laboratory studies, CR appears to be most effective when begun early in
life. In mice, CR works best when begun just a few months after birth. Yet, some
researchers have noted that CR seems to affect life span even when introduced
much later. For example, Weindruch at the University of Wisconsin has noted that
lab mice placed on a CR diet in early middle age lived 10 to 20 percent longer
than control mice, and they suffered less frequent development of cancer.

   Weindruch suggests consuming 10 to 25 percent less calories than an
individual's personal set point -- the genetically programmed body weight of a
person. But finding that set point, he concedes, is difficult. Instead, dieters
might try (with the assistance of a doctor or health adviser) to establish a
calorie consumption level that reduces their blood glucose, cholesterol or other
measure of health by a predetermined amount.

   No one advocates CR for children, who require steady and substantial amounts
of nutrients and calories to fuel growth and development. Christiaan
Leeuwenburgh, director of the Biochemistry of Aging Laboratory at the University
of Florida, doesn't recommend practicing CR until age 30 or older.

   "Aging really becomes apparent after age 35 or 40," he said. "Younger people
do well without CR in terms of repairing damage due to aging."

   Caloric restriction may also pose problems for some women. Depending on the
severity of the calorie reduction, resulting weight loss could affect fertility
or increase the risk of osteoporosis or sarcopenia (muscle mass loss) in later
life.

   One proposed CR regimen recommends a daily intake of approximately one gram
of protein and no more than half a gram of fat for every 2.2 pounds of current
body weight. In other words, a 180-pound man should eat no more than 81.8 grams
(3.2 ounces) of protein and 40.9 grams (1.6 ounces) of fat daily. A single Big
Mac contains 25 grams of protein and 30 grams of fat.

   Leeuwenburgh pursues a moderate form of CR, roughly limiting his daily intake
to 2,000 calories. He says his diet is not extraordinary. It emphasizes chicken,
fish, lots of vegetables and fruits and soy milk, but no red meat.

   "And it's variable. I do a lot of strength training to maintain muscle mass.
On days when I exercise hard, I eat more. On days when I don't, I eat less. I
also believe in occasionally fasting, which gives the cells some feedback and
stress that's helpful."

   Indeed, regular fasting produces at least some of the benefits of CR. The
National Institute on Aging found that the time between meals might be more
important than their size. Specifically, lab mice kept on an every-other-day
feeding schedule with no reduction in calories boasted reduced glucose and
insulin levels similar to or better than mice on CR diets.

   Pills, not meals

   For most people, though, a CR pill is a better bet than either eating less or
fasting more. But developing such a magic bullet requires understanding the
underlying mechanisms involved in life extension. And here, experts are agreed,
there is no single, simple answer. The length of our lives depends upon myriad
factors, known and unknown, controllable and not.

   But some CR researchers have highlighted specific components as promising. In
a paper published online last month in Nature, David Sinclair, an assistant
professor of pathology at Harvard Medical School, reported that a chemical
called resveratrol, found in red wine and some vegetables, triggers the same
biological mechanisms as CR does in fruit flies and roundworms, lengthening the
organisms' life spans an average of 20 percent without causing lethargy or
infertility.

   Sinclair reported similar findings last year in experiments with yeast.

   A number of scientists have investigated 2-deoxy-D-glucose or 2DG, a compound
that was first tested as an anti-cancer drug in the 1950s, but turns out to
produce many of the classic responses of CR: reduced tumor growth, lower body
temperature and higher levels of certain protective hormones.

   Experiments suggest 2DG interferes with the way cells process glucose and
their ability to manufacture internal fuel. As a result, scientists hypothesize,
cells exposed to 2DG seem to downshift into a self-preserving, antiaging mode.

   But 2DG's potential as an alternative to CR is practically nil. The compound
has proven to be toxic at some doses in animals. Nonetheless, a full
understanding of how 2DG works, say scientists, might lead them to equally
effective but safer alternative compounds.

   "If you look at all of the effects of CR, they're so complex that it's almost
impossible to think that a single compound will have an effect. Maybe a
cocktail, but I don't think there will ever be a magical pill," said
Leeuwenburgh. "Genetic modification may be more promising."

   At least eight genetic mutations have been discovered to reliably extend life
in yeast, roundworms and mice. Indeed, many scientists have turned their focus
toward identifying so-called "longevity genes," genes directly linked to
significant aspects of aging, such as sugar metabolism, hormone signaling and
cellular death.

   For example, Lenny Guarante, a professor of biology at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, and colleagues have determined that the Silent
Information Regulator 2 gene, or SIR2, determines the life span of both yeast
cells and roundworms. Add an extra copy of SIR2, the scientists found, and the
organisms live longer than normal. Delete SIR2, and they die sooner than normal.

   The SIR2 gene is not unique to yeast and roundworms. It is found in mammals,
too. While there's no proof yet that SIR2 -- or an analog -- has a direct role
in human longevity, the evidence seems to point that way, heightening hopes that
genetic therapies may eventually be developed to either fight age-related
diseases or slow the aging process itself.

   But that's not going to happen soon, maybe not even in your lifetime.

   Which leaves CR. If cutting calories by 30 percent sounds unappetizing,
remember that even modest calorie reductions -- Steven Austad at the University
of Texas says 10 percent seems to be the effective minimum -- can help.

   According to the World Health Organization, there are more than 1 billion
adults in the world who are overweight (28 percent of American men; 34 percent
of American women). One-third of these billion people are considered obese.

   Eating less certainly won't hurt them, and it may give them a few additional
years to complain about what they're missing.

   Eat and be wary

   In every animal model tested, a diet severely reduced in calories extended
the organisms' life span, sometimes almost doubling it. Percentages represent
the increase in average life span when calories were restricted.

   PROTOZOAN LIFE SPAN

   Normal diet

   average: 7 days; maximum: 14 days

   Caloric restriction

   average: 13 days; maximum: 25 days

   BOWL AND DOILY SPIDER LIFE SPAN

   Normal diet

   average: 50 days; maximum: 100 days

   Caloric restriction

   average: 90 days; maximum: 139 days

   GUPPY LIFE SPAN

   Normal diet

   average: 33 months; maximum: 54 months

   Caloric restriction

   average: 46 months; maximum: 59 months

   WHITE RAT LIFE SPAN

   Normal diet

   average: 23 months; maximum: 33 months

   Caloric restriction

   average: 33 months; maximum: 47 months

GRAPHIC: 1 ILLUSTRATION; 5 PICS; 5 CHARTS; CAPTIONS: 2-9. Eat and be wary 2,3.
PROTOZOAN LIFE SPAN 4,5. BOWL AND DOILY SPIDER LIFE SPAN 6,7. GUPPY LIFE SPAN
8,9. WHITE RAT LIFE SPAN 10. Dr. Roy Walford (second from left) and others wave
goodbye before entering the self-contained research world of Biosphere 2 in
1991. When food supplies grew inadequate, Walford put all of the Biosphereans on
his calorie restricted diet for almost two years. 11. Restricting calories by
one third: an example -- The dinner of a person on a roughly 2,000-calorie diet
might be reduced by about one third by following the calorie-restricted example
below. To avoid malnutrition, such restricted meals consist of nutrient-dense
foods.; PHOTOBY: 1. Cristina Martinez / Union-Tribune 2-9. SOURCE: Scientific
Amcerican 10. Jeff Robbins / Associated Press 11. SOURCE: Scientific American |
UNION-TRIBUNE

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2004


                             281 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           November 18, 2004 Thursday

SECTION: DOWNTOWN PICAYUNE; To The Rim; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: Delegates from Taiwan hail Tulane milestone;
Scholars discuss education initiatives

BYLINE: Tina Soong

BODY:

   A delegation from Taiwan was among the distinguished guests saluting Tulane
University Health Sciences Center at its 170th anniversary celebration.

   The delegation was organized and led by Dr. MingHo Huang, chairman of Show
Chuan Health Care System. Huang was the inaugural recipient of the International
Leadership Award from Tulane Health Sciences Center. He has been a champion of
biotechnology in Taiwan and a leader in facilitating adult stem cell
collaborations between Tulane Gene Center and its counterparts in Taiwan.

   The delegates included Yu-Tai Huang, director of International Exchange
Center; and Jing Pha Tsai, immediate past president, of Taichung Healthcare &
Management University; Dr. Steve Kuo, director of Center of Disease Control,
Department of Health; Pan-ChangYang, and Chao-Ying Kou, Industrial Technology
Research Center; Jung Shu Hsu, legislator, Legislative Yuan; Yeou-Chi Lee,
member of Control Yuan; and Brady Chen, associate director of Health, Welfare,
and Environment Foundation.

   Yuri Chih and Richard Chen, Taipei Economic & Cultural Office in Houston,
also came to meet the delegates and to join the anniversary celebration.

   Dr. Paul Whelton, senior vice president of Health Sciences of Tulane
University, said delegates and university officials had several discussions
about new initiatives in education and technology transfer.

   "The participation of the delegation, which consisted of leaders in academic
health sciences education, health care delivery, science and technology
transfer, legislation, and trade, reflects the strong, diverse and expanding
relationships with colleagues in Taiwan" Welton said. The delegation had
meetings with their counterparts at Tulane, both at School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, and at National Primate Research Center, and all the parties
are committed to expanding existing ties, officials said. "We are contemplating
an additional educational linkages with Taichung Healthcare and Management
University and an expansion of our research relationship in the use of adult
stem cells for regenerative medicine with the Industrial Technology Science
Institute" Whelton said.

   Tulane University is recognized as a leader in biotechnology and adult stem
cell research. The Tulane Center for Gene Therapy was awarded a $4.3 million
federal grant in 2003 from the National Health Institute to replicate, test and
investigate the potentials of adult stem cells for new treatments of spinal cord
injuries, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and other aliments. In
addition, the center has been designated by National Health Institute as adult
stem cell supplier worldwide.

   Taiwan, which began in recent years to develop biotechnology, with emphasis
on adult stem cell research, can benefit from Tulane in learning advanced
research methods and setting up its own adult stem cell research centers. Tulane
University has offered a master of medical management degree program for the
National Defense Medical Center in Taiwan since 1998. In 2003, the Industrial
Technical Research institute of Taiwan has signed an agreement with Tulane to
collaborate in adult stem research. In 2004, Tulane University has launched a
new Tulane Asian Elite Leadership Program that offers an executive master degree
of public health to participants from Taiwan. Also an academic exchange
agreement was signed between Tulane and Taichung Health Management College this
year.

   "Tulane and Taiwan will gain complementary strengths that we learn from each
other," said Ted Chen, professor and section head of health education and
communication at Tulane.

   . . . . . . .

   Itanji, a modern shamisen and taiko duo, will perform Nov. 20 at the
Contemporary Arts Center. The ensemble features Ajo on taiko (Japanese drum) and
Hajime Nishi, one of the top shamisen (string instrument) players in Japan and
blends traditional Japanese musicianship with contemporary style. The
performance is sponsored by the Japan Foundation and the Consulate General of
Japan. The event will also feature a special local guest, Clarence Johnson,
saxophonist.

   For information or tickets, call 528-3805 or www.cacno.org

   . . . . . . .

   Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2004


                             282 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                     November 14, 2004 Sunday Home Edition

SECTION: Arts & Books; Pg. 9L

LENGTH: 1457 words

HEADLINE: FALL BOOKS GIFT GUIDE: nonfiction

BYLINE: DON O'BRIANT

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   Against All Enemies by Richard Clarke (Free Press). A former White House
counterterrorism czar criticizes President George W. Bush's actions and
inactions in the war against al-Qaida.

   America's Game: The Epic Story of How Pro Football Captured a Nation by
Michael MacCambridge (Random House). The author traces the game's history from
its early struggle for survival in World War II and the watershed game between
the Baltimore Colts and New York Giants in 1958 to modern-day marketing that has
made the Super Bowl the most watched TV program in history.

   Arc of Justice: A Saga of Race, Civil Rights and Murder in the Jazz Age by
Kevin Boyle (Henry Holt). In this National Book Award finalist, historian Boyle
employs a novelist's techniques to explore African-American migration to the
North, racism and a sensational 1925 Detroit trial in which Clarence Darrow
defended a black doctor accused of murdering a white man.

   Beating Back the Devil: On the Front Lines With the Disease Detectives of the
Epidemic Intelligence Service by Maryn McKenna (Free Press). AJC reporter
McKenna, the only journalist given full access to the Epidemic Intelligence
Service in its 53-year-history, follows the first class of disease detectives to
come to the Centers for Disease Control after 9/11, when they must deal with
bioterrorism as well as outbreaks of Ebola and West Nile virus.

   Bloodsworth: The True Story of the First Death Row Inmate Exonerated by DNA
by Tim Junkin (Shannon Ravenel/Algonquin Books). A compelling account of how one
tenacious man --- wrongly accused of the rape and murder of a 9-year-old girl
--- got his conviction overturned after nine years in prison.

   Caught in the Current: Searching for Simplicity in the Technological Age by
Jay Bookman (St. Martin's). During a rafting trip down Oregon's Deschutes River,
AJC editorial columnist Bookman reflects on how we can achieve balance in a
hectic life increasingly ruled by technology.

   Chain of Command: The Road From 9/11 to Abu Ghraib by Seymour Hersh
(HarperCollins). The journalist who uncovered the My Lai story in Vietnam
examines the decisions that led the United States from a unified mission against
al-Qaida after 9/11 to a divisive war in Iraq today.

   America (The Book): A Citizen's Guide to Democracy Inaction by Jon Stewart,
Ben Karlin and David Javerbaum (Warner Books). Designed to look like a textbook,
this tongue-in-cheek survey of American history includes discussion questions on
why the Constitution is so boring, fun facts (transcripts of every case argued
before the Supreme Court are available for free on the Internet, whereas
transcripts for the "Judge Mills Lane" show cost $6), and the cafeteria menu for
the 108th Congress (Impeach Cobbler for dessert).

   Freethinkers: A History of American Secularism by Susan Jacobi (Metropolitan
Books). The author offers a well-researched argument that secularist
"freethinkers" such as Thomas Paine were instrumental in founding a nation based
on human reason rather than religion.

   Ghost Wars by Steven Coll (Penguin Press). Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist
Coll uses formerly classified material to reveal the CIA's involvement in the
rise of al-Qaida and the Taliban before the 9/11 attacks.

   The Grand Slam: Bobby Jones, America, and the Story of Golf by Mark Frost
(Hyperion). Frost, author of "The Greatest Game Ever Played," continues his
exploration of the sport's formative years.

   Hell Riders: The True Story of the Charge of the Light Brigade by Terry
Brighton (Henry Holt).  Unlike other accounts that relied on reports from the
British generals, this book tells the story from the viewpoint of the soldiers
who fought and died in this famous battle of the Crimean War.

   His Brother's Keeper: A Story From the Edge of Medicine by Jonathan Weiner
(Ecco). The Pulitzer Prize-winning author of "The Beak of the Finch" puts a
human face on science with the inspiring --- and heartbreaking --- story of a
young entrepreneur who launches his own gene therapy research project in a
desperate attempt to save his brother's life.

   How Soccer Explains the World: An Unlikely Theory of Globalization by
Franklin Foer (HarperCollins). A New Republic editor explains how examining
soccer in different countries helps us understand international culture and
politics.

   Huck's Raft: A History of American Childhood by Steven Mintz (Harvard
University Press). Mintz looks at the past through the eyes and experiences of
children and traces their transformation from productive workers to students and
independent consumers.

   The Island at the Center of the World: The Epic Story of Dutch Manhattan, the
Forgotten Colony That Shaped America by Russell Shorto (Doubleday). The author
of "Gospel Truth" draws on 17th-century Dutch records to re-create the daily
life and human drama of a colony that was the first place in the New World where
people of different races and religions co-existed.

   The Know-It-All: One Man's Humble Quest to Become the Smartest Person in the
World by A.J. Jacobs (Simon & Schuster). An enlightening and humorous account of
the author's mission to read all 32 volumes of the Encyclopaedia Britannica.

   Life on the Outside: The Prison Odyssey of Elaine Bartlett by Jennifer
Gonnerman (Picador). A Village Voice reporter follows the struggles of a
42-year-old mother of four to regain her life after 16 years in prison. This is
a finalist for the National Book Award, which will be announced Wednesday.

   Magical Thinking: True Stories by Augusten Burroughs (St. Martin's). This
witty collection of essays by the author of "Running With Scissors" deals with a
wide range of topics, from a deranged cleaning lady to an undertaker who shows
up in a minivan.

   The Myth of Solid Ground: Earthquakes, Prediction and the Fault Line Between
Reason and Faith by David Ulin (Viking). Ulin, who experienced his first seismic
tremor when he was 18, writes about the science and mythology of earthquakes as
well as the psychological effect of living in a state where a tectonic shift
could cause a major disaster.

   Never Coming to a Theater Near You: A Celebration of a Certain Kind of Movie
by Kenneth Turan (PublicAffairs). The Los Angeles Times and NPR film critic
writes about underrated or overlooked films such as "Devil in a Blue Dress" and
"Birthday Girl" that shouldn't be missed.

   On Foot: A History of Walking by Joseph A. Amato (NYU Press). Following in
the footsteps of his history "Dust," Amato explores the impact of walking on
society. For example, Julius Caesar banned wheeled vehicles from the center of
Rome during the day.

   Past Imperfect: Facts, Fictions, Frauds --- American History From Bancroft
and Parkman to Ambrose, Bellesiles, Ellis, and Goodwin by Peter Charles Hoffer
(PublicAffairs). Hoffer, an adviser to the American Historical Association on
plagiarism, examines the misconduct of four prominent historians, including
former Emory professor Michael Bellesile's falsification of data in "Arming
America."

   Rammer Jammer Yellow Hammer: A Journey Into the Heart of Fan Mania by Warren
St. John (Crown). An up-close and personal look at University of Alabama fans,
many of whom consider football as much a religion as a sport. The New York Times
reporter bought a dilapidated RV and spent five months traveling with hard-core
fans to better understand their obsession.

   Spirit and Flesh: Life in a Fundamentalist Baptist Church by James Ault
(Knopf). A compelling examination of the conservative Christian movement by a
sociologist and documentary filmmaker who spent three years inside the world of
a Massachusetts fundamentalist church.

   The Stories of English by David Crystal (Overlook). A groundbreaking history
of English and how the language spoken by a few thousand Anglo-Saxons became one
used by more than a quarter of the human race.

   Vanilla: The Cultural History of the World's Favorite Flavor and Fragrance by
Patricia Rain (Tarcher/Penguin). After years of being overshadowed by chocolate,
the flavor that the Spanish considered an aphrodisiac finally gets some
attention.

   What We Owe Iraq: War and the Ethics of Nation Building by Noah Feldman
(Princeton). Feldman, a law professor and the author of "After Jihad," offers
his views on how the United States should rebuild Iraq and why nation building
is good for America's security.

   The Working Poor: The Invisible in America by David Shipler (Knopf). A
disturbing look at the millions of Americans who have jobs but who are caught in
the twilight zone between poverty and prosperity.

   The 9/11 Commission Report (W.W. Norton). A surprise contender for this
year's National Book Award, this official government report on terrorism reads
like the best fiction.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2004


                             283 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2004 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                            November 14, 2004 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. E-03

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: The importance of biotechnology

BYLINE: Jeff Cheek, Richard Spritz and Jack Burns Guest Commentary

BODY:

   Recently, Colorado was ranked among the top 10 states for the impact its
biotech and pharmaceutical industries have on the state's economy. The Milken
Institute recognized Colorado for its strength in biotech research and
development, building blocks of the biotech revolution.

   And now that California voters have approved spending $3 billion on stem-cell
research, biotechnology has risen into the national spotlight. Given this new
dynamic that will spur progress in the biotechnology/biosciences industry, it is
critical to begin exploring public policy that will govern Colorado's - or any
state's - role in this burgeoning industry.

   Last year, Gov. Bill Owens launched his plan to propel the state toward
becoming a biotech hub, and among the key assets he identified were strong
research universities. The importance of Colorado's public higher education
institutions is certainly reflected in their research opportunities and
capabilities. But we also must use these institutions as forums for discussion
as we strive to balance scientific breakthroughs and opportunities with the
significant moral and ethical implications that arise from these new
technologies.

   As individuals, we will experience biotechnological advances through the
development of personalized medicine with new approaches to diagnose, treat and
even prevent many common diseases. In coming years, our potential to improve
medicine and health care will be greatly enhanced. By consulting personalized
medical profiles, doctors will be able to identify genetic risks for chronic
illnesses and tailor their medical advice to individual patients. While that
type of personalized approach has obvious benefits, access to such information -
by health insurers, for example - also poses risks. We clearly need to balance
major health care advances with consideration of costs, limitations to
accessibility, ethical issues, confidentiality and safeguards to prevent
discrimination by employers, insurers and health care providers.

   Biotechnology also will change our state's economic base. Genetically
modified crops represent an important opportunity for rural Colorado to reap
benefits from the biotechnology boom. Biopharming, one application of
agricultural bioengineering, is a method of growing pharmaceuticals within crops
- one example is growing soybeans to produce commercial antibiotics. However,
this area of biotechnology is highly controversial and demands continued
discussion by all sides of the issue.

   Stem-cell research, decoding of the human genome and genetic therapies are
other highly important yet controversial fields. The University of Colorado last
fall hosted the Summit on Biotechnology and Society, and CU plans to continue
promoting discussions about these issues.

   A university-wide initiative for targeted growth in genomics and
biotechnology is underway to explore developments such as stem-cell therapies,
defining the genetic basis for severe heart diseases and engineering tissues to
enable the body to heal itself and eliminate the need for synthetic implants.
These types of advances have the potential to strengthen our state's economy and
greatly improve the quality of life for Colorado's citizens and society.

   Studies of several states with well-developed biotechnology industries have
highlighted factors necessary for its success, namely the combination of vibrant
research universities, an educated workforce and state and corporate support.

   We need to continue, then, to open channels of communication about new issues
and their implications. Colorado would benefit from a central source for
information about biotechnology in the state so we can begin translating new
information into a system of "best practices." We also need to encourage state
policies that promote biotechnological innovation and development while
maintaining safeguards for public health and public privacy. As an emerging
leader in the biotechnological revolution, Colorado has the opportunity to
demonstrate how collaboration among universities, businesses and the public can
create new products and services that benefit everyone.

   Jeff Cheek is assistant vice president for research and learning innovation
at the University of Colorado. Richard Spritz is a professor and director of the
Human Medical Genetics Program. Jack Burns is vice president for academic
affairs and research.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2004


                             284 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 14, 2004, SUNDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CHRONICLE MAGAZINE; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 2716 words

HEADLINE: The Broken Family Tree;

How Bea Gorman's sad family history of Alzheimer's provides researchers with
fodder for years of work

BYLINE: Katherine Seligman

BODY:
The musical trill of her cell phone sounds in mid-bite as Bea Gorman sits at a
waffle house in Sacramento. She shrugs and reaches for it, a 69-year-old
grandmother from Lodi who, like the rest of the world, answers her phone
wherever she is. She's barely touched her turkey sandwich, a late lunch squeezed
between a meeting and a benefit set to start in a few hours.

    "Alzheimer's Aid Society," she says in a businesslike voice into the small
phone, which she keeps on a leash attached to her key chain. This time it's her
husband checking in before he visits a nearby nursing home, but it could have
been anyone, which is why she answers no matter where she is, from early morning
until she goes to bed. She can't predict when someone will have a crisis or just
want to talk about the symptoms that Gorman knows only too well.

    As a young girl in Kansas City she watched her mother fade away from a
baffling illness. Her father, a painter and paper hanger, kept taking his wife
to doctors, but no one knew why she got lost on the bus or forgot simple
details. No one mentioned Alzheimer's disease. Few people had even heard of it.
And certainly no one talked about it striking at such a young age. Her mother
was only in her 40s. She should have been happily taking care of her kids.
Instead, while Gorman's friends played outside, she sat with her mother each day
after school, spooning pureed food into her mouth. Her mother, whose blank eyes
had stopped recognizing her own children, would stare past her sad daughter.

    Her mother died at 52 of what doctors finally said was "re-senile dementia."
Gorman was 13, the youngest of nine children and the one who eventually would
write a book about what happened during the next few decades as first one, then
three other siblings died young from Alzheimer's disease. She became not only
the family archivist, but also a pioneer who pushed for research on genetic
links to the disease, an area that now has become the forefront in the battle
against Alzheimer's. She and her husband met with researchers and legislators
and founded the Alzheimer's Aid Society of Northern California, a nonprofit to
support research and give support and information about the disease.

    It was a path she chose out of necessity, she said, not one that anyone
would have predicted. She'd been a shy girl who dropped out of school after
ninth grade, met her husband at age 15 and married him three years later, then
had four children and became, as she says, "a Susie Homemaker type." She'd never
spoken in public or written a business letter when, in her 40s, she found
herself stuck in a reality she could no longer ignore -- the disease that erased
her mother's mind could strike her.

    "I was so worried and so guilty that I might have passed it on," she said,
arms folded on the table at the restaurant. There is still a sadness in her
demeanor. She's been told she looks like her mother, with the same eyes and high
cheekbones, but she hopes the resemblance does not extend to brain chemistry. A
tidy-looking woman with short light brown hair, she has already lived more than
15 years longer than her mother did.

    There was a long time when she felt alone with her fear. Doctors thought
Alzheimer's was rare and no one, it seemed, was talking about the disease first
described in 1906 by German doctor Alois Alzheimer. The illness became his
namesake after he presented, at a medical meeting, the curious brain disorder of
a 51-year-old woman who'd described her condition simply: "I've lost myself." An
autopsy of her brain showed the lesions that today are known to be
characteristic of the degenerative disorder that results in death of brain
cells, with loss of memory, language skills and behavior changes

    The next 70 years yielded scant more understanding of the disease. "In the
mid to late '70s, no one had heard of Alzheimer's," said Dr. Robert Cook-Deegan,
who took a family history of Gorman when he was a young medical student and is
now head of the Center for Genome Ethics, Law and Policy at Duke University.
"Alzheimer's was not a household word like it is now. There was no Alzheimer's
Association. The most famous textbook of the time said it was not genetic."

    Researchers now know there are at least two kinds of Alzheimer's --
familial, which accounts for less than10 percent of cases and typically strikes
in middle age, and sporadic, which occurs later in life. Both forms involve
degeneration of the specialized neurons that make the essential neurotransmitter
acetylcholine. Without this substance, brain cells lose their connectivity and
portions of the brain appear to shrink and decay. The big question still
remains: What causes the chain of events to begin? Scientists think age, genetic
mutations, brain injuries and environmental factors might all be triggers, but
have no firm answers.

    But their investigation has taken on a new urgency as the Baby Boomer
generation charges toward old age. The U.S. Census Bureau predicts the number of
Americans 65 and older in the year 2030 will be more than double what it was in
2000, and more people than ever are expected to live into their 80s. One scary
statistic looms: 47 percent of those now 85 or older suffer from Alzheimer's,
making it the leading age-related dementia. The disease, which now afflicts 5.8
million Americans, could affect as many as 16 million by midcentury. So the
boomers, once focused on ways to make their babies smarter, now want to know how
to keep their own minds intact.

    Siblings often create a collective memory. What one doesn't know, the others
supply. Gorman had to rely on her brothers and sisters for any recollection of
her mother as a healthy woman. They told her about the beautiful woman with a
perfect olive complexion and the warmth and determination that kept the family
together. What Gorman remembers is a tired, gray-haired woman who had no energy
to cook dinner or take care of her. She remembers walking home and looking in
windows at other people having dinner together and thinking how, one day, that
was what she'd like.

    "She was more like a grandmother to me than a mama," said Gorman, in an
interview recently in her organization's Sacramento office.

    Gorman watched her mother change from a quiet uncomplaining presence to an
invalid. Once, while visiting one of her children in the hospital who was having
her tonsils out, Gorman's mother wanted to phone her husband but forgot the
number. Then, later, she forgot how to transfer on the bus. Her husband began
cooking for the kids -- usually beans -- or they fended for themselves.

    Finally, her father took his wife to the hospital for tests. "I hope they
find out what's wrong with me," is the last thing Gorman remembers her saying.
No one is certain what went wrong at the hospital, but Gorman's mother returned
home in an ambulance, unable to walk or talk. Today, Gorman wonders if it was
the tests or just the abrupt change in her routine that precipitated the drastic
decline. She will never know for sure.

    The kids took care of Gorman's mother when she came home. She recalls her
father cutting off her mother's long dark hair so it would be easier to brush
and wash. Her mother didn't want to eat, but Gorman had the job of feeding her,
sometimes sneaking bites herself to make the job go faster. When she stopped
eating, Gorman's father put her in a county home. She died three weeks later.
Gorman's only memory of her mother looking beautiful was in the casket, dressed
in lavender, her face free of the blank, haunted look of Alzheimer's.

    She dropped out of school after ninth grade, and by age 15, she was living
in an apartment with her best friend and working to support herself. She met
John Gorman at a skating rink. He came from a close-knit Croatian family that
had everything hers lacked. The Gormans celebrated birthdays and holidays and
weddings. The two married when she was 18 and John was 19. He completed two
years of college, hoping to become a pharmacist, but left to join his family in
the grocery business. They lived for a time in Colorado, where John managed a
family-owned store and then in South Lake Tahoe, where he found a job at a large
supermarket.

    She didn't hear the word Alzheimer's until her oldest brother Herschel was
diagnosed with it in his 40s. A painter and carpenter like her father, he'd
started forgetting to show up for work. When he did show up, he forgot what he
was supposed to do. Finally, Gorman suggested to his wife that Herschel come for
a visit. To her, it was obvious Herschel was sick. He couldn't carry on a
conversation. He would disappear and rummage in drawers, leaving the contents
strewn around the room. When he returned home to California, doctors diagnosed
Alzheimer's. He continued to decline and eventually was placed in Napa State
Hospital, where he died at age 54.

    Soon Gorman's sister Minnie Sue had the disease, then her brother Leonard
and her sister Norma Jean. Gorman felt overwhelmed. John worked long hours and
was often gone, leaving her to take care of their four kids. The Tahoe winters
seemed unbearable. She was almost 40, close to the age when her siblings got
sick, when she started to think about suicide. She fantasized driving her car
off a road to escape what she feared was inevitable -- that she would get
Alzheimer's.

    In desperation, she started looking for answers. She threw herself into
research, writing to county record clerks, visiting libraries and relatives. She
traced her newfound sense of purpose to a renewed faith in God. Whatever, the
reason, she followed it with an increasing sense that time was running out. She
had to have an answer before the disease got her. As a first step, she went to
see a doctor in Tahoe.

    "He didn't tell me anything," she recalled. "He just took a book off his
shelf and read a sentence on Alzheimer's. Then he said, 'That will cost you
$35.' "

    So she wrote to the famous Mayo Clinic. A doctor there -- she still has the
letter -- responded that Alzheimer's occasionally ran in families, but was
difficult to detect and impossible to prevent. Undaunted, she wrote to
university hospitals. A neurologist at the University of Colorado who was
studying familial links to Alzheimer's finally invited her to visit. Researchers
there reviewed her family history and tested her for the first time.

    "I had the incredible job of trying to put together family trees," said Dr.
Cook-Deegan, who remembers talking to Gorman all those years ago when he was a
medical student. "The sad thing is that there are so many stories like hers out
there but we don't hear them. She was very persistent. You have a choice when
something terrible happens to you. One choice is to channel it into something
productive. Bea is one of those breed. She was one of those people who are a
force in supporting medical research, in making something happen."

    Gorman continued to corner experts are meetings, to contact research centers
and to be tested herself. She volunteered in so many studies that she once ran
into a researcher at a conference who commented, "You're Bea Gorman? We're
growing your cells in my lab."

    The one thing she declined was genetic testing. "I don't want to do it," she
said. "I have a tendency to get depressed. I think it would do me in. The kids
don't want to take it either. They're scared to death." By the time the test
became available, she said, she was past the age of early-onset Alzheimer's. And
even if she had a genetic mutation, that didn't mean she'd get Alzheimer's. She
knew a woman in New York who got the test, agonized about the positive results,
then developed the disease. It would be better to live her life without knowing,
she decided. Still, that has not made it easier to accept why some got it and
she did not. "It's just a toss of the coin," she says.

    She and John founded the Alzheimer's Aid Society of Northern California in
1980, which now has offices in their hometown of Lodi, in Modesto and in
Sacramento and is funded by donations and memorial gifts. Then, about 10 years
ago, she worked with writer Lois Bristow on her own story. Using a family
history that one doctor had labeled "Bea's manuscript," she documented how
Alzheimer's had decimated her family. The two spent days locked up in a motel
room in Southern California poring over her life. "Will I Be Next? The Terror of
Living with Familial Alzheimer's Disease" is a self-published book that has been
widely circulated among those looking for information about Alzheimer's.

    "She pushed hard to get research in this area," said Dr. William Jagust, a
professor of health and public policy at UC Berkeley, who met Gorman when he was
at UC Davis' Alzheimer research center. "The whole issue of genetics of familial
Alzheimer's is something that blew the field right open. By gaining insight into
it, we gained insight into nonfamilial forms."

    Researchers have found mutations on three genes believed to cause
early-onset Alzheimer's and are investigating whether others are responsible for
triggering the more common form of the disease. Genetic research in that area
continues while scientists work on other avenues -- in prevention and treatment.
One major aim, experts say, is to be able to detect the disease before it causes
significant brain damage. Scientists have made huge leaps in what they know
about brain pathology, advances that coincide with invention of devices that
allow doctors to look inside the body, point by point. Dr. Michael Greicius,
medical director of the Stanford Memory Clinic, is working on one technique, for
example, to examine how specific portions of the brain change over time. Instead
of using regular magnetic resonance imaging, he is experimenting with what's
called a functional MRI, which can be performed on elderly people who might have
trouble performing complicated tasks -- such as pushing buttons -- while they
lie in a scanning tube. The functional MRI works by examining the brain at rest,
measuring cell-to-cell networking in portions affected by Alzheimer's. Screening
for early stage disease is deemed essential because, at least for now, once the
plaques and tangles of Alzheimer's clog the brain, nothing can be done to repair
the damage.

    Researchers hope, though, to find new drugs that will halt or delay progress
of the disease or a vaccine to prevent it. One vaccine trial was halted when it
caused cases of encephalitis, but researchers are still working to formulate one
that will work. Drugs that attack the disease; by preventing the buildup of
plaque caused by toxic proteins called beta-amyloids, or that treat symptoms; by
blocking the breakdown of the brain chemical acetylcholine, are being studied
eagerly. Medicine that keeps the level of neurotransmitters high, even though
cells that produce it are dying, have shown promise in people with mild brain
damage, but appear to work for only a few years, doctors say. Researchers also
are looking to see if cholesterol-lowering drugs and blood pressure medicines
help fight the disease.

    In a different realm, some scientists think gene therapy or stem cell
research will provide answers. One study in Southern California is experimenting
with delivering human growth factor into regions of the brain where neurons are
degenerating in the hope of preventing cell death and atrophy. Advocates of stem
cell research -- among them former first lady Nancy Reagan -- believe it might
yield treatments for Alzheimer's, but the field is the subject of contentious
debate.

    Whatever treatments do emerge will be too late for much of Gorman's family.
She already has buried a niece, who shares a Kansas City grave site with
Gorman's sister and mother. And recently she's been worried about another niece,
the child of one of her brothers. She hopes research might help her children or
theirs. Dr. Greicius said there is reason for optimism.

    "Of course, people who have been in practice for a long time have seen hopes
dashed," he said. "Expectations came and went, but I would be pretty surprised
if in 10 years we didn't have a curative or preventive treatment. The race is
on."Katherine Seligman is a staff writer for The Chronicle. E-mail her at
kseligman@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photograph by Kevin Irby

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2004


                             285 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 14, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Book World; T12 , In BriefYou Are What You Eat

LENGTH: 348 words

HEADLINE: The question posed by the titl ...

BYLINE: You Are What You Eat

BODY:

   The question posed by the title of Why Some Like It Hot: Food, Genes, and
Cultural Diversity (Island Press, $24) doesn't produce a terribly interesting
answer. To oversimplify, some (like author Gary Paul Nabhan himself) prefer
their food hot because they have taste buds very different from those of other
people (like one of Nabhan's hapless old flames -- their romance might have gone
further if he had offered her flowers rather than a home-cooked meal.)

    An ethnobiologist who heads the Center for Sustainable Environments at
Northern Arizona University, Nabhan addresses fascinating issues: why half the
world's population can tolerate lactose while the other half can't, why it's
beneficial that teenage boys in Sardinia develop an anemia-like malaise every
spring, why some ethnic groups have a predisposition to alcoholism, how genes
can mutate due to changes in diet.

    To explain how a culture's choice of food affects -- and is affected by --
its genetic characteristics, the author went to the highlands of Crete to sample
the supposedly super-healthful Mediterranean diet. There Nabhan, winner of a
MacArthur "genius" award in 1990, learned firsthand that many modern people just
aren't equipped to digest so much olive oil.

    Nabhan writes compassionately about indigenous groups -- like Native
Americans and ethnic Hawaiians -- that are threatened by globalization. Our Fast
Food Nation is overwhelming these cultures; just as important, it is
jeopardizing their health. But for those of us whose genes have been stewing for
generations in the American melting pot, what's the point?

   One of the points is that we all should be wary of gene therapy, of
genetically modified foods, of even the now-common fortification of foods with
nutrients like folic acid. Although all of these interventions have real or
promised benefits, such tinkering can be risky.

   Nabhan's overall message is that while we are what we eat, we are also what
our forebears ate, and that some don't like it hot because too much heat can be
deadly. *

   Tom Graham writes on science for The Washington Post.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2004


                             286 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 12, 2004 Friday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 896 words

HEADLINE: Taking aim at Alzheimer's;
Three San Diego companies are trying different approaches

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   At Neurogenetics, researchers are exploring the molecular pathways of memory.
At Ceregene, a promising gene therapy is moving forward. And at Elan Corp.,
scientists are striving to turn a therapeutic tragedy into a triumph.

   Although each company is taking a different approach, all share the same
goal: to cure or curb Alzheimer's disease, the brain disorder that slowly
destroys the ability to reason and remember.

   Scores of pharmaceutical companies, small biotechnology companies and leading
academic research institutions -- many of them in San Diego -- have mounted
major research programs to investigate the complex disease.

   And while the cause of Alzheimer's still eludes scientists, they are
beginning to home in on some likely -- and interconnected -- culprits.

   Some researchers are exploring a protein called tau, which forms fibrous
tangles that kill brain cells. Others are examining the role of inflammation in
spurring dementia.

   But much of the focus has narrowed on a troublesome protein called
beta-amyloid. Scientists theorize that something triggers the abnormal
production of beta-amyloid, which forms a sticky plaque that is deposited in the
brain, ultimately causing nerve cells to wither and die.

   "In the search for new treatments, most of us have wrapped ourselves around
the amyloid hypothesis," said Dr. Michael Murphy, chief medical officer at La
Jolla-based Neurogenetics, which expects to begin testing a drug early next year
to enhance memory.

   "Of course, there are a number of hypotheses and it isn't clear which idea
will ultimately prevail," Murphy said. "But we have lots of shots on goal here
and ultimately one or more therapies will be successful."

   Such success can't come too quickly for the more than 4 million Americans who
already suffer from Alzheimer's disease. There is no treatment to prevent or
cure Alzheimer's, and the handful of drugs that have been approved to treat
symptoms such as memory loss have only minimal effect.

   If no significant improvements in treatment are found, the number of
Americans with the disease is projected to reach 11 million to 16 million by
2050, according to the American Alzheimer's Association.

   In recent years, the field has experienced its share of disappointment, most
notably a highly anticipated experimental Alzheimer's drug by Elan Corp. and
Wyeth Pharmaceuticals that was dropped in 2002 after some test patients
developed a deadly brain inflammation.

   The so-called immunotherapy was designed to spur the patient's immune system
to produce antibodies that attack amyloid plaques and help clear them from the
brain. But the severe side effects suffered by some patients in a late-stage
clinical trial proved a serious setback for the two companies.

   Yet with the failure came some significant scientific validation. Researchers
at Elan's San Francisco and San Diego drug development sites have analysed the
data from the halted trial -- patients were tracked even after the treatment was
stopped -- and the results proved intriguing.

   In July, Elan reported that patients treated with the vaccine who mounted an
antibody response had better memory after a year than those who received a
placebo. A reduction in beta-amyloid plaques was also found in some patients who
died, autopsies showed.

   Elan and Wyeth have since revamped their immunotherapy and pushed ahead with
new therapies. One treatment is already in Phase 1 clinical trials, and others
are expected to begin testing in humans over the next year.

   "In medicine there is the perception of something being either fantastically
terrific or fantastically negative, but in reality it is something in between,"
said Dale Schenk, chief scientific officer of Elan's San Diego-based American
division, Elan Pharmaceuticals. "I don't think any of us viewed it (the halted
study) as the ending of an approach -- we viewed it as a steppingstone to
getting to where we need to be in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease."

   Ceregene, a privately held San Diego biotech, is taking another approach: a
gene therapy that delivers nerve growth factor into regions of the brain where
nerve cells are degenerating.

   Data from a pilot study showed that a handful of patients who received an
earlier form of the gene therapy treatment had a reduction in the rate of mental
decline over the two years the patients were followed.

   Ceregene is testing a new version of the therapy, dubbed CERE-110, in a
clinical trial that will enroll up to a dozen Alzheimer's patients. The first
patient was treated in September.

   Gene therapy has been a minefield for drug companies, which have yet to
deliver a meaningful treatment to the market. But the approach stands a better
chance in Alzheimer's disease because it delivers very small quantities of gene
to a select target, said Ceregene CEO Jeffrey Ostrove.

   "About 70 percent of all gene therapy trials have been trying to cure cancer
that has spread everywhere; you are trying to treat somebody who is three months
away from death long enough to shrink their tumors," Ostrove said. "We are
testing our products on patients who have the ability to potentially respond, we
are using the newest generation of gene delivery vehicles, and we are putting
the gene where it needs to be."

   In August Ceregene raised $32 million from private investors to advance its
gene therapy program.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

CORRECTION-DATE: November 13, 2004

CORRECTION:

   A story yesterday described the autopsy results of some patients who
participated in a clinical trial to test an experimental Alzheimer's disease
treatment developed by Elan Corp. and Wyeth Pharmaceuticals. No patient died in
the clinical trial or as a result of the experimental drug.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Neurogenetics researcher Phuong Nguyen worked on
one of the company's early stage drugs for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease.
2. Automated machinery at La Jolla-based Neurogenetics sorted samples of the
company's experimental drug compounds. 3. Dr. Michael Murphy is chief medical
officer at Neurogenetics, which expects to begin testing a drug early next year
to enhance memory. 4. Marie Ryder worked in the lab at Neurogenetics, which is
working on compounds for Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases.;
PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4. Fred Greaves photos

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2004


                             287 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 11, 2004, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 860 words

HEADLINE: MASS. LEGISLATORS BACK WORK ON EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS
HOUSE AND SENATE LEADERS RESPOND TO CALIF. INITIATIVE

BYLINE: By Ross Kerber Globe Staff

BODY:

   Legislative leaders voiced new backing for embryonic stem-cell research
yesterday, speaking out after Californians voted to spend $3 billion to lure the
companies and scientists engaged in the much-debated research.

      Their opinions set the tone for the legislative session to begin in
January and will please some smaller biotechnology companies whose trade group
has not made the issue a top priority to date.

           New House Speaker Salvatore F. DiMasi said in a statement released
yesterday that "I support embryonic stem-cell research with proper ethical
safeguards," the first time he has addressed the issue since taking the
leadership post in September. His predecessor, former House Speaker Thomas M.
Finneran, had been the biggest factor in blocking such legislation in the past.


      Separately, Senate President Robert E. Travaglini plans to reintroduce
measures in support of embryonic stem-cell research, said spokeswoman Ann
Dufresne yesterday. Tax credits and other incentives are being considered to
attract the companies and science organizations, she said.

      "At the very least it will be legislation that shows the Massachusetts
biotech community that the state unambiguously supports this kind of research,"
she said.

      Embryonic stem cells can create any type of human tissue and seem to offer
great promise for fighting degenerative diseases including Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's, and spinal cord injuries. They are created by de stroying a human
embryo, making their use strongly opposed by many anti-abortion groups.

      After the Bush administration limited federal research funds in the area
three years ago, states rushed to adopt their own policies to attract the
academic scientists and companies engaged in the research. Last week California
voters approved the ballot initiative that would provide money to biotech
companies or laboratories located; earlier this year New Jersey also allocated
millions of dollars.

      Last year Travaglini proposed language to declare the state's support for
the research, but included no public funds. The Senate passed the measure, which
died in the House. Since then, the California ballot initiative has created
concern that Massachusetts should respond in kind.

      Dufresne wouldn't go into detail about whether Travaglini wanted the state
to spend money on stem-cell research following the California initiative, except
to say: "We're weighing potential options for making last year's proposal a
little more substantial."

      Yesterday officials in Governor Mitt Romney's administration said they
wouldn't comment on the issue until they can review specific pieces of
legislation. A spokeswoman said Romney supports stem-cell research in general
but wouldn't say if that included work on embryonic stem cells.

      A spokeswoman for DiMasi, Kimberly Haberlin, said it was too soon to
discuss what legislation the speaker might back or whether he would seek state
funding. In his statement DiMasi said he supported the research "because of its
enormous potential to advance treatments for a range of diseases," and that he
would explore whether there are legal obstacles.

      Removing those obstacles was one purpose of a bill introduced last year by
Peter J. Koutoujian, a state representative from Waltham. He said he expects
similar legislation to pass this year, given DiMasi's statement, and plans to
reintroduce his bill. Koutoujian added he doesn't expect to seek funding because
of an expected $1 billion deficit in the next budget. "I don't know that this is
the time to put out the money, but we should be embracing the research," he
said.

      Finneran, the previous speaker, is now president of the Massachusetts
Biotechnology Council, a Cambridge trade group that represents biotech companies
and large drug makers. In recent interviews he said he was skeptical of the need
for stem-cell legislation until more information was gathered, echoing word from
others involved in the group who said it wasn't tops on its agenda .

      The Boston Herald yesterday reported Finneran wants state lawmakers to
pass legislation supporting research on embryonic stem cells. In a voice-mail
message yesterday Finneran called parts of the report inaccurate and said "the
notion that somehow or other Massachusetts . . . now feels obliged to compete
with California . . . is premature to say the least."

      Finneran and a council spokeswoman didn't return messages left to request
a response on the legislative agenda. The spokeswoman previously noted that just
two small companies in the state work directly in areas affected by the
embryonic stem-cell issues, ViaCell Inc. in Cambridge and Advanced Cell
Technology Inc. in Worcester.

      But executives at other companies say they want a change too. Walter C.
Ogier, chief executive of Genetix Pharmaceuticals Inc. in Cambridge, a developer
of gene therapies, said: "Biotechnology is one of the bright areas of business
in the state and needs to be competitive with other regions."


   Ross Kerber can be reached at kerber@globe.com.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2004


                             288 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                   November 10, 2004 Wednesday Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Xavier ROTC team earns honors

BODY:

   IN THE SCHOOLS

   Xavier University's ROTC Team A captured first place at the 7th Brigade
Annual Ranger Challenge Competition at Fort Knox on Oct. 23.

   Xavier's B team placed eighth of the 27 teams from around the Midwest that
competed.

   The A team won three of eight events: fitness test, weapons
assembly/disassembly and the 10k rucksack run.

   Two Xavier ROTC members earned individual honors: Cadet Michael Burke
received the highest male physical fitness score, and Cadet Steve Belickis shot
40 for 40 (a perfect score) in rifle marksmanship.

   "This competition for us is like the Super Bowl or NCAA basketball
championships, except you train all year only to compete one day," said Tim
Gobin, professor of military science.

   MSJ teacher program

   plans open houses

   The College of Mount St. Joseph will hold two open houses for its new Teacher
Education Apprenticeship Master's-Inclusive Early Childhood program, at 6:30
p.m. Nov. 17, at 9 a.m. Nov. 20, in the Corona Room of the College's Seton
Center.

   The course prepares adult students to become teachers. Call 244-1645 or
e-mail education@mail.msj.edu for more information.

   MU grant to help fund genome decoding

   The National Science Foundation recently awarded Miami University's Center
for Bioinformatics and Functional Genomics a $477,783 grant. It will fund the
acquisition of a high-volume, rapid DNA sequencer, a robotic liquid handling
system and a computer cluster for analyzing DNA data.

   The decoding of the human genome is leading to the creation of genetically
targeted drugs and gene therapies. Miami's center involves the school's
departments of botany, chemistry/biochemistry, geology, microbiology and
zoology.

   Xavier expands degree program to Fenwick

   Beginning this spring, Xavier University will offer its master of education
degree program in elementary and secondary education at Middletown's Fenwick
High School.

   Xavier has been offering several courses at Fenwick since the fall of 2001,
but was recently approved to offer the entire program.

   The entire master's of education program, with concentrations in elementary,
secondary, and administration, also is offered at Wilmington High School.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2004


                             289 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 7, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4A; Column 1; Education Life Supplement; Endpaper; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 852 words

HEADLINE: Dear Mr. President

BYLINE: By Jamie Patrick Chandler

BODY:

   COLLEGE students may be the hot demographic for politicians, but they're a
tough group for pollsters to track down. The reason is simple: most lack the
home phone number needed for random sampling. To get a sense of what the
cellphone generation is thinking, Education Life conducted face-to-face
interviews in October at 10 campuses: Princeton, Harvard, Ohio State University,
Baylor University (Waco, Tex.), University of Texas at Austin, University of
Florida, University of Georgia, University of California at Santa Barbara,
University of Illinois at Chicago and City University of New York-City College.
Interviewers questioned 112 women and 121 men, freshmen to seniors. The students
were asked what personal and political issues mattered most to them, about the
war in Iraq and about long-term job prospects. In general, they were a hopeful
bunch; more than 80 percent were optimistic about their futures. The looming
exception was jobs, which more than 40 percent thought would be hard to find
after graduation.

Students were asked what the president should focus on first. These issues were
mentioned most: The New York Times Jamie Patrick Chandler is an adjunct lecturer
in American politics at the City University of New York.

1. Education/tuition
2. Iraq
3. Economy
4. Career/job prospects
5. College studies
6. Draft
7. Environment
9. Morality/gay marriage
10. Health care
11. Civil liberties/rights
12. National security
13. College life
14. Presidential leadership
15. Women's issues
16. Foreign policy
17. Terrorism
18. No worries
19. Ennui
20. Immigration

The issues that concern me most are those surrounding inequality and personal
freedom; i.e., homosexual civil union, Patriot Act, crime, poverty and corporate
crime.'' - Jason Kinney, 18 University of Georgia

The decline in morality and increasing liberality. Is that a word? Liberalness,
maybe. - Jasmine Dowell, 19 Harvard

I worry most about the economy and the employment rate. I worry that all my
money spent on college might be wasted.'' - Dionysios Tsalcalis, 26 Ohio State
University

Rising tuition cost because of insufficient federal funding.'' - Linda Do, 20
University of Texas at Austin

I think that eventually it will get to a draft. The way we struggle to keep
control in Iraq, the way we keep dedicating military power around the world,
more people will be needed. The prospect of a draft is a political tool.'' -
Jeff Krisko, 18 University of California at Santa Barbara

I am currently an engineering major, and I don't want to have my job handed to
someone in another country just so companies can increase profit. It happened
with computer science. It can happen to engineering. - Urribarri Abhay, 17
CUNY-City College

As a double major in economics and political science, the issue that worries me
the most would have to be the subpar operation of the Federal Reserve in that it
has kept the prime rate too low for too long, thereby creating the potential for
hyperinflation.'' - Joseph Siegrist, 21 Ohio State University

First, kill the terrorists before they kill me. Second, the meltdown of our
culture due to the idea of relativism. - Mark Roehrenbeck, 22 Ohio State
University

Speaking up more during discussions. Getting to class on time, especially when I
have only 10 minutes between classes. Time management. - Angie Nguyen, 18
University of California at Santa Barbara

I'm a pretty free-go-lucky guy. I'm not really worried.'' - Sam Yoffe, 19
University of Florida

I feel that most Americans are so uninvolved with the political aspect of their
lives. They're complacent with others deciding for them and then ultimately
deciding for me. That's alarming.'' - Kimberly Blitch, 18 University of Georgia

Please think about education! Wars, terrorism, whatever -- do that on your own
time, Mr. Pres. - Travis Moak, 22 University of Georgia

Education is the key to helping solve problems in the world, such as global
warming, globalization, gene therapy and cultural toleration. Equalizing the
opportunity for education to all should be the president's No. 1 issue.
Education should not be last on the list when it comes to budget expense and
first on the list when it comes to budget cuts. - Jill Smiley, 21 Ohio State
University

Medical care. I don't have health insurance. I don't have a job either, and I
don't have financial aid. I have a baby and a husband who is working 14 to 16
hours a day so that he can support us. - Celina Mejia CUNY-City College

Some immigrants, like myself, have to pay for other's broken dishes. Post 9/11,
many doors of opportunity have closed on immigrants, thus making things
difficult in reaching the goals we came here to achieve. - Hector Camarillo, 19
CUNY-City College

Students were asked to name which issues personally concerned them most. These
were mentioned most:

1. Iraq
2. Economy
3. Foreign policy
4. National security
5. Education
6. Jobs
7. Health care
8. Welfare/poverty
9. Morality/gay marriage
10. Terrorism
11. Immigration
12. Social Security
13. Presidential leadership
14. Civil liberties/rights
15. Draft
16. Environment
17. Women's issues
18. Personal safety
19. Nuclear proliferation
20. Insufficient foreign aid


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: (Photograph by Oscar Sosa for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2004


                             290 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     November 7, 2004 Sunday REGION EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.F-1

LENGTH: 2145 words

HEADLINE: EXPECTATIONS;
WHAT LOCAL BUSINESSES HOPE FOR IN BUSH'S SECOND TERM WHAT LOCAL BUSINESSES HOPE
FOR IN BUSH'S SECOND TERM

BODY:

   Ask businesses about their biggest challenges and how a second-term Bush
administration can address them, and many answers are similar: do something
about spiraling health care and energy costs, push through tort reform and
continue to embrace free trade.

    Then, too, there is corporate America's main request: No surprises. Even an
unpopular tax or regulatory policy is sometimes preferable to one that changes
every year or two, undermining the ability to plan long-term.

    So it was with some relief that many business leaders greeted President
Bush's re-election, not only for his pro-growth agenda of tax cuts, regulatory
reforms and energy independence. Companies are getting someone they know and
someone unlikely to stir things up by making unexpected changes and unforeseen
demands.

    The Post-Gazette business staff surveyed a range of companies in industries
that call the region home, from steel and chemicals to banks, hospitals, high
technology and transportation. Here's what they had to say about the next four
years.

    Financial services

    J. Christopher Donahue, president and CEO of Downtown money manager
Federated Investors, believes prospects for privatizing a portion of Social
Security increased with the election of Bush. Such a move would be "a great win
for our industry," he said.

    Donahue also rates as important making temporary tax cuts permanent or
enhancing them further by lowering marginal rates. That includes preserving the
more favorable treatment of dividends or lowering taxes of the quarterly payouts
even more, he said. Coincidentally, Federated has increased its dividend four
times in the last 18 months, more than doubling it.

    While Federated's bond analysts worry about the record federal budget
deficit and what it will do to interest rates, Donahue believes the deficit can
be managed with economic growth fueled by tax policy and confidence in the
economy. That will "make the whole machinery grow bigger, better, faster," he
said.

    Thomas W. Golonski, president, chairman and CEO of National City Bank of
Pennsylvania, wants more tax relief because it would benefit small-business
customers. "Small business continues to be the engine that drives our economy"
in Western Pennsylvania, he said.

    Dollar Bank CEO Stephen Hansen isn't as concerned about tax cuts and
financial issues as he is about education. He believes "the most important issue
confronting the financial services industry is the capacity of the school system
to provide the basic education that the industry will require of its future
employees."

    Hansen said he understands the federal government has a limited role to play
in local schools. But he is encouraged that Bush has demonstrated an ability to
work in bipartisan ways to improve the performance and skills learned in schools
and hopes the administration continues with this focus the next four years.

    Chemicals

    Skyrocketing health-care costs are among the most significant concerns at
Koppers Inc., the Downtown-based company that makes chemicals, railroad products
and utility poles, while high energy prices are on the minds of Nova Chemicals.

    "That's a key legislative issue for us," said Stephanie Franken, spokeswoman
for Nova Chemicals, the Canadian-based company with a management operations
center in Moon. "We feel we would have been able to work well with either
administration."

    Other local chemical concerns also are worried about high and volatile
prices for raw materials used in chemical making and called on the Bush
administration to work with Congress, regulators, energy producers and consumers
and global trading partners for more stability.

    Energy

    Westinghouse Electric Co. wants Bush to do more to promote the use of
nuclear energy in other countries, particularly China, which is about to seek
bids for nuclear plants, as well as in the United States, where no new plant has
been ordered since 1978. Vice President Dick Cheney promoted Westinghouse
specifically during a visit last spring to China.

    "President Bush and his administration have been supportive of nuclear power
and can continue to play a substantial role in fostering the re-emergence of
this non-polluting, economically competitive energy source," said Steve Tritch,
president and chief executive officer of Monroeville-based Westinghouse, a
division of Britain's BNFL.

    J. Brett Harvey, CEO at Consol Energy, a coal and natural gas producer in
Upper St. Clair, wants the administration to offer utilities regulatory
certainty about pollution controls so that they can go ahead and install
scrubbers that would promote the use of eastern coal.

    Bush "tried this in the first term but was unsuccessful for political
reasons, but I think in the second term, he will give utilities [the necessary
assurances] to put basic available technology on power plants. And that really
is a plus for eastern coal, of which we are the big player."

    A second issue for 140-year-old Consol is the average age of its 6,500
miners, which is 50 or older. It will soon need to replace these workers, so
Harvey would like to see the U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration offer
safety training and community colleges push more skills needed in the mines,
which require the operation of technical machinery.

    "These are all good jobs," Harvey said. "You'll see a lot of these rural
communities where coal people grew up, come back as we hire young people ...
Think about this. In the next 10 years, 4,000 of the 6,500 will be replaced by
someone."

    Engineering

    Michael Baker Corp. President and CEO Donald P. Fusilli, Jr., hopes Bush's
second term will produce legislation that would give impetus to the Moon
company's two businesses: engineering and energy services.

    On the energy front, he seeks passage of an energy bill that would promote
more domestic exploration and drilling.

    On the engineering front, Fusilli would like to see permanent authorization
of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, a major source of funding
for transportation projects that require the services of Baker and other
engineering firms. Hours before current stopgap funding was to expire Sept. 30,
Congress approved a short-term measure providing $24.5 billion for eight months
for roads, bridges and transit work.

    A longer-term permanent commitment is needed, Fusilli says. "There have been
short-term extensions. We believe that's delayed significant opportunities for
infrastructure improvements," he said, adding that he believes there's a better
chance of Congress putting the program on a more solid basis "with the existing
administration than with [former Democratic candidate John] Kerry."

    Health care

    West Penn Allegheny Health System President and CEO Jerry J. Fedele believes
tort reform is vital.

    "Many doctors leave the commonwealth because of malpractice insurance costs.
It requires you to recruit new doctors in and that adds to costs," he said. He
is encouraged that Bush has been a strong advocate for tort reform and is
optimistic the president and a Republican-controlled Congress will enact
legislation ''that will aid us in the future."

    But Fedele also fears that the mounting budget deficit may lead to cuts in
the Medicare program. Such changes would further erode hospitals' already thin
margins and impact their ability to "to invest and reinvest in facilities and
programs," Fedele said.

    Dr. Kenneth Melani, president and CEO of the region's dominant health
insurer, Highmark Inc., believes rising costs and the rising number of uninsured
remain the health care industry's biggest issues. He expects the Bush
administration will continue to expand prescription drug availability under
Medicare and to seek private-sector solutions through such programs as health
savings accounts, which combine high deductible insurance with tax-free savings
accounts for medical services.

    High technology

    Doros Platika, CEO of the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse, hopes that
the Bush administration continues its drive to reduce capital gains taxes,
making investment dollars more available for biotechnology research and
ventures.

    Lower capital gains taxes "increases our investors' willingness to invest in
the company," said Eric Close, CEO of RedZone Robotics. "If the taxes were
higher -- they may not invest."

    Platika would like to see the Bush administration speed Food and Drug
Administration approval of gene therapies and other biotech advances and balance
the needs of controlling Medicare costs with the industry's need for adequate
payments for new therapies.

    Manufacturing

    Even though Bush "has a greater understanding of the steel industry than any
other president in recent history," U.S. Steel President and CEO John P. Surma
believes manufacturing remains in crisis.

    "The future of manufacturing will be affected by how the president deals
with taxes, health care and tort reform in his second term," Surma said.
"Internationally, we remain concerned about the increasing trade deficit and
currency manipulation by China and Asian countries. Finally, strong enforcement
of U.S. trade laws remains an absolutely critical priority for the steel
industry and all of the U.S."

    At Curtiss-Wright Electro Mechanical Corp., the Cheswick maker of large
pumps and motors for ships and nuclear plants, the hope is that Bush will boost
the number of ships for the Navy, which fell to six in the 2005 budget year from
nine previously.

    Terri Marts, vice president and general manager of the former Westinghouse
facility, also is hopeful that there will be an increases in nuclear energy
operations globally and in deep sea oil exploration that use its pumps. "We see
this administration as being a positive influence on these issues, and ... on
strengthening the manufacturing base in the United States," Marts said."

    Small business

    Local developers are would like to see Bush's tax cuts and new incentives
for home building spur more construction and a rebound in the region's flat
commercial markets.

    For local auto dealers, the main issue is growth in the economy and in jobs.
Whatever is done to pick that up locally will be good for their business, which
relies on people being willing to spend.

    "We are very much tied into how well everybody else is doing," said Ron
Pusic, vice president of administration for the Pittsburgh Automobile Trade
Association. "If the public is doing well financially and working, that's good
for the auto business.

    "I don't think we have any particular legislative agenda," Pusci added.
''When the economy is strong, it brings business along with it. And when people
have money in their pockets, they're shopping, and that's good for the auto
industry."

    For all small businesses, the overriding concern remains health-care costs,
said Cliff Shannon, executive director SMC Business Councils, a small business
lobby. "I would say health-care costs are depressing profits or eliminating
them, they're depressing employee wages, they're restraining consideration of
other employee benefits and they're retarding hiring."

    "Part of what the administration is going to do is already evident and that
is through health savings accounts that already have been made available and
through individual tax credits that have been proposed," said Shannon, adding
that he was not certain the administration's approach would change behavior.

    Transportation

    Union Switch & Signal Corp., the maker of railroad products that has a major
research facility in Hazelwood, would like to see the Transportation Equity Act
receive permanent funding, freeing up projects vital to the firm's future.

    "Basically, we've had a band-aid on this thing for over a year, and we would
like to see that finally reauthorized and have a long-term bill in place similar
to what they did several years ago," said Ken Burk, president and CEO of Union
Switch.

    Burk also would like the Federal Railroad Administration to approve the
introduction of new technology on U.S. freight railroads that would permit
smaller crews to operate trains. He said one engineer could safely operate a
freight train equipped with Union Switch & Signal controls.

    The company has sold driverless technology to Copenhagen's new Metro system
and would benefit from the introduction of similar technology on freight lines
here. "The technology already exists," Burk said. "Getting approval from ... the
administration would be a nice breakthrough."

    While bankrupt US Airways is not looking to the government for more help
than it already has received as it tries to restructure, it would like the
administration and Congress to think more broadly about the "endless stream of
taxes and fees" on airlines and their customers "because the burden is
contributing to the industry's financial problems," CEO Bruce Lakefield said.

NOTES:
This story was written and compiled by Post-Gazette staff writers Len Boselovic,
Dan Fitzpatrick, Jo yce Gannon, Pamela Gaynor, Elwin Green, D on Hammonds, Steve
Massey, Jim McKay, Patricia Sabatini and Corilyn Shropshire.

GRAPHIC: Daniel Marsula/Post-Gazette

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2004


                             291 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            November 7, 2004 Sunday
                                TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 2117 words

HEADLINE: GREAT EXPECTATIONS;
WHAT LOCAL BUSINESSES HOPE FOR IN BUSH'S SECOND TERM

BODY:

   Ask businesses about their biggest challenges and how a second-term Bush
administration can address them, and many answers are similar: do something
about spiraling health care and energy costs, push through tort reform and
continue to embrace free trade.

   Then, too, there is corporate America's main request: No surprises. Even an
unpopular tax or regulatory policy is sometimes preferable to one that changes
every year or two, undermining the ability to plan long-term.

   So it was with some relief that many business leaders greeted President
Bush's re-election, not only for his pro-growth agenda of tax cuts, regulatory
reforms and energy independence. Companies are getting someone they know and
someone unlikely to stir things up by making unexpected changes and unforeseen
demands.

   The Post-Gazette business staff surveyed a range of companies in industries
that call the region home, from steel and chemicals to banks, hospitals, high
technology and transportation. Here's what they had to say about the next four
years.

   FINANCIAL SERVICES

   J. Christopher Donahue, president and CEO of Downtown money manager Federated
Investors, believes prospects for privatizing a portion of Social Security
increased with the election of Bush. Such a move would be "a great win for our
industry,'' he said.

   Donahue also rates as important making temporary tax cuts permanent or
enhancing them further by lowering marginal rates. That includes preserving the
more favorable treatment of dividends or lowering taxes of the quarterly payouts
even more, he said. Coincidentally, Federated has increased its dividend four
times in the last 18 months, more than doubling it.

   While Federated's bond analysts worry about the record federal budget deficit
and what it will do to interest rates, Donahue believes the deficit can be
managed with economic growth fueled by tax policy and confidence in the economy.
That will "make the whole machinery grow bigger, better, faster," he said.

   Thomas W. Golonski, president, chairman and CEO of National City Bank of
Pennsylvania, wants more tax relief because it would benefit small-business
customers. "Small business continues to be the engine that drives our economy''
in Western Pennsylvania, he said.

   Dollar Bank CEO Stephen Hansen isn't as concerned about tax cuts and
financial issues as he is about education. He believes "the most important issue
confronting the financial services industry is the capacity of the school system
to provide the basic education that the industry will require of its future
employees.''

   Hansen said he understands the federal government has a limited role to play
in local schools. But he is encouraged that Bush has demonstrated an ability to
work in bipartisan ways to improve the performance and skills learned in schools
and hopes the administration continues with this focus the next four years.

   CHEMICALS

   Skyrocketing health-care costs are among the most significant concerns at
Koppers Inc., the Downtown-based company that makes chemicals, railroad products
and utility poles, while high energy prices are on the minds of Nova Chemicals.

   "That's a key legislative issue for us," said Stephanie Franken, spokeswoman
for Nova Chemicals, the Canadian-based company with a management operations
center in Moon. "We feel we would have been able to work well with either
administration."

   Other local chemical concerns also are worried about high and volatile prices
for raw materials used in chemical making and called on the Bush administration
to work with Congress, regulators, energy producers and consumers and global
trading partners for more stability.

   ENERGY

   Westinghouse Electric Co. wants Bush to do more to promote the use of nuclear
energy in other countries, particularly China, which is about to seek bids for
nuclear plants, as well as in the United States, where no new plant has been
ordered since 1978. Vice President Dick Cheney promoted Westinghouse
specifically during a visit last spring to China.

   "President Bush and his administration have been supportive of nuclear power
and can continue to play a substantial role in fostering the re-emergence of
this non-polluting, economically competitive energy source,'' said Steve Tritch,
president and chief executive officer of Monroeville-based Westinghouse, a
division of Britain's BNFL.

   J. Brett Harvey, CEO at Consol Energy, a coal and natural gas producer in
Upper St. Clair, wants the administration to offer utilities regulatory
certainty about pollution controls so that they can go ahead and install
scrubbers that would promote the use of eastern coal.

   Bush "tried this in the first term but was unsuccessful for political
reasons, but I think in the second term, he will give utilities [the necessary
assurances] to put basic available technology on power plants. And that really
is a plus for eastern coal, of which we are the big player."

   A second issue for 140-year-old Consol is the average age of its 6,500
miners, which is 50 or older. It will soon need to replace these workers, so
Harvey would like to see the U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration offer
safety training and community colleges push more skills needed in the mines,
which require the operation of technical machinery.

   "These are all good jobs,'' Harvey said. "You'll see a lot of these rural
communities where coal people grew up, come back as we hire young people ...
Think about this. In the next 10 years, 4,000 of the 6,500 will be replaced by
someone.''

   ENGINEERING

   Michael Baker Corp. President and CEO Donald P. Fusilli, Jr., hopes Bush's
second term will produce legislation that would give impetus to the Moon
company's two businesses: engineering and energy services.

   On the energy front, he seeks passage of an energy bill that would promote
more domestic exploration and drilling.

   On the engineering front, Fusilli would like to see permanent authorization
of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, a major source of funding
for transportation projects that require the services of Baker and other
engineering firms. Hours before current stopgap funding was to expire Sept. 30,
Congress approved a short-term measure providing $24.5 billion for eight months
for roads, bridges and transit work.

   A longer-term permanent commitment is needed, Fusilli says. "There have been
short-term extensions. We believe that's delayed significant opportunities for
infrastructure improvements," he said, adding that he believes there's a better
chance of Congress putting the program on a more solid basis "with the existing
administration than with [former Democratic candidate John] Kerry."

   HEALTH CARE

   West Penn Allegheny Health System President and CEO Jerry J. Fedele believes
tort reform is vital.

   "Many doctors leave the commonwealth because of malpractice insurance costs.
It requires you to recruit new doctors in and that adds to costs,'' he said. He
is encouraged that Bush has been a strong advocate for tort reform and is
optimistic the president and a Republican-controlled Congress will enact
legislation ``that will aid us in the future."

   But Fedele also fears that the mounting budget deficit may lead to cuts in
the Medicare program. Such changes would further erode hospitals' already thin
margins and impact their ability to "to invest and reinvest in facilities and
programs," Fedele said.

   Dr. Kenneth Melani, president and CEO of the region's dominant health
insurer, Highmark Inc., believes rising costs and the rising number of uninsured
remain the health care industry's biggest issues. He expects the Bush
administration will continue to expand prescription drug availability under
Medicare and to seek private-sector solutions through such programs as health
savings accounts, which combine high deductible insurance with tax-free savings
accounts for medical services.

   HIGH TECHNOLOGY

   Doros Platika, CEO of the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse, hopes that the
Bush administration continues its drive to reduce capital gains taxes, making
investment dollars more available for biotechnology research and ventures.

   Lower capital gains taxes "increases our investors' willingness to invest in
the company,'' said Eric Close, CEO of RedZone Robotics. "If the taxes were
higher -- they may not invest."

   Platika would like to see the Bush administration speed Food and Drug
Administration approval of gene therapies and other biotech advances and balance
the needs of controlling Medicare costs with the industry's need for adequate
payments for new therapies.

   MANUFACTURING

   Even though Bush "has a greater understanding of the steel industry than any
other president in recent history," U.S. Steel President and CEO John P. Surma
believes manufacturing remains in crisis.

   "The future of manufacturing will be affected by how the president deals with
taxes, health care and tort reform in his second term,'' Surma said.
"Internationally, we remain concerned about the increasing trade deficit and
currency manipulation by China and Asian countries. Finally, strong enforcement
of U.S. trade laws remains an absolutely critical priority for the steel
industry and all of the U.S.''

   At Curtiss-Wright Electro Mechanical Corp., the Cheswick maker of large pumps
and motors for ships and nuclear plants, the hope is that Bush will boost the
number of ships for the Navy, which fell to six in the 2005 budget year from
nine previously.

   Terri Marts, vice president and general manager of the former Westinghouse
facility, also is hopeful that there will be an increases in nuclear energy
operations globally and in deep sea oil exploration that use its pumps. "We see
this administration as being a positive influence on these issues, and ... on
strengthening the manufacturing base in the United States," Marts said."

   SMALL BUSINESS

   Local developers are would like to see Bush's tax cuts and new incentives for
home building spur more construction and a rebound in the region's flat
commercial markets.

   For local auto dealers, the main issue is growth in the economy and in jobs.
Whatever is done to pick that up locally will be good for their business, which
relies on people being willing to spend.

   "We are very much tied into how well everybody else is doing,'' said Ron
Pusic, vice president of administration for the Pittsburgh Automobile Trade
Association. "If the public is doing well financially and working, that's good
for the auto business.

   "I don't think we have any particular legislative agenda,'' Pusci added.
``When the economy is strong, it brings business along with it. And when people
have money in their pockets, they're shopping, and that's good for the auto
industry."

   For all small businesses, the overriding concern remains health-care costs,
said Cliff Shannon, executive director SMC Business Councils, a small business
lobby. "I would say health-care costs are depressing profits or eliminating
them, they're depressing employee wages, they're restraining consideration of
other employee benefits and they're retarding hiring."

   "Part of what the administration is going to do is already evident and that
is through health savings accounts that already have been made available and
through individual tax credits that have been proposed," said Shannon, adding
that he was not certain the administration's approach would change behavior.

   TRANSPORTATION

   Union Switch & Signal Corp., the maker of railroad products that has a major
research facility in Hazelwood, would like to see the Transportation Equity Act
receive permanent funding, freeing up projects vital to the firm's future.

   "Basically, we've had a band-aid on this thing for over a year, and we would
like to see that finally reauthorized and have a long-term bill in place similar
to what they did several years ago,'' said Ken Burk, president and CEO of Union
Switch.

   Burk also would like the Federal Railroad Administration to approve the
introduction of new technology on U.S. freight railroads that would permit
smaller crews to operate trains. He said one engineer could safely operate a
freight train equipped with Union Switch & Signal controls.

   The company has sold driverless technology to Copenhagen's new Metro system
and would benefit from the introduction of similar technology on freight lines
here. "The technology already exists,'' Burk said. "Getting approval from ...
the administration would be a nice breakthrough.''

   While bankrupt US Airways is not looking to the government for more help than
it already has received as it tries to restructure, it would like the
administration and Congress to think more broadly about the "endless stream of
taxes and fees'' on airlines and their customers "because the burden is
contributing to the industry's financial problems," CEO Bruce Lakefield said.

NOTES: This story was written and compiled by Post-Gazette staff writers Len
Boselovic, Dan Fitzpatrick, Jo yce Gannon, Pamela Gaynor, Elwin Green, D on
Hammonds, Steve Massey, Jim McKay, Patricia Sabatini and Corilyn Shropshire.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO ILLUSTRATION: Daniel Marsula/Post-Gazette:

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2007


                             292 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 2, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1656 words

HEADLINE: Gen-Probe's Nordhoff listens well, then acts;
A businessman running a science company, he has learned to ask the right
questions

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In 1963, when Henry "Hank" Nordhoff was serving as an officer in the Navy, he
realized the importance of collecting as much information as he could from
trusted and experienced subordinates before making a big decision.

   "I was in navigation, and I didn't know anything about it," Nordhoff said
recently. "I learned I had to listen to the men around me, who'd been doing it
for years, before I gave a command."

   It is a lesson that has served him well for the past 10 years as chief
executive of Gen-Probe, a San Diego company that develops diagnostic tests.

   The company's tests are used to screen much of the nation's donor blood
supply for deadly viruses such as HIV and hepatitis C, and Gen-Probe also worked
with Emeryville-based Chiron to develop an experimental test for the West Nile
virus.

   As a businessman running a science-driven company, Nordhoff said he has
learned to ask the right questions to make himself comfortable.

   He also surrounds himself with talented, smart people who are willing to
challenge him, said a friend, Ed Calesa, former chief executive of now-defunct
Women First Healthcare.

   Calesa points to the Gen-Probe board as an example. Its members include
former astronaut Dr. Mae C. Jemison, former Pfizer president Dr. Gerald Laubach,
and Dr. Brian McNamee, chief executive of CSL, Australia's leading biotech
company.

   The confidence and comfort of knowing what he knows and doesn't know also
fuels what Nordhoff says is an open-door policy. While many chief executives may
claim to welcome employees to communicate freely, Nordhoff actually does it at
Gen-Probe, according to staff and friends.

   Besides being able to speak with the boss as he makes the rounds of the
company's sprawling building in Sorrento Valley, the company's 800 employees can
send questions, observations and thoughts to Nordhoff via the company's Internet
"hotline." Nordhoff's e-mail responses are posted for all to see.

   Nordhoff said that keeping his employees engaged, challenged and happy, and
letting them know their contribution is respected, is key to a successful work
environment.

   "Most important is to give people an opportunity, a chance to succeed or
fail," he said. "If you fail, hopefully it is a learning experience. If it's not
and you fail a second time, that could be a problem."

   To some, such directness may seem gruff.

   Admirable trait

   Friends and fellow San Diego business leaders find this no-nonsense
accountability to be one of many admirable traits they see in Nordhoff.

   "He comes to a fairly quick decision of whether something makes sense for him
or the company and moves on," said friend Peter Farrell, who is chief executive
of the Poway-based company Resmed. "He is a person of high business ethics who
sticks to his word. He's smart. He understands the business environment and what
makes things tick.

   "And he can execute, which I think shows up in the company's results,"
Farrell said.

   Nordhoff spent his undergrad years at Johns Hopkins University, studying
international relations and political economy. He had plans for law school, but
the draft board had a different idea.

   After completing his military stint in 1967, Nordhoff earned an MBA at
Columbia University.

   Degree in hand, he went to Pfizer. The drug development company was hiring
one MBA a year for service overseas, and Nordhoff was it. Typically these new
hires spent a few years stateside, proving their mettle.

   To Brussels

   Nordhoff shipped off to Brussels in a matter of months, assigned as the
assistant to the head of Pfizer's European operations. In the first year and a
half, he worked for three different people. He developed experience in mergers
and acquisitions as well as strategic planning. And he worked on his French.

   In his second year with the company, he moved to Korea to serve as managing
director, head of manufacturing and chief financial officer. That was followed
by a four-year stint in Japan, during which he traveled throughout Asia,
Australia and New Zealand. Then it was back to Europe for two and a half years
more before heading home.

   He left Pfizer about three years later for a position with Sterling Drugs,
which he describes as a "nifty company" in a turnaround situation. Eventually
the company was acquired by Kodak and top managers began leaving the company.

   Around that time, Nordhoff was contacted by an old Pfizer friend about a
small biotech company called American Biogenetic Sciences, which was based on
the South Bend, Ind., campus of Notre Dame and involved in the development of
monoclonal antibodies to fight disease.

   As chief executive, Nordhoff took the company public.

   But when Notre Dame asked the company to move off campus, Nordhoff explored
moving it to Texas. He met with political and business leaders there who
eventually offered the company 100,000 square feet of lab space rent-free and
access to some of Houston's best scientific and medical minds if the company
moved there.

   But the company's board chose to stay in Indiana, and Nordhoff moved on.

   "You can only get as far as people help you to get," Nordhoff said in
recalling that time.

   Then he became chief executive of TargeTech Inc., a gene therapy company
focused on the potential treatment of inherited diseases. After taking the
company through one round of venture capital funding, Nordhoff began negotiating
a second round while also talking to Carlsbad-based Immune Response Corp. about
a possible merger.

   At the eleventh hour, he had an investor willing to write a $2 million check
so that the $15 million round of financing could close. As he talked with Immune
Response about the best terms for a merger, the $2 million investor check was
brought to New York City where, on Nordhoff's instructions, it would be
deposited on deadline and assure the private financing if the deal with Immune
Response didn't work out.

   Likes challenges

   As the clock ticked, Nordhoff confidently informed Immune Response that he
wanted 20 percent of the closing price in a wire transfer and a letter of intent
to purchase by 4:30 that afternoon.

   Immune Response came through, Nordhoff recalled recently with a satisfied
smile, and the man with the investor check was told not to deposit it.

   "I like challenges, and I also like to be able to show progress and growth,"
he said. "I like getting the best value for shareholders.

   "I am not short-term oriented."

   Nordhoff said the willingness of Gen-Probe's former parent company, Chugai,
to invest for the long term was an important selling point when he started
talking with executives there about becoming Gen-Probe's chief executive.

   "I knew the character and global objectives of the company and knew the
Japanese were in it for the long term," he said. "I knew they were able to
invest and wouldn't have to run out and raise money all the time, which is one
problem with a start-up."

   "I later found out the company was sending money back to Japan," he said.

   Meanwhile, the enthusiasm of the company's employees and their commitment to
its products was palpable when Nordhoff took his first tour of the company.

   It's palpable still, whether walking through the building and watching the
tall and athletically trim CEO greet people with a smile, a handshake and a pat
on the back, or just observing the recent groundbreaking for an expansion of the
company headquarters.

   Shares up sharply

   In September 2002, Gen-Probe spun off from Chugai and went public at $13 a
share. Unlike many spinoffs, the company struck out on its own with virtually no
debt, $75.9 million cash and what many analysts considered a promising product
line.

   In a little over a year, the company's stock value nearly tripled and, after
a two-for-one split last October, was selling at $34.02 at the close of trading
yesterday.

   The company's success is no surprise to those familiar with its technology
and its employees, including their leader.

   "Hank is passionate about many things -- golf, tennis, squash, his family,
his two Bernese Mountain dogs and his company," said David Gollaher, who heads
the California Healthcare Institute, of which Nordhoff is a board member. "His
is one of the most versatile minds that I know in our industry. It's partly a
reflection of his own education and culture, the discipline of the years working
for Pfizer overseas."

   People who work with Nordhoff on various boards, including those of the
University of San Diego and the San Diego Regional Economic Development Corp.,
point to his "global perspective" as one of his key traits.

   "He's lived and traveled all over the world, so he understands the
international aspect of the economy as well as helping us to become more
international from the university perspective," said Monsignor Dan Dillabough, a
vice president at USD.

   "He's also calm and imbues confidence -- he's comfortable in his own skin,"
Dillabough said.

   That calm confidence is not only a trait for the boardroom. A number of
friends and colleagues said it's evident on the golf course, even when
Nordhoff's being overshadowed by his wife Robin's skills with the clubs, or
being drenched by rain.

   Some people believe it doesn't rain much in Southern California. Try telling
that to Nordhoff, who could even find rain on the golf course in Palm Springs,
Dillabough said.

   "For some reason, he thinks the game of golf needs to be played in the rain,"
Dillabough said. "And he insists on finishing even if it is pouring."

   Henry L. `Hank' Nordhoff

   Position: Chief executive officer, Gen-Probe

   Personal: Age 62. Born in Baltimore, Md. Married to Robin Tharp, a lawyer.

   Children: Four children, one grandchild.

   Education: B.A. in international relations and political economy from Johns
Hopkins University, MBA in international business and finance from Columbia
University.

   Career: Joined Gen-Probe in 1994 as president and chief executive. Previously
was chief executive of TargeTech, a gene therapy company, and spent more than 16
years at Pfizer. Served in the Navy. Terri Somers: (619) 293-2028;
terri.somers@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Henry "Hank" Nordhoff brought decades of
experience in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology to Gen-Probe in Sorrento Valley,
where he has served as chief executive for the past decade. 2. Henry L. `Hank'
Nordhoff; PHOTOBY: 1. Roni Galgano / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2004


                             293 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 1, 2004, Monday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1252 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH'S AGENDA TOO NARROW

BYLINE: BY SCOTT KIRSNER

BODY:

   It's a big week for biotech.

   The presidential campaign, whenever it alighted momentarily on domestic
issues, hit on healthcare costs, prescription drug importation, and, recently,
the flu vaccine shortage.

       In California, voters are expected to approve a ballot initiative,
Proposition 71, that would issue $3 billion worth of bonds to fund stem cell
research in the state, effectively doing an end-run around inadequate federal
funding.

      And this week, the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council will hold its fall
conference in Boston, where former House Speaker Thomas M. Finneran will address
the group for the first time since he took over as its president last month.


      It's the perfect opportunity to set a new, more pragmatic, more vigorous
agenda. Finneran needs to broaden the trade association's scope beyond its
traditional constituency: its 400 member companies. The new agenda needs to hit
a chord not just for the them, but for everyone who cares about supporting a
strong biotech industry in Massachusetts and the United States, from workers to
doctors to hospital adminis trators to elected officials to venture capitalists
to citizens who just want the best healthcare available.

      Here are five issues Finneran ought to make part of that new agenda:


      Jobs:  No matter how many surveys crown Boston as the country's most
vibrant city for biotech companies, employment has actually been declining
lately. We can't afford to treat the biotech industry like Saudi Arabia treats
oil as a naturally occurring resource that requires no cultivation.

      Chief executives like Michael Bonney, who runs Cubist Pharmaceuticals,
tell me that they often get e-mails from other states and foreign countries
begging them to build manufacturing facilities outside the Bay State.

      "They want to know what our manufacturing needs are," says Bonney, whose
Lexington company is at least five years away from building its own plant.
Though this state has a vibrant biotechnology industry, officials on Beacon Hill
and in town halls around Massachusetts need to think like they're the Red Sox in
spring training: We may have won the 2004 World Series, but what about 2005?


      Education:  The biotech industry needs to dial up its commitment to
education and workforce development. One way to do that would be a one-day
summit of biotech chief executives and college presidents, from technical
schools to MIT and Worcester Polytechnic. The college presidents would describe
what they do today to prepare students, and the chief executives (who'd ideally
represent a mix of large and small companies) could offer a reality check,
laying out what sorts of people they're trying to hire.

      "We do more hiring out of University of New Hampshire than the University
of Massachusetts," says Michael Astrue, chief executive of Transkaryotic
Therapies in Cambridge. "Massachusetts is a world leader in life sciences. Can
UMass do better by its graduates by supporting that?"

      The industry also needs to get in front of middle and high school
students, to spark their interest in science. That means opening up labs and
manufacturing facilities to field trips, and sending scientists of all ages and
colors into the schools to talk about their important and often exhilarating
work.


      Stem cell research:  If California voters approve Proposition 71, it would
instantly make that state a magnet for researchers who want to work with
embryonic stem cells, and entrepreneurs who want to start companies in that
niche.

      "What would really concern me is if we started to lose talent to the West
Coast," says Peter Barrett, a senior partner at Atlas Venture in Waltham. "We
need to be very proactive on this issue."

      That means getting the Massachusetts Legislature to roll out the welcome
mat to stem cell researchers, making it clear that embryonic stem cell research
is permitted here, and allowing the donation of surplus embryos from fertility
clinics, which routinely destroy them.

   And while a $3 billion stem cell fund probably wouldn't be wise for
Massachusetts, a more modest move would be. How about a publicly funded
incubator space that offers free rent to qualified start-ups trying to
commercialize stem cell research, located close to Harvard's new Stem Cell
Institute?


      Drug prices:  What if the industry started to communicate about some of
the issues around drug pricing in a clear and simple way? Drug companies that
develop breakthrough products need to be rewarded for the R&D money they have
invested, and the risks they've taken.

      But US consumers pay an unfair share, while consumers in other places
(Canada and Europe, for example) can buy drugs like they're on final markdown at
Filene's Basement.

      The industry needs to put forward pricing models to ensure that US
citizens aren't the only ones funding the development of medicines and
treatments.

      (Una Ryan, chief executive of Avant Immunotherapeutics in Needham, has
suggested indexing drug prices to each country's per capita gross domestic
product, which is one appealing idea.

     Generics:  If drug companies want to enjoy the free-market benefits of
profiting from innovative new drugs, they also need to let go when a drug's
patent life ends. At that point, it's time to allow generic manufacturers to
crank up production, to help lower the prices.

   As recently as last month, the national Biotechnology Industry Organization
was arguing in front of the Food and Drug Administration that "biogenerics,"
which are carbon copies of biotech drugs already on the market, should have to
go through the approval process, the same way a new drug would.

   That's silly, and consumers know it.

   The state biotechnology council needs to chart its own course here, separate
from the BIO's. Producing biogenerics will create opportunities for start-ups
even as it crunches the profit margins of big players like Amgen and Biogen,
whose older drugs are going off patent.

      The Massachusetts Biotechnology Council ought to make it a priority to
help make it easier for Bay State companies to conduct clinical trials of new
drugs and therapies on their home turf.

   "The big hospitals in Boston often force drug companies to take full
liability in a trial, even if something adverse happens in the trial that
involves one of their people making a mistake," says Alison Taunton-Rigby, a
longtime biotech industry executive who serves on the biotech council's board.

   "They say, 'If you don't want the liability, we won't do your study.' "

      By bringing together insurers, patient advocates, doctors, hospital
administrators, and drug company representatives, some of the barriers to
conducting trials in Massachusetts could be broken down.

      "It's easier for local companies to coordinate local trials, and it's
money spent here, paying the doctors who run the trials, and filling hospital
beds. And you're helping Massachusetts' citizens to get the best, most modern
care," says Taunton-Rigby.

      I'll be curious to see how quickly Proposition 71, if it's approved, has
an impact on California's biotech industry, and whether Finneran's address to
the biotech council this week indicates he's ready to roll, or still in
"fact-finding" mode.

      What else do you think should be high on the agenda for Finneran and the
council? Drop me an e-mail.


NOTES:
@LARGE / SCOTT KIRSNER
Scott Kirsner is a contributing editor at Fast Company. He can be reached at
skirsner@verizon.net.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2004


                             294 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 1, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; TECHNOLOGY; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 996 words

HEADLINE: Doctors Use Nanotechnology to Improve Health Care

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

BODY:

   Nanotechnology's bag of tricks for inventing new molecules and manipulating
those available naturally could be dazzling in its potential to improve health
care.

    Evidence is accumulating that nanotechnology may enable better early warning
systems for cancer and heart disease, cures for progressive diseases like cystic
fibrosis, techniques for making implants like artificial hips more successful,
and even artificial kidneys. But there is no reliable timeline for the home-run
projects, according to specialists like Dr. Peter R. Cavanagh, chairman of the
department of biomedical engineering at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, one of
the nation's largest hospital and health research centers.

    ''We know how to make rubber, and we know where the road is going to go,''
Dr. Cavanagh told an international gathering of nanotechnology researchers and
physicians at the Cleveland Clinic last week. ''What we don't know is where the
rubber is going to meet the road.''

    Nanotechnology has garnered headlines and billions of dollars of federal
investment because of its potentially broad effects on all parts of commerce. It
is already used in consumer products like transparent sunscreens and
stain-resistant clothing. But its capacity for mixing and matching molecules
seems especially suited for transforming medicine.

    Nanotechnology involves industrial products and processes in the realm of
nanometers, or billionths of a meter. That is also the scale on which all living
cells -- and the things that nourish or kill them -- operate. Viruses, for
instance, range in size from 20 nanometers to 300 nanometers, with human
antibodies roughly the size of smaller viruses.

    For that reason, medical research has long worked on the nanoscale. For
example, Dr. H.David Humes at the University of Michigan and Dr. Tejal Desai at
Boston University are using machinery and processes adapted from the
semiconductor industry to build prototypes of implantable artificial organs with
pores or slits smaller than 20 nanometers wide. Such nanofilters are the only
way to let essential nutrients pass in and out of the devices while excluding
cells and other biological matter that can clog or poison them.

    Medical device companies have also routinely tinkered with the molecular
structures of the surfaces of the materials they use. For devices like
pacemakers, one goal is to make them less hospitable to in-growth from tissues
that could impair the devices. In other cases, as with hip or knee implants, the
engineers try to make the body's tissues bind to the surface as fast as
possible.

    In recent years, scanning electron microscopes and atomic force microscopes
have allowed bioengineers to get sharper images of what they were doing. And
computer-controlled machinery has given them the ability to manipulate the size,
shape and surfaces of drugs and devices.

    Now, for example, device makers not only shape the surfaces of their
products, but they may also add specialty coatings like those from Biophan
Technologies. Biophan's coatings, made up of magnetic particles 20 nanometers to
40 nanometers across, make the devices visible to magnetic resonance imaging
machines used to track their placement.

    The new tools inevitably conjure up ''Fantastic Voyage,'' the 1960's
science-fiction thriller in which a medical team was shrunk and launched into a
patient's bloodstream in a cell-size submarine to wipe out a blood clot in the
victim's brain. Indeed, Dr. Aaron J. Fleischman, co-director of the laboratory
that Cleveland Clinic set up five years ago to provide researchers with
engineering support for very small-scale devices, said that doctors initially
asked him when he would start building tiny intelligent submarines -- minus the
shrunken crew, of course.

    While researchers do discuss the feasibility of making tiny robotic devices
able to maneuver inside the body and perform a variety of tasks, most current
research and new product development is focused on nano-scale particles.

    Quantum dots, metallic particles that emit bright light in a color range
that varies with their size, are now frequently used to study tumors and locate
proteins that researchers want to study. By attaching antibodies that prefer to
bind with specific types of cells to dots of different sizes, the researchers
can get a multicolored image showing the location and concentration of many
elements inside a tissue sample.

    Nanoparticles may help researchers overcome obstacles in gene therapy, which
seeks to treat genetically inherited diseases like cystic fibrosis by implanting
healthy genes to do the work of damaged ones.

    Nanoparticles may also be used to deliver heat to cancer cells to kill them.
MagForce Technologies, based in Berlin, coats iron oxide nanoparticles with a
compound that is a nutrient for tumor cells, which then ingest the particles.
When an external magnetic field causes the particles to vibrate rapidly, the
tumor cells are killed and then flushed from the body by its natural scavenger
cells, according to MagForce's research results.

    MagForce expects regulatory approval to sell the particles and its treatment
machinery in Germany in 2006 after more extensive clinical trials have been
completed. A German insurer has already agreed to reimburse hospitals there for
the technology, based on early results, according to Dr. Andreas Jordan, the
company's chief executive. Dr. Jordan said he was negotiating with large
American equipment vendors in hopes of finding a partner big enough to cope with
the costs of getting regulatory and reimbursement approval in the United States.

    Business issues aside, researchers say, nanotechnology in medicine faces so
many technical hurdles that long delays and numerous failures are inevitable.
''The complexity of biology is clearly beyond our comprehension at this time,''
said Dr. James R. Baker Jr., director of the Center for Biologic Nanotechnology
at the University of Michigan. ''That's why so many drugs fail.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Aaron Fleischman of the Cleveland Clinic holds a filtration
device that uses nanotechnology. (Photo by Barney Taxel for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2004


                             295 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     November 1, 2004 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-12 SCIENCE NOTEBOOK

LENGTH: 628 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN'S 'WORKING MEMORY' EXPANDS WITH AGE

BODY:

   Adolescents act much like adults in many situations, but often act more
impulsively under stress. One explanation, a University of Pittsburgh
neuroscientist says, may lie in the brain's working memory.

    Working memory is where the brain stores information used to make immediate
calculations and it develops and changes from childhood to adulthood.

    Pitt's Beatriz Luna reported last week at the Society for Neuroscience
meeting in San Diego on brain-imaging studies of working memory that she
performed using pre-adolescent, adolescent and adult volunteers. She found that
as people age, they incorporate additional regions of the brain into their
working memory.

    A region used by adults, the medial temporal lobe, may make the difference,
she suggested, enabling adults to keep information in working memory long enough
that they can make rational decisions under pressure.


    Gene therapy and diabetes

    Mouse studies at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine suggest
that gene therapy might be able to reverse diabetic neuropathy, a complication
of diabetes that results in numbness or tingling in the feet and legs.

    Molecular geneticist James R. Goss reported last week at the Society for
Neuroscience annual meeting in San Diego that signs of neuropathy disappeared in
diabetic mice five weeks after his team treated them with genes responsible for
producing certain neurotrophic factors.

    The genes produced either nerve growth factor or neurotrophin-3, proteins
necessary for the survival and proper function of nerve cells. Previous studies
have shown that high doses of nerve growth factor, injected into the blood
stream, could reverse neuropathy in rodents, though subsequent human trials were
disappointing.

    Goss said clinical trials of the gene therapy approach will have to wait
until safety testing is completed for the modified virus used to transfer the
genes to patient cells.


    A talk on GM foods

    Nina Federoff, a Penn State University geneticist, will address the facts
and myths of genetically modified foods at this month's Cafe Scientifique
Pittsburgh, an informal science discussion at 7 p.m. tomorrow at the Penn
Brewery, Troy Hill.

    Federoff is co-author of a new book, "Mendel in the Kitchen: A Scientist's
View of Genetically Modified Food." Cafe Scientifique welcomes all comers to its
meetings.


    Nature lessons for kids

    The Audubon Society of Western Pennsylvania is seeking schools interested in
developing natural habitats on school grounds for use as outdoor classrooms.

    The free program involves teams of students and teachers that plant trees,
shrubs and wildflowers, create trails and make bird feeders to create the
habitats.

    The group will select schools for the project based on competitive
applications. Completed applications must be postmarked by Dec. 3. For further
information, or to obtain an application packet, call Patricia O'Neill at
412-963-6100, Ext. 24.


    Update on free-space optics

    A Penn State University electrical engineer says clouds and fog need not be
an obstacle to using optical signals to transmit voice, video or computer data
through the air.

    Speaking at the Optics East 2004 Conference in Philadelphia last week,
Mohsen Kavehrad said a system encodes data as ultra-short laser pulses, which
don't interact readily with rain or fog. The same data is then transmitted
simultaneously at different signal rates to increase the odds of the signals
getting through. Lower rate signals, for instance, may penetrate clouds that
high rate signals can't.

    These optical wireless systems, known as free-space optics, could be used
for battlefield communications between air and ground vehicles, or for
connecting scattered buildings into a computer network.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2004


                             296 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            October 31, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: HIGH PROFILE

LENGTH: 162 words

HEADLINE: MEHTA/STEBBINS CHAIR UAMS event marks endowment plus a birthday

BYLINE: - Phyllis D. Brandon

BODY:

   Paul Hermonat was named recipient of the inaugural Mehta /Stebbins endowed
chair in cardiovascular research on Oct. 22 in ceremonies in the auditorium of
the College of Public Health at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences.
The "chair" is an award which "provides unfettered time for scholars to think,"
explained Dr.

   Tom Andreoli.

   It is expected that Hermonat will be studying ways to doctor sick hearts
through gene therapy. This would be important to the future of medicine and
would be very good for the state, Hermonat said.

   The chair named for Drs. Paulette and Jay Mehta was endowed by Elsie and
Howard Stebbins. The date chosen for the ceremony was Howard Stebbins' 94 th
birthday, which was celebrated during the reception in Bruce Commons. He cut a
large cake to share with the guests. Elsie Stebbins and Paulette Mehta received
bouquets of roses.

   Among the guests was Vijay Khanna, a classmate of Jay Mehta's in India.

   This article was published 10/31/2004

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2004


                             297 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 31, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk; IN BRIEF; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 320 words

HEADLINE: Monsignor Hartman Grant For Cold Spring Harbor Lab

BYLINE: By Warren Strugatch

BODY:

   The Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory has received a commitment from Msgr. Thomas
J. Hartman's Foundation for Parkinson's Research for $4.4 million over the next
five years, the laboratory's chancellor, James D. Watson, said on Monday.

    The grant will finance research conducted in accordance with Roman Catholic
doctrine, specifically proscribing the use of embryonic stem cells, said Brian
P. Cassidy, vice president of the foundation. Instead, research will be
conducted in the areas of genetics, brain circuitry and genetic therapy.

     Monsignor Hartman is well known as the director of Telecare, the television
network of the Diocese of Rockville Centre. Through Telecare, and as a result of
the busy schedule of media appearances and newspaper columns maintained by the
interfaith ''God Squad,'' where he trades a mix of quips and inspirational
messages with Rabbi Marc Gellman, Monsignor Hartman reaches millions of people
with gentle observations and words of encouragement. He was found to have
Parkinson's five years ago.

    The monsignor solicited the research proposal directly from Dr. Watson, the
Nobel laureate who is chancellor of the lab, a private research institution, Mr.
Cassidy said.

    Monsignor Hartman said he planned to raise the research funds through a
combination of public appearances and solicitations of wealthy individuals. The
monsignor, known as Father Tom, has raised about $70 million during his ministry
for such causes as Telecare and housing for the needy.

    ''If God wants us to find the cure, we have got to put the effort in,'' the
monsignor said. ''It's my dream to read the newspaper in five years and read
that the cure for Parkinson's was discovered on Long Island.''

    In June, the foundation's first fund-raiser, held in Huntington, raised more
than $2 million. Monsignor Hartman started the foundation last year using his
own funds. The foundation is based in East Islip.   Warren Strugatch


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Msgr. Thomas J. Hartman (Photo by Hartman Foundation for
Parkinson's Research)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2004


                             298 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 27, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-2:7; B-3:1,2

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: Scientists hope to turn tide in ALS battle;
New methods cited at S.D. conference

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the fight against Lou Gehrig's disease, a relentless affliction that
paralyzes its victims before killing them, scientists now believe they are
developing powerful weapons to conquer it.

   At the Society for Neuroscience meeting this week in San Diego, scientists
have discussed three new approaches that have shown some success in animals.
Scientists hope to begin preliminary human clinical trials involving two of the
approaches next year.

   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS, is an insidious killer, disconnecting
the brain from the body but leaving the mind aware enough to follow the rapid
descent into paralysis.

   The disease kills the body's motor neurons, the long nerve cells that sprout
from the spinal cord and extend toward the limbs like branches on a tree.
Without them, the brain loses control of the body. Patients lose their ability
to move, to speak and eventually to breathe.

   About 5,600 Americans are diagnosed with ALS each year. Four in five will be
dead within five years.

   In the mid-1990s, scientists identified one gene whose mutated form
contributes to the death of motor neurons. The protein the gene produces, called
superoxide dismutase, or SOD1, is found to be involved in about 20 percent of
inherited forms of the disease.

   Only about 5 percent of all ALS cases are inherited, however. The cause of
the vast majority of total ALS cases remains a mystery.

   Even so, scientists have intensively studied SOD1, hoping that what they
learn about the small percentage of cases involving this gene will help them
understand ALS in general.

   So far, success has been elusive. More than 100 drugs have been tested on
animals, but only one has shown any success in humans, and even it has limited
efficacy.

   "We've cranked through a fair number of drugs quickly . . . (but) I don't
think any of us are dissuaded by failures," said Jeffrey Rothstein, an ALS
researcher at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

   The SOD1 gene undermines not only motor neurons but also the supporting cells
surrounding them called astrocytes and microglial cells. For years, scientists
have studied how they might silence the SOD1 gene in motor neurons. But UCSD
researcher Don Cleveland has found that motor neurons in mice can be protected
-- even when they have the mutated SOD1 gene -- if astrocytes and microglial
cells surrounding them are kept healthy.

   Both are critical to the health of motor neurons: Astrocytes nourish motor
neurons, while microglial cells scavenge toxins from the cellular environment
around motor neurons.

   "You don't need to target the neurons; you need to target the neighboring
cells," Cleveland said.

   One way to protect astrocytes and microglial cells would be to change their
genetic code so their DNA no longer makes SOD1. Injecting a benign virus that
carries new genetic instructions into those cells -- gene therapy -- would be
one option.

   Another way could be to engineer stem cells in the lab to grow into healthy
astrocytes and microglial cells, then transplant the replacement cells into a
patient, Cleveland said.

   In a separate presentation Monday, Swiss researcher Patrick Aebischer spoke
of a technique called RNA interference to shut off the mutant gene that produces
SOD1 -- before the protein is even made inside the cell.

   RNA interference disrupts the action of ribonucleic acid, a molecule that
acts as an intermediary between DNA and the proteins it encodes.

   Fragments of RNA or DNA, designed to disrupt RNA action inside cells, could
be delivered to a patient by a modified -- and therefore benign -- form of the
HIV virus, Aebischer said. The engineered virus would infect astrocytes,
microglial cells and motor neurons, shutting down the production of SOD1 in all
three.

   "The goal is to silence the gene not just in motor neurons but also in the
cells around it -- the neighborhood," said Aebischer, who works at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne.

   Cleveland said a clinical trial is planned for next year that will combine
his approach, protecting astrocytes and microglial cells to safeguard motor
neurons, and Aebischer's approach, RNA interference to shut down the SOD1 gene.

   In the trial, involving Carlsbad biotechnology company Isis Pharmaceuticals,
researchers will use synthetic fragments of DNA, called anti-sense
oligonucleotides, and inject them directly into the brains of patients. The
molecules will then flow from the brain down through the spinal cord, where
researchers hope they will be taken up by astrocytes, microglial cells and motor
neurons, disrupting their production of the mutated SOD1 protein.

   Getting new treatments into patients so SOD1 can be shut down will be the
biggest challenge as researchers move from animal studies to human clinical
trials, Cleveland said.

   "The issue is not that we can't identify strategies that are effective," he
said. "It's, `Can we deliver them in an effective way?' "

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2004


                             299 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 25, 2004 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Editorial Pages Desk; Part B; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: Commentary;
Stepping Out of Line in Stem Cell Research;
Proposition 71 would cut the link between science and democracy.

BYLINE: Daniel Sarewitz, Daniel Sarewitz is a professor of science and society
at Arizona State University and director of its Consortium for Science, Policy,
and Outcomes.

BODY:

   There's no doubt that the emerging revolution in life sciences will
profoundly transform society in the coming decades. The question Californians
now need to ask themselves is whether they want to abdicate control of this
transformation and hand it over entirely to scientists and the private sector.
If they do, then Proposition 71, the California Stem Cell Research and Cures
Act, is the way to go.

   Biomedical scientists, patient advocacy groups and others have reason to be
frustrated by the restrictions President Bush has placed on stem cell research.
But Proposition 71 asks voters to cure these frustrations by undermining their
own democratic safeguards and institutions.

   Proposition 71 creates an unprecedented state constitutional "right to
conduct stem cell research." It sets aside $3 billion of public spending for
stem cell research -- and then insulates that money from meaningful public or
legislative accountability. It creates an oversight body -- the misnamed
Independent Citizen's Oversight Committee -- but then stacks that body with
those who benefit directly and indirectly from the initiative. And it
specifically precludes any amendments of the initiative for three years -- and
even then allows them only with a 70% supermajority of the Legislature.

   In other words, Proposition 71 would put stem cell research out of the reach
of democracy -- in a move that would seriously undermine the unwritten social
contract that exists between government and science in this country.

   Under that social contract, the federal government increased its annual
investment in basic scientific research from about $265 million in the early
1950s to close to $30 billion today (or a 2,000% increase after accounting for
inflation), while affording scientists considerable protection from direct
political interference in their work. In return, the world's most productive
research enterprise has delivered to Americans enormous benefits, such as
childhood vaccines and the Internet.

   But underpinning this contract is an understanding that scientists are
accountable not just to themselves but to society, to democratic processes and,
ultimately, to the public will. This core of public accountability has been good
for science and for society in three important ways.

   First, it maintains public trust in science through transparency of the
legislative process. Scientists and bureaucrats who spend public funds on
research must continually account for their activities to elected officials, and
science must continually compete for funding with other legitimate public
priorities, such as education, law enforcement and healthcare.

   Second, it ensures that science responds to changing public interests and
values. For example, political pressure from women's groups has led to
significant changes in both the priorities and practice of biomedical science,
with federal funding for research on diseases such as breast cancer increasing
much more rapidly than funding for health research as a whole. Such changes
could not occur if a Proposition 71-like system were in place in the federal
government.

   Third, and perhaps most important, democratic accountability protects the
public and the public interest from potential abuses. Most scientific research
is conducted with high attention to ethical standards. But when abuses have
occurred -- such as the infamous Tuskegee experiments, which used African
American males as unwitting subjects in experiments on syphilis treatments for
four decades, and as in the death of gene therapy patient Jesse Gelsinger in
1999, in which the doctor overseeing this research had a financial interest in a
company that could have benefited from commercialization of the therapy --
mechanisms of democracy have been available to ensure open investigation,
appropriate censure and the imposition of necessary new protections. Without
this active oversight capability, such abuses would assuredly increase, and
public trust in science would be eroded.

   Although supporters of Proposition 71 claim that the initiative includes
strict ethical controls, enforcement of these controls is left in the hands of
the Independent Citizen's Oversight Committee, which is made up of
representatives of the academic stem cell research community, the biotechnology
industry and advocacy groups. The resulting level of institutional conflict of
interest -- all members of the committee stand to gain in some way from funding
for stem cell research -- reveals an extraordinary hubris among the initiative's
authors.

   And the hubris goes even deeper: Proposition 71 would actually give
scientists a constitutional right to conduct stem cell research, as if this were
a fundamental right equivalent to freedom of speech or religion. In doing so,
Proposition 71 turns the privilege of conducting publicly funded research into
an absolute legal protection for stem cell researchers, while offering no
equivalent protection for the citizens who would be the voluntary subjects of
that research.

   The last 50 years of rapidly advancing American science shows us that
democracy and science can fruitfully coexist, even if the relationship is
sometimes contentious. If Californians want to fund stem cell research, they
could do so through legislation that preserves the balance between scientific
autonomy and democratic values by providing for annual appropriation of funds
and accountability to elected officials rather than vested interests. Democracy
is hard, but it deserves our protection more than anything else. Even more than
science.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2004


                             300 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2004 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      October 24, 2004 Sunday Home Edition

SECTION: Metro News; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: Students determine have-'bots, have-nots;
Competition helps create interest in engineering

BYLINE: KRISTINA TORRES

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   They met as planned before dawn Saturday, twins Timothy and Patrick
McPherson, Bryce Taylor and Sam Crowe. Milton High, home of the Eagles, was
quiet. The car trip from Alpharetta to Marietta took less than a half-hour.

   The four had two hours to fix a major problem.

   The gymnasium at Southern Polytechnic State University bustled. Teams, some
with dozens of members, arrived and unloaded, making last-minute adjustments.
Soon came cheerleaders, drum corps and horn blowers --- none from Milton.

   The four said it didn't matter.

   The clock ticked. Buzzers sounded. So started the second annual Georgia BEST
robotics competition, 14 teams that, by rule, had six weeks to design and build
a robot with the same given parts, including motor, plywood and plastic tubing.
They also shared the same goal: Use their 'bots to get as many baseball-size
plastic balls into specific bins, a lesson that organizers this year tied to DNA
and gene therapy.

   They called the event "BEST fever." Organizer Glenn Allen hoped it was
contagious.

   BEST --- which stands for "boosting engineering science and technology" ---
was created in 1993 by two Texas Instruments engineers to encourage more
interest in technology and engineering. It is one of two robotics organizations
that sponsors national competitions during the school year. More than 500
schools compete in BEST events, up from 14 when it started.

   But Allen, who teaches mechanical engineering technology at Southern Poly,
said there are still roughly the same number of students entering universities
to study engineering now as there were in 1970.

   "We've got a crisis," he said. "You go out and count the number of football
teams, baseball teams, basketball teams, soccer teams, and they've got county
support, booster clubs. Our culture has created a network to support
extracurricular athletics. This is extracurricular academics. This should be a
letter sport."

   At some schools, it's close. Robotics powerhouses like Kennesaw Mountain and
Wheeler, both high schools in Cobb, regularly see scores of interested students.
But at some schools, it's not. Or, as Allen hopes, not yet.

   Milton team adviser Suzy Crowe, Sam's mom and a computer science teacher,
estimates she put in 500 hours of her own time last year and is on track to beat
that this year. While the 2-year-old Milton club counts about 45 members, six of
the 10 who worked on the BEST robot couldn't make Saturday's competition because
of other commitments, including marching band and cross-country.

   Still, "it's fun," said Timothy, who worked six days a week on the 'bot these
last two weeks, staying up past midnight Friday to tweak it. "I like seeing
things that I create moving and doing stuff. I like the team aspect. Even if you
don't win, it doesn't matter."

   Milton didn't do so well at BEST last year, but Crowe had told Allen they'd
be back.

   The team struggled again this year --- the scooper on their 'bot didn't work
well (that was the problem they'd been trying to fix when they got here) and the
team, by lunch, hadn't put a single ball in a bin to score points.

   But it didn't matter. They were here.

   ON AJC.COM

* More photos from the 'bot competition.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fans from Columbus High School (left) cheer their team on at
Southern Polytechnic in Marietta. / KIMBERLY SMITH / Staff; Photo: Kevin Lowe
(from left), James Howard and Brian Lee, all seniors from Westlake High School
in Fulton County, concentrate on getting their robot right. / KIMBERLY SMITH /
Staff; Photo: The Milton High team from Alpharetta (above) works on its robot at
Saturday's competition. / KIMBERLY SMITH / Staff; Graphic: GOING TO REGIONALS
Six teams competing Saturday in the Georgia BEST robotics competition qualified
for regionals in November at Auburn University: Kennesaw Mountain High,
Kennesaw; Northview High, Duluth; Wheeler High, Marietta; Northside High,
Columbus; Jasper County High, Monticello; and Roswell High, Roswell.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2004


                             301 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 22, 2004 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 113 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF / DRUGS;
Amgen Patent Invalid, British Court Decrees

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Amgen Inc.'s British patent for its Epogen anemia treatment, the company's
bestselling drug, was ruled invalid by Britain's highest court.

   The House of Lords in London ruled unanimously in favor of Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., which challenged the patent.

   The ruling is expected to have little effect on Amgen; its Epogen patent was
already due to expire in Europe on Dec. 11.

   The British decision comes after an Oct. 15 ruling by a federal judge in
Boston upholding Amgen's U.S. patents for Epogen. Transkaryotic has said it
plans to appeal.

   Shares of Thousand Oaks-based Amgen fell $2.13 to $54.28 and Cambridge,
Mass.-based Transkaryotic rose 6 cents to $16.79, both on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2004


                             302 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                 October 21, 2004 Thursday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: VALLEY & STATE; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: GROUP BRINGS SCIENCE ISSUES TO THE PUBLIC

BYLINE: By William Hermann, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Arizona State University Regents biology Professor Jane Maienschein says she
and her colleagues in science have been casting about for years for ways to
bring new ideas about science and medicine issues to the public.

   And their first effort will be in the form of a popular prize-winning science
writer they are bringing to town.

   Maienschein says that issues in science and medicine have become so
complicated and often so controversial that "somehow, the scientific community
must start getting better feedback from the public on how they feel about the
major issues."

   "There are complicated, controversial, but extremely important issues that
the scientific community needs feedback on from the public," she said.

   Issues like stem cell research, gene therapy, genetic production of vaccines,
genetically modified foods, population growth and climate change, she said.

   "It's important to get the populace engaged with the scientific community,"
Maienschein said. "We want this discussion to occur in Arizona, but it's not
just about local issues; these are issues that are global and we believe that
Arizona scientists and the Arizona public and Arizona medical community should
be part of this international discussion."

   To help create this interface between the public and the scientific
community, Maienschein and colleagues at ASU, the Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, the
Translational Genomics Research Institute in Phoenix, the Flinn Foundation and
the University of Arizona Health Science Center's Phoenix campus have started
what they call the Arizona Consortium for Medicine, Society and Values.

   The consortium will bring speakers to town and will conduct events designed
to bring scientific issues to the attention of the public and let leaders in
science and medicine hear the public's voice.

   The consortium's first effort will be to bring Pulitzer Prize-winning science
writer Jonathan Weiner to deliver the organization's inaugural address, which
will be titled "The Edges of Medicine." It will be October 30 at 7 p.m. at the
Arizona Science Center, 600 E. Washington St. in Phoenix. The event is free, but
an RSVP is required and can be obtained at cmsv@asu.edu.

   School spokeswoman Jennifer Adkins said that while Weiner is in town he also
will conduct a public policy seminar with local scholars, clinicians and
educators and he will conduct a seminar on writing with ASU students.

   Adkins said that the consortium in February will sponsor an undergraduate
bioethics conference at ASU and in March will bring National Book Award winner,
physician and writer Sherwin Nuland to ASU to work with students, faculty and
consortium partners.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005


                             303 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 21, 2004 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: California;
Deal Costs Offset Drug Sales Gains at Amgen

BYLINE: Julie Tamaki, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. reported a 61% drop in third-quarter profit Wednesday as the
purchase of rival Tularik Inc. offset strong sales growth of anemia and
arthritis drugs.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen, the world's biggest biotechnology company,
reported net income of $236 million, or 18 cents a share, compared with $612
million, or 46 cents, in the third quarter of 2003.

   Revenue for the three months ended Sept. 30 rose to $2.7 billion, up 23% from
$2.2 billion a year earlier.

   Excluding one-time charges, notably a $554-million write-off related to the
Tularik purchase, Amgen earned $839 million, or 64 cents a share, beating Wall
Street analysts' estimates of 62 cents, according to a survey by Thomson First
Call.

   Amgen executives raised their full-year profit forecast to between $2.38 and
$2.43 a share on an adjusted basis; the previous range was $2.30 to $2.40 a
share. They also increased the company's revenue forecast for the year to
between $10.3 billion and $10.6 billion, up from $9.7 billion to $10.4 billion.

   In the third quarter, sales of Amgen's anemia drug Epogen, used to increase
red blood cells in patients suffering from cancer and kidney disease, rose 9%
from a year earlier to $681 million. Patents related to the drug were the
subject of a federal court ruling last week that favored Amgen over rivals
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and its partner, Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Sales of Aranesp, Amgen's newer anemia drug, jumped 39% from a year earlier
to $608 million, and sales of Enbrel, a drug for rheumatoid arthritis and
psoriasis, grew 45% to $496 million.

   However, Aranesp sales were down slightly from second-quarter levels, and the
drug's performance may have disappointed investors, said Geoffrey Porges, an
analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein & Co.

   "This is a key growth driver, and investors were expecting $650 million to
$660 million," Porges said, noting that "the difference was due to the rebate
payments due to physicians." Still, he said, the company has gained market share
from Johnson & Johnson, maker of rival medication Procrit.

   Amgen released its results after the close of the stock market. The company's
shares, which fell 23 cents to $56.41 in regular trading on Nasdaq, dipped more
than 1% after hours.

   Another development that may have spooked investors, Porges said, was Amgen's
announcement that it would issue earnings guidance for 2005 at the end of
January, rather than in December as the company did last year. The change comes
as an anticipated drug reimbursement rate change by Medicare causes uncertainty
among cancer drug manufacturers.

   "I think the company is being appropriately cautious," Porges said.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2004


                             304 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                           October 20, 2004 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 039

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: London calling is good news for Transkaryotic

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   A London court struck down yesterday an anemia drug patent held by biotech
giant Amgen Inc., clearing the way for a Cambridge biotech firm to sell its
anemia drug in Europe.

   With the House of Lords decision, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. can move ahead
with plans to market Dynepo by 2006.

   The court also dismissed Amgen's appeal of a ruling that Transkaryotic didn't
violate an Amgen patent.

   ``It's a pretty big deal for us,'' said Transkaryotic chief Michael Astrue.
``It takes the big uncertainty away from us in launching Dynepo in Europe,'' he
said.

   The company wants to have three drugs on the market, incuding Dynepo, by
2006.

   The anemia drug market is $2.5 billion in Europe and growing.

   The battle is over the method of producing the human protein erthyropoietin,
which spurs the production of red blood cells.

   But the battle continues in the United States.

   A judge in Boston earlier this month confirmed Amgen's U.S. patents for
Epogen.

   Transkaryotic has said it will appeal the U.S. court's ruling.

   Amgen officials said they were disappointed with the decision in London.

   ``This will have no effect on the ruling in the U.S., which confirmed the
strength of our patent rights,' Amgen spokeswoman Christine Cassiano told
Bloomberg News.

   The case in the United Kingdom courts involved ``different claims, different
proceedings and different legal standards.''

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2004


                             305 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 20, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-2

LENGTH: 853 words

HEADLINE: QUEST;
SCIENCE BRIEFS

BYLINE: Compiled from news service reports.

BODY:

   Sleeping dinosaur

   A small two-legged dinosaur has been discovered in China, curled up with its
head tucked under the forearm similar to how modern birds sleep.

   "This is the first report of sleeping behavior in dinosaurs," said Xing Xu,
of the Chinese Academy of Science in Beijing.

   Dubbed Mei long, which means "soundly sleeping dragon" in Chinese, the
dinosaur was about 21 inches long and 130 million years old.

   The sleeping skeleton was found near Beipiao City in Liaoning province, an
area rich in fossils. Judging from its position, Mei long died a peaceful and
probably sudden death, according to the report in the journal Nature. Unlike
other dinosaurs found with the neck extended back in a classic death pose, Mei
long seemed to be sleeping contentedly when it died.

   Xu and his colleague Mark Norell, of the American Museum of Natural History
in New York, are not sure what killed the dinosaur. It could have been starved
of oxygen, buried under thick layers of volcanic ash or could have been sleeping
in a cave or burrow when the roof collapsed.

   Sound protein

   Researchers have identified a protein deep in the inner ear that they believe
translates sound waves into the nerve impulses used by the brain to register
what we hear.

   The discovery could improve understanding of how normal hearing works and
perhaps help find cures for inherited forms of deafness, said David Corey, a
professor of neurobiology at Harvard Medical School and lead author of the study
published in the journal Nature.

   "For hearing researchers, this discovery is the Holy Grail in understanding
the function of both hearing and balance," said Jeffrey Corwin, a professor of
neuroscience at the University of Virginia, who was not involved in the project.

   The protein, called TRPA1, is located at the tips of specialized cilia that
act like fingers on hair cells of the inner ear. Researchers believe the
proteins form pores that open and close in sync with sound waves, allowing ions
to flow into the cells and to transform the vibrations into electric signals.
The same channel may also help people distinguish between tones of different
frequencies.

   Researchers say the discovery could allow for the development of new gene
therapies for deafness and balance disorders in the next five to 10 years.

   Frogs fight fungus

   Frogs and toads have been vanishing worldwide, and the reason just got a
little fuzzier.

   One leading theory has been that a fungal infection is devastating frog
populations. But in Australia, biologists have found a frog species that
coexists with the fungus, perhaps after having been nearly wiped out by it.

   The rare Eungella torrent frog nearly disappeared in 1985 and 1986,
presumably during a fungus epidemic. Nearly a decade later, scientists found, 18
percent of the frogs were still infected. Those carrying the fungus were no more
likely than uninfected frogs to die.

   So the frogs somehow managed to survive even with the fungus, biologists
report in the November issue of the Public Library of Science Biology. Figuring
out why could help them breed more frogs to save the species from extinction.

   Too late to mate

   It pays to come home on time, a new study of fidelity in birds suggests.

   Black-tailed godwits, migratory shorebirds that winter far from their spring
breeding grounds, don't like to wait too long for their partner to show up at
mating time.

   In the journal Nature, scientists from England and Iceland report on pairs of
the birds that usually keep the same mates for years. Even though the males and
females may not spend winters together, most manage to show up at the breeding
grounds within just a few days of each other, the scientists have found.

   But the spouse that arrives too late may be ditched. When one partner arrived
more than a week after the other, the first bird was likely to "divorce" its
partner and choose another mate. The scientists said they still don't know how
most mating pairs manage to arrive at the same time.

   Gulf War syndrome link

   Researchers have found a common link to explain many of the seemingly
disparate symptoms of Gulf War syndrome.

   Writing this month in the American Journal of Medicine, researchers from the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas report that veterans
with Gulf War syndrome appear to have damage to the parasympathetic nervous
system. That system is involved in many of the body's basic, rudimentary jobs,
such as digestion and cardiac function.

   To study the parasympathetic nervous system which is most active at night the
scientists asked 22 ill veterans to spend four nights in a sleep lab. Machines
measured the dynamics of their cardiovascular system, along with other signs
that the parasympathetic nervous system was working as it should. The data from
those veterans were compared with data from 19 healthy veterans who served in
the same battalion.

   The researchers found that among the veterans with Gulf War syndrome, the
parasympathetic nervous system did not rev up at night as it should. Damage to
the system, the researchers report, would explain such symptoms as gallbladder
disease, unrefreshing sleep and sexual dysfunction.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2004


                             306 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 17, 2004 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk ; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2598 words

HEADLINE: ELECTION 2004;
Stem Cell Debate Focuses on Morality and Money;
Prop. 71 would commit $3 billion to seeking cures for severe maladies using
human embryos.

BYLINE: Rosie Mestel, Times Staff Writer

DATELINE:  STANFORD

BODY:

   The iridescent ball sits motionless under the microscope, a bundle of
tight-packed cells lying on a bed of gray, spindly fibers.

   The ball contracts tightly. It releases. Then it contracts and releases
again, all in the span of several seconds.

   The pulsating mass is filled with bone fide heart cells, created from cells
of an in a dish of orange-pink Kool-Aid-colored broth in an incubator at a
Stanford University laboratory.They came from stem cells and, if chance had
treated them differently, they could have become skin cells, lung cells, pieces
of brain or spleen -- any body tissue at all.

   Embryonic stem cells -- the promise they hold and the ethical dilemmas they
raise -- have become a high-profile topic in this campaign year, nowhere more
than in California.

   In a little more than two weeks, Californians will vote on Proposition 71,
which would commit $3 billion in state money over the next 10 years to research
using stem cells, most of them extracted from 5-day-old 150-celled human
embryos.

   Such research divides Americans in part because of an inescapable ethical
issue: In time, the research may cure terrible maladies, but to get to that
point, scientists must destroy human embryos.

   President Bush, who has sharply limited the use of federal money to finance
stem cell research, voiced one side of that argument during his second debate
with his Democratic challenger, Sen. John F. Kerry: "Embryonic stem cell
research requires the destruction of life."

   Kerry, in return, stated the opposing view: "I think it is respecting life to
reach for that cure."

   Beyond that moral debate lies a pragmatic one. Is research into embryonic
stem cells promising enough to justify $3 billion in taxpayer money? Just how
advanced is the research? What are the risks? Can cures be found without using
embryo cells?

   *

   Potential Effects

   A taste of the potential can be seen at Hans Keirstead's laboratory at UC
Irvine's Reeve-Irvine Research Center.

   One day last month, Keirstead, an assistant professor of anatomy and
neurobiology, showed a visiting reporter a movie.

   On the screen, a rat with a splotch on its back staggered, its hind legs and
tail dragging pathetically on the ground.

   Then a second rat appeared on the screen, and this one looked a whole lot
better: It was supporting its weight on its back legs, its tail smartly up and
its hind feet alternating -- albeit clumsily -- left with right.

   Both rats had spinal cord injuries. But rat No. 2 had received an injection
of human embryonic stem cells that had first been coaxed to become
oligodendrocytes, cells that wrap around nerve fibers, insulating them. Such
insulation -- which many nerves lose when the spinal cord is damaged -- permits
the transmission of electric signals.

   Keirstead knows that nerves in the spinal cords of rats in his study are
indeed being rewrapped by the treatment. He believes, but cannot yet prove, that
this is the reason the animals improved.

   "It's tremendous," he said. "It's wonderful to run a lab where everybody
comes into work smiling.... The animals are getting better, and you can see it."

   The hope is clear: If it can be proved that stem cell injections are helping
relieve paralysis in rats, perhaps they could help wheelchair-bound humans.

   Indeed, Geron Corp., a biopharmaceutical company based in Menlo Park, plans
to seek permission next year from the Food and Drug Administration to conduct
small trials in patients with spinal cord injuries. It would be the first
clinical test of any embryonic stem cell therapy in humans.

   But researchers caution against getting too excited. Keirstead's work is
preliminary. A rat is not a human being. And biology has offered seemingly
bright hope before.

   Gene therapy was touted in the 1980s as a fix for myriad ills. Two decades
later, it has successfully treated one lethal immune disease in a few children,
two of whom developed leukemia as a side effect.

   As did genetic engineering, stem cell science may have profound effects on
biological and medical research long before anyone is cured of diabetes or
fitted with a lab-grown kidney.

   Fred Gage, professor of genetics at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies
in La Jolla, sees a time soon when scientists will use stem cells to understand
diseases and screen for new drugs with an efficiency they've never enjoyed
before.

   "This is the next great transition in biology," Gage said.

   Researchers tentatively predict that stem cell therapies are most likely for
such ailments as Parkinson's disease that involve only one type of cell that
merely would have to survive to confer a benefit. (In Parkinson's, the disease
destroys cells that normally secrete the brain chemical dopamine.)

   Disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, in which much brain death occurs and
cells would have to perform the more complicated task of correctly linking up
with other nerves, are far more challenging.

   Scientists also warn that there is much still to be learned about the
long-term risk of giving people tissues derived from stem cells.

   How long would engrafted cells survive? Might some become cancerous? Could
cells injected into spinal cords or brains connect inappropriately, causing
troubles of their own?

   With all those questions, the prospect of cures remains alluring but probably
distant. Indeed, some researchers fear that political pressure, the desire for
profit and the desperation of patients will push therapies to the clinic too
soon -- with bad outcomes, even some deaths.

   If that happens, "given the controversial nature of this field, that's going
to make for some very hard times," said James Thomson, a professor of anatomy at
the University of Wisconsin at Madison, the first to extract human embryonic
stem cells.

   A more optimistic view comes from a prominent advocate of embryonic stem cell
research, Dr. Irving Weissman, director of the Institute for Cancer/Stem Cell
Biology and Medicine at Stanford.

   "Nobody should go into this thinking that tomorrow, three years from now or
five years from now we should have cures," he says, "but nobody should think
that 20 years from now we won't have many."

   *

   A New Science

   Many of the uncertainties exist because the field of embryonic stem cells is
so new.

   The science is rooted in a fascinating biological problem: How does a
complicated body with many different tissues arise from a single fertilized egg?

   The key lies with each cell's experience during the growth of embryo and
fetus. Where a cell resides in the developing body determines the chemical
signals to which it is exposed. That, in turn, dictates which genes are turned
on or off -- and whether a cell will end up as a fat, brush-fringed absorber of
food in the gut or as a delicate, branched fiber sending electrical signals in
the brain.

   Early in the development of the embryo, when none or few of those decisions
have been made, cells retain the ability to develop into any tissue.

   At that point, days after fertilization, the embryo is a hollow ball called a
blastocyst, with a small blob of cells jutting into the fluid-filled center.

   In 1981, scientists using embryos from mice extracted cells from the blob and
successfully grew them in a state of quasi-suspended animation: The cells would
divide indefinitely without "deciding" what type of cell to be.

   Researchers then found that if they changed the chemical broth in which the
cells were grown, the cells would shed their indecision and turn into a
jumbled-up mixture of tissues.

   Not until 1998 was a similar feat achieved with human embryo cells, by
Thomson's team at the University of Wisconsin.

   Researchers were quick to see the medical possibilities. If they could learn
some basic biochemical rules, they could ply the cells with the right signals
and turn them into just the type a patient needed.

   But just as quickly, the discovery created a policy dilemma for the federal
government, which funds most biological research in the nation.

   The embryos used in research almost always come from fertility clinics. When
couples who have trouble conceiving a child seek in vitro fertilization,
fertility doctors often produce more embryos than they implant in the woman's
womb. The excess embryos are frozen in case the pregnancy fails and the couple
wish to try again. As a result, an estimated 100,000 or more embryos now sit,
frozen in liquid nitrogen, destined in most cases to be discarded.

   Supporters of stem cell research argue that no harm is done by thawing some
of those embryos and using them for research. Opponents disagree.

   In 2001, Bush resolved the issue by saying federal money could be used only
for research using embryonic stem cell lines already in existence. A stem cell
line is a colony of living stem cells maintained in a lab culture. Not a single
test tube funded with federal dollars can be used on any experiment involving
cells taken from embryos after Aug. 9 of that year.

   At the time, the administration estimated that 78 allowable cell lines
existed around the world. Today the number of available and useful lines is 22;
some were not usable, some were duplicates, some were not living and others,
because of licensing or exporting restrictions, were not accessible.

   Those cell lines have proven valuable. They were used to make the
nerve-wrapping cells used in Keirstead's rat experiments, for instance.

   But many scientists say the restrictions are, or soon will be, a roadblock.

   Some of the lines are hard to grow, and all of them were created when embryo
cells had to be grown with mouse skin cells to keep them alive and dividing.
Some researchers, although not all, think that possible contamination from
animal viruses may limit the cells' value.

   Perhaps most important, the cell lines come from a small number of embryos
and thus do not represent anything close to the genetic variability in people.

   Some young researchers say the restrictions make them worry about pursuing
human embryonic stem cell work.

   "Right now it's not inhibiting my work, but I can for sure see where it will
if the policy stays the same," said Scott Dylla, a postdoctoral researcher in
Weissman's lab.

   *

   State Funding Mulled

   Faced with the federal restrictions, California advocates for embryonic stem
cell research began to contemplate whether the state could take over the federal
government's traditional role as the funder of basic biological research.

   Doing so, they argued, would hasten the possibility of cures and also
potentially base a new advanced industry in California.

   The idea found a financial backer in Bob Klein, a wealthy developer of
affordable housing. Klein's 84-year-old mother has Alzheimer's disease, and his
teenage son is diabetic. His son's diagnosis two years ago drove Klein to search
for a cure, leading him to believe that embryonic stem cell research offered the
most hope.

   Klein spent $1.4 million of his own money to get Proposition 71 before the
voters. He has given an additional $750,000 since it qualified for the Nov. 2
ballot. Other wealthy donors, including several friends of Klein's, have boosted
the total to more than $20 million so far. Recent polls have shown the measure
headed for approval.

   Klein, who has a background in public financing, said he quickly realized
that state bonds could provide the needed resources far more effectively than
private money. After speaking to top scientists, Klein said, he determined that
$3 billion would be needed to finance both new facilities and grants.

   Weissman, among the scientists who consulted with Klein, said the figure
"made my jaw drop."

   The large sum also has become a central argument for opponents of the
proposition, who argue that even if research using embryonic cells is ethically
justified, the state should not lock itself into spending billions on a prospect
that remains uncertain.

   *

   'Therapeutic Cloning'

   Among the most controversial parts of the initiative is a provision
specifically providing funds for a procedure sometimes called "therapeutic
cloning."

   Cloning is the process by which genetic material from a nonreproductive cell
is inserted into an egg. The egg is then tricked to start developing as an
embryo, which will have the same genetic makeup as the person whose cell
provided the DNA.

   Stem cell scientists, who prefer to use the term "nuclear transfer" to
describe the procedure, say they are opposed to cloning to produce babies.
Instead, they want to use the technology to create embryonic stem cell lines
with carefully chosen genetic makeups.

   This might help them create tailor-made tissues for patients. It would also
allow scientists to create an array of stem cell lines from people with such
diseases as schizophrenia, sickle cell anemia and Alzheimer's. The cells could
be studied to see what is wrong with them, thus helping to illuminate the
underlying chemical problem.

   Another point of contention is a claim that the benefits of stem cells could
be realized by using cells from adults. In California, some churches opposed to
Proposition 71 have distributed material to congregants saying that adult stem
cells are as promising for researchers as embryonic ones.

   Scientists know that some adult organs (brain, blood and skin, for instance)
have stem cells. Unlike embryonic stem cells, these cells will not grow
indefinitely and are usually limited in what kinds of tissues they can become.
Moreover, scientists do not yet know if every organ in the body has a stem cell.

   Adult stem cells have been used successfully for many years in some types of
therapy: cells from bone marrow, for example, have been used to rebuild blood in
patients.

   Some researchers hope that adult stem cells can be used more broadly. A few
years ago, several groups reported that the cells, when treated the right way,
seemed to develop a new flexibility -- a blood stem cell, for instance, could be
coaxed to become a heart muscle cell.

   These claims have come under serious question. Scientists trying to repeat
the work have reported that the cells did not change their fate at all. Instead,
a blood stem cell would fuse with an existing heart cell, giving the semblance
of change.

   "A lot of that literature ... has just turned out to be wrong," said Dr.
Leonard Zon, professor of pediatrics at Children's Hospital Boston and Harvard
Medical School and president of the International Society for Stem Cell
Research.

   Other researchers continue to hope that somewhere in the adult body resides a
cell that has the potential to turn into many different tissues, the way an
embryonic stem cell can.

   Dr. Catherine Verfaillie, director of the Stem Cell Institute at the
University of Minnesota, thinks she may have found it: a rare cell in the bone
marrow that is devilishly difficult to grow and that in her group's hands can
make bone, fat, muscle, blood, liver, lung, gut and brain-like cells.

   Her work, too, is proving hard for others to replicate, although she is
training scientists in her lab in how to grow these difficult cells. Their
medical potential, she said, is unknown.

   Amid federal restrictions, threats of cloning bans and the hope of a massive
infusion of money, stem cell scientists are continuing to explore both embryonic
and adult stem cells, expanding the list of cell types they can make and testing
those cells for their curative potential in animals. They are not sure where
their experiments will lead them or how the political winds will work to slow or
hasten their endeavor.

   "We have a lot more research to do until we know what stem cells can do and
what they can't do," said Nobel Prize winner David Baltimore, president of
Caltech. "We need to get on with this work."

   *

   Times staff writer Megan Garvey contributed to this report.

CORRECTION-DATE: October 18, 2004

CORRECTION:

   Stem-cell debate -- The word "embryo" was omitted from a sentence in an
article in Sunday's Section A about California's Proposition 71, which would
commit state money to research using stem cells. The sentence should have read:
"The pulsating mass is filled with bona fide heart cells, created from cells of
an embryo in a dish of orange-pink Kool-Aid-colored broth in an incubator at a
Stanford University laboratory."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: RESEARCHER: Scholars and politicians gathered in Seattle this
month for a forum on stem cell research. Dr. Tony Blau, associate professor of
medicine at the University of Washington, spoke.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Elaine Thompson
Associated Press PHOTO: BACKER: Motivated by his son's diagnosis of diabetes,
developer Bob Klein has spent more than $2 million on Proposition 71.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2004


                             307 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 17, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Column 1; Society Desk; WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 153 words

HEADLINE: Olivia Howard, Ernest Sabine III

BODY:

   Olivia Cutting Howard, a daughter of Alexandra and Philip Howard of New York,
was married yesterday to Ernest Cyril Sabine III, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Sabine
Jr. of Arlington, Mass.

   The Rev. Steven Garmey performed the ceremony at the Calvary Episcopal Church
in New York.

    The bride and bridegroom met at Columbia, from which they graduated, she
magna cum laude.

    Mrs. Sabine, 26, is a senior associate in the Florham Park, N.J., office of
McKinsey & Company, the management consulting firm. Her father is the vice
chairman of Covington & Burling, the New York law firm, and is also the author
of ''The Death of Common Sense'' (Warner Books, 1996).

    Mr. Sabine, 25, is a project manager at Laird & Partners, an advertising
firm in New York. His mother, Zigrida Sabine, is a research scientist at
Transkaryotic Therapies, a biopharmaceutical company in Cambridge, Mass. His
father is a technology consultant in Arlington.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photo by Jason Walz)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2004


                             308 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   October 16, 2004, Saturday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: JUDGE DEALS TRANSKARYOTIC A BLOW IN LEGAL BATTLE WITH AMGEN

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A federal judge yesterday dealt Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge
another setback in its seven-year legal battle with Amgen Inc., the world's
largest biotechnology company, headquartered in Thousand Oaks, Calif.

      In a 290-page ruling, Judge William G. Young of US District Court in
Boston upheld four of Amgen's patent claims and said they had been infringed by
TKT.

           The decision keeps TKT and its Dynepo protein treatment locked out of
the lucrative market to treat anemia in patients with chronic kidney disease. In
2003, Amgen sold $2.4 billion of its Epogen treatment worldwide. Johnson &
Johnson also sells the same drug under the brand name Procrit for anemia caused
by a number of different conditions.


      Michael J. Astrue, TKT's president and chief executive, denounced the
decision and said he would appeal. "Courts should not create 35-year monopolies
by allowing companies to radically expand their patent claims more than a decade
after filing an application," he said. "I believe today's decision misreads the
law, discourages innovation, exports biotech manufacturing jobs overseas and
denies patients in the US an important product."

   Underlying the dispute between TKT and Amgen is whether TKT's method of
producing a human protein is sufficiently different from Amgen's. The treatments
that are the subject of the dispute are proteins that are secreted by the
kidneys in healthy individuals and which stimulate the production of red blood
cells.

      Amgen filed its lawsuit against TKT in 1997. A ruling by Young in 2001
gave partial victory to both firms. Both appealed and this year the Appeals
Court remanded the case to Young with instructions on the issues he should rule
on.

      "We're quite happy with the decision," said Christine Cassiano, a
spokeswoman for Amgen.

      Astrue said the firm's business plan isn't contingent on winning court
approval to sell Dynepo.

      TKT sells Replagal, an enzyme therapy for patients with Fabry disease, in
markets outside the United States, and is developing a treatment for another
rare disease, Hunter Syndrome. In addition, it may win a British court decision
that would clear the way for Dynepo sales in Europe.

      Trading in TKT's shares was halted around 3:30 p.m. yesterday, at a price
of $16.79, when news of the decision was imminent. Trading is expected to resume
Monday. Amgen shares gained $1.29 to close at $55.29.


      Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2004


                             309 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 16, 2004 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: California;
Judge Rules for Amgen Patents

BYLINE: Julie Tamaki, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. won a widely watched patent dispute Friday over an anemia drug
that brings it $2.4 billion a year in sales.

   In a 290-page decision, U.S. District Judge William Young found that the
patents covering Amgen's Epogen were valid and that two patents dealing with the
drug's production had been infringed by Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and its
partner, Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   The result of the ruling in Boston, coupled with earlier decisions, is that
four Amgen patents on Epogen have been found "valid, enforceable and infringed,"
said spokeswoman Christine Cassiano, a spokeswoman for Thousand Oaks-based
Amgen. "Obviously we're quite happy with this decision. It's a vindication for
us on our patents."

   Used to treat anemia in patients with kidney failure, Epogen is Amgen's brand
name for a genetically engineered version of erythropoietin, a natural protein
that spurs red blood cell production.

   Transkaryotic's version of erythropoietin, called Dynepo, is produced using
human cells, while Amgen uses hamster cells. Amgen had raised concerns that had
Transkaryotic prevailed, it could use the same technology to copy virtually any
biotech drug.

   Transkaryotic spokeswoman Justine Koenigsberg said the Cambridge, Mass.-based
company would appeal: "Certainly we're disappointed by the decision. We do
continue to believe we don't infringe any valid Amgen patents."

   Michael J. Astrue, president and chief executive of Transkaryotic, said in a
statement that Young's decision "misreads the law, discourages innovation,
exports biotechnology manufacturing jobs overseas and denies patients in the
United States an important alternative product."

   Aventis, based in Strasbourg, France, couldn't be reached for comment.

   Transkaryotic is trying to establish manufacturing in Europe for Dynepo, with
the goal of launching it by early 2006, Koenigsberg said.

   The company appealed a 2001 ruling by Young that Amgen had proved that three
of its patents covering Epogen were "valid, enforceable and infringed."

   Last year, a federal appeals court said it agreed with the lower court's
ruling that Transkaryotic's Dynepo infringed two Amgen patents. But it said
Young had misapplied the law when he declared the Amgen patents valid and
returned the case to the court in Boston.

   Friday's ruling provides reassurance to investors worried about the future of
Amgen and its top-selling drug in the face of competition from generic drugs and
other products, said Geoffrey C. Porges, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein &
Co.

   "It does solidify Amgen's intellectual property position in advance of the
competitive threat" from other drug makers, Porges said. The next big hazard, he
said, looks like it is Swiss drug maker Roche's product Cera, which it is
"likely to try and bring to market in 2007 or 2008."

   Amgen also sells a newer anemia drug, Aranesp, which brought the company $1.5
billion in sales last year.

   News of the ruling came just as stock markets were closing.

   Shares of Amgen rose $1.22 to $55.22 in regular trading and was up 26 cents
more in after-hours trading. Transkaryotic closed down 48 cents to $16.79 and
was unchanged after hours. Both are listed on Nasdaq. Aventis rose $2.32 to
$84.44 on the New York Stock Exchange.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2004


                             310 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           October 16, 2004 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; COMPANY NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 128 words

HEADLINE: AMGEN WINS LONG PATENT BATTLE OVER ANEMIA MEDICINE

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   A federal judge ruled yesterday that Amgen's patents protecting the Epogen
anemia medicine were valid. Amgen has been in a seven-year legal battle with
Transkaryotic Therapies over the drug. Judge William G. Young of United States
District Court in Boston issued the ruling, which centered on a method of
producing the human protein, erythropoietin, sold under the brand name of Epogen
by Amgen. Epogen is used to increase red-blood cell levels in anemic
kidney-disease patients. Transkaryotic, based in Cambridge, Mass., had been
blocked from selling its version of the erythropoietin, named Dynepo, because of
the patent dispute. It had developed the drug in collaboration with Aventis
Pharmaceuticals, based in Bridgewater, N.J. Amgen is based in Thousand Oaks,
Calif.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2004


                             311 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 15, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: A Promising Cloning Proposal

BODY:

   Harvard scientists are seeking permission to conduct therapeutic cloning that
would involve the creation and destruction of early stage human embryos to get
their stem cells for research. Although this kind of research is anathema to the
Bush administration and has been opposed in unusually strong language by the
president, it is vitally needed to improve scientific understanding of some of
the most daunting diseases that plague human beings.

    If the proposals pass muster with ethical and safety review boards at the
university in the next several months, the research should be welcomed for its
potential intellectual and therapeutic value.

    The research proposed at Harvard would take an important step beyond the
kind of stem cell research conducted thus far in this country. Previous research
has typically involved extracting stem cells from surplus embryos that were
created in fertility clinics but never implanted in women. The political
argument has focused mostly on how many cell lines from these surplus embryos
should be made available to scientists using federal funds.

    Now Harvard researchers, using private funds, propose to create new stem
cell lines derived not from existing embryos, but from embryos that would be
created in the laboratory for the purpose of studying specific diseases.

    They hope, for example, to take skin cells from patients suffering from such
diseases as diabetes, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and sickle cell anemia and to use
those cells to create embryos -- and extract stem cells -- that would have the
same genetic makeup as the diseased patients. By watching what happened when
those stem cells matured into the cell types afflicted with specific diseases,
scientists could learn a great deal about the underlying causes of such diseases
and how they progress in human cells.

    The research might also lead to treatments or even cures. There has been a
lot of controversy lately about how far off these developments might be. Many
scientists say it's improbable that there will be a breakthrough soon in which
stem cells might be used to grow replacement cells for diseased tissues, leading
to a spectacular cure for a dreaded condition. But other treatments, like a drug
developed to interrupt some step in the disease process, could come much faster.

    This potentially valuable line of research is either impossible or so
forbiddingly difficult as to be impractical using surplus embryos from fertility
clinics. For many diseases, there is no way to identify which embryos carry the
disease genes. That is why therapeutic cloning is a critically important next
step along the road toward stem cell treatments.

    Such research is already under way in South Korea and has been approved in
Great Britain. It is currently legal in this country, provided federal funds are
not used to support it. That has put the burden on private institutions using
private funds to keep the United States competitive.

    Of the two presidential candidates, Senator John Kerry, who endorses
therapeutic cloning with appropriate federal and institutional oversight, has
the more medically enlightened position. President Bush, by contrast, has called
for an outright ban on cloning human embryos for research or therapeutic
purposes. His approach would put a gigantic roadblock in the way of this highly
promising avenue of research.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2004


                             312 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 13, 2004 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 300 words

HEADLINE: Sex Abuse Case Tape Barred From Public

BYLINE: Richard Winton, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A judge barred disclosure Tuesday of a videotaped statement made by a
teenager who has accused William French Anderson, a renowned geneticist and USC
professor, of molesting her.

   Deputy Dist. Atty. Cathryn Brougham asked Los Angeles County Superior Court
Judge Judson W. Morris Jr. to order that the defense not release the tape
publicly.

   Morris granted the request but not before Anderson's attorney, Barry Tarlow,
asked that a similar limitation be imposed on the prosecution. Morris agreed.

   Attorneys also agreed that the girl's name would remain "Jane Doe" in all
filings.

   Anderson, 67, has been charged with sexually molesting the girl, a daughter
of a colleague at USC's Gene Therapy Laboratories, between 1997 and 2001, when
she was 10 to 14 years old.

   He faces one charge of continuous sex abuse on a child and five counts of
lewd acts upon a child, charges punishable by 32 years in prison. Anderson, who
is free on $600,000 bail, has pleaded not guilty and in an e-mail this summer to
colleagues at USC denied any wrongdoing.

   Anderson, a martial arts expert, taught the girl karate in his San Marino
home, prosecutors said. Last spring, the girl talked to a counselor. The
counselor contacted county social services personnel and they contacted police.

   Sheriff's detectives eventually taped a conversation between the accuser and
the accused that the girl initiated under their instruction. The girl wore a
concealed transmitter, sources familiar with the investigation said.

   Anderson has been dubbed the "father of gene therapy" after a team he led in
1990 cured a hereditary disease of the immune system in a 4-year-old girl. The
child was infused with white cells that had been removed from her blood and
supplied with a missing gene. It was the first time that gene therapy was
successful in humans.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2004


                             313 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 12, 2004, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B10; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 1137 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

BODY:
Screen 'Superman' filled that role in life

    Editor -- Christopher Reeve has died but his spirit stands tall with us. He
may never have walked in life after his 1995 horse-riding accident, but he walks
in faith with the many thousands of Californians living with diseases that might
some day be cured through stem-cell research.

    Every child controlling juvenile diabetes, every old person battling
Alzheimer's, every man or woman fighting back Parkinson's -- all of them are
Supergirl, Superboy, Superman, Superwoman. Reeve showed us that.

    We will keep fighting his fight. And someday -- hopefully through stem-cell
research -- we will triumph over these terrible diseases.

    Thank you, Superman.

    KIT MILLER

    Palo Alto

    -- -- --

    Editor -- The passing of Christopher Reeve comes as a great blow to us all.
He was a courageous man who never stopped fighting even in the face of great
personal tragedy.

    His struggle with paralysis defied the odds and gave hope to many across the
country and the world. His work on the screen delighted and inspired millions.
Reeve was a true hero -- he was Superman on and off the screen. I will remember
him.

    RAHSAN EKEDAL

    San Francisco

    -- -- --

    Editor -- I pray that Christopher Reeve's death doesn't turn into politics.
If it does, it will only reinforce John Kerry's hyping of embryonic stem-cell
research as a cruel chapter in the story of the 2004 election. [Kerry cited
Reeve's support of stem-cell research during the second Bush-Kerry debate.[

    Robert P. George, McCormick professor of jurisprudence and director of the
James Madison Program at Princeton University (and a member of the President's
Council on Bioethics), stated that no option exists to cure injuries or disease
from use of human embryonic stem cells, because nobody knows whether or not they
can be used therapeutically, and no embryonic stem-cell-based therapy is even in
clinical trials.

    Reeve would not have wanted to be remembered for a nonexistent cure to aid
suffering people.

    SANDY JANE WONG

    Mountain View

   ------------------------

    No pro-life, gay alliance

    Editor -- While I strongly support Brian O'Leary Bennett's wish for a future
in which gay and lesbian Americans live "longer, healthier, happier, more
successful lives" ("Forging a pro-gay, pro-life alliance," Open Forum, Oct. 8),
his idea of such an alliance is hopelessly nave.

    So-called "pro-lifers" are not and never will be natural allies of gays and
lesbians. Prenatal genetic testing for a homosexual predisposition may well be
followed by early interventions (gene therapy, hormone therapy and/or intensive
childhood behavior therapy) to reset future sexual orientation.

    If a homosexual gene becomes as easy to undo as a cleft palate, how many
pro-lifers (and others) will not avail themselves of the opportunity to have a
guaranteed heterosexual child? "Love the sinner, hate the sin" would become
"Love the child, hate the gay gene."

    In this scenario, pro-lifers would be the natural enemies, not the allies,
of unborn gay and lesbian human beings.

    Bennett and I can hope for a future in which the sexual orientation of our
unborn children concerns us no more than the color of their hair and eyes.

    The pro-life movement, excepting a minuscule number of unrepresentative
thinkers like Bennett, is not going to help us get there.

    ROBERT S. STREETT, M.D.

    Pleasant Hill

   --------------------------

    Why Taba peace failed

    Editor -- Joel Isaacson (Letters, Oct. 11) blames the wrong parties for the
failure of peace talks at Taba in 2001. The blood is on the hands of Yasser
Arafat, who walked away from the legendary deal offered him by the Clinton
administration and the Ehud Barak government of Israel.

    Not only did Arafat reject the offer -- he made no counter-offer, and went
home to plan the latest murderous intifada. Even Saudi Arabia's Prince Bandar
was shocked that Arafat had wasted such an opportunity.

    By what logic does Isaacson pin the blame on the George W. Bush and Ariel
Sharon administrations? He doesn't even mention Arafat, the president for life
of the Palestinians. Nor does he assign any responsibility to the Arab nations
that have been directing this orchestra since 1948 by way of warfare, refusals
to make peace and the hijacking of the United Nations.

    SHEREE ROTH

    Palo Alto

   -----------------------

    Give Migden credit

    Editor -- Matier & Ross got it wrong in the column, "Migden burns, pillages
her way through Marin County" (Oct. 10). Not every San Franciscan thinks of
Carole Migden in the sexist term, "hell on high heels."

    I have witnessed a very personable side of her, from calling me -- whom she
barely knows -- to offer condolences after learning of my partner's death, to
taking a leadership role in the fight against HIV/AIDS.

    Marin leaders would be very unwise not to endorse her candidacy. She has
been one of the hardest-working and most effective legislators, and will serve
the state Senate district well.

    RYAN CLARY

    San Francisco

   ------------------------

    More virtues of instant runoffs

    Editor -- Beyond those advantages pointed out in your editorial
("Election-day guinea pigs," Oct. 11), a preferential voting system has further
advantages.

    Voters may vote not only for candidates (by numbering them first) but also
against candidates (by numbering them last).

    Third parties and independent candidates are encouraged. They may tip the
balance in close elections by directing supporters to vote in particular ways
for second, third and fourth choices, etc. They may even win themselves on
preferences.

    Voters have more choice under the preferential system.

    Elections more precisely reflect voter opinion. Candidates of major parties
are forced to consider the views of significant minorities.

    Elections mean something more than a choice between two candidates who
represent virtually identical policies. Democracy is strengthened.

    STEPHEN JUAN

    Napa

   -----------------------------

    No 'smear' of Poizner

    Editor -- Regarding your "Political Watch: Smear tactics in Assembly race"
Oct. 11): Mayor Gavin Newsom's letter about Republican Steve Poizner, running in
Assembly District 21, is hardly a "smear."

    Poizner has no record on issues (having never held elective office), so we
can only look at his actions.

    Poizner has repeatedly donated big bucks to pro-life candidates. They range
from George W. Bush to a Republican candidate for Congress in Kansas, to the
Assembly's leading pro-life legislator, Republican Guy Houston of Livermore.

    Ira Ruskin, Poizner's Democratic opponent, has no history of supporting or
contributing to pro-life candidates.

    Where I come from, you judge a person by actions, not just words.

    STEVEN MAVIGLIO

    Spokesperson, Assembly Democrats

    Sacramento

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC, PHOTO: Christopher Reeve, the actor who campaigned for
spinal-cord research, died Sunday at 52. / Suzanne DeChillo / New York Times,
GRAPHIC: Steve Ansul / Special to The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2004


                             314 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             October 8, 2004 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A22

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Find New Way Stem Cells Repair Organs;
Chemicals They Make Help Rejuvenate Tissue

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Embryonic stem cells, valued by researchers for their ability to become any
kind of tissue that a body might need, also produce druglike compounds that can
help ailing organs repair themselves, scientists are reporting today.

   The new work offers the most definitive evidence yet that the versatile
cells, derived from embryos, can help repair organs two ways: by filling in
damaged areas -- the primary focus of stem cell research to date -- and also by
secreting potent chemicals that can make tissues rejuvenate themselves.

   In the new study, mice treated with chemicals derived from stem cells
survived an inherited heart deformity that is  usually 100 percent fatal. Tests
indicated that the chemicals prompted the animals' defective heart muscles to
rebuild themselves -- literally refashioning their mutated hearts into healthy
pumps that now appear to be working perfectly.

   "I think these [stem] cells are more powerful than people had originally
imagined," said Robert Benezra, a molecular biologist at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, who led the study with Diego
Fraidenraich.

   Researchers emphasized that the technique is a long way from being tested in
people. For one thing, the ailing mice were dosed with stem cell chemicals
before they were born. That gave their mutated hearts a chance to remodel
themselves before birth -- an approach unlikely to be tried in humans anytime
soon because of technical and ethical concerns.

   But scientists speculated that stem cell-derived compounds could help
diseases of adulthood, too. Many conditions, including chronic heart disease,
involve patterns of abnormal gene activity, scientists  said, which the stem
cell compounds may be able to correct.

   The goal is to harness the chemical signals by which stem cells coordinate
the development of fetal organs in the womb, then recapitulate the process in
adulthood to resculpt degenerating organs into a more youthful condition.

   "Most of the work on stem cells to date has focused on how to get these cells
to turn into a heart cell, a kidney cell, a bone cell or whatever it is you
need," said Craig Basson, director of cardiovascular research at Cornell
University's Weill Medical College in New York, who was involved in the mouse
study. "The key scientific finding here is that stem cells can also modify the
cells that are already there, to repair, in this case, injured hearts."

    Previous experiments had hinted at this potential. In research described
last summer in the Journal of Neuroscience, Jeffrey Rothstein, John Gearhart,
Douglas Kerr and colleagues at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
injected a kind of embryonic stem cell into the spinal fluid of rats that had
paralyzing motor neuron injuries. Weeks later, the rats that got the cells had
largely recovered while those untreated remained paralyzed. Tests indicated
their recovery was not a result of the stem cells turning into replacement
neurons but was the result  mostly  of chemicals secreted by the stem cells,
which restored the damaged neurons' ability to work.

   In the new work, described in today's issue of the journal Science, the New
Yorkers injected a few embryonic stem cells from healthy mice into the embryos
of mice with a genetic defect that blocks normal heart development. A few of the
injected cells did become heart cells, but tests showed it was two substances
the cells produced -- gene-regulating compounds known as IGF-1 and WNT5a -- that
really saved the mice.

    Stem cells were placed not into the embryos themselves but into the bodies
of the pregnant mother mice. The cells could not cross the placenta into the
developing fetuses, but the compounds  the cells secreted did, and  those
compounds corrected the fetal heart defects.

   "It's a first," said Michael F. Clarke, a developmental biologist and
professor of internal medicine at the University of Michigan Medical School. He
said the work had "huge significance" for showing that stem cells can overcome
genetic errors -- not by fixing aberrant genes by "gene therapy," an approach
that has failed repeatedly over the years, but by providing embryonic chemicals
that can directly control organ development, making the defective gene
irrelevant.

   He and others said they doubted that stem cells from adults -- which
opponents of embryo research favor for research -- can make the same
regenerative compounds.

   Brigid Hogan, chairwoman of cell biology at Duke University Medical Center,
applauded the study but cautioned that it could take many years to identify the
many potentially therapeutic compounds secreted by stem cells; purify them or
make synthetic versions of them; and find the best way to get them where they
are needed in the body.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2004


                             315 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            October 7, 2004 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: D Business; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: WISCONSIN BRIEFING

BODY:

   More people use Net to research purchases

   A survey released by the Dieringer Research Group in Milwaukee indicated that
more consumers are using the Internet to do research before making a purchase in
stores. The study of buying habits of 3,000 adults for the 12 months ending with
the second quarter found that Internet-influenced spending in stores increased
by 31 percent, while direct online spending grew by 14 percent.

   Also Wednesday, a separate study, sponsored by Shop.org, found that 89
percent of respondents were planning to use the Internet more than last year to
do research before they shop in stores.

   Mirus awarded grant to develop gene therapy

   Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison-based biotechnology company, said Wednesday it has
been awarded a $1.26 million Small Business Innovation Research grant to develop
a gene therapy to treat anemia. The product will be based upon Mirus'
trademarked gene delivery technology, which inserts genes into human cells. The
genes then instruct the cell to produce the desired proteins.

   Patients suffering from anemia, a blood disorder commonly associated with
kidney failure, cancer and AIDS, currently get regular injections of a protein
called erythropoietin to increase their red blood cell volume. Mirus' proposed
therapy, delivered through several injections, would carry to muscle cells
genetic instructions to produce the protein, eliminating the need for regular
injections of it.

   DMC Advertising purchases Marek Litho

   DMC Advertising, a direct-response advertising agency in Pewaukee, is
purchasing Marek Litho in Muskego.

   Marek's printing equipment will be moved to DMC's Pewaukee office at 1
Creative Way, and the purchased company will be renamed MK Litho.

   Paul Marek, former owner of Marek Litho, will serve as vice president of
sales for the new company and Jeff Nowak, head of DMC, will be president.
Marek's 20 employees have been offered jobs at the new company.

   Marek Litho has been in business for 35 years.

   Criticare gets OK to sell monitoring system

   Criticare Systems Inc. said Wednesday that the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration has given its approval to market a vital-signs monitoring system
for use in radiology departments. The monitor represents the company's plan to
move away from selling commodity-type patient monitoring systems and into niche
products, the company said.

   Shares of Waukesha-based Criticare rose 40 cents, or 20 percent, to close at
$2.37 in trading on the American Stock Exchange.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2005


                             316 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            October 7, 2004 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; E01 , .com Leslie Walker

LENGTH: 1226 words

HEADLINE: Kurzweil's Quest For Eternal Youth Sets Group Abuzz

BYLINE: Leslie Walker

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.

BODY:

   Inventor Ray Kurzweil takes 250 nutritional supplements a day in his quest to
live long enough to reap the benefits he expects from biotechnology. He says
he's trying to reprogram his body, as he would his computer.

    "I really do believe it is feasible to slow down the aging process,"
Kurzweil told Technology Review magazine's Emerging Technologies Conference at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology here last week. "We call that a bridge
to a bridge to a bridge -- to the full flowering of the biotechnology
revolution."

    Kurzweil, a well-regarded scientist who invented the flatbed scanner and a
reading machine for the blind, claimed his pills appear to be helping:
Biological tests conducted at a clinic in Denver found his body resembles that
of a man in his early forties, he claimed, rather than his true age of 56.

    The claim startled many in the audience because there is no medically
accepted way to measure aging. Most biological markers simply measure health.

    And health is a theme Kurzweil returned to repeatedly; it is the subject of
his latest book, "Fantastic Voyage: Live Long Enough to Live Forever,"
co-authored with medical doctor Terry Grossman. But it was his broader vision of
how biology, nanotechnology and information science are merging that set the
backdrop for the conference, which brought together nearly 1,000 scientists and
executives from various disciplines to peer into the future.

    Kurzweil has long contended technology is advancing exponentially, as each
new breakthrough -- fire, the printing press, computers, the Internet -- is used
to speed up development of the next. Debate at the two-day event ranged widely
about just what is on the horizon.

   Presentations ranged across the frontiers of science, including robotics,
nanotechnology, biometrics and geographical positioning systems. World Wide Web
inventor Tim Berners-Lee described the second big phase of the global computer
network, a "Semantic Web" project involving tagging or defining online content
in a special language. The idea is to let computers accomplish work humans now
do by making it possible for machines to read the Web. "Isn't that a bit
old-fashioned, having a human being browse the Web?" mused Berners-Lee.

    DuPont's research chief, Uma Chowdhry, said her company is working on a
long-range project for the Department of Energy involving a bio-refinery to
create renewable energy resources. General Motors Corp. chief executive G.
Richard Wagoner Jr. described the automaker's plans to expand the safety and
security services it offers through its OnStar subsidiary.

    Yet no one got the crowd talking like Kurzweil, winner of the National Medal
of Technology and author of "The Age of Spiritual Machines." He's known for
making accurate predictions, including one about the emergence of a global
network resembling the World Wide Web and another about when computers would
beat humans at chess.

    At MIT last week, Kurzweil described a future in which he's convinced
immortality -- or a drastically longer life span -- will be possible thanks to
emerging technologies. His new book, which will hit stores in a few weeks,
outlines a special "longevity program" of diet, exercise and nutritional
supplements aimed at slowing the aging process.

    He and Grossman recommend simple starches and foods low in sugar and high in
anti-inflammatory agents such as fish and nuts. They advise taking all sorts of
substances such as phosphatidylcholine, a cell-membrane component that people
tend to lose as they age, making their skin sag.

    In an interview, Kurzweil said he and Grossman also have developed their own
line of products and will launch a Web site to sell them, including shake mixes
and other meal-replacement products .

    Such dietary supplements tend to be controversial in the medical community.
David Schardt, senior nutritionist at the nonprofit Center for Science in the
Public Interest in Washington, said the only regimen that has shown real
potential to slow aging to date is drastically reducing calorie intake.

    "We tell people to take these claims with a grain of salt because in many
instances there is no evidence -- or the evidence is far from conclusive -- that
these supplements will do anything," Schardt said.

   Kurzweil acknowledged that science today can't halt aging, but he said he
believes science will develop age-defying or even age-reversing techniques
within 10 to 20 years, thanks to advances in biotechnology and nanotechnology.

   He described three stages or "bridges" on the purported road to immortality.
First is his healthy living program designed to correct "metabolic imbalances"
and keep people alive long enough to benefit from the second stage. In stage
two, a decade or so away, he contends biotechnology advances will block diseases
and slow aging, because the decoding of our genome is already leading to
tissue-engineering techniques for regrowing cells and organs, and to the
creation of genetically targeted drugs and gene therapies.

    These techniques, he said, should help some people reach the third stage --
about 30 years away -- when nanotechnology will allow humans to radically
rebuild and extend their bodies with help from "nanobots," itsy-bitsy robots
smaller than human blood cells that will slip into our bloodstreams to fix DNA
errors, fight pathogens and expand intelligence.

    At that point, he declared, humans may be able to live forever.

    Some are skeptical. S. Jay Olshansky, an epidemiology professor at the
University of Illinois School of Public Health, called Kurzweil's vision
"science fiction" in a phone interview. He said life expectancy isn't likely to
change much even after the expected medical advances. "Life expectancy is
inching up. It's not jumping up."

    At the MIT conference, not everyone seemed enamored with this idea. During
lunch the next day, Daniel McCurdy, chief executive of consulting company
ThinkFire Services USA Ltd., said immortality didn't strike him as all that
appealing:

   "I'm already periodically bored, and I'm only 48. Why would you want to live
forever?"

    Kurzweil later conceded that radically extending human life could lead to a
"deep ennui" if nothing else changed, but he believes we will grow smarter and
vastly improve our quality of life. Nanobots, if we let them swim around our
brain capillaries, will boost our brainpower, he said, as they chatter with our
biological neurons over a wireless local network and the Internet, creating a
hybrid form of super-intelligence.

    "This scenario will enable us to expand our mental faculties through these
massively distributed neural implants with no surgery required," he added.

   Kurzweil said he doesn't think such changes will detract from our humanity.
"The emergence of artificial intelligence is not an alien invasion of
intelligent machines coming from over the horizon to compete with us," he
declared. "Rather, it is emerging from our human civilization."

    For baby boomers, though, it's a safe bet many will resist the idea of
tinkering with Mother Nature. That's the thinking of McCurdy, who believes part
of what makes life a great adventure is knowing it will end.

    "I would rather continue the adventure by dying and going into a different
plane," he said, "instead of having nanobots running around my brain."

    Leslie Walker's e-mail address is walkerl@washpost.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2004


                             317 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                           October 6, 2004 Wednesday
                          FINAL Edition; ALL Editions

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. E8

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: Measures may help women keep breast cancer at bay

BYLINE: DR. TARVEZ, SPECIAL TO THE PLAIN DEALER

BODY:

   WOMEN'S

   HEALTH

   Editor's note: This is the first of a weekly column dealing with women's
health. Readers are encouraged to mail or e-mail their questions about women's
health to the addresses at the end of the column.

   Breast cancer is the disease most feared by women in America.

   Heart disease is actually the No. 1 killer of women in our country, but most
women have known someone who has had breast cancer, and many of us have watched
a loved one or friend die from this disease.

   Just what is your risk of getting breast cancer? And, perhaps more important,
what can you do to protect yourself against this disease?

   We have all seen the grim statistic: One in eight women will develop breast
cancer at some time in her life. But let's take a look at that statistic.
Because older age is one of the chief risk factors for the disease, the chances
the average 40-year-old will get breast cancer in the next 10 years is less than
1 in 60, whereas for a 70-year-old, the likelihood is 1 in 25.

   What is your personal risk for breast cancer? Is there anything you can do
now to decrease that risk? How much do genetics play a role? What questions can
you ask your doctor to determine your individual risk?

   Assessing your risk

   Factors that increase your risk:

   Having a mother, sister, a daughter or an aunt with a history of breast
cancer. (Rarely some women will inherit an abnormality of the breast cancer
genes, BRCA 1 or 2, which can be a strong risk factor for breast cancer. But
most women who develop breast cancer do not have these abnormal genes.)

   Having a first child after age 30, starting your menstrual periods before age
12 or beginning menopause after age 50. (These factors increase the amount of
time breast tissue is exposed to estrogen.)

   Receiving hormone replacement therapy, particularly combination therapy with
estrogen and progestin, for more than five years after menopause. (Note that
taking the birth control pill does not increase your risk of breast cancer.)

   Having a history of breast changes or having had biopsies of breast tissue in
the past.

   Assessing your risk

   Factors that may decrease your risk:

   Reducing your weight, especially after menopause.

   Eating a low-fat diet. The data to support a low-fat diet as protective
against breast cancer is not conclusive, but fat intake during childhood or
adolescence, for example, may be relevant. A reduction of fatty foods in your
diet may certainly reduce your body weight. Being overweight has been shown to
be a risk factor for breast cancer. Extra fat increases estrogen production in
the body. Some recent studies have shown that increasing protein consumption
while decreasing fat consumption may be protective.

   Avoiding frequent consumption of alcohol. Have no more than one small drink a
day. If you do drink, taking high-folate vitamin supplements may modify the risk
that alcohol poses.

   Increasing physical activity, even starting later in life, can reduce the
risk of breast cancer significantly, even if your risk is high because of
genetic factors.

   My recommendations

   Walk briskly for 30 minutes at least five days a week. Start out at 10
minutes if you're not used to exercise. The best exercise, such as walking,
swimming or biking, uses large muscle groups. Do something you enjoy so you'll
stick with it.

   Modify the fat content of your diet and watch your weight after menopause.

   Limit alcohol to a glass or two of wine a week.

   Get regular mammograms, depending on your age and risk factors.

   Do monthly breast self-examinations. The shower is a great place to do this.
It'll take a few times to become familiar with your own breast anatomy. The best
time is just before your period, before your breasts become tender. Ask your
doctor or nurse how to perform this preventative measure. Too often fear of
finding a lump causes a woman to put it off doing a self-exam. Remember, most
lumps are actually benign, not cancerous.

   Women -- or the men who care about them -- who have a question about women's
health can send their questions to Dr. Tucker via e-mail to AskDrTucker@aol.com
or mail them to Ask Dr. Tucker, The Plain Dealer Features Department, 1801
Superior Ave., Cleveland, OH 44114. Tucker is a clinical associate professor of
neurology at Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine and is directing
medical student education at the American Headache Society.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2004


                             318 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              October 5, 2004 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1583 words

HEADLINE: New center will focus scientists' brain power

BYLINE: TINA HESMAN Of the Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Foundation seeks to jump-start progress toward cures for ALS and other
disorders.

   Chris Hobler has a plan to find cures for neurological diseases fast. The
singer and songwriter has a personal stake in the matter. Hobler has amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, often called Lou Gehrig's disease or ALS. There is no cure
for the fatal disease, but Hobler intends to mine success from research on other
brain disorders to produce treatments for ALS. Along the way, scientists also
may discover cures for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, multiple
sclerosis and other disorders of the nervous system. Hobler's foundation, ALS
Hope -- The Chris Hobler/James Maritz Foundation, is teaming with Washington
University to create a new basic science research center dedicated to finding
the causes of debilitating brain diseases and their cures.

   The foundation, which is changing its name and mission, will give the
university $1 million to set up the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders,
kicking off a multimillion-dollar fund-raising effort. The center will provide
resources, grants and intellectual stimulation to researchers working on
diseases that affect the brain and spinal cord.

   =====================

   Diseases researchers will tackle

   Researchers at the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders will study brain
diseases that grow progressively worse. Some of the diseases they will focus on
include the following:

   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also called "Lou Gehrig's disease," a
fatal neurodegenerative disease in which the nerves of the spinal cord and brain
die. Patients become paralyzed and cannot speak, but their minds are unaffected
by the disease.

   Whom it affects: About 30,000 people in the United States have ALS, with more
than 5,600 new cases diagnosed each year. The disease strikes men more than
women. People with ALS are commonly diagnosed at an average age of 55, but some
people get the disease in their mid-30s.

   What to expect: Half of people with ALS die within three years of diagnosis.

   Alzheimer's disease, a type of dementia that affects memory and thought.
Certain proteins build up in the brain and are thought to kill neurons.

   Whom it affects: Alzheimer's disease is most common in older people. About 4
million people in the United States have the disease, including 3 percent of
people ages 65 to 74 and half of people 85 and older.

   What to expect: People commonly live with Alzheimer's disease for eight to 10
years, but may live for 20 years.

   Parkinson's disease, a movement disorder caused by the death of neurons in a
part of the brain called the substantia nigra. The cells usually produce the
brain chemical dopamine. The chemical is a neurotransmitter, or brain messenger,
that helps with coordination.

   Whom it affects: About 1.5 million Americans have Parkinson's disease, with
about 60,000 new cases diagnosed each year. About 15 percent of cases are in
people younger than 50, but the disease usually develops after age 65.

   What to expect: The disease progresses at different rates. People with
Parkinson's disease can live a normal lifespan with proper treatment.

   Multiple sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune disorder. MS is caused when the immune
system attacks and damages a sheath of fat, called myelin, which insulates
nerves and helps them conduct electricity.

   Whom it affects: About 400,000 people in the United States have MS. Every
year more than 10,000 people are newly diagnosed. The disease strikes women two
times to three times more often than men. Most people are diagnosed between the
ages of 20 and 50.

   What to expect: The disease has four different patterns of progression.
Multiple sclerosis is not considered fatal, and most people with the disease do
not become severely disabled.

   Sources: ALS Hope; the Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral Center;
National Parkinson Foundation; The National Multiple Sclerosis Society The shift
to funding research in multiple diseases is reflected in the organization's
decision to change its name to "Hope Happens," said Hobler, 39. The foundation
plans to announce its name change and the establishment of the Hope Center this
afternoon at a reception at the Center for Advanced Medicine at Barnes-Jewish
Hospital.

   It's a brave move, said Dr. Mark P. Goldberg, director of the Hope Center.

   "It's easy for someone who has MS or ALS to say, 'I want to put all my
resources into my disease,'" Goldberg said. "It takes a much bigger vision to
realize that sharing resources among many diseases can produce results."

   Ideas generated by research on one disease could spark discoveries in others,
said Dr. David M. Holtzman, head of the neurology department at Washington
University. Although the diseases have different causes -- genetic defects,
injury, immune-system attacks or the buildup of harmful proteins -- nerves
follow many of the same paths to death or recovery, Holtzman said. With
collaboration, researchers investigating different brain diseases are likely to
find ways to stop nerve death and promote healing faster than they would be able
to working alone, he said.

   Speed is of the essence for Hobler and other people with neurological
diseases, but the wheels of scientific progress can turn frustratingly slowly.

   "When I was diagnosed with ALS in June 2001, I had a different reaction than
most," Hobler said in an e-mail. "I had an advantage. I grew up with ALS. My
grandfather had ALS for 14 years. I understood what my diagnosis meant. I also
understood that nothing had changed in the last 30 years. No cure, no treatment,
no hope."

   The lack of progress angered him.

   "I knew the reason had more to do with money and publishing than science," he
said. "I think my life is worth saving. The fact that ALS was viewed as
unprofitable by the pharmaceutical industry, and researchers don't share results
because of proprietary publishing and tenure, did not sit well. My voice was
gone, my career as a singer-songwriter was over. I wanted to fix the system that
had made no progress in 30 years. My immediate reaction was to call my family
and say I wanted to start my own lab."

   Instead, Hobler founded ALS Hope to raise money to support research that
could lead to a cure. The foundation funded research at academic institutions
and companies. But breakthroughs in the laboratory often take decades to reach
patients. That's a lifetime, sometimes several lifetimes, for a person with a
degenerative nerve disease.

   "Because my life hangs in the balance, I find many of the systemic restraints
that slow the research process down inexcusable," Hobler said.

   The Hope Center will require its members to share data, ideas and equipment.
The center does not have one physical location, but four core components -- an
animal research core, a molecular biology core, an imaging facility, and an
outreach and information core -- will bring scientists together.

   The facilities are designed to give scientists research tools they might not
otherwise have access to, Goldberg said. The animal research facility will
provide scientists with rats and mice that are genetically engineered to get
neurological diseases, Goldberg said. The imaging facility contains powerful
laser-powered microscopes that can peer into the brains of living creatures. The
molecular biology facility will help create viruses for gene therapy. And the
information core will organize seminars, including a national summit on
neurological diseases.

   In the highly competitive world of science, researchers often hold results
close to the vest to prevent others from stealing ideas. But secrecy can impede
rapid scientific progress, Hobler said.

   Geneticist Alison Goate plans to initiate a search for the genes that put
people at risk for getting ALS. She sees an advantage to sharing samples and
data.

   "If you share your data at an early stage when other people can replicate
them, you find out quicker whether you're going down the right path or a blind
alley," Goate said.

   And the investment makes economic sense, Hobler said. Pooling resources will
allow researchers to act quickly on discoveries and stretch funds, he said.

   Private money allows researchers to try things that more restrictive
government grants wouldn't allow, Holtzman said. The Hope Center will give
grants to researchers for preliminary research and established projects. Some of
the grants may go to researchers outside Washington University, he said.

   The university announced Monday that it would move clinical trials for
neurological diseases to a central facility, called the neuroclinical research
unit. A $1.6 million grant from the National Institutes of Health and matching
funds from Washington University will pay for the renovation of a
14,000-square-foot facility in the McMillan and Irene Walter Johnson buildings
at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, said Dr. Joel Perlmutter, director of the
neuroclinical research unit.

   The facility, which will open in 12 to 18 months, will include office space
for researchers, examination rooms, testing areas, interview rooms for social
workers, and a kitchen and bathroom area where patients can practice daily
living skills.

   "This is people-oriented research," Perlmutter said.

   The researchers don't expect to find cures for neurological diseases
immediately, Goldberg said. He doesn't want to oversell the center or offer
false hope, he said.

   "But I know for sure that we're going to discover things we weren't expecting
to discover."

NOTES:
HOPE FOR NEUROLOGICAL DISEASES

GRAPHIC: photo; (1) Color Photo by ANNELIESE SCHAEFER / WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY -
Studies of neurons in mice may lead to advances in human medicine. This image
shows microscopic motor neurons from the spinal cord of a lab mouse. (2) Color
Photo by ANDREW CUTRARO / POST-DISPATCH - Research assistant Bryan Kennedy
displays an image of a neuron from a live mouse brain on equipment at the Hope
Center for Neurological Disorders at Washington University.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2004


                             319 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              October 5, 2004 Tuesday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1583 words

HEADLINE: New center will focus scientists' brain power

BYLINE: TINA HESMAN Of the Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Foundation seeks to jump-start progress toward cures for ALS and other
disorders.

   Chris Hobler has a plan to find cures for neurological diseases fast. The
singer and songwriter has a personal stake in the matter. Hobler has amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, often called Lou Gehrig's disease or ALS.

   There is no cure for the fatal disease, but Hobler intends to mine success
from research on other brain disorders to produce treatments for ALS. Along the
way, scientists also may discover cures for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease, multiple sclerosis and other disorders of the nervous system. Hobler's
foundation, ALS Hope -- The Chris Hobler/James Maritz Foundation, is teaming
with Washington University to create a new basic science research center
dedicated to finding the causes of debilitating brain diseases and their cures.

   The foundation, which is changing its name and mission, will give the
university $1 million to set up the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders,
kicking off a multimillion-dollar fund-raising effort. The center will provide
resources, grants and intellectual stimulation to researchers working on
diseases that affect the brain and spinal cord.

   The shift to funding research in multiple diseases is reflected in the
organization's decision to change its name to "Hope Happens," said Hobler, 39.
The foundation plans to announce its name change and the establishment of the
Hope Center this afternoon at a reception at the Center for Advanced Medicine at
Barnes-Jewish Hospital.

   It's a brave move, said Dr. Mark P. Goldberg, director of the Hope Center.

   "It's easy for someone who has MS or ALS to say, 'I want to put all my
resources into my disease,'" Goldberg said. "It takes a much bigger vision to
realize that sharing resources among many diseases can produce results."

   Ideas generated by research on one disease could spark discoveries in others,
said Dr. David M. Holtzman, head of the neurology department at Washington
University. Although the diseases have different causes -- genetic defects,
injury, immune-system attacks or the buildup of harmful proteins -- nerves
follow many of the same paths to death or recovery, Holtzman said. With
collaboration, researchers investigating different brain diseases are likely to
find ways to stop nerve death and promote healing faster than they would be able
to working alone, he said.

   Speed is of the essence for Hobler and other people with neurological
diseases, but the wheels of scientific progress can turn frustratingly slowly.

   "When I was diagnosed with ALS in June 2001, I had a different reaction than
most," Hobler said in an e-mail. "I had an advantage. I grew up with ALS. My
grandfather had ALS for 14 years. I understood what my diagnosis meant. I also
understood that nothing had changed in the last 30 years. No cure, no treatment,
no hope."

   The lack of progress angered him.

   "I knew the reason had more to do with money and publishing than science," he
said. "I think my life is worth saving. The fact that ALS was viewed as
unprofitable by the pharmaceutical industry, and researchers don't share results
because of proprietary publishing and tenure, did not sit well. My voice was
gone, my career as a singer-songwriter was over. I wanted to fix the system that
had made no progress in 30 years. My immediate reaction was to call my family
and say I wanted to start my own lab."

   Instead, Hobler founded ALS Hope to raise money to support research that
could lead to a cure. The foundation funded research at academic institutions
and companies. But breakthroughs in the laboratory often take decades to reach
patients. That's a lifetime, sometimes several lifetimes, for a person with a
degenerative nerve disease.

   "Because my life hangs in the balance, I find many of the systemic restraints
that slow the research process down inexcusable," Hobler said.

   The Hope Center will require its members to share data, ideas and equipment.
The center does not have one physical location, but four core components -- an
animal research core, a molecular biology core, an imaging facility, and an
outreach and information core -- will bring scientists together.

   The facilities are designed to give scientists research tools they might not
otherwise have access to, Goldberg said. The animal research facility will
provide scientists with rats and mice that are genetically engineered to get
neurological diseases, Goldberg said. The imaging facility contains powerful
laser-powered microscopes that can peer into the brains of living creatures. The
molecular biology facility will help create viruses for gene therapy. And the
information core will organize seminars, including a national summit on
neurological diseases.

   In the highly competitive world of science, researchers often hold results
close to the vest to prevent others from stealing ideas. But secrecy can impede
rapid scientific progress, Hobler said.

   Geneticist Alison Goate plans to initiate a search for the genes that put
people at risk for getting ALS. She sees an advantage to sharing samples and
data.

   "If you share your data at an early stage when other people can replicate
them, you find out quicker whether you're going down the right path or a blind
alley," Goate said.

   And the investment makes economic sense, Hobler said. Pooling resources will
allow researchers to act quickly on discoveries and stretch funds, he said.

   Private money allows researchers to try things that more restrictive
government grants wouldn't allow, Holtzman said. The Hope Center will give
grants to researchers for preliminary research and established projects. Some of
the grants may go to researchers outside Washington University, he said.

   The university announced Monday that it would move clinical trials for
neurological diseases to a central facility, called the neuroclinical research
unit. A $1.6 million grant from the National Institutes of Health and matching
funds from Washington University will pay for the renovation of a
14,000-square-foot facility in the McMillan and Irene Walter Johnson buildings
at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, said Dr. Joel Perlmutter, director of the
neuroclinical research unit.

   The facility, which will open in 12 to 18 months, will include office space
for researchers, examination rooms, testing areas, interview rooms for social
workers, and a kitchen and bathroom area where patients can practice daily
living skills.

   "This is people-oriented research," Perlmutter said.

   The researchers don't expect to find cures for neurological diseases
immediately, Goldberg said. He doesn't want to oversell the center or offer
false hope, he said.

   "But I know for sure that we're going to discover things we weren't expecting
to discover."

   =====================

   Diseases researchers will tackle

   Researchers at the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders will study brain
diseases that grow progressively worse. Some of the diseases they will focus on
include the following:

   Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also called "Lou Gehrig's disease," a
fatal neurodegenerative disease in which the nerves of the spinal cord and brain
die. Patients become paralyzed and cannot speak, but their minds are unaffected
by the disease.

   Whom it affects: About 30,000 people in the United States have ALS, with more
than 5,600 new cases diagnosed each year. The disease strikes men more than
women. People with ALS are commonly diagnosed at an average age of 55, but some
people get the disease in their mid-30s.

   What to expect: Half of people with ALS die within three years of diagnosis.

   Alzheimer's disease, a type of dementia that affects memory and thought.
Certain proteins build up in the brain and are thought to kill neurons.

   Whom it affects: Alzheimer's disease is most common in older people. About 4
million people in the United States have the disease, including 3 percent of
people ages 65 to 74 and half of people 85 and older.

   What to expect: People commonly live with Alzheimer's disease for eight to 10
years, but may live for 20 years.

   Parkinson's disease, a movement disorder caused by the death of neurons in a
part of the brain called the substantia nigra. The cells usually produce the
brain chemical dopamine. The chemical is a neurotransmitter, or brain messenger,
that helps with coordination.

   Whom it affects: About 1.5 million Americans have Parkinson's disease, with
about 60,000 new cases diagnosed each year. About 15 percent of cases are in
people younger than 50, but the disease usually develops after age 65.

   What to expect: The disease progresses at different rates. People with
Parkinson's disease can live a normal lifespan with proper treatment.

   Multiple sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune disorder. MS is caused when the immune
system attacks and damages a sheath of fat, called myelin, which insulates
nerves and helps them conduct electricity.

   Whom it affects: About 400,000 people in the United States have MS. Every
year more than 10,000 people are newly diagnosed. The disease strikes women two
times to three times more often than men. Most people are diagnosed between the
ages of 20 and 50.

   What to expect: The disease has four different patterns of progression.
Multiple sclerosis is not considered fatal, and most people with the disease do
not become severely disabled.

   Sources: ALS Hope; the Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral Center;
National Parkinson Foundation; The National Multiple Sclerosis Society

NOTES:
HOPE FOR NEUROLOGICAL DISEASES

GRAPHIC: photo; (1) Color Photo by ANNELIESE SCHAEFER / WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY -
Studies of neurons in mice may lead to advances in human medicine. This image
shows microscopic motor neurons from the spinal cord of a lab mouse. (2) Color
Photo by ANDREW CUTRARO / POST-DISPATCH - Research assistant Bryan Kennedy
displays an image of a neuron from a live mouse brain on equipment at the Hope
Center for Neurological Disorders at Washington University.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2004


                             320 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     October 4, 2004 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg.A-1

LENGTH: 1169 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY FINDS HOPE FOR BOY IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   When Zachary Balog's hair is closely cropped, you can see the little round
bare spots, scars from the six burr holes that a doctor drilled into the boy's
skull June 1.

    For now, the scars are the only signs of the experimental gene therapy for
Batten disease that 8-year-old Zach received at the Weill Cornell Medical Center
in New York City.

    If everything works just right, the genes that Dr. Ronald Crystal infused
through those holes will allow Zach's brain cells to begin producing a crucial
enzyme that he has lacked. The enzyme might halt the brain deterioration that
disables and ultimately kills patients with Batten disease, a rare genetic
disorder.

    But no one knows whether the transferred genes are working or whether the
enzyme would make a difference in patients with advanced symptoms, such as Zach,
who cannot walk, talk or see.

    "We haven't seen any major improvement," said his mother, Susan Balog of
Cranberry. More importantly, however, "we haven't seen any worsening."

    And, for now, that is enough.

    She and her husband, Steve, had no illusions about what was in store for
Zach. He's the first patient to undergo gene therapy for Batten disease, so the
major questions are whether it will be safe and whether it will work at all.
Significant improvement or even a cure are only possibilities, not
probabilities.

    "Is it going to work? I have no idea," said Peter Lobel, a pharmacologist at
the Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine in Piscataway, N.J., who
discovered the genetic defect that causes Zach's form of the disease. "It's a
real long shot. I would be amazed if there were a response."

    The Balogs are among a small band of parents who raised millions of dollars
to finance Crystal's research and hasten the clinical trials on the chance that
it might save their children's lives.

    Two more children, 10-year-old Nathan and 7-year-old P.J. Milto of
Greenwood, Ind., received the gene therapy this past summer and another patient
is expected to be treated this month, according to the parents.

    The privately financed trial comes at a time when questions abound regarding
the safety and effectiveness of gene therapy ---- a strategy for fighting
disease by introducing beneficial genes into the patient's cells.

    Thousands of patients have been treated in clinical trials of various gene
therapies in the past decade and a half, but as yet no gene therapy has gone
beyond the research stage.

    Moreover, the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in 1999 at the University
of Pennsylvania raised questions about the safety of some of the modified
viruses being used to deliver the therapeutic genes to cells. Just last year,
two French children developed leukemias after receiving gene therapy for immune
deficiency.

    Crystal refuses to discuss his clinical trial, preferring to keep a low
profile.

    But the parents of Batten disease patients, who generally die of the disease
during their teens, have kept pressing for the experiments.

    "Some scientists, it would seem, would be happy to just study, study,
study," Balog said. "Well, we don't have that time."

    For the past four years, the Balogs have watched the disease's inexorable
progression in Zach: First, the seizures, then the trips and falls. He lost his
sight, his ability to talk, his ability to walk. He now uses a wheelchair and is
fed through a tube; he eventually may need help just to breathe.

    But he can still smile and laugh.

    "We're hopeful that the progression will stop," Balog said.

    Batten disease is one of about 50 disorders known as lysosomal storage
diseases. People with these diseases lack one of a number of enzymes that cells
need to break down proteins, fats and other substances. The cells can't
eliminate these wastes, so they build up inside the cells, causing dysfunction
and eventually killing them.

    Only a few hundred children suffer from Batten disease, noted Phil Milto, a
Greenwood, Ind., dry cleaner and father of the two boys who received the gene
therapy this past summer after Zach. Thus, few economic incentives exist for
developing new treatments.

    "You don't typically attract the best and the brightest" to study the
disease, he said. Nevertheless, five years ago he organized a conference of
researchers who were studying techniques that targeted the brain. His hope was
to convince them to use Batten disease as a means of testing their techniques,
which might ultimately be used for a number of disorders.

    Crystal is a pioneer in gene therapy, having developed a number of modified
viruses and other so-called "vectors" for transferring genes to cells. Milto
eventually convinced him to launch a feasibility study.

    Milto launched a foundation, Nathan's Battle Foundation, which raised $3
million to finance research necessary to get U.S. Food and Drug Administration
approval for the gene trial.

    The foundation also has pledged $2.1 million over three years to finance the
gene therapy trial for 10 patients. With two years yet to go, Milto said the
group still has another $1 million to raise.

    Dr. John Barranger, an authority on lysosomal storage diseases and medical
director of the Molecular Medicine Institute at the University of Pittsburgh,
said Crystal had some impressive results in animal studies to back up his
proposal for the clinical trial.

    "I think it's a step ahead, but it's a risky one," said Barranger, who is
making preparations for a gene therapy trial of his own, for a disorder similar
to Batten called metachromatic leukodystrophy. "It's time to have some
successful trial."

    Though Lobel sees Crystal's trial as a long shot, he has no trouble
supporting it.

    "Ethicists will talk about this until they're blue in the face," he said,
but these children have no other option. "This disease is a death sentence."

    Even if it doesn't work, "hopefully you can learn something from it," he
said.

    Balog said she and her husband are relieved that Zach has suffered no ill
effects from the treatment. He will return to New York either next month or in
December for a magnetic resonance imaging scan of his brain, to see if it has
deteriorated further.

    "We don't know what the MRI will show," or how long it will take before they
know whether the therapy worked or not, she said.

    "It was nerve-racking being the first one, but we knew all along that we
wanted this for Zach."

    "As a parent, you sometimes wonder if your children would choose this,"
Milto said. His older son is blind, bed-ridden and on a feeding tube; he can
make noises to indicate his feelings, but that's about it. His younger son still
has some vision, can still get up on his knees and can still say a few words.

    "They would love to have another day," he has concluded.

    It's too early to see any beneficial effect from the therapy, he cautioned,
and, like the Balogs, his immediate wish is simply that his boys not lose more
than they already have.

    "We know very well that no change is a positive," Milto said.


NOTES:
Post-Gazette science editor Byron Spice can be reached at
bspice@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1578. For information about the Nathan's
Battle Foundation, visit www.nathansbattle.com.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lake Fong/Post-Gazette: Steve Balog cares for his son, Zach, in
their Cranberry home.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2004


                             321 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2004 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   OCTOBER 3, 2004 Sunday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. 1L

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: LIFE'S SECRETS BOIL DOWN TO LITTLE THINGS

BYLINE: FRANK PROVENZANO FREE PRESS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   explores the promise of genetic research.

   As far as secrets go, this one is about as big as it gets.

   Yet the most pressing question evoked in "Genome: The Secret of How Life
Works" at the Detroit Science Center isn't whether the secrets of genetics
research will be splashed on tabloid covers or taken up by Oprah.

   Rather, the question is why aren't the issues raised in the exhibit as
commonly discussed in our public conversation as the threat of terrorism,
economic prosperity and which presidential candidate is more patriotic.

   "Genome: The Secret of How Life Works" explores the history and impact of
genetics with a sense of awe and mystery while presenting the challenges facing
researchers, politicians and anyone who believes the flip side of progress is
dealing with challenging ethical questions about cloning and gene therapy.

   On an obvious level, the exhibit offers an objective rendering of the
findings of genetic research. There's no mistaking the aim is to appeal to
middle-schoolers and adults not intimately familiar with terms like allele,
enzymes and ribosome. The urge to simplify takes a wacky turn with the hokey
display that draws an analogy between genetics and a cookie factory.

   But that's only a minor irritation.

   Telling the complicated story that begins with Gregor Mendel's 1865
explanation of the patterns of heredity, continues through Watson and Crick's
1953 breakthrough discovery of the structure of DNA and moves on to the mapping
of more than 30,000 human genes last year is more than even Bill Nye the Science
Guy can handle.

   In a series of large displays of double-helixes, interactive models of genes
and short documentaries featuring leading researchers, there's plenty to inspire
a sense of wonder and raise questions about who controls the exploration and
application of scientific knowledge.

   Dolly the sheep, cloned in 1996, and the use of fetal stem cells to clone
cells has cast gene research as more science fiction than reality. The power of
"Genome: The Secret of How Life Works" is that it offers the untainted facts,
which even to the most critical person should suggest the greatest promise
medicine has ever known.

   For instance, within the knowledge collected about how genes are arranged as
recipes and codes of life lies the key to seeking causes and eventually cures
for such ailments as heart disease, diabetes, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and
various forms of cancer.

   The exhibit, curated by Clear Channel in conjunction with the National Human
Genome Research Institute and Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for Genome
Research, is funded through the biotech research and pharmaceutical company
Pfizer Inc., whose logo appears on two displays. It's the kind of corporate
presence inside a museum that has become all too common in times of reduced
funding from government, foundations and individuals.

   Pfizer has a vested financial interest in the continuance of genetic research
and in developing drugs to treat and cure diseases.

   "This isn't an endorsement of any corporation," says Shawn Kahle, president
of the science center. "Without Pfizer's support this exhibit wouldn't have been
possible. That's the reality.

   "To the extent we can demystify scientific knowledge and make it
understandable, we've done our job."

   Since it reinvented itself and expanded three years ago, the science center
has been a local success story, finding ways to attract donors and 1.2 million
visitors. By the end of 2005, they'll complete their $29.5-million capital
campaign, which covered funding for tripling its size and providing ongoing
operational support, including building a much-needed endowment.

   Until now, the science center's greatest success was drawing a record crowd
of 193,346 people during last year's 7-month run of "Titanic: The Artifact
Exhibit." Their last few special exhibits -- one on the brain and another on
Mars explorations -- have been more sterile than stimulating.

   With "Genome: The Secret of How Life Works," the science center won't attract
Titanic-like crowds, but should draw kudos for a timely exhibit that offers
lucid explanations and presents the intricate science of genetics in digestible
bits and pieces.

   Contact FRANK PROVENZANO at 313-222-6696 or provenzano@freepress.com

   'Genome: The Secret of How Life Works"

   THREE STARS OUT OF 4 STARS

   Through Dec. 23

   Detroit Science Center: 5020 John R., Detroit: 313-577-8400 or
www.detroitsciencecenter.org

   [DISCLAIMER]

   THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION MAY DIFFER SLIGHTLY FROM THE PRINTED ARTICLE.

GRAPHIC: Photo DETROIT SCIENCE CENTER;
"Genome: The Secret of How Life Works" explores the promise of genetic research.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2005


                             322 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            October 2, 2004 Saturday

SECTION: CLEARWATER TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: CLEARWATER TIMES; NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; LARGO TIMES

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: Choir sings praises of freedom

BYLINE: EILEEN SCHULTE

DATELINE: CLEARWATER

BODY:

   Dr. Matus Katz said that in the former Soviet Union there was a maxim: If you
had to have a tooth extracted, you had to have it pulled through your nose
because you couldn't open your mouth.

   The KGB was everywhere, watching. If you sneaked out to the synagogue, you
would be fired from your job or sent to Siberia, where only four or five of
every 1,000 prisoners survived.

   "It was very hard being Jewish there," said Katz, 85, a gastroenterologist
living in Clearwater who fled Latvia near the Baltic Sea in 1987.

   Even singing songs associated with God was forbidden. So in 1989, when
Russians were finally able to practice religion again, they had to relearn the
traditional music.

   A group of men began to study the melodies, and a year later, they formed the
Moscow Jewish Choir and began touring  the country and abroad singing about
freedom. The group's tour makes a stop tonight at Temple B'nai Israel for a
benefit to raise money for the Yachad chapter of Hadassah, the Women's Zionist
Organization of America. Katz's daughter is a member.

   The 14 men have performed at Carnegie Hall and Lincoln Center, singing
Yiddish, Hebrew and Russian folk songs, as well as Broadway standards.

   Surprisingly, few of the men are Jewish.

   But the music was forbidden for so long that Gentiles "are proud to sing
Jewish and Hebrew songs," said Selma Kron, an organizer of the event.

   The group performs in eight languages, Kron said, and the show is "so
stimulating you literally sit at the edge of your chair."

   Tickets cost $36 and will be available at 6:30 p.m. at the temple door, 1685
S Belcher Road, Clearwater. The show starts at 8 p.m. The venue seats 500.

   Proceeds benefit Hadassah, an apolitical, 300,000-member group for women that
supports Jewish people in Israel, promoting education and health care.

   "Whatever profits go to the Hadassah Hospital in Israel," Kron said. "They
just completed a new emergency care center. It is triple the size of the
original because of the terror."

   Projections indicate Hadassah Hospital's new $40-million, 12,000-square-foot
Center for Emergency Medicine will treat as many as 120,000 patients annually.
If facing mass casualties, it will be able to double its capacity.

   Kron and her husband founded the gene therapy program at the facility, which
treats Jews, Christians and Muslims.

   "The hospital is on the cutting edge of medicine," she said. "It is the
finest hospital in the Middle East."

   More than 700,000 patients from all over the world come to Hadassah's
hospitals at Ein Kerem and Mount Scopus in Jerusalem for treatment.

   The hospital's superior research programs have achieved a breakthrough cystic
fibrosis treatment and the linking of a specific gene to post-traumatic stress
disorder.

   Eileen Schulte can be reached at (727) 445-4153 or schulte@sptimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2004


                             323 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      October 1, 2004 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1138 words

HEADLINE: Edwards still part of Watson's game;
 Golf: The memory of his friend/caddie and the fight against ALS continue to
drive the PGA Tour veteran.;
 Golf

BYLINE: Don Markus

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Tom Watson's last trip to Baltimore for a golf tournament provided a
bittersweet memory for the Hall of Famer, a five-hole playoff loss to Don Pooley
in the 2002 U.S. Senior Open at Caves Valley.

   Watson has been back only once, but his ties to the city have become a lot
deeper in the past two years.

   It had to do with the life - and ultimately the death - of his longtime
caddie and close friend, Bruce Edwards, whose condition was diagnosed a few
months after the Open as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou
Gehrig's disease. Edwards died in April of the incurable disease at age 49.

   Watson's decision to play in this year's Constellation Energy Classic, a
Champions Tour event that will begin today at Hayfields Country Club in Hunt
Valley, is due partly to one of the tournament's charities - the Robert Packard
Center for ALS Research at the Johns Hopkins Medical School.

   "What Bob (Packard) did before he died with ALS was create a funding
mechanism for research, with the stipulation that if you wanted the grants or
the funds, you had to share your research," Watson said last week. 'To me, that
made definite sense. That's the reason I got involved with it."

   According to Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, the director of the Packard Center,
Watson has raised more than $500,000 for the funding of a new gene therapy trial
program that Hopkins officials hope will begin next year. Watson also donated
the $1 million annuity he received as the Champions Tour's Charles Schwab Cup
winner last year to ALS research.

   In all, Rothstein estimates Watson's efforts have raised nearly $3 million to
help find a cure for a disease that eventually robs people of their ability to
walk, talk, swallow and breathe. Those who suffer from the disease usually
succumb in a two- to five-year period.

   "Tom's support has been phenomenal and extremely helpful," said Rothstein.
"Anytime someone talks about a disease that is relatively rare, it helps raise
awareness. He touches on another community. He affects a population that has not
been engaged before."

   That community was not only hit hard by the news of Edwards' illness and
death, but also by PGA Tour player Jeff Julian's similar struggle. Julian was
diagnosed in 2001 and died in July at age 42. Both Edwards and Julian remained
on tour long after their disease was made public.

   Watson has spent much of the past two years raising awareness about ALS.

   "I've had lots of people that didn't know anything about it come to me and
say essentially they learned what they knew from they saw Tom do and say on
television," said Rothstein. "It all helps because they might come forward after
hearing that and donate money."

   Watson's visit to Baltimore this week comes at a time when the 55-year-old
golfer has struggled with his game, in large part because of a nerve problem
that caused weakness in his right shoulder back in June. He has also been
hampered because of a degenerative condition in his hip.

   After this week's tournament, Watson will undergo arthroscopic hip surgery
and will later get the shoulder repaired.

   "I hope that in six months, when I come back, I am stronger than I am right
now and will be able to play with the freedom of pain, and more motion and more
strength in the right arm," said Watson, who, after leading the Champions Tour
in earnings last year with more than $1.8 million, has fallen to 41st this year.

   Though he is approaching an age when many Champions Tour players seem to
watch their skills decline, Watson is hopeful his game will come around once his
injuries heal.

   "Physically, the ability to hit good golf shots is paramount to whether you
win or lose," said Watson. "My body right now isn't allowing me to do that, and
that's caused me to get off (track) to a greater degree than it has in my
career."

   As a result of the poor swings to go along with another putting slump that
hampered him toward the end of his career on the regular tour, Watson's
confidence has sagged.

   "You lose your confidence because you're playing cruddy," said Watson. "You
gain your confidence by hitting good shots. That's common sense. What I've tried
to do is remember those thoughts - if I can remember them at my age - that I had
during that 2002 Senior Open."

   His second-place finish to Pooley at Caves Valley was one of five Watson had
that year. After coming from three strokes behind on the final day and making
six birdies in eight holes to forge a playoff with Pooley, Watson lost when he
missed a 10-foot birdie putt on the 77th hole.

   "I have mostly good memories there," said Watson, who also finished second in
the 2003 Senior Open. "I obviously didn't win it, but I had an opportunity to
win. I played very well that week. I wish I could regain that form."

   That might happen, but the part of Watson's success that will never be
recreated was his relationship with Edwards. The two joined forces in the
mid-1970s and were together for the better part of 30 years, including for most
of Watson's 39 PGA Tour victories and four Champions Tour wins.

   It was Edwards who suggested Watson find a new caddie when the disease caused
him to stop working a few months after the two shared their last moment in the
spotlight together - when Watson took the first-round lead in the 2003 U.S. Open
at Olympia Fields outside Chicago.

   "The second to the last visit I had with Bruce, he asked me who was going to
caddie for me," recalled Watson. "He knew he couldn't caddie. I said, 'Who do
you have in mind?' "

   Edwards recommended Jeff Burrell, a veteran caddie of whom Watson said: "He's
got his knee brace on and his back brace on. He's just about as broken down as I
am."

   Turning serious for a moment, Watson said: "Jeff and I have a very
professional relationship. He does his job and I do my job. Obviously, I lost a
friend who knew me a lot better than Jeff knows me, so there's a loss of not
only the friendship and love we had for each other, but the understanding we had
for each other."

   While some believe Watson's struggles on the course this year were affected
by his caddie's death, Watson said, if anything, he has used Edwards for
inspiration and a dose of reality rather than as an excuse.

   "I'm just taking a page out of Bruce's book. Whenever anything went on in
Bruce's life that didn't go right, he'd just say, 'Let's just carry on,' " said
Watson. "I use that term a lot. I learned a long time ago that if you can't do
anything about the things that affect you, why worry about them?"

   Constellation Energy Classic
What: Champions Tour Constellation Energy Classic
Site: Hayfields Country Club, Hunt Valley
When: Today-Sunday
2003 winner: Larry Nelson
Directions: Take Baltimore Beltway to Interstate 83 north. Take Exit 20A for
Shawan Road East and follow signs to parking areas.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Tom Watson; 2. Cal Ripken's swing never got him in trouble
like this in baseball. He was playing in the pro-am at Hayfields yesterday.; 3.
Edwards; 1. CHRISTOPHER T. ASSAF : SUN STAFF; 2. LLOYD FOX : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2004


                             324 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             October 1, 2004 Friday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Genetic privacy concerns raised;
Genome institute head highlights progress

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   The leader of the federal program that decoded the human genome, which can
show the potential to develop debilitating diseases, said Thursday that Congress
should protect Americans from discrimination in hiring and issuing health
insurance, based on that information.

   "We need to enhance genetic privacy," Dr. Francis Collins, director of the
National Human Genome Research Institute, said at a Tulane University symposium
at the Sheraton New Orleans Hotel. "We're all walking around with a couple dozen
(genetic) variants that place us at risk for certain diseases. . . . You need
not fear that genetics will be used against you."

   The Senate unanimously approved a genetic privacy law last year, but the
House has not acted, he said.

   Collins was the lead speaker in a three-day celebration of Tulane's 170th
birthday.

   Collins and others outlined the technology-driven future of medicine,
describing how enhanced knowledge of the finer points of heredity, proteins and
the body's own cells will enable researchers to develop treatments that will
address a patient's specific problem and, perhaps, find cures for such maladies
as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and heart ailments. "For me as a
physician-scientist, there has never been a more exciting time than right now,"
Collins said.

   He was not alone Thursday morning in calling for a policy change in the
developing field. Even though the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy uses only adult
stem cells instead of those from human embryos, Dr. Darwin Prockop, its
director, criticized President Bush's limitation of the number of embryonic cell
lines for which the federal government will provide research money.

   "I do not see why we should not proceed" with research on embryonic stem
cells, he said. "I think the president's order of 2001 was a mistake."

   Stem cells are manufactured in bone marrow and deployed throughout the body
to develop into bone, cartilage, fat, muscle, nerve and other types of cells.
Limiting the number of cells available for federal financing necessarily limits
research, Prockop said.

   "There's unlikely to be one magic cell for all diseases," he said. "There are
more than 300,000 embryos in freezers around the country. You have a choice: Use
the cells in research or destroy them."

   Even though Prockop spoke optimistically of plans for using stem cells for
breast cancer, spinal-cord injuries and brittle-bone disease, he said people
shouldn't expect this treatment to be a panacea.

   "There are likely to be unexpected and unfortunate results," he said, "but
there's hope for you, and there's hope for me."

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2004


                             325 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                  SEPTEMBER 30, 2004, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BAY AREA; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: BERKELEY;

Discussing the ethics of altering human genes

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Charles Burress

BODY:
The brash young science of genetic engineering, like a newly licensed teenager
behind the wheel, is driving civilization toward "the biggest break with human
history that we can imagine," journalist Bill McKibben warned a rapt audience at
UC Berkeley on Tuesday night.

    American society seems to be asleep in the back seat as it careers into a
world where our grandchildren could become the first genetically modified
generation, said McKibben, author of the sobering book "Enough: Staying Human in
an Engineered Age."

    The power to create "designer children," in McKibben's view, is one genie
that humanity should leave in the bottle.

    Yet the advent of applied human gene manipulation is rapidly drawing closer,
as researchers gain greater mastery over the human genome without a
corresponding mastery over where, if anywhere, to draw the line.

    Would many parents hesitate to adjust an unborn child's genes to prevent a
genetic disability? Or prevent dwarfism? Improve resistance to cancer? How about
enhancing IQ or musical ability, or the eternal human dream -- prolonging life?

    Given the great disparities in wealth and access to medical technology,
McKibben said, both sides on the human gene-altering debate acknowledge that the
species could bifurcate between what Princeton geneticist Lee Silver called the
"GenRich" aristocracy and a great mass of the "Naturals."

    Imagine, McKibben said, that "you go to the clinic and pull out your Visa
card and pick the best child that you could afford, the most interventions along
the genome." And what if, three years later when the second child arrives, you
go back and find that your upgraded first child "has become sort of Windows 95,"
he asked.

    Experts disagree over how soon such possibilities will arrive, but many
agree that humans will possess them before long.

    "Just how fast this power is coming is really hard to believe," said
Professor Michael Pollen, director of the Knight Program in Science and
Environmental Journalism in the Graduate School of Journalism.

    When Dolly, the world's first cloned mammal, was created in 1996, Pollen
said, people believed that "human cloning was generations away. Well, it's
happened now."

    Tuesday night's program, where the audience overflowed the journalism school
library, was an attempt to generate public awareness and debate about "nothing
less than how we are to think about the future evolution of our species," Pollen
said.

    "This issue, as important as it is, is simply not a big part of the national
conversation right now," he said.

    Scientists and ethicists do engage in often heated exchanges over the issue.
Nobel Prize-winner James Watson, who discovered DNA with the late Francis Crick,
has famously asked, "Who wants an ugly baby?"

    Gregory Stock, director of the program on Medicine, Technology, and Society
at UCLA's School of Public Health, has argued that human clones "are merely
delayed identical twins."

    Stock says advances in gene therapy are inevitable and notes that
innovations such as vaccines, antibiotics, test-tube babies and organ
transplants also were seen as unnatural at first.

    Gene therapy shouldn't be rejected, but a stop sign should be placed at the
point where an alteration would be passed to future generations, said Marcy
Darnovsky, associate director of the Center for Genetics and Society in Oakland.

    A "bright line" can be drawn "between those technologies that you apply to
yourself -- you understand what you are doing to yourself -- and alterations to
your future children," Darnovsky told the Berkeley audience.E-mail Charles
Burress at cburress@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2004


                             326 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 27, 2004, Monday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 912 words

HEADLINE: SEC FOCUSING ON DRUG MAKERS
FULL DISCLOSURE OF TESTS CALLED KEY

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The Securities and Exchange Commission is scrutinizing biotechnology
companies as part of a wider effort to ensure that companies don't mislead
investors by covering up negative results of clinical trials.

      The SEC's Boston office has made the biotech industry a new focus because
of the concentration of companies in the area and the possibility that selective
disclosure could seriously harm investors, say lawyers and company officials.

           "We won't comment on any particular matter," said Walter Ricciardi,
district administrator of the SEC in Boston, "but speaking generally, we'd note
that when companies speak, they must do so truthfully and accurately.
Misrepresentations about the status of a product in development can be very
damaging to investors."


      The heightened interest comes amid a flurry of Boston-area cases involving
disclosure of clinical trial information.

      In December, the SEC sent so-called Wells notices to Biopure Corp., its
chief executive, and a former official, indicating they were likely to be sued.
Four other Biopure officials received such notices in the spring. The Cambridge
company said the SEC is looking at whether it misled investors when it failed to
tell them the Food and Drug Administration had blocked clinical trials because
of safety concerns.

      In July, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said the SEC had recommended seeking
penalties against the Cambridge company and its former chief executive. The
commission is investigating company disclosures surrounding its drug Replagal
for Fabry disease.

      And in August, Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it is under investigation
by the SEC, which is looking at whether the Lexington firm disclosed the results
of a clinical trial with a drug candidate in a timely fashion in January.

      Drug companies' prospects are determined in large part by their success in
winning FDA approval for new treatments. For most investors, the way to track
drugs in the pipeline is to follow the human clinical trials, which take place
over years.

      But there are no hard-and-fast rules as to how and when companies must
disclose such trial results. Some are published in medical journals or presented
at medical conventions. Others are publicized in news releases. Sometimes,
companies extract and disseminate specific information from a larger trial, such
as disclosing results from a single location.

      Regulators have become increasingly concerned that drug companies may be
highlighting successful trials while burying the results of failed trials.

      In June, New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer sued GlaxoSmithKline,
alleging the drug giant had engaged in "repeated and persistent fraud" by
failing to disclose clinical trial information about its antidepressant Paxil.
In particular, Spitzer alleged, Glaxo had suppressed trials showing that Paxil
was not effective in treating depression in children and adolescents.

      "The attorney general's office has an ongoing interest and concern with
respect to the pharmaceutical industry," said Marc Violette, a spokesman for
Spitzer. "I cannot comment on biotech."

   Violette said that, to the best of his knowledge, "this office is not
involved in a review of the biotech industry."

      Spitzer's action has already sparked a small revolution in the medical
publishing world. A group of editors of prestigious medical journals, including
the New England Journal of Medicine, said this month that they would publish
results only from trials that are registered in a central database. The move is
intended to prevent the journals from unknowingly highlighting only positive
results.

      "The drug companies want to tell you the good news, but they want to bury
the bad news," said Dr. Jeffrey M. Drazen, in a recent interview with the Globe.


      The disclosure of trial information is particularly important to biotech
companies, which tend to be younger and smaller than pharmaceutical firms.
Biotech firms often depend on a single promising drug candidate. Share prices
often plunge when a biotech firm discloses a clinical setback for that one
product.

      Because biotechnology firms have fewer products, the threshold for
materiality whether information has enough impact on a firm's results to require
disclosure to investors is lower for their clinical trial results.

      "The larger the company and the more drugs in the pipeline, the less
likely the information is going to be considered material," said Derek M.
Meisner, an attorney with Kirkpatrick & Lockhart LLP in Boston and a former SEC
enforcement attorney. "If the drug's success is crucial to the company's bottom
line or scientific credibility, then disclosure may be warranted."

      Meisner said he is advising biotech firms to develop explicit policies to
notify their lawyers when trial results are imminent. Company lawyers need to be
able to "react to prevent innocent but embarrassing and perhaps even legally
actionable" statements by the company, he said.

      The new focus on clinical trials began in February, when SEC enforcement
director Stephen M. Cutler said the commission would be working more closely
with the FDA. One step: The FDA, which has tremendous reservoirs of clinical
trial data, will take steps to share "nonpublic information" more quickly with
the SEC.


      Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.


NOTES:
LIFE SCIENCES: PHARMACEUTICALS

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2004


                             327 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2004 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           September 27, 2004 Monday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 366 words

HEADLINE: Wave of luminaries set to visit Tulane;
Speakers celebrate school's anniversary

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Two Nobel laureates, a former president of the American Medical Association,
the director of the National Institutes of Health and the leader of the project
that mapped every gene in the human body will speak at Tulane University this
week.

   The speakers are part of a three-day program marking the founding 170 years
ago of the Medical College of Louisiana, which became Tulane University.

   The program, to run from Thursday through Sunday, will focus on medical
achievements. Dr. Paul Whelton, Tulane's senior vice president for health
sciences, said the program is designed to survey research projects under way and
speculate about Tulane's role in future scientific developments.

   Free lectures, to be held at the Sheraton New Orleans Hotel, will feature
Nobel Prize recipients Andrew Schally, who will speak Thursday at 1:30 p.m., and
Louis Ignarro, whose address will be Friday at 1:30 p.m.

   Both men won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine. Schally, whose honor
came in 1977, is a clinical professor of medicine at Tulane. Ignarro, a
pharmacology professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, earned the
Nobel in 1998 for work he had begun at Tulane.

   For other events, a registration fee is required. The amount varies.
Information is available at alumni.hsc.tulane.edu/170th, (504) 561-1191 and
1(800) 899-1191.

   The program starts Thursday at 8 a.m. with a symposium on the impact that the
development of the human genetic blueprint will have on the future of medicine.
Scheduled speakers are Dr. Francis Collins, who led that project; Dr. Darwin
Prockop, director of Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy; Dr. Lance Liotta, chief
of the pathology laboratory at the National Cancer Institute Center for Cancer
Research; and Dr. Steven Paul, president of Lilly Research Laboratories.

   Other scheduled participants in the three-day event include Dr. Elias
Zerhouni, director of the National Institutes of Health; Dr. Jaime Sepúlveda
Amor, director of the Mexican National Institutes of Health; and Dr. Donald
Palmisano, a Tulane medical school graduate and a former president of the
American Medical Association.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2004


                             328 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 26, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1626 words

HEADLINE: THE BODY'S BARRICADE;
When it's healthy, your skin is the first line of defense against an assortment
of invaders

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It's all around you, literally. All 25 square feet or so.

   It's the largest organ in your body, weighing in at about 8 pounds.

   It's your skin.

   Over the next 27 days, you will shed all of its 7 billion cells, which will
flake away unnoticed, an amount equivalent to 1.5 pounds in a year. Plump new
cells will percolate from the skin's inner layers to the surface.

   You will do this repeatedly and become an entirely changed person almost
1,000 times throughout a normal life span, at least on the outside.

   "The skin does a ton of amazing things," said Dr. Lawrence Eichenfield, a
pediatric dermatology specialist at Children's Hospital and Health Center and
the University of California San Diego School of Medicine.

   Besides keeping blood and tissue inside the body, the skin orchestrates its
dozen layers and sublayers to protect the body against invasion from outside
forces, such as germs, blunt objects, corrosives, bugs and the weather.

   Markings -- moles, fingerprints, freckles, pigmentation, dimples, scars,
hairiness (or lack of it) and even lines and wrinkles -- give each person a
unique appearance.

   Cells in the skin's three primary layers -- the epidermis, dermis and
subcutaneous -- usually seem to know precisely what they should let inside, such
as an increasing number of medications applied by patch or cream, and what to
keep out, such as caustic metals and irritants.

   They seem to know what to let out as well, such as salty water to cool the
body when it gets too hot, and oils from glands embedded in the skin when the
air is dry to keep the skin from drying out.

   Skin protects a fragile network of 45 miles of tiny nerves, and in every
square inch cells are entwined with 625 sweat glands.

   It tingles, itches, blushes and throbs. It gets goose bumps when it is cold
or when a person is scared. And when the skin is hurt, it stings and bleeds and
scabs and scars.

   With calluses, extra layers of skin actually provide protection from
repetitive stress, such as the bulge on the middle finger from using a writing
utensil all day.

   Skin also stores energy and fat and synthesizes vitamin D, vitally necessary
for the entire body. Skin protects against constant friction from everyday
contact with chairs and beds and general wear and tear. It changes appearance
and color when we aren't getting the right nutrition.

   "As doctors, we have the advantage with skin of seeing with the eye more of
what's going on inside the body than we can with internal organs," Eichenfield
said.

   But along the way, a few things can and usually do go wrong with our skin.
Eichenfield, a pediatrician, said that for every job that skin cells do right,
there are examples seen in infants and children of how they fail.

   "We learn how normal functions are supposed to work by seeing how they don't
work," he said.

   An example is skin of newborns that grows too thin or too dry at first.
Sometimes, the genes regulating the normal anchors that hold the skin down are
missing in infants, as in a tragically disfiguring but rare disorder called
epidermolysis bullosa. The skin constantly blisters and wounds don't heal.

   Assault from sunlight can cause cancers, overactive cellular turnover
provokes psoriasis, and allergic reactions to detergents, metals or other
environmental chemicals can cause inflammation leading to eczema.

   Genetic mutations can create distressed or weak skin. Environmental toxins
from poison ivy to man-made chemicals can cause rashes. And the body's own
immune system can revolt, causing a variety of annoying to disabling conditions.

   Such conditions can range from alopecia areata, or hair loss, to lupus, in
which antibodies see the skin as foreign and attack it, causing inflammation of
blood vessels and rashes when skin is exposed to the sun.

   A list of common and rare skin diseases and conditions runs from A to Z --
from common acne and athlete's foot to xerosis and herpes zoster. Some
dermatologists say the dictionary of dermatology reads like a Scrabble player's,
with dreadfully sounding terms such as:

   [] ichthyosis, potentially disfiguring skin flaking and scaling;

   [] myxoid cysts, clear rubbery nodules usually appearing on the toes and
fingertips;

   [] pityriasis, oval pink patches usually on the back that are probably caused
by a virus;

   [] vitiligo, death of melanocytes, the cells in the epidermis that produce
melanin or pigment, causing areas of skin to turn white.

   Some San Diego dermatology experts say that in rare cases they treat people
with leprosy, a bacteria that attacks nerve cells of susceptible people, mainly
small numbers of immigrants who acquired the disease in their native lands.

   "I think I can safely say that at some point in everyone's life, they will
have some problem with their skin," said Dr. Stephen Webster, clinical professor
of dermatology at the University of Minnesota School of Medicine in Minneapolis
and a spokesman for the American Academy of Dermatology.

   "I'm 69, and there's no one who can live to be that age who hasn't gotten
warts, acne, blisters or wrinkles."

   Unfortunately, Webster said, "we're big on cholesterol to protect your heart,
but we take the skin for granted."

   Every square inch of human skin is home to about 32 million friendly bacteria
whose job is to protect their host against its opportunistic cousins, microbes
such as bacteria, fungi, viruses, protozoa, amoeba and a variety of yeasts.

   Sometimes there is not quite enough to do the job. Certain viruses may get
through, causing cold sores or warts, and some varieties of bacteria can keep
ordinary wounds from healing. Fungal infections can be unsightly as well as
painful.

   Certain drugs also can have an effect on skin, causing allergic reactions or
rashes.

   Then there is the insult of aging.

   Hair grows where it isn't supposed to and doesn't where it should.

   Wrinkles, lines, dark spots and veins creep in, damaging collagen and elastin
that give skin its smooth firmness and elasticity.

   Gradually, skin appears mottled and worn, a process that has spawned a
rapidly evolving and lucrative industry of cosmetic techniques involving
everything from creams and abrasives to plastic surgery, chemical peels, lasers
and light therapies.

   Sclerotherapy agents -- fluids including saline -- are injected into the skin
to collapse spider veins and other forms of varicose veins that are not harmful
to health but can be unsightly.

   Some dermatologists say they chose this field rather than another medical
specialty because in most cases, the fix is fast and pleasing to the patient.

   "To me it's very rewarding to address peoples' concerns about their skin,
because the skin is so visible," said Dr. Susan Shimomaye, a dermatology surgeon
in Oceanside who spends 80 percent of her time treating skin diseases and the
rest fixing cosmetic problems.

   Added her colleague, Dr. Robert Bushman of La Mesa: "It is often a quick fix.
People walk in and walk out with satisfaction."

   Some conditions can't be cured, such as psoriasis and eczema.

   "But with newer medicines we can control them and make them better," Bushman
said.

   Dr. Martin Kabongo, a UCSD clinical professor of family medicine who
specializes in skin disorders, said most skin problems are not treated by
dermatologists, but by primary care practitioners.

   Kabongo said that is often a problem because many family doctors fail to
diagnose skin diseases in people of color, whose pigmented skin may mask
problems that are much more easily seen in people with light complexions.

   Pigmented skin can mask fungal infections such as ringworm in children, for
example.

   "Pigmented skin has a way of hiding the subtlety of skin changes, such as a
mole that may turn out to be a dangerous melanoma," a lethal form of skin
cancer, Kabongo said. "Most people dismiss it as part of a person's normal
color."

   In San Diego, skin cancer is a significant dermatological concern, from
relatively benign basal cell carcinomas to potentially problematic squamous cell
lesions. Neither are fatal. But when dark, irregularly shaped marks appear and
seem to grow, they need immediate treatment.

   One in six people in the nation will be diagnosed with skin cancer in his or
her lifetime. In San Diego, where exposure to the sun is greater for the average
person, the rate is thought to be much higher, experts say.

   Melanoma accounts for 4 percent of skin cancer cases, but causes 79 percent
of skin cancer deaths, according to the American Cancer Society, which estimates
about 55,000 patients will be diagnosed with melanoma in the nation this year.

   Experts say that with proper sunscreens and early attention to the earliest
signs of skin change, most San Diegans can protect themselves.

   Doctors are looking forward to an onslaught of discoveries of drugs,
monoclonal antibodies, gene therapy and techniques such as refined laser
technologies that wipe out imperfections and disease and to take years off aging
baby boomers.

   New medicines for psoriasis target the disease rather than the broader immune
system.

   "In the next 10 to 20 years, there will be dramatic changes in treatment,"
Webster said. "There will be a great deal of genetic research to provide gene
therapies to prevent many genetic disorders of the skin that can be so
disabling.

   "There's no question these compounds will benefit. And we're just at the very
beginning."

   Care Instructions:

   Take care of your skin, it's the largest organ in your body. Protect from sun
exposure. Use sunscreen every day. Pay attention to moles, marks and growths.
See a doctor immediately if they change. Don't smoke. If you get a tattoo, go to
a professional. Check credentials of any skin care professional, including
plastic surgeons. Ask for health and safety records. Use ordinary soap and water
to clean wounds. Drink plenty of water.

   Cheryl Clark: (619)542-4573; cheryl.clark@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 ILLUSTRATION; 1 CHART; 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: 2. Care Instructions 3. The
arms of the Michael family of Encinitas -- mother Kim, daughters Solana, Melea
and Jamila, and grandmother Juanita -- demonstrate the rich and varied shades of
the human skin.; PHOTOBY: 1. Nadia Borowski Scott / photo illustration 3. Nadia
Borowski Scott / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2004


                             329 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 26, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: SPECIAL: HEALTH; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 860 words

HEADLINE: Early attention can prevent acute wound complications

BYLINE: Michael Scott-Blair, Michael Scott-Blair is a San Diego-based freelance
writer.

BODY:

   Millions of Americans suffer from potentially serious skin ulcers, sores and
other wounds.

   The number only will increase as the population gets older and more young
people pay the price -- namely with diabetes -- of being overweight.

   Here is one staggering figure: 70,000 to 80,000 amputations are performed on
people with diabetic foot ulcers in the United States each year. At least half
could be avoided with early basic care, experts say.

   "I admit to being passionate about getting diabetic patients and their health
care givers to take a more proactive role in preventing this unnecessary
surgery," said Susie Seaman, a nurse practitioner and founding staff member of
the Sharp Grossmont Hospital Wound Healing Center.

   Dr. Gerit Mulder, director of the Wound Treatment and Research Center at the
University of California San Diego and an associate professor of surgery, said
that at any one time, 800,000 to 1 million people nationwide suffer from
diabetic or venous ulcers.

   Venous ulcers, more common in women than men, are generally found on the
lower legs and feet and often are caused by poor blood flow. They also can be
associated with leg injury, obesity, phlebitis, a family history of varicose
veins and types of employment that require standing or sitting for long periods
of time.

   If all such skin ulcers are tallied, including bedsores suffered by
paraplegics, quadriplegics and the bed-ridden elderly, as many as 5 million
people are suffering skin wounds.

   "I tour the nation and foreign countries lecturing on wound treatment, and I
find that knowledgeable treatment is quite limited," Mulder said.

   Ann Z. Moore, a registered nurse and director of the Pomerado Wound Care
Clinic in Poway, is concerned that the number of people with wound problems will
increase.

   "Better education of the patients and the caregivers could radically decrease
the number of amputations," Moore said.

   Such views are supported by numerous studies, including one at Columbia
University's Department of Surgery that concluded, "The majority of the 82,000
diabetic amputations done each year could be prevented" by better care
protocols.

   What that means is health care providers need to do a better job of
inspecting their patients' skin. In the case of diabetes, earlier intervention
-- such as removing a callus -- can prevent serious conditions from developing.

   "Older people feel there is a stigma attached to these (diabetic and venous)
wounds," Moore said. "They feel guilty that they might have done something wrong
to cause it, so they are ashamed and hide it from their family."

   She and Seaman said they are on a campaign to get patients to push their
doctors and caregivers to pay more attention to their feet.

   "I tell my patients to take their shoes and socks off as soon as they get to
the doctor's office and make sure they are inspected for any callouses or
sores," Seaman said.

   And when they go home, Moore said, "we teach patients to put a mirror on the
floor and do a daily inspection themselves."

   Mulder said diabetics often lose feeling in their feet and can walk around
with a stone in their shoe, or with an ill-fitting shoe, and not know it.

   That can form a callus and then lead to a sore, which gets infected and has
the makings of an ulcer that then can lead to amputations, often several for an
individual, he said.

   "If a patient has an amputation, we find that they will probably have another
within five years: first a toe, then a couple more toes, then a foot followed by
half a leg," Moore said.

   "This has a drastic impact on the golden years of many seniors. It means they
cannot travel as they had intended, cannot enjoy their grandchildren or just
hang out with their friends."

   If some health professionals lack adequate knowledge in dealing with such
ulcers, local specialists said they do not blame the medical schools.

   "They already have a huge body of knowledge to teach, and the treatment of
acute wounds is only now starting to get some attention," Seaman said.

   Such attention is being focused on the treatment of acute wounds at UCSD by
Mulder.

   "We are nearing the completion of the first phase of a gene therapy program
involving 16 patients," he said.

   The effort seeks to test a toothpaste-like gel, which is applied to the
wound.

   The gel contains an inactivated cold virus designed to flood the sore with a
gene responsible for making growth factors, which the body normally produces to
help heal wounds and repair skin.

   Plenty of treatments are available that treat the ulcers, but they treat
wounds in a general manner.

   "There is nothing that really targets the wound as we're trying to do with
the (platelet-derived growth factor)," said the study's principal investigator,
Dr. David Hoyt, vice chairman of the UCSD Department of Surgery, and chief of
trauma, burn and critical care.

   Added Mulder: "It used to be that we got excited when somebody came up with a
more effective dressing. Now we are talking gene therapy, and the initial
results are very promising."

   There is increased demand for chronic wound care.

   "A few years ago, there were just two clinics in the San Diego area," Moore
said. "Today there are six, and we are all busy all the time."

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2004


                             330 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                           September 24, 2004 Friday
                          FINAL Edition; ALL Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Scientific small wonders;
OSU nanotech center ponders medical research's next big thing

BYLINE: JOHN MANGELS, PLAIN DEALER SCIENCE WRITER

BODY:

   A new "nanoscale" research center at Ohio State University aims to develop
ways to mass-produce inexpensive, ultra-small devices to diagnose and treat
diseases.

   Some day soon, a custom-made magnetic probe no bigger than a few dozen
hydrogen atoms could latch on to an infectious protein and steer it to a
detector. Or a patch bristling with "nanoneedles" could inject molecules of
medicine into an individual cancer cell.

   Eventually a "nanofactory" might be able to churn out artificial viruses
carrying repair genes that substitute for missing or malfunctioning ones.

   "I strongly believe the state of Ohio has an opportunity to play a major
role" in nanotechnology, said James Lee, who will direct OSU's Center for
Affordable Nanoengineering of Polymer Biomedical Devices. The National Science
Foundation said this week it will provide $12.9 million over the next five years
for the new Columbus research program, one of 14 such centers in the country.

   Nanotechnology, sometimes called atom-level engineering, is an emerging field
that blends biology, chemistry and physics to create new materials and products.
The work is done on an almost unimaginably small scale - a nanometer is a
billionth of a meter.

   Although nanotechnology shows great promise, especially in medicine, it is
still largely experimental and has produced few commercial products. One of the
constraints, Lee said, is the lack of reliable, affordable manufacturing
processes.

   That's one problem the OSU center intends to tackle. Within the next three
years it hopes to create the protein-detecting device, which could be used to
scout for bioweapons and germs in drinking water, or as a screen for AIDS and
other diseases.

   The nanofactory that would assemble artificial viruses for gene therapy is a
more remote goal that will require much more research, Lee said.

   Other states, particularly Illinois, Massachusetts and California, have a
substantial head start in nanotechnology because of a concentration of
scientists and research money. But there is no reason Ohio can't have a major
part in the nanotech revolution, Lee said, especially considering its expertise
in polymers, one of the chemical building blocks of the nanoworld. The
University of Akron, which does a large amount of polymer research, is one of
seven partner universities in the new OSU nanotech center. Other collaborators
include the Cleveland Clinic and Dayton's Wright Patterson Air Force Labs.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   jmangels@plaind.com, 216-999-4842

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2004


                             331 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                          September 22, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 525 words

HEADLINE: Rush uses gene therapy to insert hope into Alzheimer's battle

BYLINE: Jim Ritter

BODY:

   For 26 years, Ron Shellady took risks every day as a commodity  trader on the
Chicago Board of Trade.

   And now that he's retired and experiencing early symptoms of  Alzheimer's
disease, Shellady is taking an even bigger gamble.

   Shellady, 63, was the first to volunteer for a study at Rush  University
Medical Center on a gene therapy for early-stage  Alzheimer's.

   On July 27, neurosurgeon Dr. Roy Bakay drilled two nickel-size  holes in the
top of Shellady's head. Bakay injected copies of a  gene that, it's hoped, will
at least stop the progression of  Shellady's disease.

   There was a 1 percent to 2 percent chance the surgery would cause a  brain
hemorrhage similar to a stroke. There also was the  possibility of side effects
from the treatment, including loss of  appetite and pain.

   But Shellady has had no complications. And there was so little pain  he took
only a single aspirin.

   "I had to do it or I would just go down hill," he said.

   It's too early to tell how well the treatment is working, if it's  working at
all. But Shellady and his family believe it's helping.

   Shellady doesn't have as much trouble recalling peoples' names at  church, or
remembering where he put his glasses. And he no longer  forgets his
granddaughter's name.

   "I think he is inching forward," said his wife, Sue. "On the other  hand, I
know we're positive people and we're looking to see  positive results."

   In Alzheimer's disease, there is a die-off of brain cells involved  in memory
and cognition. The goal of gene therapy is to boost  production of a naturally
occurring protein, called nerve growth  factor, that prevents cell death and
helps neurons grow new  connections, said Dr. Zoe Arvanitakis, co-director of
the study.

   The gene is delivered by a fragment of a harmless virus. The  surgeon
delivers a few drops, containing about 1 billion viral  fragments, deep into the
brain. It's hoped the viral fragments will  invade brain cells and deliver the
gene. The gene then would direct  the cells to produce the nerve growth factor.

   Gene therapy has been tried for other diseases, including cystic  fibrosis,
cancer and Parkinson's disease. But many efforts have  failed, and no gene
therapy has been approved for general use  outside of clinical trials.

   The Rush trial is the second study of the Alzheimer's gene  treatment, called
CERE-110. An earlier study of eight patients at  the University of
California-San Diego found that CERE-110 is  generally safe. The Rush study is
using a different mechanism to  deliver the gene.

   Rush researchers initially plan to enroll six to 12 patients. If  the
technique is shown to be safe, the next step would be to test  whether it works.
This phase-two study would include 30 to 40  patients. They all would undergo
brain surgery, but for comparison  purposes, some would get a placebo.

   The study is funded by Ceregene Inc., which makes CERE-110.

   If the treatment proves effective, it would be costly. The surgery  alone
costs $20,000 to $40,000, Bakay said.

   Researchers are recruiting patients ages 50 to 80 who have mild to  moderate
Alzheimer's disease but are in otherwise good health. For  more information,
call (866) 761-7806.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2004


                             332 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                  SEPTEMBER 22, 2004 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: WHERE WE LIVE-REPORT ON LIFE IN UNIVERSITY CITY; Pg. G08

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: After diplomas, University City 'is research writ large'

BYLINE: Matthew P. Blanchard INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   On any given day, research teams in University City are teaching robots to
work as a team, or linking carbon atoms into microcircuits for the coming era of
nanocomputers.

   They are analyzing speech patterns and consumer preferences, the news media
and terrorism, the human genome and, in one Penn psychology lab, the precise way
your eye moves across a page of text just like this one.

   "The sheer magnitude of what is going on here has been a continual surprise,"
said Perry Molinoff, who nine months ago became the University of Pennsylvania's
vice provost for research. "But that's the beauty of it. It is broad and
all-encompassing and it's all on the same campus. . . . It is research writ
large."

   After diplomas, the major products of University City are basic and applied
research. The area is home to four hospitals, a dental school, a veterinary
school and three universities: Penn, Drexel and the University of the Sciences
in Philadelphia, all with research labs.

   The list of accomplishments includes ENIAC, the world's first computer,
developed at Penn in 1946; the practice of cognitive therapy, developed in the
1960s; and the acne cream Retin-A, concocted in 1975.

   Today, Penn alone devotes a combined 1.6 million square feet to research
facilities, an area larger than the largest Center City skyscraper. Penn's
research budget exceeds $700 million, Molinoff said, making it one of the
nation's top 10 research universities.

   In total, Molinoff estimates a population of 20,000 researchers and
assistants; 70,000 animal test subjects; and hundreds of outpatient human guinea
pigs. (Do you experience feelings of sadness or depression? Then you may be
eligible.)

   The death of a patient halted Penn's gene therapy program in 2000, and in
1984, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals exposed 70 hours of video
footage showing baboon abuse in a Penn head-injury laboratory. But by and large,
the lab coat-wearing legions work unnoticed by the public.

   So what are they up to?

   Biotechnology is a major focus: The University City Science Center on Market
Street is home to dozens of biotech companies, mostly spin-offs from Penn and
Drexel research, including the Monell Chemical Senses Center, where 100
researchers do nothing but study taste and smell. For this task, Monell
maintains an aquatic facility with 5,000 pounds of catfish, trout, bass, and a
variety of other fish prized for their acute chemical sensitivity.

   At Penn, the so-called "mighty mice" dwell in the physiology lab of Hugh Lee
Sweeney. These super-muscular rodents, treated with Insulin Growth Factor-1,
develop and retain muscle mass to the mouse age of 80, offering a possible
treatment for muscular dystrophy - and perhaps a future race of Lou Ferrignos
(TV's Incredible Hulk).

   Drexel devotes 75 percent of its research efforts to medical fields such as
bioinformatics, which, now that the human genome has been decoded, employs
databases to make use of it, analyzing hundreds of thousands of protein
elements.

   Nanotechnology is another growth sector. Penn researcher Dawn Bonnell is
pioneering a process called ferroelectric nanolithography, the ability to etch
circuit boards so small they can only be seen with an electron microscope.
Future applications may include nanosensors capable of detecting a single
molecule of a substance.

   Which brings us to terrorism, the domain of ISTAR, Penn's Institute for
Strategic Threat Analysis and Response, a loose alliance of researchers who
develop computer models of smallpox outbreaks in Manhattan, apply game theory to
the security screening of airline baggage, and generally do our long-range
worrying for us.

   So take a second look as you walk by that anonymous building with a roof full
of vents. Whether it contains a particle accelerator or 100,000 fruit flies,
pieces of the future could be taking shape inside.

   Contact staff writer Matt Blanchard at 610-313-8120 or
mblanchard@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
ERIC MENCHER, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Doug Yates, technical director of the Penn Regional Nanotechnology Facility,
prepares samples for a transmission electron microscope. University City is
bursting at the seams with research facilities. The area is home to four
hospitals, a dental school, a veterinary school, and three universities.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2005


                             333 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    September 20, 2004 Monday FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Use it or lose it

BODY:

   RESEARCHERS HAVE hit upon what sounds like the perfect prescription for older
Americans worried about coping with rising health costs.

   It's a therapy that lowers the risk of heart disease, diabetes, arthritis,
high blood pressure, obesity and stroke, and at the same time wards off
depression and the moodiness of menopause. What's more, it's cheap.

   The downside is that it requires effort and determination, and returns little
immediate gratification beyond the endorphin high.

   No doubt where we're going here, right? Down the old jogging path, which as
it turns out offers as many benefits or more for older runners as for youthful
ones and does not discriminate on the basis of age in terms of training
potential.

   In fact, a 16-year study of 415,000 New York Marathon finishers showed
runners in their 50s are improving at a faster rate than younger competitors.

   People tend to be weaker as they age, many such studies show, not because
they are doing (or have done) too much, but because they are doing (or have
done) too little.

   Running is not for everyone, of course. But employers, insurance companies or
individuals picking up the tab for health care expenses should be doing what
they can to encourage at least moderate exercise.

   That may sound like old news. But there are still plenty of health insurance
plans that will pay for blood pressure medicine far more quickly than for
exercise classes, said Dr. Kerry Stewart, who teaches clinical exercise
physiology at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

   Medical science is also a bit to blame. A spirited search is under way for a
gene therapy that can reverse the effects and repair the damage of a life of
inactivity. After much time and investment, perhaps it will succeed.

   Meanwhile, Dr. Stewart observes the fastest and surest route to improving
physical and mental health is "gym therapy."

   It's not too late, no matter what the age or infirmity. Even creaky old knees
will be the better for it, since movement is the most effective treatment for
osteoarthritis.

   Just lace up the sneakers and get out there.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2004


                             334 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                           September 20, 2004 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1838 words

HEADLINE: Respected Mentor Now Abuse Suspect;
USC's William French Anderson, a pioneer of gene therapy, denies charges he
molested girl.

BYLINE: Anna Gorman, Richard Winton and James Ricci, Times Staff Writers

BODY:

   Eight years ago, renowned USC geneticist William French Anderson, an avid
martial arts practitioner, sought out expert karate teacher Paul Godshaw for
private instruction, and declared his goal: winning a gold medal at the Amateur
Athletic Union national tournament.

   The scientist, then nearing 60, went to Godshaw's Mission Viejo training
facility once a month for more than a year. Two or three times, he brought along
a shy girl of about 10 -- whom he said he was training at his San Marino home --
for professional instruction.

   The karate instructor found Anderson "a tremendous athlete" and the girl
"rather timid." But at the 1998 AAU national tournament in Orlando, Fla., both
the scientist and the girl won gold medals in their age categories.

   Their success reflected many of the personal characteristics for which
Anderson, who has been called "the father of gene therapy," is known -- the
single-minded pursuit of goals, a preoccupation with martial arts and personal
safety, and a history of assisting what he has called "surrogate children."

   However, Anderson's relationship with the girl, now a 17-year-old high school
senior, is no longer one of mentor and protege, but of accused and accuser.

   Anderson has been charged with sexually molesting the girl, the daughter of a
colleague at USC's Gene Therapy Laboratories, from when she was 10 to when she
was 14. He faces one charge of continuous sex abuse on a child and five counts
of lewd acts upon a child, charges that could imprison him for the rest of his
life.

   Anderson has pleaded not guilty; a date for a preliminary hearing in the case
is to be set next month. He has declined The Times' requests for interviews, and
his defense attorney has not returned calls for comment.

   In a recent e-mail to friends at the university, a copy of which The Times
obtained, Anderson wrote: "It is a nightmare being falsely accused. I have not
done the things I am charged with."

   *

   Anderson's closeness to the girl and her parents, especially her mother, was
apparent to others.

   The girl's mother is "an incredibly gifted scientist" at USC's Gene Therapy
Laboratories -- which Anderson started in 1992 -- and Anderson's most trusted
assistant, said Al MacKrell, a biology professor at Bradley University in
Illinois who was the lab's first post-doctoral researcher.

   "She was the one person he felt he could entrust with important projects,"
MacKrell said.

   At age 13, the woman's daughter took up soccer. Over the next three years,
Tom Ashby, former girls' soccer coach at the Los Angeles-area high school the
girl attends, watched her develop into a star who helped her team win a
California Interscholastic Federation championship.

   Anderson, known to many as French, consistently attended soccer practices,
usually showing up for the last hour and then driving the girl to her home
nearby, Ashby said. "It's something you notice when it's not a parent," he said.
"I'd see him more often than her parents."

   Coaches and players knew Anderson was a friend of the girl's family, that her
mother worked with him and that he had helped family members, who are
immigrants, adapt to life in California. The relationship appeared "pretty
normal," said former team captain Ruth Apraku, 18, who graduated this year.

   The manager of a private soccer club in which the girl played had a different
impression.

   "Wherever [the girl] was, there was Dr. French," Scott Dority, the club
manager, said in an interview. "It bothered me from Day One."

   During the high school's last soccer season, which ran from August to March,
Anderson stopped attending practices and games, according to coaches and a
player. In the spring, the girl talked to a counselor, the counselor contacted
county social services personnel and they contacted police, authorities said.

   Detectives monitored responses to a series of e-mails sent by the girl to
Anderson at their direction, according to law enforcement sources familiar with
the case. Police also taped a conversation the girl initiated at the instruction
of detectives. She wore a concealed transmitter.

   Contacted by a Times reporter, the girl's mother would not answer questions,
saying only, "The truth will prevail. I trust the justice system."

   *

   Anderson's signal scientific achievement came in 1990, when a team he led
cured a hereditary disease of the immune system in a 4-year-old girl. They
infused the girl with white cells that had been removed from her blood and
supplied with a missing gene. It was the first time gene therapy had been
successful in humans, guaranteeing Anderson a place in medical history.

   Anderson's achievement also has made him a lightning rod in the controversy
over the ethics of genetic manipulation. He has received death threats because
of his work and developed a keen interest in personal security measures.

   When dealing with very young patients during his 27 years at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., Anderson was known for his gentleness and
unassuming approach, wrote Jeff Lyon and Peter Gortner in their book "Altered
Fates: Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life." Anderson typically
crouched to a child's eye level when greeting him or her for the first time,
according to the authors.

   Early in his marriage, Anderson has told various writers, he and his wife,
Kathryn, who recently retired as chief surgeon at Childrens Hospital Los
Angeles, decided not to have children so they could concentrate more fully on
their work. While at NIH, the couple has said, they began mentoring numerous
"surrogate" children, and in some cases paid for their college educations.

   Anderson can be shy to the point of non-engagement, yet can enthrall an
audience of peers or laymen, according to colleagues, biographers and others who
know him. He is mildly dyslexic and a painfully slow reader, according to
biographers, but holds 12 patents and has an IQ of 178.

   Anderson is a crack pistol shot and a devoted friend of law enforcement who
self-published a detailed analysis of a famous FBI shootout. A Harvard- and
Cambridge-educated medical doctor, he is also licensed as a security guard in
California.

   "French does not have hobbies, he has obsessions," his wife told biographers.
"Everything he does has to be the best that it can be done."

   In 1969, after a nurse was attacked near the NIH campus, Anderson, who had
been a cross-country runner and track team member at Harvard, began taking
lessons in the Korean martial art taekwondo.

   By 1978, he was a black belt, eventually attaining the fifth degree. He
co-founded a taekwondo school at NIH, where he helped train children and adults.
His dedication to the sport helped keep his 5-foot-9-inch frame lean and
muscular.

   Over time, he became a certified taekwondo referee, designed what came to be
mandatory tournament headgear for participants and served as physician for the
U.S. taekwondo team at the 1988 Olympics in Seoul.

   At his San Marino home, which is assessed at $1.9 million, he built a
rubberized outdoor sparring mat surrounded by benches in the midst of an
orchard, where he works out and trains others.

   Anderson has been a friend of the San Marino Police Department. He funded a
new gym for its officers and trained its personnel in self-defense. He has been
a civilian volunteer with the department and until his arrest was the only city
resident who held a department permit to carry a concealed weapon. San Marino
Police Chief Arl Farris' own two children, accomplished karate students, sparred
with Anderson a few times at his home facility.

   When the molestation accusations against Anderson arose, Farris referred the
case to the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department to avoid any suggestion of
conflict of interest.

   According to authors Bob Burke and Barry Epperson, whose biography of
Anderson, "W. French Anderson: Father of Gene Therapy," was published last year,
the geneticist has long had close ties with law enforcement. While at NIH in
Bethesda, he sometimes trained local police officers in martial arts.

   *

   Anderson came to USC in 1992, backed by millions of dollars from the Swiss
pharmaceutical company Sandoz (now part of pharmaceutical giant Novartis), which
had bought the rights to his patented method of gene transfer. He started USC's
Gene Therapy Laboratories, where work has centered on stem-cell research and the
possibility of correcting defective genes in fetuses.

   The lab soon became a beacon to researchers. "Anyone who was really looking
to do serious gene-therapy research wanted to come to USC," said former lab
researcher MacKrell.

   In the ultra-competitive upper reaches of medical research, Anderson has
always attracted passionate loyalists who praised his integrity, mentoring
skills and dedication -- and the enmity of detractors.

   "He is a first-class scientist," said Laurence H. Kedes, director of USC's
Institute for Genetic Medicine. "As a scientist, he is thoughtful and insightful
and full of creative ideas. He is very easy to get along with."

   By contrast, Dr. Frederick Hall, a USC medical professor from 1989 to 2002,
and Dr. Erlinda Gordon, a USC emergency medicine physician and tenured faculty
member, sued Anderson. They accused him of interfering with funding for their
research and clinical trials on a gene-therapy treatment for pancreatic cancer
that the pair said they developed. They also contend Anderson had no right to
file for a patent on the treatment.

   Their suit was dismissed, a ruling that is being appealed.

   "I think he's an opportunist. I think he's basically corrupt," Gordon said in
an interview.

   Robert O'Brien, a lawyer who represented Anderson and USC in the matter, said
Hall and Gordon's lawsuit was frivolous. "We feel the appeal has very little
likelihood of success," he said.

   Since his arrest July 30, Anderson has been on administrative leave from USC,
which means he may not have professional contact with colleagues regarding
research or other university business.

   Work at the lab has continued unabated in his absence, Kedes said. Other
researchers said Anderson has always encouraged scientists in the lab to work
independently of him and develop as colleagues rather than subordinates.

   MacKrell described Anderson as extremely hardworking, easygoing and
accessible. "His authority all came from respect from the people who were
working under him," MacKrell said.

   Kedes said Anderson has been "an impeccably ethical person ever since I've
known him, and even before, by reputation. I have no belief that these charges
will stick." He said he and other USC faculty members have e-mailed Anderson
expressions of their support.

   In his response to such messages, Anderson echoed Kedes' confidence.

   "I know that my name will be cleared when this horrible experience is over,"
Anderson wrote in an e-mail to colleagues.

   "As I sat alone in my jail cell for three days, I came to appreciate what is
truly important in my life. As I thought, my devastation turned to anger and my
anger turned to determination. I am determined not to allow a false accusation
to destroy what I have spent my life building."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: SUSPECT: "It is a nightmare being falsely accused," wrote
William French Anderson in a recent e-mail to friends at USC.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Reuters PHOTO: CHARGED: Appearing in court last month, Anderson pleaded not
guilty to charges that could imprison him for the rest of his life.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Annie Wells Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2004


                             335 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 20, 2004 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1712 words

HEADLINE: Californians to Vote on Spending $3 Billion on Stem Cell Research

BYLINE: By JOHN M. BRODER and ANDREW POLLACK

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 19

BODY:

   The federal government spent $25 million last year on studies involving human
embryonic stem cells. But California, in an act of political and scientific
rebellion against limits on stem cell research imposed by the Bush White House,
may be on the verge of spending $300 million a year in each of the next 10 years
on such research.

      A coalition of Hollywood producers and actors, technology billionaires,
scientists, patient advocates and business organizations -- including Michael J.
Fox and Bill Gates -- has marshaled emotion, scientific argument and money to
underwrite a state ballot proposal that would let Californians make the
decision. The initiative on the Nov. 2 ballot, known as Proposition 71, would
authorize the state to issue $3 billion in bonds to pay for a range of stem cell
research. This promising but ethically controversial field of biomedical
research is now severely limited by the Bush administration's policy restricting
public money for research on embryonic stem cells.

      Others are also moving to facilitate more stem cell research. Gov. James
E. McGreevey of New Jersey signed legislation in May to establish a
state-supported stem cell research facility, and researchers at Harvard are
raising millions of dollars for a stem cell institute.

      But the California initiative would create by far the largest state-run
scientific research effort in the country and make California a global center of
stem cell research, on par with Singapore, Israel, South Korea and the United
Kingdom, which have moved aggressively in the field since the late 1990's.

      Critics say the initiative would be a publicly financed windfall for
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, while repaying little to the
taxpayers. They expect to be outspent by at least 20 to 1 by supporters of the
initiative and add that the state cannot afford $3 billion in new debt when it
is reducing spending on education, health care and public safety.

      Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger has said that he supports stem cell research in
principle but has not announced a position on the initiative.

      The public appears to be about evenly split, though it has not yet been
exposed to an expected barrage of television advertising featuring testimonials
from scientists, celebrities and those suffering from diseases, including
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and diabetes, that might be treated by therapies
derived from stem cells.

      Backers of the measure include celebrities like Mr. Fox, who has
Parkinson's disease, and Christopher Reeve, who was paralyzed in a riding
accident. It is also supported by dozens of elected officials, 22 Nobel
laureates, 50 patient advocacy groups and several business organizations.

      George P. Shultz, a Republican and a former secretary of state under
President Ronald Reagan, and the California Chamber of Commerce support it, as
do California's senators and more than half of its Congressional delegation. Mr.
Reagan died in June after a long battle with Alzheimer's, but his widow, Nancy,
and their son, Ron Reagan, have not taken a stand on the measure, though they
have made clear their support for stem cell research in the past.

      Supporters have already raised nearly $15 million, with some donors giving
more than $1 million.

      Among the major contributors are Pierre M. Omidyar, the founder of eBay,
who with his wife, Pamela, has given more than $2 million; Mr. Gates, the
founder of Microsoft, who gave $400,000; William K. Bowes Jr., a founder of
Amgen, who contributed $1.3 million in company stock; Senator Jon S. Corzine,
Democrat of New Jersey, who gave $100,000; and John Doerr, the Silicon Valley
venture capitalist, who contributed $974,000. The Juvenile Diabetes Research
Foundation has contributed $1 million to the committee sponsoring the
initiative.

      Robert N. Klein, a Palo Alto real estate developer, is leading the effort
to pass the measure and has contributed more than $2 million. Mr. Klein's
14-year-old son has juvenile diabetes, and his mother has Alzheimer's.

      ''We are on the edge of one of the great watershed medical discoveries in
history,'' Mr. Klein said. Half of California's families are affected by one or
more of the 70 diseases or conditions that could respond to stem cell therapies,
he said, and the research could significantly reduce the $110 billion spent on
health care in the state each year. In his view, California has the research
infrastructure and the financial ability to support this venture.

      ''We have more than 50 percent of the biotech capacity in the United
States and more than most other countries,'' he said. ''We can run a substitute
national program.''

      Opponents have raised about $150,000, much of it from the state and
national Catholic Church and from Howard Ahmanson Jr., a conservative
businessman from Orange County. They oppose the research because it destroys
embryos and because some believe it leads down a slippery slope to human
cloning.

      ''I'd say we were David going up against Goliath,'' said Wayne C. Johnson,
a Republican consultant in Sacramento who is coordinator of the effort opposing
the proposal, ''but David had five smooth stones, and we don't have that yet.''

      The debate over embryonic stem cell research is among the most difficult
in politics and science. Many scientists and patient advocacy groups believe
these cells, which are the basic building blocks of the body from which the
organs and other cells develop, can yield therapies and cures for diseases that
affect as many as 125 million Americans.

      But to develop the self-perpetuating colonies of stem cells, researchers
must destroy human embryos, an act that is abhorrent to some religious
conservatives and opponents of abortion, an important part of the Republican
Party's base.

      The California initiative emphasizes financing for embryonic stem cell
research, but also provides money for adult stem cell research and specifically
prohibits spending on human cloning.

      Despite the proponents' advantages in money and endorsements, the public
remains skeptical and, at this point, divided along partisan lines, according to
a Field Poll published in August. The survey showed 45 percent of California
voters favoring the stem cell initiative and 42 percent against it. Democrats
favor it by 2 to 1, while Republicans oppose it by a comparable margin. However,
only 40 percent of the respondents said they knew much about the proposal.

      Mr. Johnson said there were numerous arguments against the proposition,
beyond the moral objections. California is already heavily indebted and is
having trouble meeting its day-to-day expenses. He also said that the measure
contained insufficient ethical safeguards and could lead to profiteering by
venture capitalists and biotechnology interests.

      The measure would give the governor and the Legislature virtually no power
to direct or oversee spending. ''There's no guarantee that one dime goes to the
public,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''It's an absolutely no-strings-attached gift of $3
billion.''

      He also said that the measure devoted a lot of money to a scientific field
that was still in its infancy, while giving nothing to other, more mature
medical technologies. The National Institutes of Health spent $24.8 million on
research involving human embryonic stem cells and $190.7 million on human adult
stem cell research in fiscal year 2003, a spokeswoman said. The institutes'
entire budget that year was about $27 billion.

      Backers of the plan dismissed all these points, saying there were
stringent rules in the proposal to ensure that the research was conducted under
federal ethics guidelines and that royalties were paid to the state. The plan
also calls for a 29-member commission to review grants and report annually to
the Legislature.

      The committee promoting the plan released a study last week that said the
measure would pay for itself in lower health care costs and higher income and
sales tax revenues. The study, financed by the initiative's proponents, also
predicted that the research would generate $537 million to $1.1 billion in
royalties to the state over the next 35 years.

      Some scientists said they hoped the initiative would set off a chain
reaction in other states and, at the least, make embryonic stem cell research
more acceptable.

      ''It changes the community's perception of the value of the work,'' said
Dr. Steven A. Goldman, chief of cell and gene therapy at the University of
Rochester Medical Center, of the prospect of the plan's passage.

      Backers of Proposition 71 say that the stem cell research could also spawn
a big industry in California because new discoveries will lead to new companies.

      Some point to genetic engineering, which was developed in the 1970's by
scientists at Stanford and the University of California at San Francisco. One of
those scientists helped found Genentech, the first company to exploit that
technology. Genentech is now one of the world's biggest biotechnology companies,
and hundreds of other biotechnology companies are based in California.

      Still, whether this happens with stem cells depends to some extent on
whether the technology proves commercially useful. Venture capitalists have been
reluctant to invest much in the field directly because the potential payoff is
years away.

      Yet venture capitalists are among the biggest donors to the Proposition 71
campaign. Critics contend that private investors are supporting the initiative
in the hopes of getting the public to pay for the research until it is ready for
commercial application.

      Joseph S. Lacob, a partner at the Menlo Park, Calif., venture capital firm
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, gave $500,000, even though he said he did not
expect any immediate commercial profit from the work. Mr. Lacob said he was a
Republican who voted for President Bush in 2000, but he said he was angry that
the president had shut down what he considered a promising avenue of research.

      ''This country is falling behind because of an administration directive
that I think is totally in error,'' Mr. Lacob said. ''I felt something had to be
done to send a message to the Bush administration and the world that the United
States and particularly California is going to take a leadership role.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert N. Klein, a real estate developer, leads the stem cell
effort. (Photo by Associated Press)(pg. A23)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2004


                             336 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2004 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           September 19, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: NEIGHBORHOOD TIMES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Dali museum group attends artist's Venice retrospective

SERIES: ON THE TOWN

BYLINE: MARY JANE PARK

BODY:

   Representatives of St. Petersburg's Salvador Dali Museum have been in Italy
for the Sept. 12 opening of a centennial retrospective of the artist's work at
the Palazzo Grassi in Venice.

   Becky Pierson, the Dali's finance director, reports that Spain's King Juan
Carlos and Queen Sofia attended the opening reception; Dali was born in
Catalonia in 1904.

   Eleanor Morse, co-founder of the St. Petersburg museum, attended with her
son, Brad; museum executive director Hank Hine and his children, Charles and
Grace; board chairman Tom James and his wife, Mary; board member Carole
Ketterhagen; board member and Eckerd College president Don Eastman and his wife,
Chris; museum deputy director Kathy White; education director Peter Tush;
exhibitions director William Jeffett; and events coordinator Natasha Nickodem.

   St. Petersburg's Mel Sembler, who is the U.S. ambassador to Italy, went to
the reception and later gave a dinner for the delegation in the Villa Taverna,
the official residence he shares with his wife, Betty, in Rome.

   The coterie also visited the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice and toured
Vatican City.

   Joan Kropf, the Dali's collections director, canceled her trip as Ivan
approached. Hurricane evacuation is an enormous operation in which every work is
removed from the ground floor and moved to a secure vault.

   Pierson said it took about 10 hours to reposition the pieces last Sunday in a
"very long and tedious" process that required eight workers just to pack and
transport the huge masterworks.

+++

   Publication of Neighborhood Times' eighth annual Social Calendar generated
requests for including additional events. Below is an addendum. Many thanks for
your contributions.

Saturday

   HIGH HEEL HIKE: Benefits Children's Dream Fund, Pediatric Cancer Foundation.
Open to all genders. Also launches Shop 'til You Drop campaign. Outrageous
shoes, accessories suggested. 10 a.m. Old Hyde Park Village, Tampa (former
Sharper Image site). Minimum entry fee $25. 896-6390; (813) 269-0955;
http://www.childrensdreamfund.org;  http://www.pcfusa.org.

Oct. 2

   PUMPKIN PALOOZA: Fall family fun festival benefits St. Petersburg Junior
Woman's Club charitable projects. 1-7 p.m. St. PetersburgWoman's Club, 40 Snell
Isle Blvd. NE. Free. 341-2201.

Oct. 12

   MEMBERSHIP TEA: Garden Club of St. Petersburg event features a musical
program. Rescheduled from Sept. 14. 1 p.m. 500 Park St. S. 360-5793.

Oct. 16

   LES FAUVES AFTER HOURS: Gulf Coast Museum of Art young professionals
membership group event features works, studio of glass artist Duncan McClellan.
Hors d'oeuvres, drink specials. 4-7 p.m. 8917 Maislin Drive, Building F, Tampa.
Free. 518-6833 ext. 206.

Oct. 17

   SEC ALUMNI GOLF TOURNAMENT: Fundraiser for Help A Child. Scramble format.
1:30 p.m. Countryside Country Club, 3001 Countryside Blvd., Clearwater. $85.
773-8665.

Oct. 23

   ELKS GOLF TOURNAMENT: Holiday Isles Elks  No. 1912 event benefits Florida
Elks Children's Therapy and Youth Camp. Baypointe Golf Club, 9399 Commodore
Drive, Largo. $50 entry fee (accepted through Oct. 9) includes golf, cart,
lunch. 393-6742; 398-5672.

Nov. 5

   PATRIOTIC TRIBUTE: Third annual volunteers of America of Florida event
benefits Florida veterans housing and outreach programs. Buffet dinner, live
entertainment, silent auction. 6-9 p.m. Wyndham Harbour Island Hotel, 725 S
Harbour Island Blvd., Tampa. $45. (813) 282-1525 ext. 245.

Nov. 6

   MENORAH MANOR GUILD GALA: Cabaret and casino evening, silent auction. 6:30
p.m. Harborview Center, 300 Cleveland St., Clearwater. 302-3729.

   A CHOSEN GENERATION: 19th anniversary gala and auction benefit Pregnancy
Center of Pinellas County. Black tie optional. 6:30 p.m. Coliseum, 535 Fourth
Ave. N, St. Petersburg. 545-8100, ext. 23.

Nov. 10

   COLISEUM 80TH ANNIVERSARY OPEN HOUSE: Charly Raymond Orchestra and the Apple
Blossoms perform a tribute to Harry James and the Andrews Sisters. 1-4 p.m.
Coliseum, 535 Fourth Ave. N, St. Petersburg. Free.

Nov. 13

   ST. VINCENT DE PAUL DINNER: Society of St. Vincent de Paul South Pinellas
benefit dinner, auction support food center, transitional housing. 6 p.m.
Coliseum, 535 Fourth Ave. N, St. Petersburg. $80. 823-2516.

Nov. 19

   CELEBRATE THE SEASON: Holiday gift market sponsored by Junior League of St.
Petersburg to finance community programs, organizations. 9 a.m.-3 p.m.; Happy
Hour shopping 5-8 p.m.; Roman Holiday launch gala 7-11 p.m. Coliseum, 525 Fourth
Ave. N. $5; children under 12 free. $50 gala. 895-5018;  http://www.jlstp.org.

Nov. 20

   CELEBRATE THE SEASON: Holiday gift market. 10 a.m.-5 p.m. Coliseum. $5;
children under 12 free. 895-5018;  http://www.jlstp.org.

Nov. 21

   CELEBRATE THE SEASON: Holiday gift market. 11 a.m.-4 p.m. Coliseum. $5;
children under 12 free. 895-5018;  http://www.jlstp.org.

Dec. 8

   CASA PEACE BREAKFAST: benefits Community Action Stops Abuse, domestic
violence victims. Keynote speaker: Denise Brown. Renaissance Vinoy Resort, 501
Fifth Avenue NE, St. Petersburg. 895-4912 ext. 114; casa-stpete.org.

Jan. 10

   KEEPERS OF THE GATE: St. Petersburg chapter of Hadassah luncheon benefits
research in breast cancer, gene therapy. Noon. Private home. $1,000.
Reservations required. 367-2706; 866-9032.

Feb. 5

   BIG TOP BALL: 74th annual Charity Ball benefits All Children's Hospital.
Coliseum, 535 Fourth Ave. N, St. Petersburg. 347-6288;  http://www.allkids.org.

April 9

   GREAT CHEFS OF TAMPA BAY: Seventh annual Family Resources benefit features
Italian-style village of work by bay area artists, Family Resources' Youth Arts
Corps; food by local dignitaries, celebrity chefs; entertainment. 6-9:30 p.m.
Private home. $125. 550-4000.

April 16

   ROCK ROLL AND REMEMBER: benefits Help A Child. 8 p.m.-midnight. Coliseum.
544-3900 ext. 179.

April 18

   CASA AMIGAS GOLF TOURNAMENT: Benefits victims of domestic abuse. Four-person
handicapped scramble. Noon registration. 895-4912 ext. 114; casa-stpete.org.

   Mary Jane Park can be reached at (727) 893-8267; fax (727) 893-8675; e-mail
park@sptimes.com; P.O. Box 1121, St. Petersburg, FL 33731.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2004


                             337 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                          September 16, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; PLANET; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1206 words

HEADLINE: Beyond the mirage of cell science

BYLINE: By Gregory M. Lamb Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

BODY:

   Microscopic embryonic stem cells might hold the answer to afflictions from
baldness, wrinkles, and age spots to the most intractable diseases.

   Or they might be a medical mirage, a tempting oasis of healing on a horizon
that never grows closer.

   This fall, as entities ranging from California to the United Nations prepare
to make major decisions about the future of stem-cell research, American public
opinion has swung strongly in favor of the technology. But just as medical
research has created breakthroughs in physical treatments, it has also led
doctors - and the public - down blind alleys.

   It's not yet clear which path stem-cell research will follow. It is, however,
certain that it will spark more political fireworks than any medical technology
in at least a quarter century.

   "Americans love medical technology," says Robert Blendon, a professor of
health policy and management at Harvard University who tracks public attitudes
toward medicine. But embryonic stem cells have become linked to the abortion
debate - "the single biggest, most contentious issue in American society," he
adds. That alone makes the issue unique.

   To be sure, those in the field are pretty sure they're onto something
exciting. "There's absolutely nothing we've seen so far to suggest that this
cannot be done," Dr. Douglas Melton, a leading stem-cell researcher at Harvard
University, said at an international conference on stem-cell research in Boston
in June.

   But others remember a cautionary tale from the mid-1990s: "gene therapy"
aimed at replacing, manipulating, or supplementing human genes that were not
working with healthy genes.

   "When it [gene therapy] was first proposed, it was going to be the way to fix
everything," says Josephine Johnston, a bioethicist at the Hastings Center, a
nonprofit bioethics research institute in Garrison, N.Y. Advocates announced
that treatments based on genetic manipulation would be available no later than
the turn of the millennium. But by 2004, not one had reached the market, while
many human test subjects had suffered adverse effects. Several died.

   For the moment, US public opinion is moving in favor of stem-cell research,
especially after pleas from the wife and son of former President Reagan, whose
battle with Alzheimer's disease raised the question whether the nascent
technology might have provided a cure.

   The swing in the polls is a boon for proponents, because major decisions
about the technology's future loom. In October, the United Nations General
Assembly is expected to vote whether to adopt a ban on all human cloning, backed
by the Bush administration. Or it might ban only reproductive cloning and allow
so-called therapeutic cloning, which creates stem cells.

   On Nov. 2, Californians will vote on a ballot initiative to provide $ 3
billion in state funds for stem-cell research. Proponents, including billionaire
Bill Gates, have contributed more than $ 10 million to push its passage,
suggesting that it will be a boon to the state and lead to breakthroughs that
the federal government has refused to underwrite.

   Supported by antiabortion advocates, the Bush administration has restricted
federal funds for embryonic stem-cell research to a series of stem-cell lines
created before Aug. 9, 2001. (Scientists are also studying stem cells from
adults and the blood from the umbilical cords of newborns. While showing
promise, these may have limited therapeutic abilities.) Fewer than 20 of the
original 78 embryonic stem-cell lines have proven useful to scientists, who
argue they need access to many, many more to conduct meaningful research.

   Opponents of therapeutic cloning, which uses cells from human embryos, say it
amounts to murder because the embryos are destroyed in the process.

   These embryonic stem cells can grow into all types of cells and tissues found
in the body. Scientists say if they learn how to direct their growth, stem cells
could be used to combat a host of intractable diseases.

   Those who see a bright future for stem cells don't look to gene therapy but
to in vitro fertilization (IVF) as a possible model. On July 25, 1978, Louise
Brown became the first baby born using the then-controversial technique, in
which conception takes place outside the womb. Critics called IVF unnatural,
dangerous, and a threat to family life. But in the following quarter century,
IVF has become widely used and accepted and now is considered a relatively safe
medical procedure.

   Ironically, IVF produces excess human embryos that clinics routinely destroy.
Yet there has been little public outcry "because that technology is so popular
that it would be political suicide to try to close in vitro fertilization
clinics," says Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia. There may be some 400,000 such
embryos in clinics around the world.

   The IVF experience suggests that religious and moral opposition to embryonic
stem-cell research might fade only after it produces a useful therapy.

   However hard it is to gauge the probability of success, many people are
already weighing the costs of research against potential benefits. Besides
California voters deciding whether to invest in stem cells, venture capitalists
are backing a number of biotech firms. The lure of finding a miraculous healing
agent makes the investment attractive.

   "I can find no example where over the long term we have not moved ahead for
research for cures of major diseases," says Dr. Blendon at Harvard. When people
are polled about stem cells, he says, if the question mentions that the research
might produce cures for well-known diseases, the number of people who say they
support it zooms to a strong majority.

   The potential for stem cells "is enormous," but there are countless twists
and turns left on the path to harnessing them, adds Ann Parson, author of the
new book "The Proteus Effect: Stem Cells and Their Promise for Medicine." "The
amount of biology that we have to learn to turn that embryonic stem cell into a
cell of one's choosing is huge. I personally wonder if it's not going to take
one or two life times to see."

   "There's a sort of idea in science that if you search long enough and hard
enough, you'll find a solution to everything, especially in medicine,"
bioethicist Johnston says. "But that doesn't always pan out." She sees some
parallels between the promise of stem cells and the search for an AIDS vaccine
that after two decades remains undiscovered.

   Furor over stem cells

   * Embryonic stem cells form in the first days after conception and eventually
turn into all the cells, tissues, and organs in the human body. Scientists hope
to use these in the treatment of a wide range of ailments.

   * Adult stem cells - donated by humans - are extracted from bone marrow or
umbilical blood and have been used to fight disease for many years.

   * By one count, 24 countries have flexible or permissive laws on embryonic
stem cells, including China, Russia, Japan, France, and the United Kingdom.

   * In November, voters in Switzerland and California will vote on measures to
regulate or support such research.

   Source: William Hoffman

   (c) Copyright 2004. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2004


                             338 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2004 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 15, 2004 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D02

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: DAILY BRIEFING POSSIBLE ERRORS MAY LEAD DIGIMARC TO RESTATE
PASTFINANCIAL RESULTS

SOURCE: BOAZ HERZOG - The Oregonian ALLAN BRETTMAN - The Oregonian JULIE TRIPP -
The Oregonian

BODY:

   A roundup of business activity in the Northwest

   Possible errors may lead Digimarc to restate past financial results Digimarc
Corp. may restate financial results from the past three years because of
possible accounting errors of at least $1.2 million discovered by managers of
the Tualatin-based company.

   Software development costs were improperly capitalized, according to a
Digimarc assessment announced Monday. The errors range from $1.2 million to $2
million and may lead the company to restate results from 2002-04. Other possible
errors in accounting for capitalization costs in Digimarc's key ID Systems
business unit could reach as high as $1.5 million and may also result in
negative adjustments to past results.

   Digimarc said it will probably restate results for the first two quarters of
2004 and for all of 2003.

   The announcement came after markets closed Monday and less than two months
after the company surprised investors by reporting a second-quarter loss and
forecasting another loss in the current quarter.

   Digimarc shares closed Tuesday at $8.58, up 9 cents, on the Nasdaq Stock
Market. The shares have fallen by almost half in the past 12 months. -- Boaz
Herzog

   Clark County unemployment rate climbs to 7.4 percent in August

   VANCOUVER -- Clark County's unemployment rate for August edged up two-tenths
of a percentage point, according to data released Tuesday by the state
Employment Security Department.

   The county's rate, not adjusted for seasonal factors, was 7.4 percent in
August. It was 7.2 percent in July and 10.1 percent in August 2003.

   "Considering a margin of error, I wouldn't say unemployment hasn't changed
one way or another in the county," said Scott Bailey, the department's regional
economist.

   Washington's seasonally adjusted unemployment rate rose to 6.2 percent in
August, well above the national average, but still better than the state's rate
of 7.7 percent a year ago.

   The state's seasonally adjusted jobless rate rose two-tenths of a percentage
point over the previous month's 6 percent.

   The comparable national average dropped one-tenth of a point to 5.4 percent.

   Oregon's seasonally adjusted rate for August was 7.4 percent, up from 6.8
percent in July, and down from 8.4 percent in August 2003.

   Overall in Clark County, Bailey said, the employment picture is improving. He
pointed to the county's 3.6 percent job growth rate for this year, outpacing the
nation's 1.3 percent rate.

   About 13,700 county residents were unemployed in August -- a drop of 5,000
from August 2003.

   Unemployment rates elsewhere in Southwest Washington: Cowlitz, 7.9;
Klickitat, 8.5; Lewis, 6.9; Pacific, 5.9; Skamania, 6.2; and Wahkiakum, 4.

   -- Allan Brettman

   OHSU researchers' federal grant in biodefense will finance study Oregon
Health & Science University announced Tuesday that its researchers will receive
$2.5 million from a federal biodefense contract to study the bacteria that cause
salmonella poisoning, typhoid fever and the virus that causes monkeypox. The
project will seek to develop drugs that fight such pathogens.

   Researchers at OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute will collaborate on
the project with Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, based in Richland, Wash.
OHSU is sharing in a $10.3 million, five-year contract that the Department of
Energy lab won from the National Institute for Allergies and Infectious
Diseases.

   -- Boaz Herzog

   Clark Public Utilities board OKs general manager's salary increase

   VANCOUVER -- Clark Public Utilities commissioners approved a 3.5 percent
salary increase for general manager Wayne Nelson on Tuesday, raising his pay
from $159,390 to $165,000.

   Commissioners also allowed Nelson to convert 100 hours of sick leave to
vacation.

   Clark Public Utilities, providing electric service for about 166,000
customers in Clark County, is the 18th-largest customer-owned utility in the
United States when ranked by the number of customers served, according to the
utility. The national average salary for managers of customer-owned utilities
with more than 100,000 customers was about $224,000 in 2003, the utility said.

   -- Allan Brettman

   Portland Teachers credit union offers less costly short-term loans Portland
Teachers, the largest credit union in Oregon, today is introducing a Payday
Advantage Loan to give its members a lower-rate alternative to storefront
lenders who charge borrowers 400 percent interest or more on emergency
short-term loans.

   Credit union members who are pressed for cash can quickly get as much as $600
at 14 percent interest and no set-up fees, repayable five days after the
member's next payday or within 30 days. Members who use automatic payment from
their credit union accounts qualify for 12 percent interest.

   Portland Teachers is the second large credit union to provide lower-cost,
short-term loans in response to state surveys showing a need. Beaverton's First
Technology Credit Union began offering payday loans in July.

   Gov. Ted Kulongoski has urged lenders to provide such loans to help
Oregonians who "find themselves stretched thin between paychecks."

   Oregon is one of 17 states that allows lenders to charge what they like
without interest rate caps. The state's survey found that payday loans at
exorbitant rates are big business in Oregon, where 550,000 such loans totaling
$175 million were made in 2002, the latest year for which statistics were
available. -- Julie Tripp

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2004


                             339 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1954 words

HEADLINE: Method to Turn Off Bad Genes Is Set for Tests on Human Eyes

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   If all goes according to plan, about half a dozen elderly people at risk of
blindness will visit Dr. Lawrence J. Singerman's retina clinic in the coming
weeks to receive injections in the whites of their eyes.

    The experimental injections will contain a new type of drug based on a
recently discovered genetic phenomenon, called RNA interference, that has
excited scientists with its versatile and powerful ability to turn off genes.
Having quickly become a standard tool for genetic studies in the laboratory, the
technique is now set to be tested in people for the first time.

    Acuity Pharmaceuticals, a two-year-old company in Philadelphia, said last
week that the Food and Drug Administration had granted permission for it to
conduct the first human test of RNA interference -- the experiment in which Dr.
Singerman's clinic in Cleveland and a second clinic plan to participate. The
early-stage clinical trial, largely a safety review, will test the technique
against the gene that sets off the process of age-related macular degeneration,
a deterioration of the retina that is the leading cause of blindness in the
elderly.

    Success is far from guaranteed. While RNAi, as it is known, works well in
the laboratory, there are questions about whether it will work in people. Two
other techniques that were also once considered highly promising ways to turn
off genes -- antisense and ribozymes -- have not yielded any significant drugs
despite years of effort.

    But if it works, RNAi could potentially yield a cornucopia of other drugs
designed to silence errant, disease-causing genes in the body, or disarm an
invading virus by knocking out its genes. A second company, Sirna Therapeutics
of Boulder, Colo., applied to the F.D.A. last week for permission to begin a
trial of its own drug for macular degeneration.

    Several other small biotechnology companies say they, too, are planning
clinical trials in the next couple of years to use RNA interference to treat
that disease and others including AIDS, hepatitis, Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's
disease. It could become one of the quickest ways that the new knowledge about
human genes generated by the Human Genome Project is translated into medical
benefits.

    ''From the basic science that's been done in this area, I think the
direction has great promise,'' said Dr. Singerman, president of Retina
Associates of Cleveland. Noting that the small Acuity trial will have only a few
investigators, he added, ''I kind of feel privileged to be one of them.''

    Big pharmaceutical companies, which already use RNAi as a laboratory
technique for testing how suppressing a single gene affects a cell, are joining
the field by linking up with smaller RNAi-specialist companies. Merck formed a
partnership with Alnylam Pharmaceuticals to work on drugs for eye diseases, and
Eli Lilly & Company signed a deal with Sirna Therapeutics to explore RNAi drugs
for cancer.

    Like the older gene-intervention techniques, the RNAi approach involves
taking a short stretch of RNA, the cousin of the DNA in genes, and delivering it
into cells in the body. But delivery has not proved an easy task. RNA is quickly
chewed up by enzymes in the blood or removed by the liver and kidneys and
excreted. And even if the RNA survives its journey through the bloodstream, it
cannot easily pass through the membranes surrounding the cells in which it is
needed.

    ''There's not a lot of evidence showing it can just be injected in blood and
work,'' said David R. Corey, professor of pharmacology at the University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas.

    Backers, though, say that RNAi appears to be more potent than the earlier
techniques because it makes use of the cell's natural mechanism.

    ''There's no doubt in my mind that this is the clear winner,'' said Mark A.
Kay, a Stanford professor. He hopes to test an RNAi treatment for hepatitis C in
cooperation with Benitec, an Australian company that now owns a company he
founded.

    Some animal tests have demonstrated the technique's potential. According to
a paper published in June, scientists at the F.D.A. led by Suzanne L. Epstein
used RNAi to partly protect mice from lethal flu viruses, including two strains
of avian flu that experts worry could become the basis for a new pandemic.

    Beverly L. Davidson and colleagues at the University of Iowa reduced the
severity in mice of one type of ataxia, a hereditary brain disease somewhat
similar to Huntington's. ''It's very exciting,'' she said, ''because we finally
have a tool to approach therapies'' for diseases like Huntington's and ataxia.

    But the animal tests have not been numerous. And in some cases, to overcome
the delivery obstacles, the RNA was injected into the mice at such high pressure
and volume that some experienced temporary heart failure. It is not yet known
whether injections of lower volumes of fluid at lower pressures, as required for
human safety, will be effective.

    RNA is a string of chemical units, called bases, that represent the letters
of the genetic code. It serves as a messenger, carrying the recipe for a protein
from the DNA in the genes to the cell's protein-making machinery. Proteins form
much of the structure of a cell and carry out much of its activities.

    While DNA has two strands -- the famous double helix -- RNA is usually
single-stranded. If cells sense double-stranded RNA, they act to destroy it and
any other RNA with the same sequence. Some researchers conjecture that this RNA
interference mechanism might have evolved as a defense against viruses, which
sometimes create double-stranded RNA.

    Scientists can harness this mechanism to prevent any gene in the body from
being used to make a protein, effectively shutting off the gene. They synthesize
a short string of double-stranded RNA that corresponds to part of the messenger
RNA carrying the protein recipe. Rather than creating the protein, the cell
destroys the messenger.

    The process is straightforward enough that drugs using this mechanism are
being readied for clinical trials only three years after RNAi was reported to
work in the cells of mammals. ''It has had a remarkably fast transition to the
clinic,'' said Andrew Z. Fire, a professor at Stanford who was a co-discoverer
of an animal form of RNAi in a worm around 1998.

    Several of the first tests of RNAi will be for the ''wet'' form of macular
degeneration, in which abnormal leaky blood vessels damage the retina. This
disease was chosen partly because the RNA can be injected directly into the eye,
easing the delivery challenge.

    Other companies have demonstrated that the disease can be treated by
blocking the action of a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor,
which spurs blood vessels to form and to leak. But instead of blocking the
action of the protein, the RNAi approach, by turning off the gene, would block
the protein from being formed in the first place.

    ''The other technologies really act like a mop in a leaky basement,'' said
Samuel J. Reich, the senior director of research and development at Acuity.
RNAi, he said, ''turns off the leak at the faucet.''

    Acuity, which plans to begin its human trials next month once it receives
approval from a review board for the clinics, has gained a head start on its two
closest competitors, Sirna and Alnylam, by taking the simpler approach of using
a plain double-stranded piece of RNA. Its rivals are both chemically modifying
their double-stranded RNA in an effort to make their treatments more effective
and longer-lasting, cutting down on the number of injections patients would
need.

    ''You can't simply take a naked short interfering RNA and use it as a
drug,'' said John Maraganore, chief executive of Alnylam, deriding Acuity's
approach.

    Mr. Reich countered that modifying the RNA, as his competitors plan to do,
might increase the side effects.

    Alnylam, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., and was founded in 2002 by some
academic pioneers of RNA interference, hopes to begin a trial treatment for
macular degeneration in the second half of next year. It is also working on a
treatment for Parkinson's disease in which the RNA would be injected directly
into the brain.

    Sirna, besides its work in macular degeneration, is pursuing a treatment for
hepatitis C and has licensed the work done at the University of Iowa to treat
Huntington's disease.

    Another company, CytRx of Los Angeles, hopes to begin a trial next year to
treat a form of Lou Gehrig's disease that is caused by a gene mutation. It is
also working on drugs for obesity and diabetes. Two other companies, Benitec and
Nucleonics, have chosen not to try using short pieces of RNA as drugs. Instead,
they create genes that cause the body to produce RNA that folds back on itself
like a hairpin, producing a double strand.

    Having the body make its own interfering RNA could eliminate the need for
frequent injections, although delivering genes into cells -- known as gene
therapy -- is a field with its own failures and safety concerns.

    Benitec is working with the City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte,
Calif., on plans for beginning tests next year of RNA interference as a
treatment for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.

    John J. Rossi, a scientist at City of Hope, said patients would first have
their immune systems wiped out by chemotherapy and then receive a transplant of
their own bone marrow stem cells. But before the transplant, the stem cells
would be given a gene to make double-stranded RNA that corresponds to a gene in
H.I.V. The idea is to repopulate the immune system with cells that will fend off
re-infection by H.I.V.

    To be eligible for the trial the patients must also have lymphoma, a cancer
that can be treated by bone marrow transplantation -- an arduous and risky
procedure that would not normally be used on patients with H.I.V., Dr. Rossi
said.

    The other company taking the folded RNA approach, Nucleonics, a privately
held company in Horsham, Pa., hopes to begin a trial to treat hepatitis B by the
end of next year, according to its chief executive, Robert J. Towarnicki.

    Numerous uncertainties remain about whether the drugs can be safe and
effective. RNAi, for example, might not completely repress a disease-causing
gene, making a drug ineffective. Some studies, meanwhile, have shown that the
RNA can reduce the activity of genes other than the intended one, possibly genes
that partly match the sequence of the target. Such inaccuracies could lead to
undesirable side effects in the patient. Double-stranded RNA can also provoke a
powerful immune response in some situations.

    Natasha J. Caplen, a gene therapy expert at the National Cancer Institute,
said the F.D.A. had not decided how it would regulate RNAi drugs, making it
unlikely that the companies would be able to begin clinical trials as quickly as
they hoped. The F.D.A., which as a matter of policy declined to verify whether
it had granted Acuity permission to begin its trial, said that for now it would
consider each request on its merits.

    Besides scientific and regulatory issues, the field is facing possible legal
battles for control of crucial patents, and also the challenge of attracting
investors. Sirna's stock traded as high as $8 last November but closed yesterday
at $2.81. Alnylam, which went public in May, was forced by a lukewarm market
response to reduce the price of the stock offering to $6 a share, down from the
hoped-for $10 to $12. The stock closed yesterday at $5.82.

    ''This is a new technology and there are reasons for people to be skeptical
until there's proof points out there,'' said Dr. Maraganore of Alnylam.

    Acuity, for its part, hopes the first proof points might soon be in the eyes
of Dr. Singerman's beholders.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart/Diagram: ''Shutting Off Disease Genes''Medical researchers are
harnessing a naturally occurring phenomenon, RNA interference, to create
treatments they hope will fight disease by shuttingdown the genetic process that
prompts a person's cells to produce disease-causing proteins.Making a proteinIn
the cell nucleus, chromosomes are made of wound-up DNA strands.Genes are
sections of DNA.Genes instruct the cell to make proteins by transcribing their
sequence of bases, or code, into messenger RNA.Messenger RNA leaves the nucleus
where the cell ''reads'' its code to make proteins.Malfunctioning messenger
RNAMost RNA consists of a single strand. But doublestranded RNA can be created
by the cell by mistake or deliberately in some cases. Viruses entering a cell
can also create double-stranded RNA.As a natural defense, cells create protein
complex to destroy doublestranded RNA and any matching RNA before a protein can
be made.Using the cell's natural defense mechanismScientists can manufacture
doublestranded versions of RNA whose code corresponds to part of the
singlestranded versions that cause disease.In theory, injecting this
double-stranded RNA into a cell causes the cell to destroy it and anything with
a corresponding code sequence, effectively shutting off the production of the
protein.Diagrams highlight the parts of a cell as well as the aforementioned
processes.(pg. C6)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2004


                             340 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 11, 2004, Saturday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: ROSEMARY QUIGLEY, WROTE OF LIVING WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By Tom Long, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Rosemary Quigley, 33, was a medical ethicist who wrote poignantly about
living with cystic fibrosis and undergoing a double lung transplant. She died of
double pneumonia Monday at Massachusetts General Hospital, five months after the
procedure.

      Ms. Quigley was "remarkably spirited and inquisitive and engaged in other
people's lives," her cousin Mary T. Marshall of Boston said yesterday.


           A sprightly woman with reddish-brown hair, she was born with cystic
fibrosis, a genetic disorder that causes the body to produce an abnormally
thick, sticky mucus that clogs the lungs and leads to life-threatening
infections.

      "As a child, I was always conscious of my mother lingering at the bedroom
door, watching my chest rise and fall as I rested," she wrote in a story
published in Boston Review in January 1991. "Now, as I fall asleep, I too am
tormented by breath. Every wheeze and restriction fills me with dread, making
the passage of deep breaths even harder. Some days I am too exhausted having
lived to pay attention: I am grateful that I still have these days."

      She had an unusual perspective on the fund-raising efforts to fight the
disease.

   "The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation sells thick red candles, admonishing
passersby to 'give the breath of life,' " she wrote. "The mode of promotion is
ironic to CF sufferers, to whom flaming tapers on birthday cakes present an
annual pulmonary function test."

      In 1989, when the genetic cause of cystic fibrosis was discovered, it gave
her a new perspective. "Ultimately we are all casualties of nature, and we will
increasingly know the genetic flaw inciting our death," she wrote. "I am a newly
discovered and endangered species: that which flourishes in a productive third
decade, constantly aware of no guarantees from modern medicine."

      A graduate of Acton-Boxborough Regional High School and Harvard College,
Ms. Quigley earned a law degree and a master's degree in health management and
policy at the University of Michigan. While in college she read about the first
proposed gene therapy for cystic fibrosis. "I felt more somber than elated," she
wrote, "the promise of discovery discounted by a fear of disappointment."

      While in Michigan, Ms. Quigley was a staff member of the Governor's
Commission on Genetic Privacy. She investigated ethical decision-making relating
to genetic illnesses in Great Britain, Ireland, and the Netherlands on a
Trustman Traveling Fellowship.

      "Hope is my currency, what I offer in exchange for their help," she wrote,
referring to parents she interviewed in Europe who had discovered that their
children had cystic fibrosis.

      For the past three years Ms. Quigley was an assistant professor of medical
ethics and health policy at Baylor University, where she helped write a medical
consent form. "She thought she would be effective given her own personal history
and extraordinary life-threatening illness in trying to assist others in
teaching and making decisions in a hospital environment, " said her cousin.

      Last year she was one of three winners nationally of a three-year
Greenwall Foundation Award for medical ethics research.

      In a journal published in Slate Magazine in March, Ms. Quigley wrote of
getting a phone call at 5:30 a.m. on Feb. 2 notifying her that lungs were
available and a double lung transplant would be conducted in Texas Medical
Center.

      "During my years of decline with CF, I suffered profound fear of a
transplant because I didn't want to die in surgery or in severe complications
immediately thereafter," she wrote. "I also thought I would be overwhelmed by
the necessary circumstances of receiving lungs that someone else must die."

   She gamely endured the extensive regimen of medicines and medical procedures
before, during, and after the transplant. It gave her a new lease on life.
"Realizing I can breathe when I am walking and talking, I stop in my tracks,"
she wrote. "My colleagues marvel that they can no longer detect respiratory
symptoms."

      In 2001, when Ms. Quigley was living in Portland, Maine, clerking for
Judge Kermit Lipez of the US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, she met her
future husband, Jeffrey Harris. They lived in the same apartment building and
had "Save Fenway Park" stickers on their cars.

      They were married in Portland in May and moved to Watertown.

      Ms. Quigley endured a couple of periods when her body rejected her new
lungs and a series of lung infections.

      "I'm 33 and counting," she wrote in Slate, "and at this time it is not
hard to imagine living much longer than a decade with these new lungs. I don't
mean to be greedy, but I think I will always want more life. At the same time, I
am grateful to have had as much as I've been given."

   In addition to her husband and cousin, she leaves her parents, Mary Beth and
Larry of Acton, and a sister, Ann Corkery of Natick.

      A funeral Mass will be said at 10 a.m. today in St. Elizabeth of Hungary
Church in Acton. Burial will be in Woodlawn Cemetery in Acton.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2004


                             341 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            September 5, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: Pigs, artificial organs and stem cells are possible solutions to organ
shortage

SERIES: 50 YEARS OF ORGAN TRANSPLANTS

BYLINE: Jim Ritter

BODY:

   It may be a long shot, but the long-term solution to the shortage  of
transplant organs could end up being pigs.

   Pig organs are roughly the size of human organs. Researchers are  trying to
make them compatible with the human immune system, and if  they succeed, there
could be an almost unlimited supply of  transplant organs.

   A normal pig organ would be quickly rejected. The human immune  system would
recognize a sugar on the surface of pig cells as  foreign, and antibodies would
mount a furious attack. But gene  therapy could be used to knock out the pig
gene that's responsible  for the troublesome sugar.

   There are still other hurdles, though, that have to be overcome.  For one,
pigs age much more quickly than people: One pig year is  the equivalent of 39
human years. It's not known whether  transplanted pig organs would last a
patient's lifetime.

   Another worry: Pigs could transmit viruses or other germs that  might be
harmless to pigs but deadly to people.

   Animal-to-human transplantation -- known as xenotransplantation --  so far
has proved to be more difficult than many researchers  initially expected.

   "Ten years ago, everybody thought it would come about," said  Michael Lysaght
of Brown University's Center for Biomedical  Engineering. "Enthusiasm has
waned."

   Another alternative to human transplants is artificial organs. The  heart
likely would be the easiest to manufacture. After all, it's  just a pump.

   Surgeons have been implanting artificial hearts since dentist  Barney Clark
received a Jarvik heart in 1982. But Clark lived only  112 days, and
artificial-heart patients have since been plagued by  blood clots, infections
and other problems.

   One artificial heart under development -- the AbioCor -- is  completely
contained within the chest cavity, with no protruding  hoses or wires. It has
been implanted in at least 14 patients since  2001. None has lived longer than
about 17 months with the  artificial organ.

   Other researchers are studying ways to grow artificial organs,  using a
combination of synthetic materials and human cells.

   The first step would be to lay cells down on a sort of scaffold.  The second
step would be to get rid of the artificial materials  altogether, Lysaght said.

   Another possible alternative to transplants would be to repair  failing
organs using stem cells. Because stem cells are extremely  adaptable, many
researchers believe they could be used to  regenerate tissue and organs.

GRAPHIC: Researchers are trying to make pig organs compatible with the human
immune system. See also related stories pages 19, 20, 21.

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2004


                             342 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 31, 2004 Tuesday SOONER EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-3 FITNESS FOR ALL

LENGTH: 1709 words

HEADLINE: PICK YOUR CHARITY, PICK YOUR EVENT AND GET MOVING

BYLINE: KATHY SAMUDOVSKY, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Here are some upcoming fall walks, runs, bike treks and golf classics to
raise money and awareness for disease charities and other health-related
efforts. This list also will be available on the Health page of the Post-Gazette
Web site at www.post-gazette.com.


    Sept 4

    * 12th annual UPMC Health Plan/Genesis Riverside Run for Adoption, 9 a.m.,
Pittsburgh's North Shore, near Heinz Field. Includes a 10K race, 5K race and
1-mile fun walk. $20. Proceeds will benefit Genesis, a nonprofit social service
and agency dedicated to supporting women facing unplanned pregnancies.

    To register, call Tricia at 412-766-2693.



    Sept. 7 to 15

    * Westmoreland Chamber Challenge Golf Tournament, at multiple locations. A
nontraditional tournament where individuals can challenge a partner (or a
foursome can challenge another company's foursome), with the loser donating an
agreed-upon amount to charity. Games can be played on any course, but there's a
25 percent discount on greens fees by playing on a chamber partner course.
Benefits the Children's Institute of Pittsburgh and the chamber.

    For information, visit www.chamberchallenge.com or call 724-834-2900.


    Sept. 12

    * 4th annual Karen F. Bowers Memorial "Walk for the Whisper," 10 a.m., North
Park Boat House. 1-mile and 5-mile walks at North Park Lake. Pre-walk
activities, 9 a.m. Sponsored by the Pittsburgh Division of the National Ovarian
Cancer Coalition. $25 adults, $10 children (12 and younger).  Proceeds fund
ovarian cancer research and educational initiatives.

    Participants can register on event day, or in advance by calling
412-486-4952.

    For information on ovarian cancer, visit www.ovarianpgh.org or
www.ovarian.org.


    Sept. 15

    * PNC Advisors Missie Berteotti Golf Classic, Sept. 15, Southpointe Golf
Club, 360 Southpointe Blvd., Canonsburg. Shotgun start, 1 p.m. Event highlights
include putting and chipping instructions by Missie. Proceeds will help
Southwinds, of Castle Shannon, continue to provide community living arrangements
for developmentally challenged adults. Cost: 175 per golfer.

    For more information, call 724-941-7600.


    Sept. 18

    * Walk for PKD (Polycystic Kidney Disease), 9 a.m., North Park's Harmony
Shelter, near the Boat House. Registration, 8 a.m. Pledge-based event sponsored
by the PKD Foundation, whose mission is to raise funds for medical research to
find a treatment and cure for the disease. $15.

    To register in advance, visit www.pkdcure.org or call 412-388-0871.

    * "Walk on the Wild Side" walk-a-thon, 9 a.m., Pittsburgh Zoo and PPG
Aquarium, Highland Park. A 2-mile trek to benefit the Make-A-Wish Foundation of
Western Pennsylvania. Registration, 8 a.m. $20 adults; $10 children.

    For more information or to register, visit www.wishwesternpa.org or call
Stacey at 412-471-9474.


    Sept. 19

    * PaceSetter 5K Run/Walk & Family Fun Day, 9 a.m., Schenley Park Oval,
Oakland. Registration, 7:30 a.m. $15 walkers, $20 runners through Sept. 3;
after, $20 walkers, $25 runners. Leashed dogs, $10. Proceeds benefit the Western
Pennsylvania/West Virginia Chapter of the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of
America.

    For details, visit www.ccfa.org or call 412-687-9775.

    * Burger King "5K...Have it Your Way!" Walk, 10 a.m., North Park, across
from the Boathouse. Registration, 9 a.m. Pledge walk benefitting the Cancer
Caring Center, featuring Steelers Coach Bill Cowher as honorary chairman.  Top
ten fund-raisers will have lunch with Cowher at LeMont restaurant, Mount
Washington. No registration fee.

    For more information, visit www.cancercaring.org or call 412-622-1212.


    Sept. 23 to 26

    * Zach Attack & 84 Lumber Classic, various start times, Mystic Rock golf
course at Nemacolin Woodlands, Farmington, Fayette County. Golf pros including
Vijay Singh, John Daly, Rocco Mediate and others will compete for a $4.2 million
purse during this Pro Golf Association tour, which coincides with the fall
festival at Nemacolin.

    Tickets prior to event start are $10 per day or $40 for four days. Proceeds
benefit the Zach Attack and Nathan's Battle Foundation to fund upcoming gene
therapy clinical trials for Batten Disease. Tickets purchased during the event
will be $22 and will not benefit the charity.

    The foundation is named after Zachary Balog, 8, of Cranberry, and Nathan
Milto, 9, of Greenwood, Ind., who have the disorder, which causes mental
impairment, worsening seizures and progressive loss of sight and motor skills.

    For information about the foundation, visit www.nathansbattle.com. For
tickets, call 724-538-5661.


    Sept. 26

    * America's Walk for Diabetes 2004. Local sites:

    -- 11/2 mile walk at Pittsburgh Zoo and PPG Aquarium. Check-in, 7:30 a.m.;
walk start, 9 a.m., following an aerobic warm-up by Curves.

    -- 4 miles at Twin Lakes Park Activity Center in Westmoreland County.
Check-in, 9 a.m.; walk start, 10 a.m.

    Pledge-based walk benefiting the American Diabetes Association.

    For more information and other sites, visit www.diabetes.org/walk or call
1-888-342-2383, ext. 4610.

    * 2nd annual Sugar Run Bike Event, Sept. 26, Peters Township Recreation
Center, Peterswood Park, McMurray. A three-venue biking event for amateurs and
professionals to benefit Watchful Shepherd USA in its mission to stop child
abuse and family violence. Rolling registration starts 8 a.m.

    -- Bike Race: 9 a.m. 10-mile loops through Peters and Venetia.

    -- Bike tours, 10 a.m. Choice of 15-mile, 25-mile or 62-mile bike rides
through scenic parts of Washington, Pa.

    -- Family events, 11 a.m. Includes rock wall climbing, a bike rodeo, bike
inspections, a 5-mile family fun ride through Peters Woods Park, etc.

    For registration and other details visit www.wingedvelo.org or call Scott at
412-296-6500.


    Oct. 2

    * 3rd annual Kidney Walk, 9 a.m., Schenley Park Oval, Squirrel Hill. A
noncompetitive 5K walk/run celebrating the importance of organ donation, while
focusing on education and prevention of kidney and urinary tract disease.
Registration, 8 a.m.; aerobic warm-up, 8:45 a.m. Sponsored by the National
Kidney Foundation of Western Pennsylvania. For more information, visit
www.kidneywp.org or call 1-800-261-4115, ext. 16 or 412-261-4115, ext. 16.

    * Casino Royale, 6 p.m., Omni William Penn Hotel. Gaming event with funny
money to include blackjack, craps, roulette, slots, etc. Guests also will have
the opportunity to buy a spot in four mini Texas Hold'em Tournaments. Proceeds
benefit the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Tickets, $75.

    For more information, call Tammi Fleet at 412-321-4422.


    Oct. 6

    * Leukemia & Lymphoma Society's sixth annual Light the Night Walk, 7:30
p.m., Heinz Field, North Shore. Registration and celebration, 5:30 p.m.
Distance: 11/2 to 2 miles around Heinz Field. Non-competitive, travel at your
own speed. Zambelli fireworks after the walk. Proceeds will benefit patients
with leukemia, Hodgkins and non-Hodgkins lymphoma and myeloma. For more
information or to register in advance, visit www.lightthenight.org or call
Maureen at 412-395-2875.


    Oct. 9

    * "Race for Pace" 5K Run/Walk, 9 a.m., Pace School, 2432 Greensburg Pike,
Churchill. Advance registration, 6 to 7:30 p.m. Oct. 8. Event day registration
and check-in start, 7:30 a.m. Proceeds support special education and mental
health services for school students. $15 through Oct. 1; $18 after.

    For more details, check www.paceschool.org or call Marilan at 412-244-1900,
ext. 4202.


    Oct. 10

    * Good Samaritan Hospice's 3rd annual Memorial 5K Run and Walk, 9 a.m.,
North Park Boat House. Check-in start, 8 a.m. Proceeds will benefit the new Good
Samaritan House, a home for hospice patients who don't have adequate end-of-life
caregivers. $15 by Sept. 17; $18 after.

    For details, visit www.good-samaritanhospice.org. To register, call Beth at
724-933-8888.


    Oct. 11

    * Animal Rescue League Second Annual Golf Tournament, 10 a.m. shotgun start,
Westmoreland Country Club, off Route 236, Export. Proceeds to benefit animal
health and welfare activities at the ARL of Western Pennsylvania. Registration,
8 a.m. $150 per person; $20 for breakfast and hors d'oeuvres only. Registration
deadline, Sept. 30.

    For more information, call 412-661-6452, ext. 214.


    Oct. 17

    * 5-Mile Fun Run/Walk to benefit St. Clair Hospital, 9 a.m., through
Southpointe business park, Cecil. $15 through Oct. 14; after, $18. Check-in, 8
a.m. in the parking lot of The Health Club at Southpointe. Proceeds will benefit
the hospital's emergency room expansion project and construction of a new
outpatient services facility. Co-sponsored by the hospital and the health club.

    The health club will offer free seminars, twice daily, to prepare for the
walk/run: 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. Sept. 7 and 28, plus free health screenings from 9
a.m. to 1 p.m. on event day.

    For run/walk information, visit www.stclair.org or call 412-344-6600, ext.
1025. For seminar information, call 724-597-0014.


    Oct. 24

    * 2004 Patti Burns Memorial Walkathon, 9 a.m. to noon, Carnegie Mellon
University Track, Forbes Avenue, Oakland. Registration, 8 a.m. $20 individuals
or $35 families through Oct. 13; after, $30 individuals or $40 families; $15 for
students. Proceeds benefit Radio Information Service, which broadcasts the
reading of print material for the blind, the visually impaired and those who
have difficulty holding printed material.

    For information, call Beth at 412-488-3944, then press 5.


    Nov. 11

    * 16th annual Indoor Triathlon/Biathlon, 7 a.m. to 7:30 p.m., Executive
Fitness Center, Westin Convention Center, Downtown. The course consists of a
500-yard swim in a 20-yard pool, 4-mile stationary bike ride, 2-mile treadmill
run and 2,000-meter row. Any combination of three or two events. Honorary chair
will be Jenna Morasca of TV's "Survivor" fame. Registration deadline, Nov. 10.
Per event cost: $25 for one, $40 for two, $50 for three; $150 for a corporate
team. Proceeds will benefit the Western Pennsylvania/West Virginia Chapter of
the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society. For more information, call Kira at
1-800-726-2873, ext. 2880 or 412-395-2880.



CORRECTION-DATE: September 2, 2004

CORRECTION:
2004.< The in-person registration fee for the Sept. 12 Walk for the Whisper is
$25. The $20 figure reported Tuesday was for mail-in registration, which closed
Aug. 16. The error was repeated yesterday in Don Hammonds' Risk Diary.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Doreena Balestreire/Post-Gazette: Rachel Becse, 3, of Penn
Township, got a lift from her uncle Rob Becse during last September's Walk for
the Whisper to benefit ovarian cancer research and awareness while her cousin,
Katie Nathenson, 9, walked along beside them.  The girls were walking in memory
of their grandmother Ilona Becse, who died of the disease.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2004


                             343 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             August 27, 2004 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1949 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
DNA May Soon Be in Play;
Gene therapy helps build muscle and offers hope in treating disease. The dangers
are real, as is the temptation for athletes seeking an edge.

BYLINE: Alan Zarembo, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Dr. James Wilson never intended to create super-monkeys.

   A pioneer in genetic engineering, he was experimenting with a way to insert
single genes into muscle cells, a technique that could eventually be used to
treat a variety of genetic illnesses.

   He chose a gene that boosts levels of erythropoietin, or EPO, a key hormone
in the production of oxygen-toting red blood cells and a convenient marker to
measure his experiment's success.

   But EPO has another claim to fame. Its synthetic version, created in the
1980s to treat anemia, is one of the most notorious performance-enhancing drugs
in competitive sports, able to increase endurance by raising the oxygen supply
to muscles.

   In less than two weeks, many of Wilson's rhesus monkeys had red cell counts
greater than those of world-class runners who train at high altitude.

   By three weeks, they had a higher concentration of red cells than even the
worst EPO abusers in sports.

   And no drug was ever injected.

   As the sports world vainly struggles against the epidemic of illegal drugs,
science has already opened the door to the next frontier in fraud: "gene
doping."

   By introducing specific genes, the experimental technology has created bigger
muscles, faster metabolism and greater endurance in laboratory animals. Hidden
in cells, gene enhancements in humans would be much harder to detect than drugs.

   "We know that gene therapy at some point will be abused," said Olivier Rabin,
the director of science for the World Anti-Doping Agency in Montreal. "It will
happen."

   There is no evidence that any athlete has tried genetic alteration, but the
agency added it last year to the international list of "banned methods" and had
begun funding research to detect gene abuse.

   The temptations for athletes are high. But they are not without risks.

   For example, all eight monkeys in Wilson's experiment are dead.

   *

   Wilson, a boyish-looking professor of medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, knows the highs and lows of gene therapy, a field barely three
decades old.

   He led one of the earliest trials in humans -- to introduce genes to cure
cystic fibrosis. In 1992, at 37, he became the first director of the
university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   But seven years later, he found himself at the center of gene therapy's
biggest disaster. Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old from Tucson with a rare liver
disorder, enrolled in one of Wilson's clinical trials. He received a genetic
injection, which his body rejected. Four days later he was dead.

   The university shut down the institute. The Food and Drug Administration,
which ruled that Wilson should have stopped the experiment sooner, has moved to
bar him from leading human trials.

   Despite the setback, Wilson and other scientists are pushing ahead. There
have been nearly 1,000 gene therapy clinical trials worldwide.

   The field remains one of medicine's best hopes in the fight against disorders
caused by defects in genes, such as diabetes and Parkinson's disease.

   The concept of gene therapy first appeared in the late 1960s. As scientists
learned how to manipulate DNA, they came to believe that genetic defects could
be fixed by installing new genes.

   To accomplish that, they had to figure out how to deliver the therapeutic
genes to cells. The leading method today uses viruses, which naturally invade
cells. Researchers snip out the harmful parts of the virus and splice in the new
gene.

   These "viral vectors" are typically injected into the body. In some cases,
they are designed to permanently merge the new gene into the subject's DNA so
that it is replicated and passed on when cells divide. In other cases, the virus
deposits the new gene as a self-contained ring of DNA in the cell nucleus, where
it remains for the life of the cell.

   The problem is that the interactions among genes are still poorly understood
and the therapeutic genes do not always land where scientists intend.

   In humans, success has been limited and sobering. The most-cited example is
the treatment of a fatal immune disorder known as X-linked SCID -- or "bubble
boy disease" -- in 10 children in France. Eight recovered. Two developed
leukemia after the new gene landed in a dangerous spot.

   The stakes in gene therapy are unusually high. "You can't turn it off,"
Wilson said. "That's the problem."

   It could be years or decades before viable therapies are on the market. Most
clinical trials are conducted on terminally ill patients seeking a last resort.

   Despite the risks, it didn't take long for sports officials to recognize the
potential for athletes to abuse genetic technology.

   "We know that some athletes are willing to take very high risks to enhance
their performance," said Rabin, the antidoping official.

   How much is an extra tenth of a second worth?

   *

   The week that H. Lee Sweeney, a physiologist at the University of
Pennsylvania, announced that he had genetically engineering a group of
freakishly muscular mice, he received a call from a high school football coach.

   Could Sweeney inject the entire team with the gene he had used to bulk up the
mice?

   Later came a similar request from a wrestling coach.

   Sweeney's mice, which had been given a muscle-building gene, developed hind
limbs that rippled like mini-Mr. Universe thighs. They were up to 30% bigger
than those in their unmodified cousins. No exercise was required.

   Sweeney explained to both coaches that the gene had never been tried in
humans and that using their athletes as guinea pigs could land them in prison.

   He had little interest in helping athletes. His research seeks to slow the
muscle breakdown that occurs with aging and degenerative diseases such as
muscular dystrophy.

   The building and repair of muscle is partly controlled by a protein known as
insulin-like growth factor 1, or IGF-1. Sweeney introduced a gene in mice that
would manufacture IGF-1 in muscle cells.

   Rats received the same injection, but in only one leg. After an eight-week
training regimen that included scaling ladders with weights on their backs, they
emerged imbalanced. The genetically altered legs had twice the strength of the
normal legs.

   Some athletes are already familiar with IGF-1. The body makes it in response
to human growth hormone, a banned drug in competitive sports.

   The gene-made version of IGF-1 would offer athletes two advantages. The
hormone would stay in the muscle and out of the blood, where it is known to
increase the risk of cancer and heart problems. And since blood and urine would
be useless in detecting the gene implant, an invasive muscle biopsy would be the
only way to find it.

   "The regulatory agencies are freaked out," Sweeney said.

   On the surface, tampering with genes is merely a sophisticated form of sports
cheating.

   "I want to be sure when I cheer that I'm cheering for the [athlete] and not
his or her chemist," said Leon Kass, a fellow at the American Enterprise
Institute and head of the President's Council on Bioethics.

   But the situation is not as simple as it seems.

   What if gene therapy becomes a standard method of treating injuries? Should
an athlete given a muscle-building gene to repair an injury be banned from
competing?

   Technologies on the distant horizon further blur the debate.

   It might someday be possible, for example, for parents to engineer children
at birth to be athletic.

   Molecular physiologist Ronald Evans, of the Salk Institute for Biological
Studies in La Jolla, reported this week that by injecting a single gene into the
nucleus of a fertilized egg, he created mice born with more efficient muscles,
faster metabolisms and stronger hearts.

   "When we put these mice on a treadmill, their very first run, they were able
to run an hour longer than the unmodified mice," said Evans, who is also an
investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University of
Maryland.

   Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Center, an independent bioethics
institute in Garrison, N.Y., said there was no easy answer to whether athletes
genetically altered as embryos should be allowed to compete.

   "This child didn't choose to have this gene put in, just as none of us choose
our genes," he said. "I think that's going to be a very tough case for sport to
handle. Thankfully, we don't have to deal with it just yet."

   In the meantime, the phone keeps ringing in Sweeney's office. He receives a
few calls every week, mostly from power lifters and wrestlers.

   *

   If the athletes had seen Jim Wilson's monkeys, perhaps they would think
twice.

   Soon after Wilson injected the gene into the legs of the eight monkeys, their
EPO levels began to rise.

   The body naturally produces EPO in the kidneys. But it turns out that almost
any cell in the body retrofitted with the EPO gene will produce the compound.

   In the monkeys, tiny rings of DNA deposited in muscle cell nuclei were making
the hormone and releasing it into the blood, signaling bone marrow to
manufacture more red blood cells.

   But the monkeys were not well.

   In less than a month, the red cell counts in four of them began to reach
dangerous levels. Too many red cells thicken the blood, increasing the risk of
stroke.

   The damage was irreversible, enmeshed in their DNA like the code for their
dark eyes and long tails.

   The animal handlers had to insert needles in the monkeys' forearms -- twice a
month, on average -- to thin their blood. It was the only way to keep the
monkeys alive.

   That result was not unexpected, but Wilson was perplexed at what happened to
the other four monkeys.

   Within two weeks, their EPO levels began to fall -- sharply. Red cell counts
soon followed.

   Their bodies had identified the EPO produced in the muscle cells as a foreign
invader and mounted an immune response. But the attack was not limited to the
new EPO. The natural EPO made in the kidneys was also being destroyed.

   The monkeys had severe anemia. Wilson had no choice but to euthanize them.

   The other four monkeys were kept alive for more than a year to monitor their
EPO production. Then, they too were euthanized.

   "It's hard for me to believe that [any athlete] would try to do this," Wilson
said.

   *

   But there is a grim resignation among sports officials that eventually
somebody will try some form of gene doping.

   "The world may be about to watch one of its last Olympic Games without
genetically enhanced athletes," Sweeney, the creator of the muscular mice, wrote
in the July issue of Scientific American.

   The arms race has begun.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency will spend up to $1 million this year -- more
than a fifth of its research budget -- to fund studies aimed at detecting gene
doping.

   "I cannot go into too much detail," Rabin said, emphasizing the need for
secrecy.

   A piece of good news came early this month. Francoise Lasne, at the French
National Anti-Doping Laboratory, reported that EPO produced in muscle tissue in
monkeys varied slightly from the natural variety produced in the kidneys. The
difference was detectable in blood.

   But Philippe Moullier, a gene transfer expert at the French national health
laboratories and an author of the study, said he had identified a different
organ in the body that produced indistinguishable EPO. He plans to publish the
results soon.

   Even if the antidoping authorities catch up, researchers are already
experimenting with a technique that could further complicate detection.

   Wilson and Moullier have begun working on EPO-producing genes that can be
turned on and off with common drugs, such as antibiotics.

   The technique could be an enormous benefit for medicine, providing doctors
with the ability to control the therapeutic output of the genes they install.
They could keep hormones at desired levels. And when the gene has done its work,
it can be switched off, hidden away until needed again.

   For sports cheaters, of course, it's a dream come true.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: PIONEER: James Wilson, a top gene therapy researcher, says he
finds it incredible that any athlete would try doping.  PHOTO: MIGHTY MICE:
Researchers have used genetic engineering to create mice with greatly developed
muscles and better stamina.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2004


                             344 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 27, 2004 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 58 words

HEADLINE: Before We Start Improving on Nature . . .

BODY:


   To the Editor:

    I agree with Nicholas D. Kristof's statement that ''genetic tinkering gives
me the willies.'' Gene therapy should be used to improve the human soul, not the
physical body.

    Why not try to manipulate the gene that causes hatred and killing? (I
wouldn't mind eliminating my sweet tooth as well.)

Mary Dabulas
Ballston Spa, N.Y., Aug. 25, 2004


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2004


                             345 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 27, 2004, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: Of marathon mice and men

BODY:
Welcome to the 2056 Summer Olympics. On NBC's viewing schedule, two categories
of events: one for the "natural" athletes; another for the genetically enhanced.
A future Katie Couric will reel off DNA sequences that help identify
competitors' best-performing genetic combinations.


   Science fiction? Think again. This week, scientists in California announced
they had created "marathon mice" through genetic engineering. Even the laziest
mice on high-fat diets gained muscle and super-endurance at running and never
became obese.

   The gods -- Greek or otherwise -- couldn't have come up with more prescient
timing: The men's Olympics marathon takes place Sunday, the last day of the
Athens games. While the leap from mice to men still has to be made, the news
underscores a 21st century truth: Genetic "doping" is coming fast.

   Already, scientists have created "Schwarzenegger mice" that have been
injected with muscle-building genes. That would benefit weightlifters. And mice
have been bred with super-athlete genes, which humans one day might be able to
select.

   Though experiments today aim to treat illnesses from muscular dystrophy to
diabetes, the implications for athletics are profound. Quite apart from
conjuring up Frankenstein or Nazi experimentation, genetic injections could be
used as early as the 2008 Beijing Olympics, some experts predict. And they
currently aren't detectable.

   That prospect stands to destroy recent progress on athletic drug cheats.
Olympics competitors these days have to sign on to a regime of strict tests for
performance-boosting substances, and risk expulsion if they test positive. In
Athens, seven athletes have failed tests, and three dropped out of the Games
after missing tests.

   That's a far cry from the Cold War years, when Soviet-bloc athletes were
pumped up and gender bent, such as the female East German weightlifter, now a
man, dubbed "Hormone Heidi." And many Western countries ignored their athletes'
transgressions.

   At least, marathon mice may get us to rethink what 21st century athletics
could, and should, be about. If genetic therapy becomes a common medical
treatment, and an athlete receives an injection to repair a torn muscle or cure
a metabolic illness, is that a no-no? Should we indeed divide the Olympics into
two categories?

   For now, just enjoy the men's marathon based on the legendary run by
Pheidippides in 490 B.C. It may be one of the last unclouded by suspicion.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2004


                             346 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     August 26, 2004 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Olympics: A genetic target?

BYLINE: NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

BODY:

   For a glimpse of what post-human athletes may look like beginning in the 2012
or 2016 Olympics, take a look at an obscure breed of cattle called the Belgian
Blue.

   Belgian Blues are unlike any cows you've ever seen. They have a genetic
mutation that means they do not have effective myostatin, a substance that curbs
muscle growth. A result is that Belgian Blues are all bulging muscles, bovine
caricatures of Arnold Schwarzenegger.

   These mutants may also point to the future of humans, particularly athletes.
Gene therapies are being developed that would block myostatin in humans, and
they offer immense promise in treating muscular dystrophy and the frailty that
comes with aging. But once this gene therapy becomes available for people who
really need it, it'll take about 10 minutes before athletes are surreptitiously
using it, particularly because, in contrast to today's doping, gene therapy
leaves no trace in the blood or urine.

   The standard human shape would become different, and anyone with money could
look like a bodybuilder. As H. Lee Sweeney, chairman of physiology at the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, writes in a fascinating article
in July's Scientific American, "The world may be about to watch one of its last
Olympic Games without genetically enhanced athletes."

   Even more important, gene therapy goes to the heart of an issue that will
turn our species upside down in the coming decades. We are beginning to
understand our own operating system -- genes -- and we're gaining the ability to
try to "improve" our genetic endowment.

   Genetic tinkering gives me the willies. My concern is not so much the details
of blocking myostatin, although Belgian Blue calves are so muscled that their
mothers are at high risk of dying while giving birth, as with the possibility
that we will irreversibly change what it is to be human. Geneticists have tried
to improve apples over the last 50 years, producing larger, prettier species
that just aren't as tasty or as interesting as they used to be; it would be a
tragedy if we did to humans what we've done to apples.

   Yet gene therapy also offers immense promise. Injecting genes to block
myostatin could help not only those with muscular dystrophy but also anyone
suffering the routine loss of musculature that comes with aging. Instead of
breaking their hips and limping about on walkers, nonagenarians could run road
races.

   So far, the experiments have been impressive. Sweeney and his team injected
mice with genes that resulted in muscles 15% to 30% larger than in other mice.
And when middle-aged mice were injected with the gene, their muscles did not
weaken in old age.

   A small number of humans have natural genetic mutations that are similar, and
these people appear to live normally and to be exceptional athletes. For
example, Eero Mantyranta of Finland was a three-time Olympic gold medalist in
cross-country skiing in the 1960s, and his family later turned out to have a
genetic mutation that produced extremely high levels of red blood cells.

   Likewise, The New England Journal of Medicine in June documented a human
version of the Belgian Blues, a boy with a genetic mutation that interferes with
myostatin. From the moment he was born, he had extraordinary muscling. At age 4,
he can hold a 3-kilogram dumbbell in each hand with his arms extended.

   Perhaps the most important and complex decision in the history of our species
is approaching: In what ways should we improve our genetic endowment? Yet we are
neither focused on this question nor adequately schooled to resolve it.

   So we desperately need greater scientific literacy, and it's past time for a
post-Sputnik-style revitalization of science education, especially genetics, to
help us figure out if we want our descendants to belong to the same species as
we do.

   ------------

   Nicholas D. Kristof is a columnist for The New York Times.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2004


                             347 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 26, 2004 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.A-21

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: GOLD MEDAL BODIES/ GENETICALLY ALTERED ATHLETES MAY CHANGE THE OLYMPIC
GAMES

BODY:

   For a glimpse of what post-human athletes may look like beginning in the 2012
or 2016 Olympics, take a look at an obscure breed of cattle called the Belgian
Blue.

    Belgian Blues are unlike any cows you've ever seen. They have a genetic
mutation that means they do not have effective myostatin, a substance that curbs
muscle growth. A result is that Belgian Blues are all bulging muscles without a
spot of fat, like bovine caricatures of Arnold Schwarzenegger. (I have posted a
photograph of a Belgian Blue at www.nytimes.com/kristofresponds.)

    These mutants may also point to the future of humans, particularly athletes.
Gene therapies are being developed that would block myostatin in humans, and
they offer immense promise in treating muscular dystrophy and the frailty that
comes with aging.

    But once this gene therapy becomes available for people who really need it,
it'll take about 10 minutes before athletes are surreptitiously using it,
particularly because, in contrast to today's doping, gene therapy leaves no
trace in the blood or urine.

    The standard human shape would become different, and anyone with money could
look like a body builder. As H. Lee Sweeney, chairman of physiology at the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, writes in a fascinating article
in July's Scientific American, "The world may be about to watch one of its last
Olympic Games without genetically enhanced athletes."

    Even more important, gene therapy goes to the heart of an issue that will
turn our species upside down in the coming decades. We are beginning to
understand our own operating system -- genes -- and we're gaining the ability to
try to "improve" our genetic endowment. If we do so, the ramifications could be
as enormous as when our ancestors first crawled out of the slime to live on
land.

    Genetic tinkering gives me the willies. My concern is not so much the
details of blocking myostatin, although Belgian Blue calves are so muscled that
their mothers are at high risk of dying while giving birth, as with the
possibility that we will irreversibly change what it is to be human. Geneticists
have tried to improve apples over the last 50 years, producing larger, prettier
species that just aren't as tasty or as interesting as they used to be; it would
be a tragedy if we did to humans what we've done to apples.

    Yet gene therapy also offers immense promise. Injecting genes to block
myostatin could help not only those with muscular dystrophy but also anyone
suffering the routine loss of musculature that comes with aging. Instead of
breaking their hips and limping about on walkers, nonagenarians could run road
races.

    So far, the experiments have been impressive. Sweeney and his team injected
mice with genes that resulted in muscles 15 percent to 30 percent larger than in
other mice. And when middle-aged mice were injected with the gene, their muscles
did not weaken in old age.

    Other gene therapies are being developed that would prod the human body to
produce more red blood cells, a huge benefit to athletes. In monkeys and
baboons, these therapies led the red blood cell count to just about double in 10
weeks.

    A small number of humans have natural genetic mutations that are similar,
and these people appear to live normally and to be exceptional athletes. For
example, Eero Mantyranta of Finland was a three-time gold medalist in
cross-country skiing Olympics in the 1960s, and his family later turned out to
have a genetic mutation that produced extremely high levels of red blood cells.

    Likewise, The New England Journal of Medicine in June documented a human
version of the Belgian Blues, a boy with a genetic mutation that interferes with
myostatin. From the moment he was born, he had extraordinary muscling, and at
age 4 he can hold a 3-kilogram dumbbell in each hand with his arms extended. A
European weight-lifting champion is said to have a similar mutation.

    Perhaps the most important and complex decision in the history of our
species is approaching: In what ways should we improve our genetic endowment?
Yet we are neither focused on this question nor adequately schooled to resolve
it.

    So we desperately need greater scientific literacy, and it's past time for a
post-Sputnik style revitalization of science education, especially genetics, to
help us figure out if we want our descendants to belong to the same species as
we do.

NOTES:
Nicholas D. Kristof is a syndicated columnist for The New York Times
(nicholas@nytimes.com).

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2004


                             348 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                           August 25, 2004 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: UAMS gets grant to study blood cancer

BYLINE: BY NELL SMITH ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences received a five-year, $18
million grant that researchers hope will help them discover ways to treat and
prevent myeloma, a plasma cell cancer that causes bone fractures and weakness.

   The grant, from the National Cancer Institute, which is part of the federal
National Institutes of Health, renews a grant UAMS has had since 1992. The grant
was originally worth $6 million to $7 million, said Dr. Bart Barlogie, director
of the Myeloma Institute for Research and Therapy.

   It was renewed and increased in 1998, he said. The latest award again
increased the grant by 15 to 20 percent over the 1998 award, Barlogie said.

   The $18 million grant is the largest ever given to the Myeloma Institute,
which is part of the Arkansas Cancer Research Center, Barlogie said. A UAMS news
release said it is one of the largest awards in the school's history. A UAMS
spokesman could not say Tuesday what the largest was.

   "It's definitely significant," said Anne Quinn Young, program director for
the Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation, a New Canaan, Conn.-based organization
that raises money for myeloma research. "It's exciting that NCI is making that
investment in myeloma research."

   In terms of federal money for scientific research, the grant is significant,
said John Shaughnessy Jr., director of the UAMS Lambert Laboratory of Myeloma
Genetics.

   "That's a lot of dough," he quipped.

   "You can't really expect to get much more than $18 million out of the NIH for
five years, especially given the fiscal conditions now."

   Shaughnessy said the National Institutes of Health are reducing the
percentages of grants it is funding and even cutting some already funded.

   A representative from the National Cancer Institute did not return a call
Tuesday afternoon regarding the range of grants it awards.

   Shaughnessy said the grant will continue some of the research already
underway, including an effort to identify the gene causing a severe form of
myeloma. He said researchers also believe that the same gene is involved with
other cancers.

   "We're in the process of validating some findings, that will probably be, in
our view, some pretty earth-shattering results that apply not only to myeloma
but possibly to many cancers," he said.

   Shaughnessy expects the group's findings will be published within the next
few months.

   If the researchers are right, identifying the culprit gene could lead to new
treatments or even gene therapy to prevent myeloma and other cancers. The $18
million grant will help scientists with this phase of study. The myeloma
researchers will also receive about $600,000 annually from UAMS's philanthropic
funds, Barlogie said.

   "This is something that the federal government wants to see," he said.
Government wants evidence of the institution's commitment and of its
contribution to this effort, he said.

   The funding will support four ongoing projects as well as other supportive
functions, such as data management and administration.

   Those projects will keep myeloma researchers busy for the next five years.
That thought keeps Barlogie from getting too excited over the thought of $18
million.

   "We have no time for excitement," the scientist said.

   In the meantime, the Myeloma Institute for Research and Therapy is also
moving its outpatient clinics to the fourth and fifth floors of the Jackson T.
Stephens Spine and Neurosciences Institute in about six months. The current
space in the Arkansas Cancer Research Center is "very tight," Barlogie said.

   This article was published 8/25/2004

CORRECTION-DATE: August 26, 2004

CORRECTION:

   The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences received a five-year $18
million grant to study myeloma. A headline in Wednesday's editions should have
characterized the disease as a cancer of the plasma cells in bone marrow.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2004


                             349 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2004 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                           August 25, 2004 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NORTHWEST ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: UAMS receives $18 million grant to research plasma cancer

BYLINE: BY NELL SMITH ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences received a five-year, $18
million grant that researchers hope will help them discover ways to treat and
prevent myeloma, a plasma cell cancer that causes bone fractures and weakness.

   The grant, from the National Cancer Institute, which is part of the federal
National Institutes of Health, renews a grant UAMS has had since 1992. The grant
was originally worth $6 million to $7 million, said Dr. Bart Barlogie, director
of the Myeloma Institute for Research and Therapy.

   It was renewed and increased in 1998, he said. The latest award again
increased the grant by 15 to 20 percent over the 1998 award, Barlogie said.

   The $18 million grant is the largest ever given to the Myeloma Institute,
which is part of the Arkansas Cancer Research Center, Barlogie said. A UAMS news
release said it is one of the largest awards in the school's history. A UAMS
spokesman could not say Tuesday what the largest was.

   "It's definitely significant, said Anne Quinn Young, program director for the
Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation, a New Canaan, Conn.-based organization
that raises money for myeloma research. "It's exciting that NCI is making that
investment in myeloma research."

   In terms of federal money for scientific research, the grant is significant,
said John Shaughnessy Jr., director of the UAMS Lambert Laboratory of Myeloma
Genetics.

   "That's a lot of dough," he quipped.

   "You can't really expect to get much more than $18 million out of the NIH for
five years, especially given the fiscal conditions now."

   Shaughnessy said the National Institutes of Health are reducing the
percentages of grants it is funding and even cutting some already funded.

   A representative from the National Cancer Institute did not return a call
Tuesday afternoon regarding the range of grants it awards.

   Shaughnessy said the grant will continue some of the research already
underway, including an effort to identify the gene causing a severe form of
myeloma. He said researchers also believe that the same gene is involved with
other cancers.

   "We're in the process of validating some findings, that will probably be, in
our view, some pretty earth-shattering results that apply not only to myeloma
but possibly to many cancers," he said.

   Shaughnessy expects the group's findings will be published within the next
few months.

   If the researchers are right, identifying the culprit gene could lead to new
treatments or even gene therapy to prevent myeloma and other cancers. The $18
million grant will help scientists with this phase of study. The myeloma
researchers will also receive about $600,000 annually from UAMS's philanthropic
funds, Barlogie said.

   "This is something that the federal government wants to see," he said.
Government wants evidence of the institution's commitment and of its
contribution to this effort, he said.

   The funding will support four ongoing projects as well as other supportive
functions, such as data management and administration.

   Those projects will keep myeloma researchers busy for the next five years.
That thought keeps Barlogie from getting too excited over the thought of $18
million.

   "We have no time for excitement," the scientist said.

   In the meantime, the Myeloma Institute for Research and Therapy is also
moving its outpatient clinics to the fourth and fifth floors of the Jackson T.
Stephens Spine and Neurosciences Institute in about six months. The current
space in the Arkansas Cancer Research Center is "very tight," Barlogie said.

   This article was published 8/25/2004

CORRECTION-DATE: August 26, 2004

CORRECTION:

   The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences received a five-year $18
million grant to study myeloma. A headline in Wednesday's editions should have
characterized the disease as a cancer of the plasma cells in bone marrow.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2004


                             350 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           August 25, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: Building Better Bodies

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

   E-mail:nicholas@nytimes.com

BODY:

   For a glimpse of what post-human athletes may look like beginning in the 2012
or 2016 Olympics, take a look at an obscure breed of cattle called the Belgian
Blue.

    Belgian Blues are unlike any cows you've ever seen. They have a genetic
mutation that means they do not have effective myostatin, a substance that curbs
muscle growth. A result is that Belgian Blues are all bulging muscles without a
spot of fat, like bovine caricatures of Arnold Schwarzenegger. (I have posted a
photograph of a Belgian Blue at www.nytimes.com/kristofresponds.)

     These mutants may also point to the future of humans, particularly
athletes. Gene therapies are being developed that would block myostatin in
humans, and they offer immense promise in treating muscular dystrophy and the
frailty that comes with aging. But once this gene therapy becomes available for
people who really need it, it'll take about 10 minutes before athletes are
surreptitiously using it, particularly because, in contrast to today's doping,
gene therapy leaves no trace in the blood or urine.

    The standard human shape would become different, and anyone with money could
look like a body builder. As H. Lee Sweeney, chairman of physiology at the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, writes in a fascinating article
in July's Scientific American, ''The world may be about to watch one of its last
Olympic Games without genetically enhanced athletes.''

    Even more important, gene therapy goes to the heart of an issue that will
turn our species upside down in the coming decades. We are beginning to
understand our own operating system -- genes -- and we're gaining the ability to
try to ''improve'' our genetic endowment. If we do so, the ramifications could
be as enormous as when our ancestors first crawled out of the slime to live on
land.

    Genetic tinkering gives me the willies. My concern is not so much the
details of blocking myostatin, although Belgian Blue calves are so muscled that
their mothers are at high risk of dying while giving birth, as with the
possibility that we will irreversibly change what it is to be human. Geneticists
have tried to improve apples over the last 50 years, producing larger, prettier
species that just aren't as tasty or as interesting as they used to be; it would
be a tragedy if we did to humans what we've done to apples.

    Yet gene therapy also offers immense promise. Injecting genes to block
myostatin could help not only those with muscular dystrophy but also anyone
suffering the routine loss of musculature that comes with aging. Instead of
breaking their hips and limping about on walkers, nonagenarians could run road
races.

    So far, the experiments have been very impressive. Dr. Sweeney and his team
injected mice with genes that resulted in muscles 15 to 30 percent larger than
in other mice. And when middle-aged mice were injected with the gene, their
muscles did not weaken in old age.

    Other gene therapies are being developed that would prod the human body to
produce more red blood cells, a huge benefit to athletes. In monkeys and
baboons, these therapies led the red blood cell count to just about double in 10
weeks.

    A small number of humans have natural genetic mutations that are similar,
and these people appear to live normally and to be exceptional athletes. For
example, Eero Mantyranta of Finland was a three-time gold medalist in
cross-country skiing Olympics in the 1960's, and his family later turned out to
have a genetic mutation that produced extremely high levels of red blood cells.

    Likewise, The New England Journal of Medicine in June documented a human
version of the Belgian Blues, a boy with a genetic mutation that interferes with
myostatin. From the moment he was born, he had extraordinary muscling, and at
age 4 he can hold a 3-kilogram dumbbell in each hand with his arms extended. A
European weight-lifting champion is said to have a similar mutation.

    Perhaps the most important and complex decision in the history of our
species is approaching: in what ways should we improve our genetic endowment?
Yet we are neither focused on this question nor adequately schooled to resolve
it.

    So we desperately need greater scientific literacy, and it's past time for a
post-Sputnik style revitalization of science education, especially genetics, to
help us figure out if we want our descendants to belong to the same species as
we do.

William Safire is on vacation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2004


                             351 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             August 23, 2004 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Conference spotlights advances in fighting retinal disease

BYLINE: Brenda Warner Rotzoll

BODY:

   To anyone suffering severe vision loss or blindness, Cleveland  Cavaliers
owner Gordon Gund offers a few simple but important rules  for coping:

   Ask for help.

   Ask questions -- never assume.

   Get organized.

   Have patience with yourself. Face the fact a lot of things are  going to take
more time to do.

   Gund learned these things the hard way after he became totally  blind in 1970
because of retinitis pigmentosa, a degenerative  disease of the retina.

   Today, he runs a basketball team, heads an investment company, goes
fly-fishing, skis and is co-founder and chairman of the Foundation  Fighting
Blindness, the world's largest non-governmental source of  funding for research
on retinal degenerative diseases.

   The foundation's biennial Visions conference on the latest in  research to
overcome retinal diseases drew 600 people to Chicago  over the weekend. Gund
talked about coping skills during a luncheon  speech and in an interview.

   Several years ago, he was in a hotel basement. He didn't know there  was a
sub-basement, too.

   "When someone said I was approaching the stairs, I took a step up,  but it
was a down staircase. I almost tumbled the length of it. You  have to ask. You
can't assume," Gund said.

   When you ask for help, keep asking questions. People may not think  to say
that a curb or revolving door or escalator is coming up,  Gund said.

   Retinal diseases have blinded or caused severe vision loss in  nearly 10
million Americans.

   "A few years ago, we had no treatments. A couple of years ago, we  thought
the best we could do was slow the course" of age-related  macular degeneration
and retinitis pigmentosa, said Dr. Jerry  Chader of the Doheny Retina Institute
at the University of Southern  California.

   Now, with gene therapy, intraocular implants and ultimately stem  cell
research, "We think what we can do is restore vision to many  who are currently
sightless or rapidly losing vision," he said.

   Technology figured heavily among product exhibits at the  conference. There
were eight companies displaying electronic  magnifiers to greatly enlarge print
so people with severely  impaired vision can read. They ranged from a pocket
model weighing  10 ounces and costing $800 to 17-inch-screen models weighing
anywhere from 20 to 70 pounds, costing up to $3,000 or more.

   For more information, see www.fightblindness.org.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2004


                             352 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                            August 23, 2004, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; PLANET; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 981 words

HEADLINE: Will gene-altered athletes kill sport?

BYLINE: By Gregory M. Lamb Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

HIGHLIGHT:
Soon, animal DNA could make us faster and stronger - no training needed.

BODY:

   It would make today's "cat and mouse" detection of drug-taking athletes seem
trivial. It would produce excellence without effort, challenging the spirit of
the Olympics and the meaning of all sports competition. More broadly, it could
become a kind of referendum on how the world views the improvement of humans
through technology.

   The catalyst is an emerging science called gene modification or gene
enhancement. Using it, an athlete could be injected with the DNA of an animal,
for example, and quickly become much faster and stronger. "You don't need to
lift weights, and you don't need to go on 10-mile runs to train for endurance,"
explains Peter Weyand, who teach kinesiology - the study of muscles and human
movement - at Rice University in Houston. "It would replace training; it would
make training seem trivial and more than obsolete. Somebody who's not athletic
at all could be transformed into something superhuman."

   Today's world-class athletes are already genetic oddities, possessing
superior native abilities that they hone through training - and in some cases,
through illegal drugs. But with genetic engineering, anyone might enhance his or
her abilities "100, 200, 500, 1,000 percent," Dr. Weyand says. Borrowing the
fast-twitch muscles of a mouse, for example, could create superfast sprinters.
"If you start to think about the extremes in nature, it's absolutely
frightening" to consider what's possible, he adds.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), which determines which substances are
banned in international sports competitions, is so concerned that it has already
declared gene doping illegal, even though it believes it's unlikely that anyone
is doing it yet. "The time to grab hold of this matter is now," said Richard
Pound, president of WADA, at a meeting of prominent scientists earlier this
year. He urged them to devise ways to detect genetic enhancement even as they
develop the technique. Medical researchers are excited about the possibilities
of genetic therapies to help patients with muscle diseases such as muscular
dystrophy, and to strengthen the elderly.

   Interest in genetic enhancement in the sports world has exploded since
publication in March of a study in a scientific journal showing that mice and
rats underwent remarkable changes when injected with a gene that promotes
growth. H. Lee Sweeney, a University of Pennsylvania researcher, found that
these "Schwarzenegger mice" showed up to 50 percent muscle growth. Rats altered
in the same way gained 35 percent in strength when the technique was combined
with exercise. Since reporting his findings, Dr. Sweeney has been inundated with
requests for information from coaches and athletes.

   Though Sweeney's work is years away from trials in humans, that doesn't mean
that others might not be quietly moving ahead, eager to reap the benefits. "The
technology is available now for athletes to use. They're taking a big risk by
doing it, but nevertheless it's out there, and they could be trying it," says
Andy Miah, a bioethicist whose book "Genetically Modified Athletes: Biomedical
Ethics, Gene Doping and Sport," was published last month in Britain. As last
year's sports scandal over the designer steroid THG and the continuing drug
disqualifications at this year's Olympics show, "athletes are still doing things
we don't know about," he says.

   Gene therapies hold so much promise for helping humanity, Dr. Miah says, that
he has urged the WADA not to treat them simply as a new form of illegal doping.
For example, gene therapy potentially could be used to repair the injured
muscles of athletes. Would that use also be illegal? "It's that kind of boundary
that's unclear from the present rulings," he says. By making genetic
modification illegal, athletes may seek out "rogue scientists," he says. "If we
do prohibit it, we push it underground, and we don't know what athletes are
doing. They don't know what they're doing." If we regulate instead, "we can try
to make sure they're doing it in a safe manner," he says.

   That's why Miah favors legalization and regulation over a ban. The world of
sports already recognizes differences in innate ability, he says, as shown by
the paralympics competition for those with various disabilities, and the use of
weight classes in sports such as boxing. Regulation would make it possible to
look at the genetic profiles of athletes and decide which ones are suited to
compete against one another, he says.

   Right now, no test exists to detect genetic enhancement, though finding
foreign DNA eventually might be possible by taking tissue samples from athletes.
Equally unknown are the side effects.

   "All bets are off when you start playing with genetic engineering ... in
terms of system function, organ function, and long-term effects," says Weyand.
"If you put in superfast muscle, are you going to alter function in a way that
the tendons and the bones might not be able to support the loads?... You might
start to snap tendons and bones. There might be deleterious health effects. We
really don't know."

   Yet the benefits will be overwhelmingly attractive to athletes. Strength and
speed aren't the only abilities that could be supersized. Red blood cells could
be enhanced to carry more oxygen, revolutionizing endurance sports such as
cycling, cross-country skiing, and long-distance running. The technique also
might be used to alter the way athletes sense pain, Miah says, allowing them to
push themselves harder and challenging sports' ancient work ethic: "No pain, no
gain."

   "It's a terrible situation," says John Hoberman, a professor at the
University of Texas at Austin who has studied the history of sports doping.
Legalizing genetic modification would lead to "anarchy," he says. "Inevitably
it's going to turn [sports] into a kind of circus - a freak show."

   (c) Copyright 2004. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2004


                             353 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 23, 2004, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10B

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: You can call this movie 'T4: Attack of the Virus'

BODY:
Purdue University scientists have been able to turn cryoelectron microscope
images of a virus attacking its host into a movie that could reveal secrets of
viral infection and improve gene therapy techniques. Structural biologists have
obtained clearer pictures of how the T4 virus, which infects E. coli bacteria,
alters its shape as it prepares to pierce its host's cell membrane. The research
is in current issue of the journal Cell.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Purdue University graphic; Special effects: Artist's
conception of the T4 after it penetrates a bacterium.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2004


                             354 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            August 19, 2004 Thursday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: Ireland Center gets new leadership

BYLINE: Diane Suchetka, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   More cancer research, more cutting-edge clinical trials, more people to do
the work and more space to do it in.

   That's what the Cleveland area can expect from cancer centers at Case Western
Reserve University and University Hospitals of Cleveland under the leadership of
Dr. Stanton Gerson.

   Case and University Hospitals officials announced Wednesday that Gerson will
become the new director of Ireland Cancer Center of University Hospitals and
Case Comprehensive Cancer Center.

   He succeeds Dr. James Willson, a nationally recognized pioneer in the
treatment of cancer, who leaves Sept. 1 to head a cancer center in Dallas.

   Gerson, 53, is an expert in stem cell research and DNA repair.

   He takes over the new positions immediately so he can help with the
transition until Willson's departure.

   "We have an outstanding clinical program in cancer and really incredible name
recognition for the quality of care, in good part due to our ability to develop
comprehensive, cutting-edge, clinical trials," Gerson said Wednesday.

   "We know that we need to build and expand at every level on that."

   He plans to broaden research, too.

   "We're going to really aggressively recruit, into the research space,
additional investigators in a whole variety of areas - cancer genetics, the
basic biology of cancer, cancer pathology, stem cells, informatics and
biostatistics," Gerson said.

   And, he said, he hopes to work more closely with Cleveland Clinic.

   A comprehensive plan, he said, should be finished by fall.

   "I think you'll be hearing about that very soon, and it will be very
exciting," Gerson said.

   Until the announcement, he was chief of Case's hematology/oncology division
and served as associate director of research at Ireland.

   He continues to oversee Cleveland's Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, a collaboration among Case, University Hospitals, the Clinic, Athersys
Inc. and Ohio State University.

   He graduated from Harvard University in 1973 and from Harvard Medical School
in 1977. He completed his internship, residency and fellowship training at the
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.

   In addition to numerous publications and National Institutes of Health
grants, Gerson holds seven patents in stem cells and cancer drugs.

   He is co-editor of the textbook "Cancer Gene Therapy" and serves on a number
of advisory boards, including those at the University of Minnesota Cancer Center
and the Duke Cancer Center.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: dsuchetk@plaind.com, 216-999-4987

GRAPHIC: Gerson

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2004


                             355 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                           August 18, 2004 Wednesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & SOUL; HOTLINE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: OUTER LIMITS THE REAL DOPE ON THE OLYMPICS

BODY:

   Here are illegal drugs that could propel some athletes in Athens to Olympic
glory - or send them home in disgrace.

   EPO

   PERCEIVED ADVANTAGE: Increases stamina by prompting the body to make more red
blood cells.

   HEALTH RISKS: Added red blood cells thicken the blood and raise blood
pressure. EPO use is suspected in the sudden deaths of several world-class
cyclists.

   QUESTION MARKS: Difficult to test for, but has been found in ­cyclists,
swimmers and distance runners.

   STEROIDS

   PERCEIVED ADVANTAGE: Allows athletes to train harder and build muscle.

   HEALTH RISKS: Shrinks testicles, adds hair to women's

   faces, raises cholesterol, causes violent mood swings.

   QUESTION MARKS: Steroid scandals have plagued the Olympics for decades. In
the most recent debacle, the Bay Area company Balco was accused of selling the
test-evading steroid THG to dozens of athletes, including professional football
and baseball players and several Olympians.

   GENE DOPING

   PERCEIVED ADVANTAGE: Could alter genetic activity to create super-strong
athletes.

   HEALTH RISKS: Early gene therapy trials have produced more side effects than
expected. An 18-year-old research subject died suddenly in a 1999 experiment. A
child in a French trial developed leukemia.

   QUESTION MARKS: Experts say it's likely to be several years before genetic
technology allows athletes to manipulate their genes.

   HUMAN GROWTH HORMONE

   PERCEIVED ADVANTAGE: Breaks down fat, creates muscle.

   HEALTH RISKS: Can cause diabetes, increased risk of cancer, damaged heart
muscle and abnormal growth of face and hands.

   QUESTION MARKS: Undetectable in current tests, but use has been reported in
sprinters and weightlifters, among others.

   STEROID-LIKE SUPPLEMENTS

   PERCEIVED ADVANTAGE: May help build muscle.

   HEALTH RISKS: Loosely regulated, available without a prescription, not widely
studied.

   QUESTION MARKS: Baseball slugger Mark McGwire made steroid-like supplements
famous. Olympians who test positive for steroids often claim they used
supplements, not steroids.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2004


                             356 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 17, 2004 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1456 words

HEADLINE: Tumor killer may be key for Genetronics

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It took 21 years and more than $70 million in investment, but federal
regulators finally noticed Genetronics.

   The Food and Drug Administration recently deemed the San Diego company's
technology for treating head and neck tumors promising enough to give it
fast-track review status.

   The designation potentially could speed to market a device that charges
tumors with an electrical pulse to make them more permeable for drugs. The
device, called the MedPulser, is now in two late-stage clinical trials.

   The trials on 400 people with head and neck cancer aim to show how the
MedPulser improves a patient's quality of life by helping to kill tumors, while
enabling the patient to avoid disfiguring surgery to remove part of the tongue,
palate, jaw or ear, said Dr. Avtar Dhillon, Genetronics chief executive.

   Because the technology helps the absorption of drugs, it eliminates some side
effects created by toxins left floating outside the cells.

   In earlier trials involving 54 people with a total of 69 tumors, 26 percent
of the tumors were eliminated completely; 32 percent showed at least a 50
percent shrinkage.

   "The data they are presenting (in early stage clinical trials) is pretty
amazing, but they really have to prove their efficacy in a real, broad Phase 3
trial," said Dr. Michael Posner, who leads the head and neck oncology practice
at Harvard's Dana Farber Cancer Institute in Boston.

   Positive data in the current Phase 3 trials and subsequent approval from the
FDA finally would allow Genetronics to start generating revenue after two
decades and a brush with bankruptcy less than two years ago. The same technology
is involved in pre-market trials in Europe, to generate data that would be used
to sell it to doctors.

   Fast-track designation does not mean approval is imminent. It means the FDA
has acknowledged the therapy would fill an unmet need for a serious illness.

   Genetronics shares have risen 47 percent in the past year, but still trade
below $1. The stock closed yesterday at 88 cents, up 3 cents.

   "The real news would be if something didn't get fast-tracked," said John
McCamant, editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley. "What I'm
looking for is whether they have an FDA approval or not. Approval of their
technology would be huge."

   If that approval is secured, the real economic promise for the company -- and
the therapeutic promise for patients -- is in the technology's use in the
still-developing field of gene therapy vaccines, analysts and medical
professionals said. The concept is to use DNA as a drug to replace missing or
defective genes with healthy ones.

   The biologics used in these therapies are even larger molecules than
traditional cancer therapies and therefore difficult to get into diseased cells.
Using electroporation would eliminate the need to use viruses as transmitters,
thereby avoiding their side effects.

   Second chances

   "We are excited to be working with them," said Vijay Sammant, chief executive
of Vical, a San Diego biotechnology company that is collaborating with
Genetronics on an undisclosed cancer treatment. "Their technology complements
ours well and could create some exciting and beneficial opportunities in the
field of cancer treatment."

   Genetronics also is collaborating with the Emeryville-based biotechnology
powerhouse Chiron and has signed a licensing agreement to use its
electroporation to help drug company Merck develop a DNA vaccine program.

   Genetronics, it seems, has new life.

   Two years ago, with shares sinking below 50 cents and only two months worth
of cash, the company was poised for bankruptcy. Dhillon, a family physician
turned venture capitalist, was hired as Genetronics CEO.

   Dhillon, 43, had been a vice president at the venture capital firm MDS. He
liked Genetronics' technology immediately upon seeing it, saying it passed his
test: "Is this something I'd use on my patients?"

   He saw obvious problems with the business: the burn rate was too high at
$800,000 a month; there was a cash-sucking research division with no revenue;
and there wasn't enough cash.

   Dhillon told the company's board he was interested in investing MDS cash, if
they first would take some decisive actions on the company's shortcomings. The
board responded with a challenge. If Dhillon was so smart, he should join the
company and fix it.

   With Dhillon at the helm, the research division was sold for $3.7 million and
20 percent of the company's 90 employees were let go. The burn rate was reduced
to $400,000 monthly. Recently, as the company began to enroll patients in its
clinical trials, the burn rate has jumped up to about $600,000.

   Since Dhillon joined the company it has secured three of what he called
"bridge loans" to keep it afloat: $2.3 million shortly after Sept. 11, 2001;
$4.4 million; and the sale of its BTX instruments division for $5 million.

   The deals kept the company alive.

   Earlier this year, the company's existing investors showed further support
with a $10.9 million financing through a private stock placement.

   "They managed to raise $10 million, which is very impressive in shareholder
terms," Adam Noah, who follows health care companies for Granite Financial Group
in San Diego, said of a preferred stock financing completed in May. "They are
definitely going to be around for at least a year or two because of that money."

   The Food and Drug Administration allowed the company to revise the goals it
must meet in its late-stage clinical trials, making it easier for the company to
get approval, Noah said.

   "I don't know how they pulled it off, but they've been handicapped in a good
way," he said.

   Instead of showing that the MedPulser increases survivability, the trials
have to show it helps preserve organs, improves quality of life and creates an
alternative to standard therapy, which is surgery.

   "I can see there is going to be certain low hanging fruit from which they can
capitalize. The question is, `Is it enough for them to make a living?' " Noah
said.

   Head and neck cancer is just the beginning, Dhillon said. The company has
plans for trials using electroporation in the treatment of breast and other
cancers, he said. Because those trials are expected to be smaller, the time to
market should be shorter, he said.

   More challenges

   Posner, the Dana Farber oncologist, said he thinks the head and neck cancer
niche, which Genetronics is focused on domestically, is small -- about 10,000 to
15,000 people -- and is being served by increasingly good drug therapies that
have been approved for market recently.

   In Europe, Genetronics wants to be the first course of treatment for people
with head and neck cancers, a market of about 80,000 people a year, Dhillon
said.

   In all markets, Genetronics' approach is preferable to surgical options
because it is a quick, one-time treatment with little recovery time, which means
a shorter, if any, hospital stay, Dhillon said.

   Posner points out that cancer drugs generally attack the disease
systemically, rather than a tumor area that is visible, as does the Genetronics
technology. Treating a diseased area runs the risk of missing diseased areas
that are not visible, he said.

   At $20,000 for the MedPulser generator and $2,000 for each single-use probe,
Genetronics' technology is "pretty expensive," Posner said.

   "An eight-month course of chemotherapy can cost as much," he said.

   The technology could offer patients treatment options where fibrosis and
scarring could be caused by surgery or drugs, he said. Posner said Genetronics'
technology was more interesting for liver and prostate cancers because it could
spare patients some of the major toxicities caused by the systemic drugs.

   Those therapies are still being developed by Genetronics.

   Posner said he also found the concept of electroporation in gene therapy
intriguing.

   "I've been involved in some gene therapy trials, and it is very hard to
inject into these tumors," he said.

   McCamant is familiar with Genetronics' research in gene therapy because he
has followed Chiron.

   "Companies like Chiron have been willing to explore this technology, but
they're not putting all their eggs there," McCamant said. "When you talk about
gene therapy, people still get spooked."

   In September 1999, the death of a teenager in a gene therapy experiment at
the University of Pennsylvania marked a low point in the research.

   Gene therapy research is beginning to make a cautious comeback, and it could
be years before a product results. Can Genetronics flourish until then?

   "It's been one of those perpetually small San Diego biotechs that doesn't go
out of business but doesn't go up higher," McCamant said.

   "You've got to ask yourself, does this belong as a stand alone? Maybe it
would be better if it was combined."

   Terri Somers: (619) 293-2028; terri.somers@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 GRAPHIC; CAPTIONS: 1. Genetronics chief executive Dr. Avtar
Dhillon was hired two years ago to bring the company back from the brink of
bankruptcy and shepherd its MedPulser to market. 2. How the process works;
PHOTOBY: 1. Scott Linnett / Union-Tribune 2. CHARLOS GARY / Union-Tribune |
SOURCE: Genetronics Biomedical Corp.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2004


                             357 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 16, 2004 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; E05

LENGTH: 215 words

HEADLINE: In Profile

BODY:

    Name: Advanced Vision Therapies Inc.

   Location: Rockville

   Big idea: Develops and markets therapies for the treatment of major
sight-threatening eye diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration, the
leading cause of vision loss for people over age 50 in the Western world.

   Founded: January 2003. Three scientists left Genetic Therapy Inc., a wholly
owned subsidiary of pharmaceutical giant Novartis AG, to found the company.

   Web site: www.avtxinc.com

   Who's in charge: Michael Kaleko, president and chief scientific officer;
Sheila Connelly, vice president of development; Tianci Luo, vice president of
research.

   Funding: The company earlier this year received three grants from the
National Institutes of Health totaling $687,000 to be used for research. It also
has received funding from Montgomery County, the Maryland Technology Development
Corp., and the Maryland Department of Business and Economic Development.

   Employees: Five

   Partnership: AVT is developing its products with academic collaborators from
leading experts in the gene therapy field from Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Temple University and Stanford University. It also
works closely with the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which is dedicated to
finding cures for retinal diseases.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2004


                             358 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 16, 2004 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; E05 , START-UP A Weekly Look at the Region's Newest
Companies

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: Promoting a Shared Vision

BYLINE: A Weekly Look at the Region's Newest Companies, Washington Post Staff
Writer

BODY:

   As Michael Kaleko kept running into people who were getting older and having
more vision problems, he realized he could do something about it.

   Early last year, he and two other scientists founded Advanced Vision
Therapies Inc. of Rockville, which is developing a technology to treat
back-of-the-eye diseases through gene therapy.

   "If we could do something to prolong people's vision, I personally would
consider that a lifetime achievement," Kaleko said.

   Eye-related diseases worsen as people age, with some leading to blindness.
One of the most serious and debilitating eye diseases is age-related macular
degeneration, or AMD. Caused by the hardening of the arteries that nourish the
retina, it is the most common cause of vision loss in the United States in those
50 and older.

   As one gets older, the back of the eye wears out to some extent, creating a
loss of vision, and for some patients, new blood vessels that grow in the retina
are defective. This is known as dry AMD. When these fragile blood vessels leak
and bleed (wet AMD), however, it can rapidly lead to blindness, Kaleko said.
About 10 percent of those who suffer from AMD have wet AMD.

   AVT is developing a gene transfer vector, a vehicle holding a specific gene,
that would be injected into the edge of the retina. The vector is supposed to
bind to the cells in that area, releasing a gene. That gene is supposed to allow
the cells to produce therapeutic proteins that would bathe the retina, knock out
defective blood vessels and prevent others from cropping up, Kaleko said. A
second AVT product would treat dry AMD and other eye diseases by keeping alive
photo receptors, which enable people to see light.

   Some of the treatments now used to slow vision loss, such as lasers or
repeated injections to the back of the eye -- some every four to six weeks --
are either injurious or counterproductive, he said. Kaleko said his company's
treatment "will be easier to take and be more efficacious in the long run."

   AVT hopes to begin clinical trials in early 2006, pending Food and Drug
Administration approval. The company is also seeking venture capital.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2004


                             359 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    AUGUST 14, 2004 Saturday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 491 words

HEADLINE: Colorectal-cancer drug poses heart hazard, studies conclude;
Avastin raises the risk of chest pain, heart attacks
and strokes, the drug's maker and the FDA warned.

BYLINE: Diedtra Henderson ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The government and Genentech are warning doctors that Avastin, used to treat
colorectal cancer, increases patients' risk of heart ailments including chest
pain, strokes, ministrokes and heart attacks.

   Avastin also raises the risk that patients might die from those heart
ailments.

   Colleen Sweeney, a Genentech spokeswoman, said yesterday that the heart
ailments had killed some patients who took the drug, but she could not say how
many. "I don't have the data," Sweeney said. Genentech developed and
manufactures the drug.

   During clinical trials before the drug's approval, one patient died, but a
"clear relationship" could not be determined between Avastin use and the
heart-related fatality, she said. Additional analyses led to the drug warning by
the company and the Food and Drug Administration.

   "Right now, we're working with the FDA, with these analyses, to update the
Avastin label," she said.

   Shares in Genentech fell $2.88, or more than 6 percent, to close at $44.23 on
the New York Stock Exchange.

   Genentech would not say how many patients were prescribed Avastin after FDA
approval. "We don't give out prescription information," Sweeney said.

   The company told health-care providers in its warning letter that patients
whose cancer had spread were twice as likely to suffer serious heart ailments if
they received Avastin with their chemotherapy. The highest-risk individuals had
a history of such heart problems and were older than 65.

   The highly anticipated drug's progress through clinical trials had been
watched closely. The South San Francisco-based company's stock rose after
reports last summer that Avastin helped the sickest colon-cancer patients
survive a few months longer than those receiving standard care.

   On Feb. 26, the FDA approved the product, a genetically engineered version of
a mouse antibody that contains mouse and human components, after testing showed
patients who received the drug intravenously lived an additional five months.
The drug, the first approved angiogenesis inhibitor to treat colorectal cancer,
works by blocking new blood vessels, essentially depriving cancer cells of the
oxygen and nutrients required to thrive.

   The company's warning letter points to the need for more basic research, said
Antonio Giordano, a gene-therapy expert and director of the Sbarro Institute for
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine at Temple University.

   "Clearly, these biological drugs are being developed to be specific for the
colon," Giordano said. "There is a possibility some of the targets in the colon
are represented, also, in other tissue and organs. I think more specific work
needs to be done in order to understand the precise mechanism of the action of
this drug."

   According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cancer of the
colon or rectum is the nation's third most common cancer and is the
second-leading cause of cancer-related deaths.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005


                             360 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            August 14, 2004 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Colon cancer drug tied to heart trouble

BYLINE: DIEDTRA HENDERSON, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   The government and Genentech are warning doctors that Avastin, used to treat
colorectal cancer, increases patients' risk of heart ailments, including chest
pain, strokes, ministrokes and heart attacks.

   Avastin also raises the risk that patients might die from those heart
ailments.

   Colleen Sweeney, Genentech spokeswoman, said yesterday that the heart
ailments had killed some patients who took the drug, but she could not say how
many. "I don't have the data," Sweeney said. Genentech developed and
manufactures the drug.

   During clinical trials before the drug's approval, one patient died but a
"clear relationship" could not be determined between Avastin use and the
heart-related fatality, she said. Additional analyses led to the drug warning by
the company and the Food and Drug Administration.

    "Right now, we're working with the FDA, with these analyses, to update the
Avastin label," she said.

    Shares in Genentech fell $2.88, or more than 6 percent, to close at $44.23
on the New York Stock Exchange.

   Genentech would not say how many patients were prescribed Avastin after FDA
approval. "We don't give out prescription information," Sweeney said.

   The company told health care providers in its warning letter that patients
whose cancer had spread were twice as likely to suffer serious heart ailments if
they received Avastin with their chemotherapy. The highest-risk individuals had
a history of such heart problems and were older than 65.

   The highly anticipated drug's progress through clinical trials was watched
closely. The South San Francisco-based company's stock leapt after reports last
summer that Avastin helped the sickest colon-cancer patients survive a few
months longer than those receiving standard care.

   On Feb. 26, the FDA approved the product, a genetically engineered version of
a mouse antibody that contains mouse and human components, after testing showed
patients who received the drug intravenously lived an additional five months.
The drug, the first approved angiogenesis inhibitor to treat colorectal cancer,
works by blocking new blood vessels, essentially depriving cancer cells of the
oxygen and nutrients required to thrive.

   The company's Aug. 12 warning letter points to the need for more basic
research, said Antonio Giordano, a gene therapy expert and director of the
Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine at Temple University
in Philadelphia.

   "Clearly, these biological drugs are being developed to be specific for the
colon. There is a possibility some of the targets in the colon are represented,
also, in other tissue and organs," Giordano said. "I think more specific work
needs to be done in order to understand the precise mechanism of the action of
this drug."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             361 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             August 13, 2004 Friday

SECTION: FINANCIAL; CASUAL FRIDAY; Pg. 71

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: For some zoom with a view, try Net next week

BYLINE: Chris Whitehead

BODY:

   Next weekend is the Air and Water Show, which gives some people the  willies
but draws others -- by the hundreds of thousands -- to the  lakefront to have
their knees turned to jelly by loud, fast jets.

   For those of you who don't like crowds, but who like fast planes,  there's
another option, thanks to Red Bull and the country of  Hungary.

   On Friday, Red Bull is sponsoring an air race in Budapest, in which  eight
pilots, including American Kirby Chambliss, will compete --  by flying through
obstacles, doing aeronautic stunts, performing a  touch-and-go on a small
artificial island in the Danube and flying  under a bridge.

   Hungarian TV will broadcast it live, but if that's not one of the  channels
you get, Red Bull is supposed to stream it live on the  Internet at
www.redbullairrace.com.

   They'll do it again in Reno, Nev., in the middle of next month.

   Root for the cube

   Remember the Rubik's cube? It's another thing we can thank Hungary  for.

   The first European championship for solving the cube was held last  weekend
in Amsterdam. The winner, Belgian Lars Vandenbergh, did it  in a record 16.19
seconds. Picked up $3,000.

   Trophies were also awarded for completing the puzzle while using  only one
hand and using just feet.

   Invented by Hungarian professor Erno Rubik in 1974, the cube has  nine
squares on each face that can be shuffled, mixing up the  colors. You solve it
by returning the cube to one color on each  side, though if you're like me you
take longer than Lars did.

   Try to de-emphasize the bars

   If Martha Stewart has plans to redecorate her cell, she might want  to
consider a paint other than her own, at least according to the  September issue
of Consumer Reports.

   It rated different paints on such things as ability to cover a  contrasting
color, mildew resistance, how it held up to scrubbing.  Her flat paints came in
16th and 22nd out of 23; her low-luster was  13th out of 19 and her semigloss
versions were 14th and 15th out of  16.

   What should she go with? Well, for just $2 more than her Everyday  Colors
line, Martha can pick up a gallon of the top-rated Behr  Premium Plus flat
Enamel, which, at $20, gets top marks for hiding,  mildew and stain resistance
and ability to withstand scrubbing.

   Since, as the magazine points out, both low-luster and semigloss  finishes
can emphasize a wall's imperfections, a flat finish would  be best.

   After all, if the wall's got imperfections, you'd have to ask for a  putty
knife, and a knife's a knife where prisons are concerned.

   Keep your hat on

   The American Academy of Dermatology wants you to know that this is  its
fourth annual Hair Loss Awareness Month.

   It's my experience that people who are losing their hair are pretty  aware of
it, but it's nice to have a month where we can all share.

   Coming soon to a cubicle near you

   Don't let your boss know about this: Scientists have managed to  turn
procrastinating monkeys into workaholics by switching off a  gene in the brain
circuit.

   A National Institute of Health study found that monkeys, like  humans,
procrastinate when they think rewards are far off. As they  get closer to being
compensated, the monkeys work more efficiently  and cut down on errors.

   But scientists also found that a gene therapy -- blocking the brain
messenger chemical dopamine -- made them work hard all the time.

   The monkeys had been trained to perform simple computer tasks in  return for
treats.

   Sounds pretty much like what we do here.

   The monkeys will love this

   Paper Mate has a new labor-saving device called the Advancer. It's  a
mechanical pencil, but it's a self-advancing model. No more  clicking. Think of
the time you'll save. Think of the peace and  quiet.

   Get 'em with orange, yellow, purple, red or green barrels -- or  charcoal, if
you need visual peace and quiet -- at $5.95 for five,  which is a pretty cheap
way to be part of advanced technology.

   Investment opportunity

   Connecticut dairy farmer Matt Freund recently got a $72,000 federal  grant to
develop biodegradable planting pots made from the manure  his 225 cows create.

   He's looking for machinery to mass-produce the things -- right now  he can
only make six at a time -- and is talking with a marketing  consultant about
what he calls "poop pots," which may be the first  thing the marketing
consultant tells him to change.

   Anyway, for the gardener, the things have all the advantages of  peat pots
plus they have built-in fertilizer. And they don't smell  the way you'd think
they would.

   "It turns into a grain-like smell," Freund said. "That's an added  bonus
because nobody likes the smell of manure."

   Contributing: Howard Wolinsky, AP, Bloomberg News, Daily  Telegraph

GRAPHIC: THE NEWS FROM DOWN UNDER: Morrie the sheepdog herds performing ducks
Jack, Darcy and Sam in Melbourne, Australia, in a promotion this week for the
2004 Deniliquin World Record Ute Muster in October. A ute is an Australian
car/pickup hybrid like the old Chevy Camino. The ducks are Indian Runners, known
for their upright stance. Early explorers called them "penguin ducks."
Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2004


                             362 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2004 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                            August 12, 2004 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; SUN-TIMES INSIGHT; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1572 words

BYLINE: Gregory M. Lamb, Christian Science Monitor

BODY:

   Ray Kurzweil plans to live forever. To that end, he carefully  chooses what
he eats and drinks. On top of that he keeps his weight  down, exercises, and
takes dietary supplements, about 250 a day.

   He feels his strategy is working. Though he was born 56 years ago,  a recent
exhaustive physical examination revealed that his body is  that of a
40-year-old, he says.

   So far, so good.

   Kurzweil, a successful inventor, entrepreneur and futurist, knows  even his
most rigorous efforts to preserve his body won't by  themselves lead to physical
immortality. But his plan is to live in  good health long enough, perhaps
another 30 years, that future  scientific advancements can take him the rest of
the way.

   It's a vision with extraordinary appeal. As the nation's 76 million  baby
boomers march toward retirement -- the first boomers turn 65  in 2011 -- many
are beginning to cast sidelong glances at what's  come to be known as the
life-extension movement.

   Already in 2002, Americans spent about $43 billion on anti-aging  products
and treatments -- and that figure may rise to $64 billion  by 2007, according to
the market research company FIND/SVP. The  bodies of more than 70 people in the
United States, including  baseball great Ted Williams, have been frozen in
anticipation of  future life-reviving technology.

   There's little evidence so far that any of these strategies and  treatments
will work, scientists point out. Even the breakthroughs  of the 20th century
have done little to allow seniors to live  longer. Still, skeptics admit that
life-extension technologies will  eventually emerge. And recent advances in
genetics have generated a  growing faith that such technologies will appear in
decades rather  than centuries.

   Some observers call this faith a new religion.

   "These people are saying, 'I don't want to die, and I'm going to do
something about it,' "says Brian Alexander, author of Rapture:  How Biotech
Became the New Religion. They were raised in the  post-World War II era of a
booming economy, grew up watching the  wonders of science fiction, and were told
they lived in a world  where everything was going to be possible. "And then
they're faced  with death," he says. "That makes them angry."

   There's a sense that they may be the last generation that is going  to have
to die, that they might just miss out on immortality,  Alexander adds. "And
that's going to be enormously frustrating."

   Big advances in biotechnology in recent years, such as deciphering  the human
genome, may have also inflated expectations, says S. Jay  Olshansky, a professor
of public health at the University of  Chicago and an internationally recognized
expert on aging.

   In some ways, the current movement echoes the early 20th-century  eugenics
movement, Olshansky says, which followed scientific  advances in the
understanding of genetics and also sought to  perfect humans through genetic
manipulation."When we acquire the  ability to modify something that kills us, we
become giddy and  begin to believe that if we can modify this, we can modify
that,"  says Olshansky, co-author of the book The Quest for Immortality.  "And
that has always been the belief that we can modify aging."

   Today, "we're getting giddy again," he adds.

   While it's true that the average life expectancy of an American  rose from 47
years to 77 years during the 20th century, experts on  aging point out that most
of that increase was due to reducing  deaths at early ages. The upper limit
hasn't really changed. "A  hundred years ago, a thousand years ago, there were
people who made  it out past 100 years of age," Olshansky says. "If you brought
someone from 5,000 years ago into the present and gave them the  lifestyles we
have today, they would live equally long. We haven't  changed at all
biologically."

   Even today's medical advances may be overstated. Pulitzer  Prize-winning
science journalist Laurie Garrett has pointed out  that the invention of
antibiotics and other 20th-century medical  "marvels" have contributed less than
4 percent to the total  improvement in life expectancy since the 1700s. Instead,
she  calculates, longer average life spans are due to better basic
public-health measures, including providing clean water, sewage  systems, and
better nutrition for the poor.

   The life-extension argument, then, really centers on views of the  future,
the potential for breakthroughs, and the speed with which  they might arrive.

   "Everything they say about life extension is going to become true  -- and
we're all going to be dead by then," says Alexander, who's  been called a "fence
sitter" on the question of life extension. "It  may be 100 years, 500 years, who
knows when it's going to happen.  But there is a picture emerging now that there
will be a thing  called radical life extension, and people will live to be a
couple  of hundred years or more."

   But life-extension advocates say Alexander's time frame is much too  long. It
fails to take into account the fact that the pace of  scientific discovery is
quickening.

   "Until recently, there wasn't much you could offer people" to  radically
extend life, says James Hughes, executive director of the  World Transhumanist
Association, which advocates the ethical use of  technology to overcome the
limits of the human body. Now research  into areas such as mineral supplements
and the benefits of  restricting the intake of calories is going to "cascade in
the next  couple of decades to the point where life extension will begin to
radically extend," says Hughes, who teaches bioethics at Trinity  College in
Hartford, Conn.

   For example: Years of research on animals have suggested that  cutting intake
of calories in half increases their life span. Few  people are willing to endure
semistarvation to follow this regimen.  However, within the next decade, drugs
that mimic the effects of a  restricted-calorie diet may become available,
Hughes says. "We're  very close to being able to have a genetic therapy or a
pharmaceutical treatment which will turn on those mechanisms in the  body and
hopefully gain a one-third to 50 percent increase in life  expectancy."

   Further into the future, but still in this century, nanobots --  tiny robots
the size of molecules -- may be able to do tasks such  as replacing white or red
blood cells, he predicts, fighting  diseases and carrying oxygen much more
efficiently than their  biological counterparts and extending life even more
dramatically.

   Others don't share this techno-exuberance, remaining firmly in the  "show me"
camp. Upgrading the human body from Version 1.0 to  Version 2.0, as computer
whiz Kurzweil suggests, may run into  unexpected challenges. So far, modifying
genes in animals has  almost always resulted in negative tradeoffs, Olshansky
says. A  turkey altered to have more white meat, for example, might also
develop problems with infections.

   "We may have to pay a price, and the price we pay may be something  we don't
like," he says. He adds that he'd be "absolutely ecstatic"  if science could
lengthen the average life span by 10 years.

   If lives were ever extended dramatically, bioethicists foresee a  number of
disruptive questions that will emerge, ranging from  practical issues like its
effects on government retirement programs  and overpopulation to profound
philosophical questions about  whether there is a natural, even beneficial,
shape to human lives.  Mortality may provide an urgency to our endeavors and
drive humans  to achieve, they say.

   Alexander sees the search for life extension as a kind of new  religion.
"What religion has promised to give us is trial and  tribulation now, but a
reward at the end," he says. "And we will  have everlasting life, and we will
have happiness, and we'll have  enhanced bodies and minds.

   "Well, if we can give ourselves these things, why do we need to  wait for God
to give them to us? That's quite a challenge."

   If long-lived humans in the future were just like those of today,  after "500
years or 1,000 years we would develop a deep ennui, a  profound despair by
having more time than we know how to deal  with," Kurzweil concedes. But that
won't happen.

   "We're also going to be expanding our mental horizons during that  time," he
says. "I think this is our destiny. This is the whole  point of our evolution.
This is the next step in evolution." Being  human, he says, means to "expand our
horizons." Humans have learned  how to fly and even how to leave this planet.
"We didn't stay  within the limits of our biology. ... We're going to expand our
thinking beyond that."

   Christian Science Monitor

   the afterlife -- on ice

   *Cryonics (not to be confused with cryogenics) refers to the  freezing and
resuscitation of organisms.

   * Some reptiles freeze in solid blocks of winter ice and revive  when they
thaw. Their secret: high levels of glucose -- a natural  antifreeze -- in their
blood.

   * R. Ettinger's 1962 book The Prospect of Immortality began the  cryonics
movement. His Cryonics Institute preserves clients in  liquid nitrogen. Cost per
person: $28,000.

   * More than 70 people are frozen in the United States, including  a man from
1967.

   * Many scientists, such as plant cryo-preservation expert Paul  Lynch of
England's University of Derby, call human resurrection an  impossibility.

   SOURCES: UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA, CRYONICS.ORG, DERBY EVENING  TELEGRAPH

   Live long and prosper

   Aging boomers are intent on never growing old, and they're pulling  out all
the stops to make it so

GRAPHIC: CHART; See below.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2004


                             363 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 09, 2004, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1337 words

HEADLINE: Good for medicine, but bad for sports;
Building better muscles could help save lives - and taint athletic feats

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER

BODY:

   Baseball superstars Barry Bonds and Jason Giambi can't hit a home run without
facing questions about steroids. Lance Armstrong just won a record sixth Tour de
France, but did so amid suspicions by a few that he doped his blood.

   And the signature contests of the 2004 Olympic Games that open this week in
Athens - track-and-field events - will undoubtedly unfold under a pall of
cynicism: Did the gold medalists, as many have in the past, take steroids?

   With ever-increasing pressure to win, it's difficult to find a major sport
where elite athletes haven't been accused of juicing their bodies.

   Now, here's the bad news: These may be the halcyon days of fair athletic
competition.

   By understanding how the body works on a molecular level, and decoding the
human genome, scientists are beginning to tailor treatments that target the
biological roots of health problems. And as genetics revolutionize medicine, new
treatments to build muscle more naturally, safely and quickly than steroids
could be one of the first applications.

   Though the manipulation of muscle-building genes may prove a godsend for
people with diseases such as muscular dystrophy, it would be a nightmare for
anti-doping agencies.

   "This is scary stuff, and it's right around the corner" said John Eliot, a
Rice University lecturer and consultant to Olympic athletes and teams.

   "This is the next step in artificial enhancement, and it's far ahead of
testing."

   Anti-doping officials say they don't think these genetic techniques will be
used in this summer's games. But when the Olympics reach Beijing four years from
now, the games may enter the genetic age.

   "Certainly, by 2008, the entire gene therapy field will be much more
developed, and the World Anti-Doping Agency is very concerned," said Dr. Carlos
Hamilton, a committee member of the agency and an executive vice president of
the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

    How it works

    Gene therapy has already worked in rats, and scientists have identified a
gene in humans that gives a tremendous advantage to weight-lifting. These
therapies are on the cusp of, or are already in, human trials for muscle-loss
diseases.

   The critical scientific work in this area is new, started less than a decade
ago, when scientists began understanding precisely how muscle is built.

   A normal workout microscopically tears muscle fibers, triggering a chemical
alarm in the form of a protein called IGF-I, which calls nearby cells to make
multiple copies of themselves by the normal process of cell division. Some of
these cells then merge with the muscle fibers, adding bulk and strength. When
the muscle is rebuilt, another protein, called myostatin, tells the nearby cells
to stop.

   In recent years research groups have begun working to boost IGF-I in human
muscle cells, or block myostatin, with the thought that doing one or the other
would lead to beefed-up muscles.

   Simply injecting IGF-I into muscles would have little effect, because it
dissipates quickly. So scientists at the University of Pennsylvania designed a
mechanism to insert a synthetic IGF-I gene into muscle cells, where it should
last for the life of a cell. Since muscle cells live a long time, a single dose
could last for a decade, or more.

   The researchers used a harmless virus to smuggle the gene into muscle cells,
where it mingles with the existing DNA in the host cells and begins raising
production of IGF-I.

   The team then turned to the Austin-based laboratory of Roger Farrar, a
University of Texas professor of kinesiology. They injected the modified virus
into one leg of lab rats, then gave them eight weeks of resistance training.

   The injected muscles performed like champions - they gained twice as much
strength as the non-treated muscles, and after training stopped, they lost mass
twice as slowly. Even rats that received injections but did not work out saw a
15 percent gain in muscle mass. The ones who received injections were otherwise
normal and healthy.

   "There are some real benefits, healthwise, you could see in this," Farrar
said. "But you can also see how it could be abused by an athletic population
with sufficient resources."

   For now the IGF-I researchers plan to continue their work in larger mammals,
such as dogs, before moving to humans.

    Successful studies

    Studies on the other muscle-building pathway, blocking myostatin, are
further along.

   In 1997, scientists found the gene in mice that produces myostatin, and
determined that mice without the gene had twice the muscle mass of normal mice.
Earlier this year, the same group, led by Dr. Se-Jin Lee, a genetics professor
at Johns Hopkins University, found similar evidence in a child.

   At about the same time, based partly on Lee's research, Wyeth Pharmaceuticals
announced a clinical trial to study the safety of a myostatin-blocking drug. It
is just the first round of trials, so the drug remains several years away from
the market. Such tests will determine whether gene therapy has serious health
implications like those caused by steroid use.

   Lee said he fears the brewing furor over genetic doping in sports will
overwhelm the medical advantages.

   "There certainly is the potential for abuse, so clearly we'll have to do
whatever we can to prevent the misuse of these drugs," he said. "At the same
time, the potential medical uses are enormous. If this really does work like we
think it can, it really could provide some profound benefits for people with
some pretty devastating diseases."

    Clear health benefits

    As much as 50 percent of a fit person's body weight is muscle mass, but
between middle age and old age, people lose as much as a third of their muscle.
As a result they become weaker, fall easier and see a decline in their quality
of life.

   For people with some forms of muscular dystrophy, muscle loss can mean a
childhood spent in a wheelchair, and death by the age of 20 or 25.

   Muscle wasting is a health problem for people with chronic diseases such as
AIDS and cancer, too, and can affect people recovering from surgery, those in
comas and those with injuries that force them to remain sedentary.

   The vast potential of gene therapy has groups such as the Muscular Dystrophy
Association talking confidently about a cure, perhaps for the first time.

   "We've known about these muscle-wasting diseases for 200 years, but they
really have never been treatable," said Sharon Hesterlee, the MDA's director of
research development. "Gene therapy is an amazing breakthrough that may solve
the problem."

    Very hard to test

    Anti-doping officials have expressed the most concern about IGF-I gene
therapy because it is injected directly into the muscles. There would be no
evidence of it in blood or urine, which Olympic officials test.

   To find any evidence at all officials would have to perform an invasive
muscle biopsy to detect the virus or synthetic gene. Even such a test, however,
might be inconclusive, and it is difficult to imagine an athlete consenting to a
procedure that would damage muscle.

   Myostatin blockers may pose less trouble for testing, at least for now. Lee
said it would not be too difficult to develop a test for the drug in development
by Wyeth. But certainly there is potential for abuse with the myostatin-blocking
gene as well, experts said.

   "I would not underestimate the cleverness of those that would abuse any
potential way to enhance performance," said Hamilton, of the anti-doping agency.

   As evidence, he cited Balco Laboratories, which has been investigated by the
IRS and other federal agencies, and is accused of creating a so-called "designer
steroid" for athletes to evade drug testing. Bonds, Giambi and sprinter Marion
Jones headline a list of several dozen top athletes who reportedly received the
steroid, THG.

   "The THG saga is evidence that the science available to the 'dark side' is
formidable, and it is only by a degree of luck and the persistence of the IRS
that Balco was even suspected of evil intent," Hamilton said.



NOTES: eric.berger@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2004


                             364 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       August 9, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 04G

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: Wider treatment window seen;
Gene could protect blood-deprived organs

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- Looking for a way to reduce damage from heart attack and
stroke, researchers designed a new combination gene that switches on when oxygen
is reduced, triggering a defense mechanism that protects the threatened tissue.

   If it works in humans, the therapy, given in advance to at-risk patients,
might provide extra time to get treatment before major damage is done.

   In heart attack and stroke, blood supplies to the heart or brain are blocked,
resulting in a lack of oxygen that is the major cause of severe injury or death.

   "The biggest unmet need is a window of time" to get treatment, said Victor J.
Dzau, chancellor of health affairs at Duke University. "While drugs that can
protect heart muscle are available, most patients barely make it to the hospital
in time to take advantage of them."

   The new therapy may provide that time by protecting tissues from damage, said
Dzau, who led the study at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston before moving
to Duke in July.

   The findings, based on work in rats, are reported in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences.

   Dzau said the next step is to try the therapy in larger animals such as pigs
and, if all goes well, studies in people could occur in a year or two.

   The therapy would be for people who have already had a heart attack or have
some other high-risk factor for having another one, he noted.

   Someone who has a high risk of a heart attack in six months to a year would
be given the combination gene, which could then activate when needed.

   For the therapy, the researchers combined two genes -- one that can detect
oxygen deficiency and a second one, called heme-oxygenase 1, that protects
tissues from damage when they do not get enough oxygen. They used a harmless
virus to deliver the combination gene to the muscle, liver and hearts of three
rats.

   Five weeks later, the researchers used tourniquets or clamps to cut off
blood. The affected tissues reacted by activating the protective gene, and
damage was dramatically reduced compared with rats that did not get the
combination gene therapy, Dzau reported.

   John Fakunding, program director for heart research at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute, called the work "a unique and novel idea, if it can be
translated into the clinic. I think it could have a potential for certain
patients."

   The problem with trying to protect the heart is not knowing when a heart
attack may occur, he observed. With this therapy, someone at high risk of a
heart attack could be treated in advance.

   ------------

   Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences: www.pnas.org

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2004


                             365 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                            August 7, 2004 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: Los Angeles;
Secret Taping Reported in Abuse Case;
Detectives monitored conversations and e-mails between a girl and the scientist
she says molested her, according to sources.

BYLINE: Anna Gorman and Richard Winton, Times Staff Writers

BODY:

   Detectives secretly taped famed USC medical researcher William French
Anderson's conversations with a girl who alleges that he sexually molested her,
law enforcement sources said.

   Anderson also sent a series of responses to e-mails sent by the girl at the
direction of investigators, sources said.

   The specific contents of the communications could not be learned, but both
the tape and the e-mails are likely to be presented as evidence in the criminal
case against Anderson, a nationally known researcher in gene therapy, sources
said.

   Los Angeles prosecutors allege that Anderson sexually abused the girl, who is
now 17, from 1997 to 2001. He has pleaded not guilty. The charges are punishable
by 56 years in prison.

   Anderson, a martial arts expert, taught the girl karate in his San Marino
home, prosecutors said.

   Sheriff's investigators are also attempting to locate and question other
children known to have taken karate lessons from Anderson. Investigators have
not ruled out the possibility that there may be other cases involving the
scientist, sources said.

   "The Sheriff's Department is continuing its investigation of Dr. Anderson,
including talking to others he may have mentored over the years," said district
attorney's spokeswoman Sandi Gibbons.

   Gibbons confirmed that e-mails were exchanged but wouldn't comment on their
content or other evidence.

   Anderson's defense attorney did not return calls.

   The inquiry began a few months ago, after the girl told a counselor about the
alleged abuse. The therapist reported the allegations to county social services
authorities, who told police. The San Marino Police Department, which has had a
long relationship with Anderson, referred the case to investigators for county
Sheriff Lee Baca.

   Anderson had helped pay for the San Marino police gym, taught officers
martial arts and donated money to police functions, sources said.

   With the cooperation of the girl, sheriff's detectives began monitoring her
communications with Anderson, sources said.

   Then, about a month ago, Anderson went to San Marino Police Chief Arl Farris
to report that he believed he had been the victim of extortion by the girl and
her family. Anderson showed Farris a document that contained his own statement,
plus comments from the scientist's wife and a purported statement by the girl,
sources said.

   Farris turned the information over to the Sheriff's Department to avoid the
appearance of a conflict of interest.

   In an interview, Farris acknowledged referring the case to the Sheriff's
Department but said he could not comment on an investigation by another agency.

   One of Anderson's e-mails contained a reference to a gun, which defense
attorneys said referred to a possible suicide threat. A judge ordered Anderson
to surrender all firearms as a condition of his release Monday.

   Anderson had a concealed-weapons permit from the San Marino Police
Department. Sources said the permit was issued in part because Anderson had
received threatening letters regarding his gene therapy work.

   Anderson, who is on administrative leave from USC, teaches biochemistry,
molecular biology and pediatrics. He previously spent 27 years at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. He is a fifth-degree black belt in tae
kwon do.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2004


                             366 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 6, 2004 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A04

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: Geneticist Denies Abuse Charges;
Community Patron in Seclusion After Allegations Are Publicized

BYLINE: Kimberly Edds, Special to the Washington Post

DATELINE: SAN MARINO, Calif.

BODY:

   In the world of gene therapy research, W. French Anderson was at the top. He
made his name leading the first approved experiment in which patients were given
new genes. Once a pioneer at the National Institutes of Health, for the past
decade he has headed the Gene Therapy Laboratories at the University of Southern
California.

   In this posh Los Angeles suburb, he was a good if quiet neighbor and a
benefactor, writing checks for community projects that included outfitting the
local police department's running team with uniforms.

   But now the researcher is in seclusion, charged with molesting a teenage girl
he once coached in tae kwon do. He is free on $600,000 bail, has surrendered his
passport and firearms and, if convicted, faces as much as 26 years in prison. In
court earlier this week, his lawyer said Anderson had mentioned suicide and when
he was in jail last weekend, he was on a suicide watch.

   Outside the courtroom in which he pleaded not guilty, Anderson told
reporters, "It is a nightmare being falsely accused. I did not do the things
that I am charged with."

   Anderson is charged with one count of continuous sex abuse on a child and
five counts of lewd acts upon a child, felony charges that could result in a
sentence of 26 years in state prison.

   Prosecutors said Anderson began abusing the girl during the monthly tae kwon
do lessons he taught at his home starting in January 1997, when she was 10. A
fifth-degree black belt, Anderson still competes. The abuse continued for almost
five years, until December 2001, prosecutors say. Even after that, the doctor
continued to visit and e-mail the girl, authorities said. She is now 17.

   Anderson's attorney did not return repeated calls for comment.

   Anderson was placed on administrative leave from USC on Friday when sheriff's
deputies arrived on campus with a search warrant, university officials said.
Computers and computer files were taken.

   Anderson was born in Tulsa, and he graduated from Harvard Medical School in
1963. He met his wife, Kathryn, in an anatomy class at Cambridge University.
They married in 1961. Kathryn Anderson retired last month as chief of surgery at
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. They have no children.

   In his research, Anderson has focused on improving the way healthy genes can
be transported into cells to replace variant genes that can cause disease. He
has also been developing methods for performing gene therapy on human fetuses as
a way of preventing diseases in babies before they are born.

   Anderson made his mark on the scientific world in 1990 when he organized and
oversaw the removal of white blood cells from 4-year-old Ashanti DeSilva,
inserting copies of a missing gene and re-infusing the cells into her body. The
procedure, and a similar one performed on 9-year-old Cynthia Cutshall, was
partially successful. Both girls, who suffered from a rare genetic disorder that
left them without a functioning immune system, are now healthy -- though in part
from a drug that was not available before 1990.

   While gene therapy has had mixed results overall, Anderson has pursued his
quest to perform gene therapy as routinely as doctors administer drugs now.

   DeSilva's parents, Raj and Van, said they were devastated by the news of the
accusations against the doctor who saved Ashanti's life.

   "We've left our daughter with him alone many times. We support him fully. We
trust him fully. We don't believe any of these charges," Raj DeSilva said.

   Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute, who with Anderson tested
the safety of gene therapy in cancer patients, said Anderson played an important
role in the early development of the technology.

   "He is a good scientist and a caring person. I would be incredibly shocked if
these charges turned out to be true," Rosenberg said. "I find this all very hard
to believe. I've always known French to be an honorable person."

   At home, the white-haired doctor may have been a little quirky for the
button-down neighborhood, with a karate ring in his back yard and his 1990 Acura
Legend in the driveway on a street lined with luxury cars.

   But he was known for his generosity. In addition to providing the San Marino
Police Department's running team with uniforms, he paid for the overhaul of a
gym used by the city's police and firefighters. He has been a frequent visitor
to the station and is friends with the police chief, Arl Farris, who approved a
concealed-weapons permit for him.

   After being tipped off by his accuser that charges might be coming, Anderson
wrote to Farris saying that he could be the target of an extortion attempt. But
prosecutors say there is no evidence of blackmail.

    "We think it was just an attempt to already start setting up a defense,"
Deputy District Attorney Cathryn Brougham said.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2004


                             367 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                            August 5, 2004, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; PLANET; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1550 words

HEADLINE: High-tech hope: escape from the sands of time

BYLINE: By Gregory M. Lamb Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

HIGHLIGHT:
Life-extension movement gains momentum as baby boomers push to live longer

BODY:

   Ray Kurzweil plans to live forever. To that end, he carefully chooses what he
eats and drinks. On top of that he keeps his weight down, exercises, and takes
dietary supplements - about 250 a day.

   He feels his strategy is working. Though he was born 56 years ago, a recent
exhaustive physical examination revealed that his body is that of a 40-year-old,
he says.

   So far, so good.

   Mr. Kurzweil, a successful inventor, entrepreneur, and futurist, knows even
his most rigorous efforts to preserve his body won't by themselves lead to
physical immortality. But his plan is to live in good health long enough,
perhaps another 30 years, that future scientific advancements can take him the
rest of the way.

   It's a vision with extraordinary appeal. As the nation's 76 million baby
boomers march toward retirement - the first boomers turn 65 in 2011 - many are
beginning to cast sidelong glances at what's come to be known as the
life-extension movement.

   Already in 2002, Americans spent about $ 43 billion on antiaging products and
treatments - and that figure may rise to $ 64 billion by 2007, according to the
market research company FIND/SVP. The bodies of more than 70 people in the
United States, including baseball great Ted Williams, have been frozen in
anticipation of future life-reviving technology.

   There's little evidence so far that any of these strategies and treatments
will work, scientists point out. Even the breakthroughs of the 20th century have
done little to allow seniors to live longer.Still, skeptics admit that life-
extension technologies will eventually emerge. And recent advances in genetics
have generated a growing faith that such technologies will appear in decades
rather than centuries.

   Some observers call this faith a new religion.

   "These people are saying, 'I don't want to die, and I'm going to do something
about it,' " says Brian Alexander, author of "Rapture: How Biotech Became the
New Religion." They were raised in the post-World War II era of a booming
economy, grew up watching the wonders of science fiction, and were told they
lived in a world where everything was going to be possible. "And then they're
faced with death," he says. "That makes them angry."

   There's a sense that they may be the last generation that is going to have to
die, that they might just miss out on immortality, Mr. Alexander adds. "And
that's going to be enormously frustrating."

   Big advances in biotechnology in recent years, such as deciphering the human
genome, may have also inflated expectations, says S. Jay Olshansky, a professor
of public health at the University of Chicago and an internationally recognized
expert on aging.

   In some ways, the current movement echoes the early 20th-century eugenics
movement, he says, which followed scientific advances in the understanding of
genetics and also sought to perfect humans through genetic manipulation."When we
acquire the ability to modify something that kills us, we become giddy and begin
to believe that if we can modify this, we can modify that," says Dr. Olshansky,
coauthor of the book "The Quest for Immortality." "And that has always been the
belief that we can modify aging."

   Today, "we're getting giddy again," he adds.

   While it's true that the average life expectancy of an American rose from 47
years to 77 years during the 20th century, experts on aging point out that most
of that increase was due to reducing deaths at early ages. The upper limit
hasn't really changed. "A hundred years ago, a thousand years ago, there were
people who made it out past 100 years of age," Olshansky says. "If you brought
someone from 5,000 years ago into the present and gave them the lifestyles we
have today, they would live equally long. We haven't changed at all
biologically."

   Even today's medical advances may be overstated. Pulitzer Prize-winning
science journalist Laurie Garrett has pointed out that the invention of
antibiotics and other 20th-century medical "marvels" have contributed less than
4 percent to the total improvement in life expectancy since the 1700s. Instead,
she calculates, longer average life spans are due to better basic public-health
measures, including providing clean water, sewage systems, and better nutrition
for the poor.

   The life-extension argument, then, really centers on views of the future, the
potential for breakthroughs, and the speed with which they might arrive.

   "Everything they say about life extension is going to become true - and we're
all going to be dead by then," says Alexander, who's been called a "fence
sitter" on the question of life extension. "It may be 100 years, 500 years, who
knows when it's going to happen. But there is a picture emerging now that there
will be a thing called radical life extension, and people will live to be a
couple of hundred years or more."

   But life-extension advocates say that Alexander's time frame is much too
long. It fails to take into account the fact that the pace of scientific
discovery is quickening.

   "Until recently, there wasn't much you could offer people" to radically
extend life, says James Hughes, executive director of the World Transhumanist
Association, which advocates the ethical use of technology to overcome the
limits of the human body. Now research into areas such as mineral supplements
and the benefits of restricting the intake of calories is going to "cascade in
the next couple of decades to the point where life extension will begin to
radically extend," says Dr. Hughes, who teaches bioethics at Trinity College in
Hartford, Conn.

   For example: Years of research on animals have suggested that cutting intake
of calories in half increases their life span. Few people are willing to endure
semistarvation to follow this regimen. However, within the next decade, drugs
that mimic the effects of a restricted-calorie diet may become available, Hughes
says. "We're very close to being able to have a genetic therapy or a
pharmaceutical treatment which will turn on those mechanisms in the body and
hopefully gain a one-third to 50 percent increase in life expectancy."

   Further into the future, but still in this century, nanobots - tiny robots
the size of molecules - may be able to do tasks such as replacing white or red
blood cells, he predicts, fighting diseases and carrying oxygen much more
efficiently than their biological counterparts and extending life even more
dramatically.

   Others don't share this techno-exuberance, remaining firmly in the "show me"
camp. Upgrading the human body from Version 1.0 to Version 2.0, as computer whiz
Kurzweil suggests, may run into unexpected challenges. So far, modifying genes
in animals has almost always resulted in negative tradeoffs, Olshansky says. A
turkey altered to have more white meat, for example, might also develop problems
with infections.

   "We may have to pay a price, and the price we pay may be something we don't
like," he says. He adds that he'd be "absolutely ecstatic" if science could
lengthen the average life span by 10 years.

   If lives were ever extended dramatically, bioethicists foresee a number of
disruptive questions that will emerge, ranging from practical issues like its
effects on government retirement programs and overpopulation to profound
philosophical questions about whether there is a natural, even beneficial, shape
to human lives. Mortality may provide an urgency to our endeavors and drive
humans to achieve, they say.

   Alexander sees the search for life extension as a kind of new religion. "What
religion has promised to give us is trial and tribulation now, but a reward at
the end," he says. "And we will have everlasting life, and we will have
happiness, and we'll have enhanced bodies and minds.

   "Well, if we can give ourselves these things, why do we need to wait for God
to give them to us? That's quite a challenge."

   If long-lived humans in the future were just like those of today, after "500
years or 1,000 years we would develop a deep ennui, a profound despair by having
more time than we know how to deal with," Kurzweil concedes. But that won't
happen.

   "We're also going to be expanding our mental horizons during that time," he
says. "I think this is our destiny. This is the whole point of our evolution.
This is the next step in evolution." Being human, he says, means to "expand our
horizons." Humans have learned how to fly and even how to leave this planet. "We
didn't stay within the limits of our biology... We're going to expand our
thinking beyond that."

   Afterlife...on ice

   * Cryonics (not to be confused with cryogenics) refers to the freezing and
resuscitation of organisms.

   * Some reptiles freeze in solid blocks of winter ice and revive when they
thaw. Their secret: high levels of glucose - a natural antifreeze - in their
blood.

   * R. Ettinger's 1962 book "The Prospect of Immortality" began the cryonics
movement. His Cryonics Institute preserves clients in liquid nitrogen. Cost per
person: $ 28,000.

   * More than 70 people are frozen in the US, including a man from 1967.

   * Many scientists - such as plant cryo-preservation expert Paul Lynch of
England's University of Derby - call human resurrection an impossibility.

   SOURCES: University of Florida, cryonics.org, Derby Evening Telegraph.

   (c) Copyright 2004. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: August 04, 2004


                             368 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            August 4, 2004 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: Drug co. nearer partner, EU

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. moved a step closer to launching a major anemia
drug in Europe with a partnership to make Dynepo in England, officials said
yesterday.

   Lonza AG, based in Switzerland, agreed to make the drug at its plant in
Slough, England.

   Financial terms weren't disclosed.

   Transkaryotic had been blocked from selling Dynepo in Europe because of
patent disputes with Amgen, maker of rival Epogen. But Amgen's patent expires in
2006, and a second patent was ruled invalid. (Amgen has appealed.)

   ``We feel we should be OK, but there is still some theoretical risk there,''
said Michael Astrue, Transkaryotic chief executive.

   Dynepo could be introduced late next year, he said.

   Transkaryotic also said yesterday that it hired Ronald Cass, a former Boston
University Law School dean, to advise it on how to fend off efforts by rivals to
block Dynepo's entry into Europe.

   Getting another drug on the market could prove to be a boost to
Transkaryotic, which relies on revenue from just one drug, Replagal, a Fabry
disease treatment sold only in Europe.

   ``We believe this announcement will be viewed as highly positive as it sets
plans for a Dynepo EU market entry into motion,'' said Jennifer Chao, an analyst
for Deutsche Bank.

   She projected Dynepo sales of $20 million in 2006, doubling to $40 million in
a year. The market for the drug is ultimately more than $200 million to $400
million.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2004


                             369 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 4, 2004 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE:
REGIONAL MARKET -- New Jersey; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: Making Room for Technology Start-Ups

BYLINE: By RACHELLE GARBARINE

BODY:

   After a long search for lab and office space for their fledgling life-science
company late in 2002, Christian Kopfli and his business partner found a home at
the Commercialization Center for Innovative Technologies in North Brunswick,
N.J., a new, nonprofit complex providing ''incubator'' space for emerging
technology companies.

    It offered an ''attractive rent in a modern facility that people would want
to work in,'' said Mr. Kopfli, chief executive of Chromocell, which creates cell
lines for use in research and gene therapy.

     Since then, the company has expanded into three 800-square-foot labs and
needs a fourth, and it has increased its work force to 14 people from 2. If
Chromocell wants more space, there is none available.

    So now, like most of its tenants, the center is making plans to expand. In
hopes of providing a site where more new businesses can survive until they
become profitable, it will more than double in size, to 48,000 square feet, and
will accommodate 26 businesses instead of the 9 it holds now.

    The center is on the 50-acre campus of the Technology Centre of New Jersey,
a state-supported collection of research and production facilities with 380,000
square feet in six buildings. It too is about to expand: it is under contract to
buy an additional 25 acres for its campus, which is on the so-called research
corridor of the Route 1 commercial artery near Princeton. In addition, Rutgers
University in New Brunswick has leased 26,000 square feet adjacent to the
commercialization center for several burgeoning businesses with ties to the
university, as an extension of the campus-based incubator, said Michael Breton,
associate vice president for research at Rutgers.

    The commercialization center where Mr. Kopfli's office is located has labs
for life-science and high-technology firms needing as little as 800 to 1,000
square feet. It also offers shared business services like legal and accounting
advice, as well as office support and conference rooms that are available to
tenants. Rents of $30 a square foot cover both the space and the shared
services.

    Thomas P. Sullivan, a senior vice president at CB Richard Ellis, the real
estate services firm, said the center's expansion was proceeding even though the
vacancy rate in northern and central New Jersey for research and lab space for
large users remains steady at 18 percent.

    But, he added, ''few private developers will divide space to below 3,000
square feet'' or build labs for small users, because they view the costs and
risks as being high.

    There may be a growing need for such space, however. State universities and
large pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms are spinning out young companies,
said Debbie Hart, president of the Biotechnology Council of New Jersey, a trade
organization, and there are now 124 biotechnology firms in the state.

    The competition for the start-up companies is expected to intensify as the
economic recovery gathers strength. To that end, the state and Rutgers
University in Camden have started to erect a 100,000-square-foot building in a
technology center on the Camden waterfront. The initial building will house the
Rutgers-Camden Business Incubator, which will relocate into the building and
double its space to 40,000 square feet.

    Frank Keith, executive director of the Rutgers incubator, said the school's
existing center houses 33 businesses in a mix of industries. Ultimately, the
Camden Center will have up to 500,000 more square feet in five additional
buildings.

    In the private sector, a Manhattan developer plans to break ground next
spring on an 80,000-square-foot building in a four-building research and
development park on Route 535 in East Windsor, N.J. SciPark, as the development
is called, will have labs and office space for companies needing at least 6,000
square feet, Michael J. Simon, the developer, said.

    But more than space, small companies, hindered by high operating costs and
the lack of credit, need financial help, said Caren Franzini, chief executive of
the state Economic Development Authority. Along with offering rents at the
commercialization center that are slightly below market, Ms. Franzini said, the
state has several programs that will help, including one that allows
money-losing companies to sell tax credits to profitable companies that need
write-offs against New Jersey taxes.

    As for Mr. Kopfli of Chromocell, he expects his company to become too large
to remain in an incubator building much longer, and he plans to lease larger
quarters next year. But that does not mean he will leave the Technology Centre
of New Jersey entirely: ''I most likely will stay'' in production space there,
he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Larissa DiGiovanni, a Chromocell technician, at the technology
center in North Brunswick, N.J. (Photo by Norman Y. Lono for The New York
Times)Chart: ''Data Update''New privately owned housing units authorized by
building permits, not seasonally adjusted, through June.Graph tracks regional
figures, measured in thousands, since 2000.NATIONAL IN THOUSANDSJUNE '03:
172.1APR. '04: 186.7MAY '04: 184.8JUNE '04: 191.0(Source by U.S. Census Bureau)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2004


                             370 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                  August 3, 2004 Tuesday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: ARIZONA LIVING; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 2369 words

HEADLINE: HIGH-TECH HEART REPAIR; 4 CUTTING-EDGE TREATMENTS SHOW PROMISE IN
REPAIRING VITAL ORGAN

BYLINE: By Scott Craven, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Along with 12 News and azcentral.com,

   we issue this challenge: Decide to live a more healthful life, and begin now.

   In August, we want to help you take care of your heart, and each Tuesday,
we'll present a different way to do that.

   * See all of the past issues of our challenge at health.azcentral.com.

   * Watch related segments on Arizona Midday at 11 a.m. today on Channel 12
(KPNX).

   * For exercise and fitness tips, check out Wednesday's Arizona Living.

   --

   Those who have held a beating heart in their hands can attest to the
fragility of the romanticized organ. When the heart malfunctions, the
consequences can be catastrophic and immediate.

   Coronary heart disease is the nation's single leading cause of death,
according to the American Heart Association. This year 1.2 million Americans
will suffer a heart attack, and 502,000 of them will die.

   But experimental treatments aimed at repairing and strengthening the heart
show promising results, doctors say.

   Repairing the heart, rather than attempting to stop the damage caused by
heart attacks, is the hottest thing on the treatment horizon, said George Sopko,
a cardiologist with the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the
National Institutes of Health.

   Each attack results in scar tissue, nature's attempt to heal the damage,
Sopko said. But scars are made up of dead cells and can debilitate the heart.
Scientists are looking for ways to create or generate live tissue.

   "So far it looks very promising," Sopko said. "But we're not there yet. Only
time will tell."

   Institutions in the Valley are making use of new treatments as well as
conducting clinical trials of procedures that may be available in the future.
Here's a sampling:

   Cell therapy

   A heart attack usually marks the beginning of a long and difficult road. A
damaged and weakened heart can curtail an active lifestyle and make the organ
more vulnerable to other attacks.

   But researchers have found that a particular group of muscle cells can mend
the damage when injected into the heart.

   Matthew Plummer suffered his first heart attack when he was 36. After
undergoing an experimental treatment in which myoblasts (regenerative muscle
cells) were taken from his leg and injected into his heart, his life is nearly
back to normal.

   Before the October operation at the Arizona Heart Institute, Plummer couldn't
walk 100 yards without leg pains and shortness of breath. Now he walks three
miles a day and bicycles six more.

   "I am so much better off," said Plummer, 42, who a month ago moved to
Holiday, Fla., from Peoria. "I can lead an active life with no worries."

   Nabil Dib, an interventional cardiologist at the Arizona Heart Institute who
has been running a clinical trial of this groundbreaking cell therapy, oversaw
Plummer's case.

   "Cell therapy is one of the most significant steps we've taken in cardiac
medicine," Dib said.

   Plummer is one of 22 patients who have received the myoblast injection during
a heart bypass, Dib said. Heart function has improved an average of 12 percent
in those patients (a 5 percent improvement is considered significant). Doctors
aren't sure how much the bypass contributed to the results, but Dib said a
bypass alone likely would not result in such an improvement.

   If all goes well, Dib estimates cell therapy should be available to the
public in five years.

   Gene therapy

   In gene therapy, doctors replace missing or faulty genes with normal or
modified ones that can produce the necessary proteins and enzymes to correct the
condition, said Dib, who heads the clinical testing of the procedure at the
heart institute.

   The synthetic genes are implanted by catheter into areas of the heart where
there is little blood flow. By producing proteins and enzymes, the genes create
conditions that encourage new vessels to grow, restoring normal blood flow to
the heart.

   Slightly more than a year ago, Elizabeth Longo couldn't climb a flight of
stairs without stopping two or three times to rest. Simple chores forced her to
the couch.

   Worse was the angina, a painful condition that results when the heart does
not get enough blood. Several times each day, Longo felt as if her chest were
being crushed in a vise.

   "For seven years, I was in such pain," said the 74-year-old Tempe resident
who has undergone three open-heart surgeries. "Nothing seemed to work. Life was
very limited."

   The problem was that Longo's cardiac arteries were too small, weakening the
heart and making it vulnerable to cardiac arrest. In June 2003, she underwent
the experimental gene therapy procedure.

   She felt so much better that in March, she finished first runner-up among 21
contestants in the Ms. Senior Arizona pageant.

   "I can do everything any other 74-year-old lady can do," Longo said. "Nothing
else I have that's 74 works as well as I do."

   Dib said that procedures thus far have shown encouraging results. He predicts
that gene therapy will be available to the general public within three to five
years.

   Sopko of NHLBI praised the heart institute's efforts but cautioned that
doctors need to be careful when using gene and cell therapies designed to
generate tissue to make sure cells don't grow out of control, perhaps leading to
cancer.

   "But it's very exciting what we're seeing with these studies," Sopko said.

   Virtual histology

   This new diagnostic tool may help prevent those all-too-common cases in which
apparently healthy people suffer heart attacks.

   According to Dib, 60 percent of heart attacks occur in people who have plaque
buildup in their arteries that is not considered severe. In many cases, such
blockages aren't even evident during a stress test (when a patient's heart is
monitored while he or she is on a treadmill). If a histology (a microscopic
study of the blood vessels) is done, it shows only minor blockages that don't
appear to require treatment.

   "Virtual histology," however, employs a computer to map such blockages and,
more importantly, to analyze their composition. Plaque buildup composed largely
of cholesterol is far more dangerous than deposits composed of calcium or fiber
(two other "building blocks" of plaque), Dib said.

   The lipids in cholesterol are more likely to break off and form a clot near
the heart, which can lead to a heart attack. The fibrous and calcified blockages
rarely carry such risks, he said.

   Virtual histology breaks down the plaque by color -- red for cholesterol,
white for calcium and green for fiber.

   Dib produced two images: a cross-section of a plaque-clogged artery that had
narrowed to a small hole and an artery that had only a slight blockage.

   The large amount of plaque in the first cross-section would normally be cause
for concern, he said. But the virtual histology showed it to be fibrous. In
contrast, the smaller blockage was 90 percent lipids (cholesterol), thus a
greater concern. Before virtual histology, he said such a small blockage would
not have been aggressively treated.

   "It can make a huge difference in treatment," Dib said.

   Currently, the only way to administer a virtual histology is by catheter, but
within five years (if not sooner), it may be done non-invasively via an MRI
scan. If costs come down, it could become a procedure as standard as a stress
test on a treadmill.

   Irregular heartbeats

   Atrial fibrillation can have deadly consequences and typically has been
treated with medications or, in severe cases, surgery. Doctors are using two new
methods that deaden electrical "hotspots," allowing the heart to beat normally.

   During atrial fibrillation, the heart starts to beat out of rhythm, creating
the feeling that it is fluttering like a bird. In one procedure, physicians
follow a three-dimensional map of the heart that pinpoints the areas producing
the electrical signals that trigger these irregular beats, said Dr. Rodrigo Chan
of the Baywood Heart Hospital in Mesa.

   Once these areas are located, doctors insert a catheter and block the signals
by applying intense heat to the source, creating a tiny scar, a process called
"ablation."

   "It's a very exciting technological breakthrough," Chan said. "Thanks to the
new scanning methods, we know where we need to be before ever entering the
heart. It makes our work so much easier."

   Patients controlling irregular heartbeats with medication may now opt to cure
the problem with this simple procedure, Chan said.

   In another method, surgeons use microwaves to "channel" a malfunctioning
heart's electrical impulses to regulate the heartbeat, said Kenith Fang, a
cardiothoracic surgeon at Banner Good Samaritan Medical Center in Phoenix.

   In a normal heart, electrical impulses radiate outward. Think of them as the
circles that form when you throw a pebble into a pond, Fang said. Imagine
throwing 100 pebbles into the pond. Now you have an idea of the chaotic activity
in an erratically beating heart.

   Fang employs a technique that controls and directs the energy by
"disconnecting" the appropriate tissue on a heart's surface. Through tiny
incisions on either side of the chest, Fang inserts a tiny microwave device that
heats the targeted tissue and burns it. He creates a maze through which only a
normal electrical signal may traverse.

   The technique, first used at Good Sam less than two months ago and employed
by only a handful of doctors nationwide, has shown amazing results, Fang said.
It has allowed doctors to go into the chest to cure atrial fibrillation without
cracking the breastbone.

   "A lot of people can benefit from this," Fang said. "Five million people
suffer from atrial fibrillation, and this is a way they can get back to having a
normal life again. It's such a debilitating condition."

   /

   Steps to a healthier heart

   * Be physically active. Moderate exercise

   (30 minutes a day, three to four days a week) can reduce cholesterol levels,
control blood pressure and lead to weight loss (important because obesity is a
major risk factor for heart attacks and strokes).

   * Eat a healthful diet. Foods high in cholesterol, saturated fat and trans
fat (created when manufacturers add hydrogen to vegetable oil, creating a
hydrogenated oil) contribute to atherosclerosis (the buildup of fatty
substances, calcium and other substances along the inner lining of an artery), a
primary cause of heart attack and stroke.

   * Don't use tobacco. Tobacco greatly increases the risk of heart disease and
stroke.

   * Avoid too much alcohol. One or two drinks a day may increase HDL (the
"good" cholesterol), but heavy drinking can increase blood pressure and
contribute to heart disease and stroke.

   * Have regular checkups. A doctor's expertise is vital when it comes to
evaluating your blood pressure, cholesterol levels and other risk factors. A
physician can dispense anything from advice to pharmaceuticals to help you lower
those risks.

   * Monitor your blood pressure. If it is less than 120/80 mm Hg, have it
checked by your doctor every two years. If it is above that, check it more often
according to your doctor's recommendations.

   * Control your cholesterol. Health officials recently revised levels
considered healthy, lowering the guideline for LDL ("bad" cholesterol) to 70
mg/dL from 100 mg/dL in people considered to have a high risk of heart attack.
The new guidelines also recommend drug therapy for high-risk patients whose LDL
cholesterol levels are above 100 mg/dL. For those considered to have a lower or
moderate risk of heart attack, LDL cholesterol should be below 200 mg/dL.

   Sources: American Heart Association, Arizona Heart Institute, American
College of Cardiology

   --

   Agencies, Web sites offer more information

   For more information on the heart and vascular system, try any of the
following groups, organizations and Web sites:

   * American Heart Association, 1-800-242-8721, www.americanheart.org.

   A consumer-friendly Web site filled with the latest studies as well as ways
to reduce your risk for heart disease. It lists warning signs for heart attack,
stroke and cardiac arrest.

   * Arizona Heart Institute, (602) 266-2200, www.az heart.com. Information on
the latest research is interesting, but more valuable is the variety of online
pamphlets that cover everything from aneurysms to vascular disease.

   * National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 1-(301)- 592-8573,
www.nhlbi.nih.gov. This Web site from the National Institutes of Health contains
loads of useful information but is more technical than most.

   * Mayo Clinic, (480) 301-8000, www.mayoclinic.org. There is little
consumer-oriented information on the site, but this is the place to learn more
about the medical services Mayo offers as well as what you should know if
interested in becoming a patient.

   * Banner Health Network, www.bannherhealth.com (click on "Patients &
Visitors" and place your mouse over "Health Topics," then "Conditions &
Disorders" and click on "Heart Care"). The site offers the usual consumer
information and is more useful for those seeking information on Banner's
hospitals and procedures.

   * John C. Lincoln Hospitals and Health Network,

   (602) 943-2381 (North Mountain) and (623) 879-6100 (Deer Valley), www.jcl.com
(place your mouse over "Health & Drug Information" and click on "Serious
conditions" for information related to heart health). You'll find basic and
useful information on heart-attack warning signs as well as tips to keep your
heart in good working order.

   * WebMD, www.webmd.com. The medically focused site has a wealth of
heart-related information. The only difficulty is finding it. At the home page,
type "Heart health" in the search bar and click "Go." Scroll down to "WebMD
search results" and click on the first listing, "Your Guide to Heart Disease."

   * Heart Health Online, www.fda.gov/hearthealth. This FDA site offers
everything the others offer (tips, risk factors and warning signs, among
others), but it also has information on FDA-approved products, including
medications and medical devices.

   * Johns Hopkins Heart Health, www.jhbmc.jhu.edu/ cardiology/rehab/patient

   info.html. This straightforward site addresses more than two-dozen
heart-related subjects. Click on the subject that interests you and read the
concise, easy-to- understand text.

   Reach the reporter at (602)444-8773.

GRAPHIC: 1) Above: A schematic of a transparent heart with coronary arteries;
the area of the left anterior descending coronary within the heart is
highlighted in yellow.  Right: Detail of the coronary pulled forward; the cross
section shows red blood cells and yellow plaque adhering to the interior of the
vessel wall. The plaque is caused by cholesterol, and when the blockage breaks
up as shown, the blue platelets aggregate; fibrin and red blood cells form a
clot that can lead to a heart attack. A new procedure, virtual histology, can
identify the composition of plaque to determine how aggressively it should be
treated. 2) Elizabeth Longo of Tempe, who has had open-heart surgery three
times, had trouble going up stairs until she received experimental gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005


                             371 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             August 3, 2004 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: Los Angeles;
Scientist Denies Molesting Girl;
Gene-therapy pioneer pleads not guilty to six counts of alleged crimes over a
four-year period.

BYLINE: Anna Gorman, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A prominent scientist mentioned suicide in an e-mail to the family of the
girl who accused him of sexually molesting her, his attorney said Monday.

   William French Anderson, 67, a nationally known pioneer in gene therapy
research, pleaded not guilty Monday to six charges of child molestation at a
hearing in Los Angeles County Superior Court in Pasadena. If convicted of all
counts, he could be sentenced to 56 years in prison.

   Defense attorney Marcia A. Morrissey said outside court that her client and
the girl's family had exchanged several e-mails, including the message that was
"an indication that one's life would be destroyed and a reference to a potential
suicide."

   Anderson was released from Los Angeles County Jail on Monday after Superior
Court Judge Terry Smerling reduced bail from $6 million to $600,000.

   "It is a nightmare being falsely accused," Anderson said after leaving jail.
"I did not do the things that I am charged with."

   Morrissey said Anderson was on suicide watch while in jail.

   Prosecutors declined to comment on the e-mail, other than to say that it
contained a reference to a gun.

   Morrissey also accused the girl's family of an attempted extortion.
Prosecutors said there was no evidence of such an attempt.

   Los Angeles County district attorney's spokeswoman Sandi Gibbons said
Anderson took his concerns to the San Marino Police Department after the
criminal investigation into the alleged abuse was underway.

   The girl's mother worked for Anderson, attorneys said.

   "There has been a relationship between Dr. Anderson and his wife and this
young woman and her family for a number of years," Morrissey said.

   Anderson has been called the father of gene therapy for his work in removing
white blood cells from a 4-year-old girl, using genetic engineering to insert a
missing gene and reinfusing the cells back into her bloodstream. The patient,
who suffered from a rare genetic disorder, is now healthy.

   Sheriff's deputies arrested Anderson, the director of the gene therapy
laboratories at the USC Keck School of Medicine, on Friday morning at his San
Marino home.

   In lowering bail, Smerling cited Anderson's lack of a criminal record and the
fact that he was a "person of some significant distinction." The judge ordered
Anderson to surrender his passport and firearms and issued a restraining order
barring Anderson from contacting the alleged victim, now 17, and her family.

   His wife, Kathryn D. Anderson, who recently retired as surgeon-in-chief at
Children's Hospital of Los Angeles, sat in the Pasadena courtroom during
Monday's hearing. Reached at her home Monday afternoon, she declined to comment.

   Prosecutors believe that Anderson sexually abused the girl, whom he had
coached in karate. The alleged abuse, at Anderson's home, lasted from 1997 to
2001, prosecutors said.

   The Sheriff's Department launched an investigation after the girl told a
counselor about the alleged abuse. The counselor gave the information to the
county Department of Children and Family Services, which referred the case to
the Sheriff's Department. Deputies executed search warrants at his home and USC
laboratory, where they seized computers.

   Anderson is on administrative leave from USC. He is a professor of
biochemistry, molecular biology and pediatrics.

   Prosecutors filed one count of continuous sex abuse of a child under the age
of 14 and five counts of lewd acts upon a child under the age of 14. Deputy
Dist. Atty. Cathryn Brougham said prosecutors may add more charges. Anderson is
due back in court Aug. 16 for scheduling of a preliminary hearing.

   Anderson has experienced "humiliation and shock" since the charges were filed
Friday, Morrissey told the judge.

   "He has led a life that has been beyond reproach for 67 years," she said
outside court. "Dr. Anderson is looking forward to showing that these charges
are not true."

   Anderson came to USC in 1992 after 27 years at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md. He is a fifth-degree black belt in the martial art of
tae kwon do.

   *

   Times wire services contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: BACK TO JAIL: William French Anderson leaves court Monday in
Pasadena after entering his not-guilty plea. He later was released from Los
Angeles County Jail after the judge reduced his bail.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Annie Wells
Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2004


                             372 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2004 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Health & Fitness; A CONVERSATION WITH/Thomas H.
Murray; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1346 words

HEADLINE: Olympian Talent, and a Little Artificial Help

BYLINE: By CLAUDIA DREIFUS

BODY:

   Thomas H. Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a bioethics research
group in Garrison, N.Y., spends a large part of his day considering the culture,
philosophy and ethics of the sporting world.

    As the author of several papers on the use of science in sports, Dr. Murray,
a social psychologist, has served on the United States Olympic Committee's
anti-doping panel, an experience he describes as ''the most frustrating work
I've done.''

     He also recently became chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency's ethical
issues review panel, which, he said in a recent interview, ''is really serious
about dealing with abuses.''

    Dr. Murray, 58, is an avid bicyclist. But he has no plans to go to Athens
next week. ''I've never been to a single Olympics,'' he said, with a smile.
''There are jobs within the Olympic movement that come with lots of perks. The
job I had wasn't one of them.''

Q. Recently, a major ethical or medical issue has dominated the headlines of
each Olympics. The Atlanta Games were dubbed the ''EPO Games,'' after
erythropoietin, the human growth hormone. What do you think the Athens Games
will be called?

A. Perhaps the ''Gene Games?'' The hot new topic is genetic manipulation or gene
transfer, and people are getting very excited and worried that athletes might
try to genetically enhance themselves.

    But of course, the technology is not here yet. Lee Sweeney at University of
Pennsylvania is working on a technique that could be therapeutic for people with
muscular dystrophy, but that might also be used by athletes to enhance muscle
size. Thus far, his work has only been with mice. Indeed, the whole technology
of gene therapy is very much in its infancy. So while there will be a lot of
talk about it, I don't expect there will be any genetically enhanced athletes in
Athens, although there might be some who think they have been.

Q. How can a person ''think'' they've been genetically enhanced?

A. Because there are scads of scoundrels promoting all kinds of things to
athletes. Some athletes are gullible. They hang out with these people, listen to
them.

    In the sports world, there's something called ''five-ring fever,'' which is
a desire to be associated with the Olympic movement. If you're not an athlete
yourself, you get closer by currying favor. There are athletes who will pay for
all kinds of services they think will enhance their strength and endurance. In
many cases, they're getting nothing. In others, they are ingesting some very
dangerous substances.

Q. Is the problem here the technologies or, rather, how some people use them?

A. In almost every case, the technology that is being used for enhancement
wasn't developed for that, but for some therapeutic use. EPO, which you
mentioned earlier -- it's for people who have chronic anemia. It helps them make
red cells. Athletes pretty quickly figured out, ''If this substance can get my
blood up to normal, why can't I get it a little above normal and then maybe I
can run or cycle a little faster.''

Q. Would you say that there's a subculture of self-experimentation among
athletes?

A. It's been around for decades, though it's gotten more elaborate, more
formalized and in some cases, state-sponsored. There was an enormous sports
doping industry in East Germany. It involved over a hundred scientists and
doctors and thousands of athletes. It was a horrendous activity that damaged a
lot of people.

Q. Aside from the damage that some of the enhancements do to individual
athletes, what is the harm in using them?

A. The first thing: It changes the whole idea of a level playing field.

    What most athletes hate is losing to a cheater. If you could give athletes a
way to compete without performance enhancements and have a fair shot at winning,
most would prefer that.

    The other thing is that enhancements bring into question the very meaning of
athletic endeavors. In the past, sports have been a combination of natural
talents and old-fashioned virtues like tenacity, endurance, willingness to
suffer pain -- and in the case of team sports, playing unselfishly. If all of
that is reduced to a drug or an injectable, the meaning of sport may be altered
irrevocably. If sport continues to be overwhelmed by the performance at all
costs principle, it could become something like a high-level circus exhibition,
like professional wrestling or an activity of that sort.

Q. Will we be seeing Olympics in the future where the sports physicians and
scientists are the real contenders?

A. ''Best body sculptor?'' I'm afraid you're frighteningly realistic.

    There are branches of the sport of power lifting that give us a glimpse into
that sort of future. Because within power lifting there is widespread use of
performance-enhancing drugs and steroids, the sport has split into a myriad of
governing bodies, including a ''drug free'' power lifting association and
another ''anything goes'' association. The latter is very clear: ''We don't
monitor, we don't test for drugs. Whatever allows you to lift the greatest
weight is what we permit.''

    So what will happen to the meaning of competition if all sports go that way
in the future? Will victory go to the person with the best drugs and gene
therapists?

Q. What does the current investigation into the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative
teach us?

A. That there are cadres of reasonably skilled scientists willing to work
surreptitiously to dope athletes, including the creation of entirely new drugs,
such as THG tetrahydrogestrinone, a synthetic steroid, which was thought to be
undetectable.

Q. The track star Marion Jones, whose name has been linked to the Bay Area
laboratory inquiry, feels she's been given a raw deal because she hasn't failed
any physical testing. Does she have a point?

A. Testing isn't the only way to check against doping. For a fairly long time
it's been possible to find an athlete guilty of doping from evidence other than
a laboratory test, if the evidence is sufficiently clear and independent.

    For example, it's possible to find evidence of the ''old-fashioned'' blood
doping where you got a blood transfusion, but you get it far enough ahead of the
competition so that you've urinated away the excess fluid volume, but you still
have the extra red cells. In such cases, if you found items like IV bags, or
testimony by people who've administered the blood, that could be evidence. It
was the only way to be fair to other athletes against whom this person was
competing.

Q. For more than a decade, you served on a United States Olympic Committee panel
charged with monitoring sports doping. Did you find it a waste of time?

A. No, because I met some wonderful people among the athletes who also served.
But what happened was that we would get partial information, provide the advice
we were asked to give and then we'd never find out whether the advice was
followed.

    I felt frustrated. The U.S.O.C. had to have some form of drug control
program; that's what I felt we were doing there. But there was the feeling that
the leadership of the U.S.O.C. as well as the various sports governing bodies,
with rare exceptions, was not really committed to this.

    Now with the U.S.A.D.A. -- the United States Anti-Doping Agency -- things
have changed. U.S.A.D.A. seems to be very serious about trying to give us a
different path.

Q. Dr. Gary Wadler, a well-known sports physician, claims that sports doping is
a public health issue. Do you agree with him?

A. Absolutely. Anabolic steroids are the example. They are used by a frightening
number of high school and college-age students. They take them because they
think it will make them stronger, and if they are male because they think it
will make them look more masculine.

    These young people hear of their sports heroes using them, and if their role
models are using steroids to pursue performance at any price, they think, ''Why
not?''

    Another thing I worry about -- for the young and the old -- is this feeling
out there that our bodies are mere objects to be manipulated and optimized by
whatever means available. If 14-year-olds are taking steroids, this is bad news
for all of us.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Thomas H. Murray calls his work on the U.S. Olympic
Committee's anti-doping panel ''the most frustrating work I've done.'' (Photo by
Clarence Davis for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2004


                             373 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 3, 2004 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A18

LENGTH: 532 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BODY:

    CHARLESTON, S.C. -- A hurricane warning was issued for the North Carolina
coast Monday as Tropical Storm Alex, the first named storm of the Atlantic
hurricane season, approached the Outer Banks.

   Alex had maximum sustained winds near 70 mph, just short of hurricane
strength, as of 11 p.m. The warning was extended for the North Carolina coast
from Oregon Inlet to the Virginia border.

    The storm was centered about 95 miles south of Wilmington, N.C.
Tropical-storm-force winds extended out 105 miles from the storm center, and the
storm was moving toward the northeast at 9 mph.

   *  MONTGOMERY, Ala. -- Former Alabama chief justice Roy Moore, who refused a
federal court order to move a Ten Commandments monument and then said he was
ousted for "pressing a belief in God," appealed his removal to the U.S. Supreme
Court. Attorneys for Moore argued that a judicial ethics panel imposed an
"unconstitutional religious test" on Moore when it expelled him in November.

   *  NEW YORK -- The Statue of Liberty will reopen to visitors Tuesday for the
first time since Sept. 11, 2001. In Lower Manhattan, the post office that was
damaged in the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center across the street
reopened.

   *  LOS ANGELES -- A world-famous gene therapy pioneer charged with sexually
abusing a young girl who took karate lessons from him pleaded not guilty and was
ordered to surrender his passport. W. French Anderson, 67, allegedly molested
the girl, now 17, starting when she was 10. The University of Southern
California scientist faces 56 years in prison if convicted.

   *  GREEN BAY, Wis. -- Former prosecutor Joe Paulus, who accepted more than
$48,000 in bribes in exchange for dismissing or reducing charges against
defendants, was sentenced to nearly five years in prison. U.S. District Judge
William Griesbach said the four-year, 10-month term exceeded federal guidelines
because the "horrendous crime" undermined public confidence in the criminal
justice system.

   *  SEBRING, Fla. -- Church choir director Dennis Ray, who wrote a newspaper
opinion piece supportive of gay marriage, was fired after officials at Faith
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) took issue with his assertion that half
of the church's members believe in acceptance of gays. The church considers
homosexuality a sin.

   *  CONWAY, Ark. -- Farmer Wesley Bono, who acknowledged spreading  three tons
of manure along the route of a gay rights parade in June, pleaded not guilty to
a  harassment charge, saying he was exercising his constitutional right to free
speech.

   *  CHICAGO -- A Japanese man flying to Dayton, Ohio, was arrested after a
fellow passenger turned him in for writing "suicide bomb." He was released
without charge after explaining that he saw the words in a newspaper and wrote
them down to look up the meaning later. Police said the man is learning English
by reading newspapers.

   *  WAVERLY, N.Y. -- Michael Bostwick, 25, of Sayre, Pa., who broke into an
Upstate New York animal shelter to abandon his German shepherd there, was
sentenced to 10 years of not owning an animal. He was ordered not to have
contact with animals and to make restitution to the humane society.

    --  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2004


                             374 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 2, 2004, Monday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1084 words

HEADLINE: SOME LEERY OF POSTING TEST DATA
SMALL DRUG DEVELOPERS FEAR LOSING GROUND TO BIG RIVALS

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Major biotechnology firms support releasing negative clinical trial results,
but they are not willing to go as far as some big drug companies, including one
that will begin posting such data online.

      The biggest worry among biotech firms is that releasing negative data
could put them at a disadvantage to competitors, either by tipping them off to
promising new areas of research or divulging proprietary information.

       "I worry that the little guys like us will get hurt by an overbroad
rule," said Michael Astrue, chief executive of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of
Cambridge, a developer of treatments for rare diseases. He supports the
disclosure of pivotal trials. Biotech firms are more vulnerable, he added,
because if a big company noticed their work "they could throw money at it and
beat you to the market."


      Full disclosure of clinical trial results became a hot-button issue in
June when New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer sued GlaxoSmithKline, accusing
the company of suppressing negative trial results for Paxil that showed it was
ineffective in treating depression in children and teenagers.

      The American Medical Association has also called on drug makers to send
trial results to a central data base, while the New England Journal of Medicine
and other medical publications are considering publishing trial results only
from companies that make full disclosure.

      GlaxoSmithKline, the British drug giant, said it would create its own
online database of clinical trial results for all its drugs for doctors and the
general public. Merck & Co. Inc., of Whitehouse Station, N.J., and Johnson &
Johnson, of New Brunswick, N.J., said they both support a registry of late-stage
clinical trials.

      A congressional committee is expected to hold hearings on the issue in
September.

      Clinical trials typically generate reams of information. Many companies,
or the doctors and scientists conducting the research, seek to have those
results published in prestigious scientific journals, or to present the results
at annual conventions. Many companies disclose results in news releases, because
the outcome is considered material information that can have a significant
impact on a firm's prospects.

      But there's no single place where doctors and patients can view the
results of trials. There's also an inherent bias in the existing system,
according to critics: Clinical trials are more likely to be published if they
present positive news about a drug.

      "It's just human nature that the kinds of studies that get published are
the ones that have exciting, positive findings," said Dr. Joseph M. Heyman, a
trustee of the American Medical Association, which represents many of the
nation's doctors. "The ones that are negative, neutral, or are abandoned before
they have findings just never get reported."

      Dr. Burt A. Adelman, executive vice president of development for the
region's largest biotech, Biogen Idec Inc., emphasized the inherent bias toward
publishing positive results.

      "Unfortunately, even for those in academia, your career is more likely to
advance if you publish positive results instead of negative results," he said.
He added that Biogen Idec supports disclosure of all results.

      But the failure to publish negative trial results could cause doctors to
prescribe medications that hurt patients, according to some doctors' groups.

      "Any unnecessary restriction or limitation on physicians' access to
relevant clinical data raises the possibility that patients will not receive
proper treatment or worse, that patients will be harmed," said Dr. Barry B.
Perlman, president of the New York State Psychiatric Association, in a prepared
statement.

   Biotech firms are especially sensitive about the issue because they have more
at stake, with their fortunes often riding on the success of one or two drugs.
Biotech companies typically work for years and invest hundreds of millions of
dollars to move a single drug from the lab to the market. On average, of 40
drugs that enter clinical trials, only nine will be approved, according to the
Tufts Center for the Study of Drug Development.

      Indeed, biotech investors anxiously await disclosure of clinical trial
results, which can have a dramatic impact on a firm's stock. For instance,
shares of Nitromed Inc. tripled after the Lexington company reported positive
interim results for a drug on July 19.

      The issue has left many companies scrambling to evaluate the various
proposals. Neither the Biotechnology Industry Organization nor the Massachusetts
Biotechnology Council, the two main trade groups for the industry, have adopted
formal positions.

      "This is a critically important ethical issue," said Mark Trusheim,
interim president of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council. "Where you have
science that shows potential harm, patient care could be damaged by not
disclosing it."

      The world's biggest biotech company, Amgen Inc. of Thousand Oaks, Calif.,
is considering putting clinical trial information on its website, said spokesman
Michael Beckerich. Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco, Calif., supports
"anything that makes things more transparent," said spokeswoman Robin Snyder.
However, the firm has not fully analyzed the database proposal and doesn't have
a formal position on it.

   Other companies fear that it would stifle innovation. "You've got to be able
to fail and not be tainted in some way," said Richard F. Pops, chief executive
of Alkermes Inc., a Cambridge firm specializing in unique methods of drug
delivery. "I worry about the criminalization of failure."

      Michael W. Bonney, president and chief executive of Cubist Pharmacueticals
Inc. of Lexington, said he only supports disclosure of Phase III trial results.
Those trials typically contain the pivotal results that are submitted to the
Food and Drug Administration to support approval of a drug. He said he is
particularly leery of releasing results of so-called Phase IV trials, in which a
drug maker seeks new uses for a product that's already on the market, and early
Phase I trials.

      "A central registry would be easier for the decision makers, be it
physicians or patients or a combination of the two," said Bonney. "But for Phase
I products that never get to market, I don't know if it makes sense."


      Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.


NOTES:
LIFE SCIENCES: BIOTECH

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2004


                             375 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      AUGUST 2, 2004 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. E07

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Aren't stricter new goals for LDL cholesterol too low?

BYLINE: KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   Question: I recently heard in the news that for people at very high risk of
dying from a heart attack, the level of LDL ("bad") cholesterol should now be
below 70 instead of 100. Isn't that too low? Don't we need a certain amount of
cholesterol in our bodies?

   Answer: Yes, it's true that while we need a certain amount of cholesterol in
our bloodstream - to help repair and form cell membranes, form the fatty
insulation to nerve cells, help form steroid hormones and Vitamin D - the amount
we really need is quite small. Newborn babies are actively forming new brain
cell connections and lots of cell membranes, and yet have LDL cholesterol levels
of only 30 to 50. Modern humans are the only adult mammals with an average LDL
cholesterol above 80 and total cholesterol above 160.

   What these cholesterol guideline changes are all about is finding that magic
number below which a person with heart disease will have no further progression.
If you look at the major cholesterol research trials to date, put them on a
graph and extrapolate down to the level where no "events" occur, it appears to
be an LDL "bad" cholesterol level of just 30. If you plot all the major plaque
regression trials on a graph, the magic number at which LDL cholesterol stops
accumulating in a diseased artery is 67 or below.

   That means that in a person with known heart disease, there will still be
plaque building up in the arteries unless the LDL cholesterol is 67 or less.
This is why the LDL cholesterol guidelines in a person at very high risk of
heart disease have just changed to less than 70. Interestingly, for people
without known heart or vascular disease, the LDL cholesterol level at which
there's zero risk of getting disease is 57.

   Are these numbers too low? With current cholesterol treatments, the numbers
are largely unattainable for the general population. This will change with newer
drugs in the pipeline and gene therapy.

   Are these goals feasible? The reality is that only one in three people with
heart disease is at or below the old LDL goal of 100 or less. We need to get 100
percent compliance with the more liberal standards before we can adhere to the
stricter goals.

   What contributes

   to bags under the eyes?

   Q: Why is it that numerous people getting on in years, including myself, look
like Santa coming down the chimney, a bag under each eye?

   A: There are several reasons: an inherited tendency to baggy eyes, allergies
(too much rubbing of the eyes), inadequate sleep, a salty diet, allergy to
certain mascara or eye makeup, and smoking (including prolonged exposure to
secondhand smoke). Bags are the result of either fluid collecting in the loose
skin around the eyes or fat deposits in the eyelids.

   What can you do about them? Prop your head up on a pillow at night, watch
salt/sodium in your diet, use cold compresses over your eyes, get enough rest,
quit smoking, and avoid rubbing your eyes. If fluid is the cause of the bags,
then those suggestions should help.

   Preparation H cream cautiously applied around the eyes may also help.

   If you've got bags due to fat deposits, consider plastic surgery. It's
considered cosmetic, so your health insurance probably won't pay for it. If
surgery is too costly, then makeup concealer is your next best bet.

   Mitchell Hecht is a physician specializing in internal medicine. Send
questions to him at: "Ask Dr. H.," Box 767787, Atlanta, Ga. 30076. Due to the
large volume of mail, personal replies are not possible.

NOTES: Ask Dr. H.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2005


                             376 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 1, 2004 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-6

LENGTH: 1902 words

HEADLINE: FRANCIS CRICK;
Nobelist, colleagues cracked DNA code

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The man who helped discover the secret of life is dead.

   Francis Crick, who was 88, died Wednesday night at Thornton Hospital in San
Diego after a long battle with colon cancer. Along with James Watson, Mr. Crick
was best known for discovering the structure of DNA -- the mysterious molecule
that defines and determines every form of life.

   Mr. Crick's name became scientific legend in 1953 when he and Watson, then
just 36 and 24 years old, respectively, cracked the DNA code, revealing the
structure and nature of the now-famous double helix of deoxyribonucleic acid.

   The discovery, reported in the journal Nature, earned the two men the 1962
Nobel Prize for medicine, which they shared with Maurice Wilkins. More
profoundly, it altered the state of human existence, inevitably touching almost
every aspect of modern life.

   The biotechnology industry, for example, is based largely upon Mr. Crick's
and Watson's discovery. So, too, are genetically engineered foods like bigger
tomatoes and innovative medical technologies like gene therapy. Social issues
such as whether to have children are now often affected by expanded knowledge of
DNA and its role in heredity.

   "History will judge him certainly as one of the influential biologists of the
20th century, if not the most influential," said Richard Murphy, president of
the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, which Mr. Crick joined in
1976.

   "He set the standard, not only the importance of the DNA work, he set the
standard for being a true scientist, just totally dedicated to understanding
science and the truth about biology," Murphy said.

   For many years, Mr. Crick devoted his scientific life to understanding the
biological foundations of consciousness.

   He had been playing a significant role in the development of a new research
center at Salk that will bear his name. The Crick-Jacobs Center for
Computational and Theoretical Biology, which is also named for its benefactor,
the Joan and Irwin Jacobs family, will study how genes in human DNA regulate
brain activity, as well as how networks of nerve cells influence the way the
brain works.

   [] [] []

   Francis Harry Compton Crick was born June 8, 1916, in Northampton, England,
to Harry Crick, a shoe factory owner, and Anne Elizabeth Wilkins Crick. Early in
life, the young Crick chose a life in science. His first recorded experiment, at
age 10 or 12, was an attempt to create artificial silk, which failed. He had
more success electrically igniting bottles of a homemade explosive. His parents
eventually ordered him to at least first put the bottles in pails of water, lest
he destroy himself or their home.

   Asked about how best to teach science in schools, Mr. Crick said: "It's
really important to appeal to the imagination. I taught myself a lot of science
when I was a kid because that's the best way in some ways."

   In 1937, Mr. Crick graduated from University College in London with a
bachelor of science degree. His continued studies, however, were interrupted by
World War II, which Mr. Crick spent in the British navy. In 1940, he married
Ruth Doreen Dodd. (They were divorced seven years later.) After the war, he
resumed research at Cambridge University in England, where he earned his
doctorate in 1954. He married Odile Speed, an artist, in 1949, and met a
visiting American biologist named Watson.

   The names of Mr. Crick and Watson are permanently intertwined. Their story is
a sort of literary double helix and the telling of it recalls a time when
science was still pursued by individuals rather than biotech corporations.

   Mr. Crick and Watson were distinctively different individuals. Mr. Crick was
older, English to the core and, according to Watson, something of a know-it-all
physicist. Watson was American, boisterous and, according to Mr. Crick, a
biologist prone to Yankee overstatement. The two hit it off.

   Conversation was Mr. Crick's and Watson's chief scientific tool. By talking
endlessly and building many models, they solved first the structure of DNA, a
question that had attracted the attention of many others, including Linus
Pauling at Caltech and a group of English researchers that included Wilkins.

   Mr. Crick's and Watson's answer took the shape of a twisting ladder with
backbones of sugar and phosphate atoms and rungs of hydrogen linking four
chemical bases: adenine with thymine, cytosine with guanine. Thus each single
strand of DNA represented a template for the other, a critical necessity for
reproduction.

   When it came time to announce their findings, however, it was the boisterous
Watson who balked. Recalling that time, Mr. Crick said Watson was worried they
might be wrong. The less said, the better, he advised Mr. Crick.

   "Jim was very nervous about saying anything," Mr. Crick recalled. "And I
said, 'Well, we've got to say something!' Otherwise people will think these two
unknown chaps are so dumb that they don't even realize the implications of their
own work."

   Thus, Mr. Crick penned one of the great understatements of literature,
scientific or otherwise, said the journal Science. It was just 900 words long.
In the paper, he wrote: "It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material."

   The illustration for the double helix, now instantly recognizable, was drawn
by Mr. Crick's wife, Odile.

   [] [] []

   Mr. Crick was not content to rest on the laurels of his DNA work. In fact, he
mentioned it in public only reluctantly, joking that people never knew what to
say to a Nobel laureate. He was content to reduce DNA references to his license
plate, which read ATCG -- the initials of adenine, thymine, cytosine and
guanine.

   While Watson remained in molecular biology, eventually becoming the longtime
director of the respected Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York and first
head of the Human Genome Project, Mr. Crick chose to explore the brain, with
side trips to outer space and elsewhere.

   In 1981, Mr. Crick wrote "Life Itself," a controversial book that introduced
the theory of "directed panspermia," which suggested that life on Earth may have
been introduced as microorganisms planted by a more advanced alien civilization.
Panspermia means "seeds everywhere."

   The book aroused much comment, some of it caustic, though he noted repeatedly
that directed panspermia was just an hypothesis.

   "In a way, it was probably a mistake to write the book," Mr. Crick said in a
1995 interview. "Not everybody really read it, which if you did pointed out that
directed panspermia was just an idea, something to be considered. The book was
actually quite reserved about the whole thing. Of course, if you only glanced at
it, you could have gotten the idea that I was a bit nutty."

   In 1994, Mr. Crick created a new intellectual ruckus by writing "The
Astonishing Hypothesis," in which he and colleague Christof Koch, a
neurobiologist at Caltech, proposed that all manifestations of the human "soul"
-- a person's joys, sorrows, memories, ambitions, sense of self and free will --
were in fact the result of complex chemical reactions in the brain.

   "Most people are aware of consciousness," Mr. Crick said in a 1993 interview
with The San Diego Union-Tribune. "They can see the difference. At a crude
level, it can be described as what's going on in your brain when you see
something. The real questions are: Which nerve cells produce this consciousness?
How are they firing?"

   Human behavior, he suggested, probably doesn't involve a higher authority, a
mystical god. It is more likely the cumulative effect of 100 billion interactive
neurons and associated molecules. The "Astonishing Hypothesis" remains to be
proved -- or disproved. And doing so, Mr. Crick conceded, will be difficult.

   Despite his penchant for raising eyebrows and uproars, Mr. Crick was famously
publicity-shy.

   "It's just the way I am," he told Time magazine in 1993 on the 40th
anniversary of the discovery of DNA's structure. "For a long time, I refused to
let people put my photo in textbooks. Unfortunately, I have a very good press
agent (referring to Watson, who is markedly less shy of publicity). Now it's
hopeless."

   Nonetheless, he steadfastly declined attempts to honor him, refused all
honorary doctorates and preferred to stick close to home, either at his house in
La Jolla or his getaway in Borrego Springs. It was only reluctantly that he
traveled to England in 1991 to accept the Order of Merit from the queen, an
honor greater than knighthood and limited to only 24 people at any time.

   He said he went only because his wife and secretary insisted. Nonetheless, if
cornered in an interview, Mr. Crick was invariably charming, witty and courtly.
His voice was soft, cultured and distinctly English. He loved to talk, to
startle listeners with ideas, then follow up with a wide, knowing smile that
made his blue eyes crinkle and lifted great, bushy white eyebrows heavenward.

   Except for a short stint at Harvard, Mr. Crick never taught as a full-time
university professor. He avoided the traditional classroom, which he found
stultifying, and in later years, the laboratory, which he said was best left to
"better experimentalists."

   Scientific method for Mr. Crick involved thinking, pure and simple. He was a
theorist who preferred to look at the big picture in search of big answers. He
liked to develop ideas, propose experiments, predict outcomes and then try to
figure out what they all meant.

   His usual methodology involved inviting colleagues to stay with him for a
week, a month, perhaps several months, most of that time was spent in
discussion.

   Mr. Crick kept his door -- and mind -- open to everything. Scientists often
bounced ideas off him. He was a voracious reader and a great assimilator,
consuming huge amounts of information, then processing it in new ways.

   Contrarily, he never gave much thought to how he worked -- or why it was
successful.

   "People who do this sort of thing are not very keen on examining very
carefully how they do it. They're afraid it will interfere with the process.
There are lots of things going on in the brain that you're not aware of, so it's
probably better to adopt a sort of Zen attitude: Don't press. Don't try too
hard. Let it happen. Don't analyze it too much."

   Some critics of Mr. Crick -- he had his share -- dismissed this way of doing
business (though rarely publicly). They said thinking about a problem wasn't the
same as solving it, that he had become an outsider, irrelevant because he wasn't
actively doing his own research.

   Mr. Crick was unmoved by such observations. He worked this way, he said,
because he had earned the right by lasting so long. Plus, it was cheaper.

   [] [] []

   It was Jonas Salk's offer of research resources and room to think that drew
Mr. Crick to La Jolla and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in 1976.
There, ensconced in a large, book-cluttered office with an expansive view of the
Pacific Ocean, he spent most of his time reading, writing and, of course,
thinking.

   He also served when needed. Occasionally he acted as host for high school
tours of science students, many of who, he ruefully noted, were surprised to
find their textbook icon was still alive. In addition, Mr. Crick served as
interim president of the Salk Institute, from October 1994 to September 1995,
when he stepped down due to health problems.

   The reduced duties, he said, gave him more time to think -- something he
always did well.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Francis and Odile Crick at the Salk Institute in La
Jolla on Feb. 12, 2003, to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the discovery of
DNA structure.; PHOTOBY: Marc Lieberman / Salk Institute / New York Times News
Service file photo

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2004


                             377 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 1, 2004 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A11

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BODY:

   THORP, Wash. -- A wildfire that destroyed two homes and threatened dozens of
others appears to be the work of an arsonist who has set 10 other fires in
central Washington state in the past two months, authorities said Saturday.

    A state of emergency was declared in Kittitas County as a wind-swept blaze
forced the evacuation of dozens of homes in the foothills of the Cascades.
Helicopters dropped water, and planes distributed retardant.

    "We are investigating this fire as arson," Undersheriff Clayton Myers said.
"We believe they are all linked."

    Winds gusting as much as 25 mph fanned the flames, forcing the evacuation of
about 200 mainly seasonal homes in the eastern foothills Saturday. Myers said
the blaze also destroyed a shop as it raced across 300 acres.

    LOS ANGELES -- Gene therapy pioneer William French Anderson was arrested
Friday on charges he sexually molested a girl he had coached in karate,
authorities said.

    Anderson, 67, an internationally prominent University of Southern California
scientist, was arrested at his San Marino, Calif., home one day after
prosecutors filed a criminal complaint, said Sandi Gibbons, spokeswoman for the
Los Angeles County district attorney's office.

    Authorities said Anderson abused the girl, now 17, at his home from 1997 to
2001.

    Bail was set at $6 million, and an arraignment was scheduled for Tuesday.

   *  MIAMI -- The first tropical depression of the Atlantic hurricane season
formed Saturday, and a tropical storm warning was issued for coastal areas of
the Carolinas, forecasters said. The depression, which forecasters said could
become a tropical storm by Sunday, was centered 175 miles south-southeast of
Charleston, S.C. It was moving toward the northwest at about 9 mph.

   *  NEW YORK -- The former police officer who said he found a flaming backpack
that exploded in a Times Square subway station was arrested in connection with
the incident. Joseph Rodriguez faces charges of arson, weapons possession and
reckless endangerment, police said.

   *  ANCHORAGE -- Four people heading to a fishing excursion died whsen their
plane crashed near the mouth of an Alaska river, authorities said. A Montana
family was onboard the Cessna 170, which crashed about 6:15 p.m. Friday near the
Kustatan River on the west side of Cook Inlet, about 70 miles southwest of
Anchorage.

   *  POLSON, Mont. -- A 14-foot-high balcony crowded with dozens of people at a
popular bar and casino collapsed, injuring at least 70 people, officials said.
There were no immediate reports of deaths from the accident Friday night at the
Diamond Horseshoe Casino.

   *  SOMERSET, Pa. -- The national memorial to United Airlines Flight 93,
brought down in an open field during the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, will
carry the theme "A common field one day, a field of honor forever." The theme
was set in a mission statement approved Friday by the Flight 93 Federal Advisory
Commission, which also recommended preserving about 2,200 acres of the crash
site and the surrounding area.

    --  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2004


                             378 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 31, 2004, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: Scientist held in molestation;
Gene therapy pioneer is accused of abusing teen girl

SOURCE: Reuters News Service

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - A University of Southern California scientist famous as the
"Father of Gene Therapy" was arrested Friday and accused of molesting a young
girl over a four-year period starting when she was about 12.

   W. French Anderson, 67, was taken into custody at his home in the Los Angeles
suburb of San Marino as sheriff's deputies served him with a search warrant for
the premises.

   Sandi Gibbons, a spokeswoman for the Los Angeles County District Attorney's
Office, said Anderson coached the girl in karate and was accused of molesting
her in his home. His family and the girl's family were acquainted, Gibbons said.

   Anderson, director of the Gene Therapy Laboratories at USC, was charged with
one count of continuous sexual abuse of a child under the age of 14, and five
counts of lewd acts on a child under the age of 14.

   The nationally known scientist, who could be sentenced to 56 years in prison
if convicted, was being held on $ 6 million bail pending an arraignment Tuesday.

   A USC spokesman said Anderson had been placed on administrative leave from
the university as of Friday.


LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2004


                             379 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2004 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                             July 31, 2004 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 714 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
Scientist Facing Abuse Charges;
Noted USC gene expert William Anderson is accused of molestation.

BYLINE: Anna Gorman, Thomas H. Maugh II and Joy Buchanan, Times Staff Writers

BODY:

   A nationally known pioneer in gene therapy research was being held on
$6-million bail Friday after being charged with child molestation.

   William French Anderson, director of Gene Therapy Laboratories at USC Keck
School of Medicine, was arrested Friday morning at his San Marino home.

   Prosecutors accused the scientist of molesting a teenage girl, now 17, who
was his karate student.

   Anderson, 67, allegedly abused the girl from January 1997 until December
2001. He faces one count of continuous sex abuse on a child and five counts of
lewd acts upon a child, charges that could result in a sentence of 56 years in
state prison.

   "We have evidence that he committed a very serious crime," said district
attorney's spokeswoman Sandi Gibbons. She said Anderson apparently mentored the
girl over several years, and her family knew the scientist. There are no other
known victims, Gibbons said.

   Prosecutors consider Anderson a flight risk, because of the potential long
prison term and his financial means, Gibbons said. His arraignment is scheduled
for Tuesday at Los Angeles County Superior Court in Pasadena.

   The arrest came after an investigation by the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department, which executed search warrants Friday morning at Anderson's home and
his university office. Investigators removed computers from his lab, university
officials said.

   USC has placed Anderson, professor of biochemistry, molecular biology and
pediatrics, on administrative leave. The search warrants came as a surprise,
said Jon Weiner, director of media relations for the health sciences department.

   "We're reluctant to talk about anything without knowing the facts," he said.

   Anderson, who has been called the "father of gene therapy," was born in
Tulsa, Okla., and graduated from Harvard Medical School in 1963. He came to USC
after spending 27 years at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.
There, he worked at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and served as
chairman of the department of medicine and physiology in the NIH graduate
program.

   In 1990, he inaugurated the field of gene therapy by removing white blood
cells from 4-year-old Ashanti DeSilva, using genetic engineering techniques to
insert a missing gene, and reinfusing the cells back into her bloodstream.
DeSilva suffered from a rare genetic disorder called ADA deficiency, which left
her without a functioning immune system, much like the well-known Houston
"bubble boy" who had died eight years earlier.

   The procedure, and a similar one performed on 9-year-old Cynthia Cutshall,
was successful and both girls are now healthy, although the process must be
repeated periodically to renew the supply of engineered cells.

   In 1992, Anderson came to USC when his wife, Dr. Kathryn D. Anderson, was
bypassed for a post at the Children's National Medical Center in Washington,
D.C. She accepted a position as surgeon-in-chief and vice president for surgical
administration at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles and professor of surgery at
USC.

   At the time, Anderson said, "Kathy subordinated her career to mine for 31
years. It's her turn."

   At USC Keck School of Medicine, Anderson heads Gene Therapy Laboratories,
which primarily conducts research on stem cells and the possibility of injecting
healthy genes into cells to replace damaged, disease-causing genes. He has been
working on improving the techniques. He has treated several children shortly
after birth and has proposed performing the therapy in the womb.

   In a USC publication, Anderson was quoted as saying: "Some babies are born
with lethal defects and it is immoral not to go forward with research that can
alleviate human suffering."

   He has written hundreds of research articles and won numerous prizes for his
gene therapy work. He is an ethicist in the field of human genetic engineering
and worked as the scientific consultant for "Gattaca," a 1997 science-fiction
film about a society with unrestrained genetic science, according to the
university.

   He is a 5th degree black belt in the martial art of tae kwon do and still
competes. He won a gold medal in his age division at a nationwide championship
in 1998. He said in an article for the USC website that karate is an important
part of his life.

   Times staff writer Stuart Silverstein contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: SUSPECT: William French Anderson is being held on $6-million
bail.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Reuters

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2004


                             380 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              July 31, 2004 Saturday St. Charles Five Star Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Nation/World Digest; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: NATION/WORLD DIGEST

BYLINE: FROM NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   WASHINGTON Ridge has suggested he may quit, officials say

   Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge has told colleagues he probably will
resign after the election because of his personal finances and the stress of his
job, officials told The Associated Press.

   During a meeting Friday in Miami, Ridge called the news "an
inside-the-Beltway game" and said he wouldn't comment about it. "The president
gave me a great job," Ridge said. "I'm doing the job, and after President Bush
is re-elected, we'll have to have that conversation. But I've got a job to do,
and I plan on doing it."

   Several senior Homeland Security officials said Ridge had indicated in recent
weeks he probably would resign after the election, even if Bush wins. They spoke
on condition of anonymity, citing the delicate nature of describing private
conversations with their boss.

   Ridge, 58, has explained to colleagues that he needs to earn money to
comfortably put his two children, Tommy Jr. and Lesley, through college,
officials said. Both are teenagers. Ridge earns $175,700 a year as a Cabinet
secretary.

   NEW YORK Bonanno crime boss is found guilty

   Bonanno crime boss Joseph Massino was convicted Friday of orchestrating a
quarter century's worth of crimes including murder, racketeering, arson and
extortion.

   Jurors took less than four days to weigh two months of evidence, including
testimony from a parade of turncoat mobsters. They delivered what prosecutors
called a devastating blow to organized crime.

   Massino posed as a humble Queens restaurateur, but prosecutors said he was a
"one-man army" who ruthlessly ordered rivals slain to consolidate his power over
a syndicate that earned millions of dollars from loansharking and gambling and
other illicit operations.

   Massino had been dubbed "The Last Don" for his ability to rebuild the family
and avoid jail while the heads of New York's other four Mafia families were all
behind bars.

   LOS ANGELES Gene therapy pioneer is accused of sex abuse

   Gene therapy pioneer Dr. William French Anderson was arrested Friday on
charges that he sexually molested a girl he had coached in karate, authorities
said.

   Anderson, 67, an internationally prominent scientist at the University of
Southern California, was arrested at his San Marino, Calif., home a day after
prosecutors filed a criminal complaint alleging six felony counts of assault,
said Sandi Gibbons, spokeswoman for the Los Angeles County district attorney's
office.

   Anderson abused the girl, now 17, at his home from 1997 to 2001, authorities
said. Bail was set at $6 million, and an arraignment was scheduled for Tuesday.

   Anderson is director of the university's Gene Therapy Laboratories at the
Keck School of Medicine. He was placed on administrative leave Friday, the
university said in a statement.

   RICHLAND, Wash. Nuclear power plant halts operations

   Operations at Washington state's only commercial nuclear power plant were
halted manually Friday after an automatic shutdown system failed to work
properly.

   State emergency officials said there was no release of radiation and no
danger to the public. The reactor is operated by Energy Northwest. It will
remain out of service until crews determine what caused the problem, said Brad
Peck, spokesman for the company.

   The automatic shutdown system was triggered by an indication of high
pressure, said Ken Clark, a spokesman for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. As
part of the shutdown, all 185 control rods were supposed to insert into the
reactor. But lights on a control panel indicated that two rods failed to insert,
said Heather McMurdo, a spokeswoman for Energy Northwest.

   Backup systems operated correctly after the rods, which control the reactor's
operation, were inserted manually, she said.

   WEST MELBOURNE, Fla. Boy impaled on arrow is hospitalized

   A 7-year-old boy fell on an arrow and was impaled in the neck, narrowly
missing his jugular vein, officials said.

   The father of the boy, whose name was not released, drove him 30 miles to a
fire station for help. The boy was hospitalized in stable condition after
Thursday's accident and was expected to survive, the Osceola County Sheriff's
Office said.

   The boy fell while holding the arrow and playing in his back yard in rural
central Florida, his father told paramedics.

   After piercing his neck near the jugular vein, the arrow nearly passed all
the way through to the boy's spine, said Lt. Dave Hover of the Brevard County
Fire Rescue's Station where the boy went for emergency treatment.

   Firefighters cut about 6 inches off the arrow so he could be flown to an
Orlando hospital.

   ISRAEL Palestinians take 3 foreigners hostage

   Palestinian gunmen abducted three foreign church volunteers, including an
American, in the West Bank city of Nablus late Friday, releasing them several
hours later under pressure from Palestinian authorities and other militants,
Palestinian security officials said.

   The reason for the abduction was not known, but it took place two weeks after
militants in Gaza snatched four French charity workers amid a political crisis
that shook the authority of Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. The four French
were also quickly released.

   Five gunmen seized the foreigners -- an American, a Briton and an Irishman --
around midnight Friday as they were returning to the home where they were
staying in Nablus, the officials said. The three were taken to the nearby Balata
refugee camp. Security officials said the three were freed later, but they gave
few details.

   SUDAN U.N. OKs ultimatum on disarming militias

   The U.N. Security Council adopted a U.S.-drafted resolution Friday that gave
Sudan 30 days to disarm Arab militias blamed for killing thousands in the Darfur
region or else face diplomatic and economic punishment. Sudan rejected the
resolution.

   The resolution was adopted with 13 votes, with China and Pakistan abstaining,
despite U.S. efforts to overcome objections by deleting the word "sanctions"
from the text.

   The United States said the resolution was a tough warning to Sudan to rein in
the militias, known as the Janjaweed, accused of widespread atrocities that some
observers have said amount to genocide in the barren western region of Sudan.

   "The resolution in stern and unambiguous terms puts the Sudanese government
on notice that it must comply," U.S. Ambassador John Danforth said.

NOTES:
NATION/WORLD

GRAPHIC: photo; (1) AFP/GETTY IMAGES Color Photo - ABOVE: An injured firefighter
leaves the scene of a gas pipeline explosion Friday in Ghislenghien, southern
Belgium. At least 15 people were killed and 112 injured in the blast. (2) THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo - RIGHT: Flames erupt from a building after the
pipeline explosion.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2004


                             381 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               July 31, 2004 Saturday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Nation/World Digest; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: NATION/WORLD DIGEST

BYLINE: FROM NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   WASHINGTON Ridge has suggested he may quit, officials say

   Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge has told colleagues he probably will
resign after the election because of his personal finances and the stress of his
job, officials told The Associated Press.

   During a meeting Friday in Miami, Ridge called the news "an
inside-the-Beltway game" and said he wouldn't comment about it. "The president
gave me a great job," Ridge said. "I'm doing the job, and after President Bush
is re-elected, we'll have to have that conversation. But I've got a job to do,
and I plan on doing it."

   Several senior Homeland Security officials said Ridge had indicated in recent
weeks he probably would resign after the election, even if Bush wins. They spoke
on condition of anonymity, citing the delicate nature of describing private
conversations with their boss.

   Ridge, 58, has explained to colleagues that he needs to earn money to
comfortably put his two children, Tommy Jr. and Lesley, through college,
officials said. Both are teenagers. Ridge earns $175,700 a year as a Cabinet
secretary.

   NEW YORK Bonanno crime boss is found guilty

   Bonanno crime boss Joseph Massino was convicted Friday of orchestrating a
quarter century's worth of crimes including murder, racketeering, arson and
extortion.

   Jurors took less than four days to weigh two months of evidence, including
testimony from a parade of turncoat mobsters. They delivered what prosecutors
called a devastating blow to organized crime.

   Massino posed as a humble Queens restaurateur, but prosecutors said he was a
"one-man army" who ruthlessly ordered rivals slain to consolidate his power over
a syndicate that earned millions of dollars from loansharking and gambling and
other illicit operations.

   Massino had been dubbed "The Last Don" for his ability to rebuild the family
and avoid jail while the heads of New York's other four Mafia families were all
behind bars.

   LOS ANGELES Gene therapy pioneer is accused of sex abuse

   Gene therapy pioneer Dr. William French Anderson was arrested Friday on
charges that he sexually molested a girl he had coached in karate, authorities
said.

   Anderson, 67, an internationally prominent scientist at the University of
Southern California, was arrested at his San Marino, Calif., home a day after
prosecutors filed a criminal complaint alleging six felony counts of assault,
said Sandi Gibbons, spokeswoman for the Los Angeles County district attorney's
office.

   Anderson abused the girl, now 17, at his home from 1997 to 2001, authorities
said. Bail was set at $6 million, and an arraignment was scheduled for Tuesday.

   Anderson is director of the university's Gene Therapy Laboratories at the
Keck School of Medicine. He was placed on administrative leave Friday, the
university said in a statement.

   RICHLAND, Wash. Nuclear power plant halts operations

   Operations at Washington state's only commercial nuclear power plant were
halted manually Friday after an automatic shutdown system failed to work
properly.

   State emergency officials said there was no release of radiation and no
danger to the public. The reactor is operated by Energy Northwest. It will
remain out of service until crews determine what caused the problem, said Brad
Peck, spokesman for the company.

   The automatic shutdown system was triggered by an indication of high
pressure, said Ken Clark, a spokesman for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. As
part of the shutdown, all 185 control rods were supposed to insert into the
reactor. But lights on a control panel indicated that two rods failed to insert,
said Heather McMurdo, a spokeswoman for Energy Northwest.

   Backup systems operated correctly after the rods, which control the reactor's
operation, were inserted manually, she said.

   WEST MELBOURNE, Fla. Boy impaled on arrow is hospitalized

   A 7-year-old boy fell on an arrow and was impaled in the neck, narrowly
missing his jugular vein, officials said.

   The father of the boy, whose name was not released, drove him 30 miles to a
fire station for help. The boy was hospitalized in stable condition after
Thursday's accident and was expected to survive, the Osceola County Sheriff's
Office said.

   The boy fell while holding the arrow and playing in his back yard in rural
central Florida, his father told paramedics.

   After piercing his neck near the jugular vein, the arrow nearly passed all
the way through to the boy's spine, said Lt. Dave Hover of the Brevard County
Fire Rescue's Station, where the boy went for emergency treatment.

   Firefighters cut about 6 inches off the arrow so he could be flown to an
Orlando hospital.

   MIDDLE EAST Palestinians seize, free 3 foreigners

   Palestinian gunmen abducted an American and two other foreign church
volunteers late Friday, and armed militants burned a Palestinian government
building.

   The hostages were freed unharmed after about three hours in the West Bank
city of Nablus under pressure from Palestinian authorities and other militant
groups.

   The gunmen seized the hostages at gunpoint after separating them from some
other colleagues, Palestinian security officials said. Their identities were not
released.

   In Jenin, about a dozen armed militants wanted by Israel burned a building of
the local Palestinian government to demand financial help from the Palestinian
Authority, officials said.

   The gunmen from the Al Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades, which is affiliated with
Yasser Arafat's Fatah movement, broke into the building after work hours, fired
automatic weapons into the offices and set the building on fire, said the
officials.

   SUDAN U.N. OKs ultimatum on disarming militias

   The U.N. Security Council adopted a U.S.-drafted resolution Friday that gave
Sudan 30 days to disarm Arab militias blamed for killing thousands in the Darfur
region or else face diplomatic and economic punishment. Sudan rejected the
resolution.

   The resolution was adopted with 13 votes, with China and Pakistan abstaining,
despite U.S. efforts to overcome objections by deleting the word "sanctions"
from the text.

   The United States said the resolution was a tough warning to Sudan to rein in
the militias, accused of widespread atrocities that some observers have said
amount to genocide in the barren western region of Sudan.

NOTES:
NATION/WORLD

GRAPHIC: photo; GAS PIPELINE EXPLODES IN BELGIUM (1) AFP/GETTY IMAGES Color
Photo - ABOVE: An injured firefighter leaves the scene of a gas pipeline
explosion Friday in Ghislenghien, southern Belgium. At least 15 people were
killed and 112 injured in the blast. (2) THE ASSOCIATED PRESS Color Photo -
RIGHT: Flames erupt from a building after the pipeline explosion.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2004


                             382 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2004 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 30, 2004, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: Crick, the co-discoverer of DNA's structure, dies;
 Knowledge of double-helix shape opened the doors for biotechnology

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: MICHELLE MORGANTE

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO - Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, who co-discovered
the spiral "double helix" structure of DNA in 1953 and opened the way for
everything from gene-spliced crops and medicines to DNA fingerprinting and the
genetic detection of diseases, has died. He was 88.

   Crick died Wednesday after a battle with colon cancer, according to the Salk
Institute, the research body where Crick worked in recent years.

   The British-born Crick was 36 and working at the University of Cambridge's
Cavendish Laboratory in 1953 when he and the American-born James Watson, just
24, struck upon the idea that the DNA molecule resembles a twisted ladder.

   Unlocking life's secrets

   After making the discovery, Crick walked into a Cambridge pub and announced
that he and Watson had "found the secret of life." But only a few people at the
time "even thought it was interesting," Crick once said, and it took years
before the groundbreaking discovery was firmly accepted.

   Decades later, the discovery's impact can be seen everywhere. It laid the
foundation for the biotechnology industry, enabling scientists to engineer
bigger tomatoes, doctors to pursue gene therapy to treat disease and police to
solve crimes using DNA evidence.

   Biotechnology is a $ 30 billion-a-year industry that has produced about 160
drugs and vaccines, treating diseases such as breast cancer and diabetes. Seven
million farmers in 18 countries grew genetically engineered crops last year,
allowing them to grow food using fewer pesticides.

   "It's almost too difficult to pay him high enough tribute for what he
contributed," said Stanford University scientist Paul Berg, who won the Nobel in
chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering work with genetic engineering.

   Crick's work "helped to usher in a golden age of molecular biology," said
Lord May of Oxford, president of Britain's academy of scientists, the Royal
Society.

   Crick and Watson were awarded the Nobel in medicine in 1962.

   A simple beginning

   Watson's 1968 best seller The Double Helix told how he and Crick used bits of
wire, colored beads, sheet metal and cardboard cutouts to construct a 3-D model
of the molecule.

   Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is made up of four chemical building blocks,
known as "bases." Each "rung" in the twisted ladder is made up of two bases, and
the various combinations of bases and the order in which the rungs are arranged
spell out the information stored in genes.

   Building on their work and that of others over the decades, scientists can
now alter genes to breed out disease and breed in desired traits.

   That newfound power has stirred ethical debates, but Crick said there was no
way in the 1950s that he could have foretold modern DNA developments.

   "Think of the effect television has had worldwide on politics," he said. "You
can't possibly expect the man who invented the transistor to have seen that."

   'Focused intelligence'

   In a statement Thursday, Watson hailed Crick "for his extraordinarily focused
intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed my
self-confidence."

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

   Unlike many scientists, Crick did not spend his days toiling in a lab or
instructing students. Instead, he read and mused in his Salk Institute office
overlooking the Pacific Ocean, putting in full days well beyond retirement age.

   He moved to Salk after resigning from the Cambridge faculty in 1977.

   Crick is survived by his wife, artist Odile Speed; three children; and four
grandchildren.

   The family will have a private funeral service, his wife said Thursday.






   FRANCIS CRICK

   Born: Britain, 1916

   Career: DNA discovery in 1953 paved the way for everything from DNA blood
tests to genetically engineered tomatoes; biotechnology industry is based
largely upon the discovery

   Awards: Along with James Watson, won the Nobel Prize in medicine in 1962

   Family: Wife, two daughters, son from a previous marriage, four grandchildren


GRAPHIC: Mug: 1. Francis Crick; Graph: 2. FRANCIS CRICK (TEXT); 1. New York
Times

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004


                             383 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       July 30, 2004 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 09B

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: Crick won Nobel for co-discovering DNA spiral

BYLINE: MICHELLE MORGANTE Associated Press

BODY:

   San Diego -- Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, who co-discovered
the spiral, "double-helix" structure of DNA in 1953 and opened the way for
everything from gene-spliced crops and medicines to DNA fingerprinting and the
genetic detection of diseases, has died. He was 88.

   Crick died Wednesday after a battle with colon cancer, according to the Salk
Institute, the research body where Crick worked in recent years.

   The British-born Crick was 36 and working at the University of Cambridge's
Cavendish Laboratory in 1953 when he and the American-born James Watson, just
24, struck upon the idea that the DNA molecule resembles a twisted ladder.

   After making the discovery, Crick walked into a Cambridge pub and announced
that he and Watson had "found the secret of life." But only a few people at the
time "even thought it was interesting," Crick once said, and it took years
before the groundbreaking discovery was firmly accepted.

   Decades later, the discovery's impact can be seen everywhere. It laid the
foundation for the biotechnology industry, enabling scientists to engineer
bigger tomatoes, doctors to pursue gene therapy to treat disease, and police to
solve crimes through DNA evidence.

   "It's almost too difficult to pay him high enough tribute for what he
contributed," said Stanford University scientist Paul Berg, who won the Nobel in
chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering work with genetic engineering.

   Crick's work "helped to usher in a golden age of molecular biology," said
Lord May of Oxford, president of Britain's academy of scientists, the Royal
Society.

   Crick and Watson were awarded the Nobel in medicine in 1962.

   Watson's 1968 bestseller, "The Double Helix," told how he and Crick used bits
of wire, colored beads, sheet metal and cardboard cutouts to construct a 3-D
model of the molecule.

   Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is made up of four chemical building blocks,
known as "bases." Each "rung" in the twisted ladder is made up of two bases, and
the various combinations of bases and the order in which the rungs are arranged
spell out the information stored in genes.

   Building on their work and that of others over the decades, scientists can
now alter genes to breed out disease and breed in desired traits.

   That newfound power has stirred ethical debates, but Crick said there was no
way in the 1950s that he could have foretold modern DNA developments.

   "Think of the effect television has had worldwide on politics," he said. "You
can't possibly expect the man who invented the transistor to have seen that."

   Watson praises Crick

   In a statement Thursday, Watson hailed Crick "for his extraordinarily focused
intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed my
self-confidence."

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

   In person, Crick was provocative, quick-witted and charming, though he rarely
consented to interviews. He was averse to attention of any sort, he said, not
because he was anti-social but because it cut into his thinking time.

   Unlike many scientists, Crick did not spend his days toiling in a lab or
instructing students. Instead, he read and mused in his Salk Institute office
overlooking the Pacific Ocean, putting in full days well beyond retirement age.
He had come to Salk after resigning from the Cambridge faculty in 1977.

   Watson and Crick benefited from work by researchers Maurice Wilkins and
Rosalind Franklin of King's College in London. Wilkins shared the Nobel with the
two men; Franklin died in 1958. Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously.

   Crick was born in Britain in 1916 to a shoe factory owner and his wife, who
bought their young son a children's encyclopedia to help answer his many science
questions. He studied physics at University College of London and then built
underwater mines for the British government during World War II.

   After the war, Crick became interested in "the division between the living
and the non-living" and decided to teach himself biology and chemistry.

   Among Crick's writings was "Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature," a book
suggesting that the Earth began when microorganisms were dropped by a spaceship
from a higher civilization. In another treatise, Crick proposed that dreams
exist to let the brain do some housecleaning, to clear itself for the next set
of tasks.

   Crick acknowledged that some of his postulations were offbeat and
speculative. But, he said in 1994, "A man who is right every time is not likely
to do very much."

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004


                             384 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JULY 30, 2004 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 847 words

HEADLINE: DNA pioneer Francis Crick dies;
The scientist shared a Nobel for the 1953 discovery of the spiral structure that
is still breaking ground.

BYLINE: Michelle Morgante ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, 88, who codiscovered the spiral
"double-helix" structure of DNA in 1953 and opened the way for gene-spliced
crops and medicines, DNA fingerprinting, and the genetic detection of diseases,
has died.

   Dr. Crick died Wednesday of colon cancer, according to the Salk Institute,
where he worked in recent years.

   In 1953, Dr. Crick was 36 and working at the University of Cambridge's
Cavendish Laboratory in his native Britain when he and the American-born James
Watson, then 24, struck upon the idea that the DNA molecule resembled a twisted
ladder.

   After making the discovery, Dr. Crick walked into a Cambridge pub and
announced that he and Watson had "found the secret of life." But only a few
people at the time "even thought it was interesting," Dr. Crick once said, and
it took years before the groundbreaking discovery was firmly accepted.

   Decades later, its impact can be widely seen. It laid the foundation for the
biotechnology industry, enabling scientists to engineer bigger tomatoes, doctors
to pursue gene therapy, and police to solve crimes through DNA evidence.

   Biotechnology is a $30 billion-a-year industry that has produced about 160
drugs and vaccines, treating diseases from breast cancer to diabetes. Seven
million farmers in 18 countries grew genetically engineered crops last year,
allowing them to use fewer pesticides.

   "It's almost too difficult to pay him high-enough tribute for what he
contributed," said Stanford University scientist Paul Berg, who won the Nobel in
chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering work with genetic engineering.

   Dr. Crick's work "helped to usher in a golden age of molecular biology," said
Lord May of Oxford, president of Britain's academy of scientists, the Royal
Society.

   Dr. Crick and Watson were awarded the Nobel Prize in medicine in 1962.

   Watson's 1968 best-seller, The Double Helix, told how he and Dr. Crick used
bits of wire, colored beads, sheet metal, and cardboard cutouts to construct a
three-dimensional model of the molecule.

   Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is made up of four chemical building blocks,
known as "bases." Each "rung" in the twisted ladder is made up of two bases, and
the various combinations of bases and the order in which the rungs are arranged
spell out the information stored in genes.

   Building on Dr. Crick and Watson's work and that of others over the decades,
scientists now can alter genes to breed out disease and breed in desired traits.

   That newfound power has stirred ethical debates, but Dr. Crick said there was
no way in the 1950s that he could have foretold modern DNA developments.

   "Think of the effect television has had worldwide on politics," he said. "You
can't possibly expect the man who invented the transistor to have seen that."

   In a statement yesterday, Watson hailed Dr. Crick "for his extraordinarily
focused intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed
my self-confidence."

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

   Dr. Crick was provocative, quick-witted and charming, though he rarely
consented to interviews. He was averse to attention, he said, not because he was
antisocial, but because it cut into his thinking time.

   Unlike many scientists, Dr. Crick did not spend his days toiling in a lab or
instructing students. Instead, he read and mused in his Salk Institute office
overlooking the Pacific Ocean, putting in full days well beyond retirement age.
He had come to Salk after resigning from the Cambridge faculty in 1977.

   Watson and Dr. Crick benefited from work by researchers Maurice Wilkins and
Rosalind Franklin of King's College in London. Wilkins shared the Nobel with the
two men; Franklin died in 1958. Nobel Prizes are not awarded posthumously.

   Francis Harry Compton Crick was born in Northampton, England, in 1916 to a
shoe factory owner and his wife, who bought their young son a children's
encyclopedia to help answer his many science questions. He studied physics at
University College of London and then built underwater mines for the British
government during World War II.

   After the war, Dr. Crick became interested in "the division between the
living and the nonliving" and decided to teach himself biology and chemistry.

   Among Dr. Crick's writings was Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature, a book
suggesting that the Earth began when a higher civilization dropped
microorganisms from a spaceship. In another treatise, Crick proposed that dreams
exist to let the brain clear itself for the next set of tasks.

   Dr. Crick acknowledged that some of his postulations were offbeat and
speculative. But, he said in 1994, "A man who is right every time is not likely
to do very much."

   Dr. Crick is survived by his wife, artist Odile Speed; three children; and
four grandchildren. The family will hold a private funeral service.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2005


                             385 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 30, 2004 Friday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 2286 words

HEADLINE: Scientist, colleagues cracked DNA code, won 1962 Nobel Prize;
La Jollan considered among most influential biologists

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The man who helped discover the secret of life is dead.

   Francis Crick, who was 88, died about 8:30 Wednesday night at Thornton
Hospital in San Diego after a long battle with colon cancer. Along with James
Watson, Crick was best known for discovering the structure of DNA -- the
mysterious molecule that defines and determines every form of life.

   Crick's name became scientific legend in 1953 when he and Watson, then just
36 and 24 years old, respectively, cracked the DNA code, revealing the structure
and nature of the now-famous double helix of deoxyribonucleic acid.

   The discovery, reported in the journal Nature, earned the two men the 1962
Nobel Prize for medicine, which they shared with Maurice Wilkins. More
profoundly, it arguably altered the state of human existence, inevitably
touching almost every aspect of modern life.

   The biotechnology industry, for example, is based largely upon Crick and
Watson's discovery. So, too, are genetically engineered foods like bigger
tomatoes and innovative medical technologies like gene therapy. Law enforcement
agencies now routinely collect and test DNA from crime scenes, either to convict
the guilty or set the innocent free. Social issues such as whether to have
children are now often affected by expanded knowledge of DNA and its role in
heredity.

   "History will judge him certainly as one of the influential biologists of the
20th century, if not the most influential," said Richard Murphy, president of
the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, which Crick joined in
1976.

   "He set the standard, not only the importance of the DNA work, he set the
standard for being a true scientist, just totally dedicated to understanding
science and the truth about biology."

   For many years before his death, Crick devoted his scientific life to
understanding the biological foundations of consciousness.

   He had been playing a significant role in the development of a new research
center at Salk that will bear his name. The Crick-Jacobs Center for
Computational and Theoretical Biology, which is also named for its benefactor,
the Joan and Irwin Jacobs family, will study how genes in human DNA regulate
brain activity, as well as how networks of nerve cells influence the way the
brain works.

   "He felt that this was going to be a center with tremendous potential for
understanding the brain," Murphy said, "and he was thrilled with the planning of
that."

   o o o

   In the beginning, of course, he was just Francis Harry Compton Crick, born
June 8, 1916, in Northampton, England, to Harry Crick, a shoe factory owner, and
Anne Elizabeth Wilkins Crick. Early in life, the young Crick chose a life in
science. His first recorded experiment, at age 10 or 12, was an attempt to
create artificial silk, which failed. He had more success electrically igniting
bottles of a homemade explosive. His parents eventually ordered him to at least
first put the bottles in pails of water, lest he destroy himself or their home.

   Asked once about how best to teach science in schools, Crick said: "It's
really important to appeal to the imagination. I taught myself a lot of science
when I was a kid because that's the best way in some ways."

   In 1937, Crick graduated from University College in London with a bachelor of
science degree. His continued studies, however, were interrupted by World War
II, which Crick spent in the British navy. In 1940, he married Ruth Doreen Dodd.
(They were divorced seven years later.) After the war, he resumed research at
Cambridge University in England, where he earned his Ph.D. in 1954. He married
Odile Speed, an artist, in 1949, and met a visiting American biologist named
Watson.

   o o o

   The names of Crick and Watson are permanently intertwined. Their story is a
sort of literary double helix and the telling of it recalls a time when science
was still pursued by individuals rather than biotech corporations with acronyms
that usually included the letter X.

   Crick and Watson were distinctively different individuals. Crick was older,
English to the core and, according to Watson, something of a know-it-all
physicist. Watson was American, boisterous and, according to Crick, a biologist
prone to Yankee overstatement. Yet somehow, the two hit it off. In fact, their
ability to communicate with each other was so effective and so profuse that
colleagues eventually stuck them in an office together so they would stop
disturbing everyone else.

   Conversation was Crick and Watson's chief scientific tool. By talking
endlessly and building many models, they solved first the structure of DNA, a
question that had attracted the attention of many others, including Linus
Pauling at Caltech and a group of English researchers that included Wilkins.

   Crick and Watson's answer took the shape of a twisting ladder with backbones
of sugar and phosphate atoms and rungs of hydrogen linking four chemical bases:
adenine with thymine, cytosine with guanine. Thus each single strand of DNA
represented a template for the other, a critical necessity for reproduction.

   When it came time to announce their findings, however, it was the boisterous
Watson who balked. Recalling that time, Crick said Watson was worried they might
be wrong. The less said, the better, he advised Crick.

   "Jim was very nervous about saying anything," Crick recalled. "And I said,
`Well, we've got to say something!' Otherwise people will think these two
unknown chaps are so dumb that they don't even realize the implications of their
own work."

   Thus, Crick penned one of the great understatements of literature, scientific
or otherwise, said the journal Science. It was just 900 words long, not much
more than what you've read so far. In the paper, he wrote: "It has not escaped
our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a
possible copying mechanism for the genetic material."

   The illustration for the double helix, now instantly recognizable, was drawn
by Crick's wife, Odile. "I tell her it's her best-known work," he joked in 1993.
"She normally draws nudes."

   o o o

   Crick was not content to rest on the laurels of his DNA work. In fact, he
mentioned it in public only reluctantly, joking that people never knew what to
say to a Nobel laureate. He was content to reduce DNA references to his license
plate, which read ATCG -- the initials of adenine, thymine, cytosine and
guanine.

   While Watson remained in molecular biology, eventually becoming the longtime
director of the respected Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York and first
head of the Human Genome Project, Crick chose to explore the brain, with side
trips to outer space and elsewhere.

   In the 1970s, for example, he postulated that Sigmund Freud was wrong about
dreams, that dreams did not possess deep psychological meaning but rather were
simply the result of some middle-of-the-night cerebral housecleaning, the
reshuffling of thoughts and images so that the memory could store information
more efficiently.

   In 1981, Crick wrote "Life Itself," a controversial book that introduced the
theory of "directed panspermia," which suggested that life on Earth may have
been introduced as microorganisms planted by a more advanced alien civilization.
Panspermia means "seeds everywhere."

   The book aroused much comment, some of it caustic, though he noted repeatedly
that directed panspermia was just an hypothesis.

   "In a way, it was probably a mistake to write the book," Crick said in a 1995
interview. "Not everybody really read it, which if you did pointed out that
directed panspermia was just an idea, something to be considered. The book was
actually quite reserved about the whole thing. Of course, if you only glanced at
it, you could have gotten the idea that I was a bit nutty."

   Not that he regretted the fuss. Ideas, he said, were the currency of science.

   "The important thing is that you have lots of ideas and that you learn most
are going to be wrong," he said. "The trick is to figure out which are the most
promising and work on those. A man who is right every time is not likely to do
very much. It's the person with just one idea who is a menace because he won't
give his idea up."

   In 1994, Crick created a new intellectual ruckus by writing "The Astonishing
Hypothesis," in which he and colleague Christof Koch, a neurobiologist at
Caltech, proposed that all manifestations of the human "soul" -- a person's
joys, sorrows, memories, ambitions, sense of self and free will -- were in fact
the result of complex chemical reactions in the brain.

   "Most people are aware of consciousness," Crick said in a 1993 interview with
The San Diego Union-Tribune. "They can see the difference. At a crude level, it
can be described as what's going on in your brain when you see something. The
real questions are: Which nerve cells produce this consciousness? How are they
firing?"

   Human behavior, he suggested, probably doesn't involve a higher authority, a
mystical god. It is more likely the cumulative effect of 100 billion interactive
neurons and associated molecules.

   Crick was, according to New York Times columnist Nicholas Wade, "an unabashed
reductionist, confident that no insurmountable barrier exists to stop scientists
from understanding the mind in terms of the properties and organization of its
neurons."

   The "Astonishing Hypothesis," of course, remains to be proved -- or
disproved. And doing so, he conceded, will be difficult.

   "My work with DNA was much easier and that wasn't really accepted for many
years," he said. "There, we were looking at what was happening at the molecular
level, basic processes of life. This is far more complicated, involving whole
systems we don't fully understand."

   o o o

   Despite his penchant for raising eyebrows and uproars, Crick was famously
publicity-shy.

   "It's just the way I am," he told Time magazine in 1993 on the 40th
anniversary of the discovery of DNA's structure. "For a long time, I refused to
let people put my photo in textbooks. Unfortunately, I have a very good press
agent (referring to Watson, who is markedly less shy of publicity). Now it's
hopeless."

   Nonetheless, he steadfastly declined attempts to honor him, refused all
honorary doctorates and preferred to stick close to home, either at his house in
La Jolla or his getaway in Borrego Springs. It was only reluctantly that he
traveled to England in 1991 to accept the Order of Merit from the Queen, an
honor greater than knighthood and limited to only 24 people at any time.

   He said he went only because his wife and secretary insisted.

   Nonetheless, if cornered in an interview, Crick was invariably charming,
witty and courtly. His voice was soft, cultured and distinctly English. He loved
to talk, to startle listeners with ideas, then follow up with a wide, knowing
smile that made his blue eyes crinkle and lifted great, bushy white eyebrows
heavenward.

   Except for a short stint at Harvard, Crick never taught as a full-time
university professor. He avoided the traditional classroom, which he found
stultifying, and in later years, the laboratory, which he said was best left to
"better experimentalists."

   Scientific method for Crick involved thinking, pure and simple. He was a
theorist who preferred to look at the big picture in search of big answers. He
liked to develop ideas, propose experiments, predict outcomes and then try to
figure out what they all meant.

   His usual methodology involved inviting colleagues to stay with him for a
week, a month, perhaps several months. Most of that time was spent in
discussion, intensive talks that dominated the days and often the nights.

   A colleague, one Crick story goes, asked Odile once whether her husband
worked a lot. "No," she replied, "I don't think he works a lot. But he thinks a
lot."

   Crick kept his door -- and mind -- open to everything. Scientists often
bounced ideas off him. He was a voracious reader and a great assimilator,
consuming huge amounts of information, then processing it in new ways.

   Contrarily, he never gave much thought to how he worked -- or why it was
successful.

   "People who do this sort of thing are not very keen on examining very
carefully how they do it. They're afraid it will interfere with the process.
There are lots of things going on in the brain that you're not aware of, so it's
probably better to adopt a sort of Zen attitude: Don't press. Don't try too
hard. Let it happen. Don't analyze it too much."

   Some critics of Crick -- he had his share -- dismissed this way of doing
business (though rarely publicly). They said thinking about a problem wasn't the
same as solving it, that he had become an outsider, irrelevant because he wasn't
actively doing his own research.

   Crick was unmoved by such observations. He worked this way, he said, because
he had earned the right by lasting so long.

   Plus, it was cheaper.

   o o o

   It was Jonas Salk's offer of research resources and room to think that drew
Crick to La Jolla and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in 1976. There,
ensconced in a large, book-cluttered office with an expansive view of the
Pacific Ocean, he spent most of his time reading, writing and, of course,
thinking.

   He also served when needed. Occasionally he acted as host for high school
tours of science students, many of whom, he ruefully noted, were surprised to
find their textbook icon was still alive. In addition, Crick served as interim
president of the Salk Institute, from October 1994 to September 1995, when he
stepped down due to health problems.

   The reduced duties, he said, gave him more time to think -- something he
always did well.

   Crick is survived by his wife, Odile; their two daughters, Gabrielle A. Crick
and Jacqueline M-T Nichols, both of England; a son by his previous marriage,
Michael F.C. Crick of Seattle; and four grandchildren.

   Funeral services are pending.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Francis Crick and his wife, Odile Speed, celebrated
the 50th anniversary of the discovery of DNA structure in 2003. (Ed. 1);
PHOTOBY: Marc Lieberman / Salk Institute / Associated Press file photo

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2004


                             386 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                July 30, 2004 Friday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: Francis Crick, who co-discovered structure of DNA, dies at 88

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, who co-discovered the spiral,
"double-helix" structure of DNA in 1953 and opened the way for everything from
gene-spliced crops and medicines to DNA fingerprinting and the genetic detection
of diseases, has died. He was 88.

   Mr. Crick died Wednesday (July 28, 2004) after a battle with colon cancer,
according to the Salk Institute, the research body where Mr. Crick worked in
recent years.

   The British-born Crick was 36 and working at the University of Cambridge's
Cavendish Laboratory in 1953 when he and the American-born James Watson, just
24, struck upon the idea that the DNA molecule resembles a twisted ladder.

   Only a few people at the time "even thought it was interesting," Mr. Crick
once said. And it took years before the groundbreaking discovery was firmly
accepted.

   Decades later, the discovery's impact can be seen everywhere. It laid the
foundation for the biotechnology industry, enabling scientists to engineer
bigger tomatoes, doctors to pursue gene therapy to treat disease, and police to
solve crimes through DNA evidence.

   "It's almost too difficult to pay him high enough tribute for what he
contributed," said Stanford University scientist Paul Berg, who won the Nobel in
chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering work with genetic engineering.

   Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is made up of four chemical building blocks,
known as "bases." Each "rung" in the twisted ladder is made up of two bases, and
the various combinations of bases and the order in which the rungs are arranged
spell out the information stored in genes.

   Building on their work and that of others over the decades, scientists can
now alter genes to breed out disease and breed in desired traits.

   In a statement Thursday, Watson hailed Mr. Crick "for his extraordinarily
focused intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed
my self-confidence."

   "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

   In person Mr. Crick was provocative, quick-witted and charming, though he
rarely consented to interviews. He was averse to attention of any sort, he said,
not because he was anti-social but because it cut into his thinking time.

NOTES:
NATION

GRAPHIC: photo; AFP / GETTY IMAGES Photo - British scientist Francis Crick in
Paris in 1993. His discovery with James Watson of DNA's "double-helix" structure
laid the foundation for the biotechnology industry.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2004


                             387 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              July 30, 2004 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: Discoverer of 'secret of life' dies

BYLINE: MICHELLE MORGANTE, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   Nobel Prize-winning scientist Francis Crick, who co-discovered the spiral,
"structure of DNA in 1953 and opened the way for everything from gene-spliced
crops and medicines to DNA fingerprinting and the genetic detection of diseases,
has died. He was 88.

    Crick died Wednesday after a battle with colon cancer, according to the Salk
Institute, the research body where Crick worked in recent years.

    The British-born Crick was 36 and working at the University of Cambridge's
Cavendish Laboratory in 1953 when he and the American-born James Watson, just
24, struck upon the idea that the DNA molecule resembles a twisted ladder.

   After making the discovery, Crick walked into a Cambridge pub and announced
that he and Watson had "found the secret of life." But only a few people at the
time "even thought it was interesting," Crick once said, and it took years
before the groundbreaking discovery was firmly accepted.

   Decades later, the discovery's impact can be seen everywhere. It laid the
foundation for the biotechnology industry, enabling scientists to engineer
bigger tomatoes, doctors to pursue gene therapy to treat disease, and police to
solve crimes through DNA evidence.

    Biotechnology is a $30 billion-a-year industry that has produced some 160
drugs and vaccines, treating everything from breast cancer to diabetes. Seven
million farmers in 18 countries grew genetically engineered crops last year,
allowing them to grow food with fewer pesticides.

    "It's almost too difficult to pay him high enough tribute for what he
contributed," said Stanford University scientist Paul Berg, who won the Nobel in
chemistry in 1980 for his pioneering work with genetic engineering.

    Crick's work "helped to usher in a golden age of molecular biology," said
Lord May of Oxford, president of Britain's academy of scientists, the Royal
Society.

    Crick and Watson were awarded the Nobel in medicine in 1962.

    Watson's 1968 best seller "The Double Helix" told how he and Crick used bits
of wire, colored beads, sheet metal and cardboard cutouts to construct a 3-D
model of the molecule.

    Deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, is made up of four chemical building blocks,
known as "bases." Each "rung" in the twisted ladder is made up of two bases, and
the various combinations of bases and the order in which the rungs are arranged
spell out the information stored in genes.

    Building on their work and that of others over the decades, scientists can
now alter genes to breed out disease and breed in desired traits.

    That newfound power has stirred ethical debates, but Crick said there was no
way in the 1950s that he could have foretold modern DNA developments.

    "Think of the effect television has had worldwide on politics," he said.
"You can't possibly expect the man who invented the transistor to have seen
that."

    In a statement yesterday, Watson hailed Crick "for his extraordinarily
focused intelligence and for the many ways he showed me kindness and developed
my self-confidence."

    "He treated me as though I were a member of his family," Watson said. "Being
with him for two years in a small room in Cambridge was truly a privilege. I
always looked forward to being with him and speaking to him, up until the moment
of his death."

    In person Crick was provocative, quick-witted and charming, though he rarely
consented to interviews. He was averse to attention of any sort, he said, not
because he was anti-social but because it cut into his thinking time.

    Unlike many scientists, Crick did not spend his career toiling in a lab or
instructing students. Instead, he read and mused in his Salk Institute office
overlooking the Pacific Ocean, putting in full days well beyond retirement age.
He had come to Salk after resigning from the Cambridge faculty in 1977.

    Watson and Crick benefited from work by researchers Maurice Wilkins and
Rosalind Franklin of King's College in London. Wilkins shared the Nobel with the
two men; Franklin died in 1958. Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously.

    Francis Harry Compton Crick was born in Northampton, England, in 1916 to a
shoe factory owner and his wife, who bought their young son a children's
encyclopedia to help answer his many science questions. He studied physics at
University College of London and then built underwater mines for the British
government during World War II.

    In a 1997 lecture at Rutgers University, Crick recalled those early days in
his career.

    "I still didn't know much about anything so I could go into whatever I
wanted," he said.

    "I used what I call the 'Gossip Test' to decide what I wanted to do," he
said.

    "The gossip test is simply that whatever you find yourself gossiping about
is what you're really interested in," he said. "I had found that my two main
interests which I discussed the most were what today would be called molecular
biology - what I referred to as the borderline between living and the nonliving
- and the workings of the brain."

    Among Crick's writings was "Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature," a book
suggesting that the Earth began when microorganisms were dropped by a spaceship
from a higher civilization. In another treatise, Crick proposed that dreams
exist to let the brain do some housecleaning, to clear itself for the next set
of tasks.

    Crick acknowledged that some of his postulations were offbeat and
speculative. But, he told the Associated Press in 1994, "A man who is right
every time is not likely to do very much."

    Crick is survived by his wife, artist Odile Speed; three children; and four
grandchildren. The family will hold a private funeral service, his wife said.

   Reuters contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: 1. British scientist Francis Crick, at top, died Wednesday of colon
cancer in San Diego, according to the Salk Institute. Crick, above left, was 36
when he and the American-born James Watson, above right, came upon the idea that
the DNA molecule resembles a twisted ladder.  2. double-helix

BIOGRAPHY  Crick dead at 88

 Nobel Prize-winning scientist, who along with James Watson discovered the
spiral, "double-helix" structure of DNA, has died.

Born- Britain, 1916

 Career - DNA discovery in 1953 paved the way for everything from DNA blood
tests to genetically engineered tomatoes; biotechology industry is based largely
upon the discovery

 Awards - Along with Watson won the Nobel Prize of physiology or medicine in
1962

 Family - Wife, two daughters, son from a previous marriage, four grandchildren

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             388 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 29, 2004, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 960 words

HEADLINE: TINKERING WITH THEIR MINDS
PROGRAM AIMS TO GET STUDENTS INTO SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH EARLY

BYLINE: By Emily Anthes, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   Kim Reinhold gave up a summer of swimming and dancing in her home in Hawaii
to hole up in a lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Over the past
five weeks, Reinhold, 16, has pursued her interest in artificial intelligence by
spending some 40 hours of daylight a week in front of a computer screen.

      "I love it," said Reinhold, who developed a computer algorithm that
scientists in her lab hope will be useful in teaching machines common sense.
"Working this summer has shown me that there are a lot of possibilities in the
field I'm interested in. And it's really not that boring to sit in front of a
computer for eight hours a day programming."


           Reinhold is one of 53 rising high school seniors participating in a
summer program at MIT that allows them to work on research projects in Boston
labs. The Research Science Institute aims to sell some of the nation's most
talented science students on research careers at a time when there is a shortage
of US-trained scientists.

      "We really try to take the best of the best, give them the best resources,
and give them an experience that will move them along in science," said Matt
Paschke, director of the program, which also includes 22 foreign students and is
sponsored by the Center for Excellence in Education.

      The number of US jobs requiring science and engineering skills is
increasing almost 5 percent a year as the number of Americans in those fields is
declining, according to a report released this year by the National Science
Foundation's National Science Board.

      The United States has been able to sustain its science and engineering
workforce by relying on foreign-born scientists. In 1990, 24 percent of
scientists and engineers working in the United States with doctorates were
foreign-born. By 2000, that proportion had increased to 38 percent, the report
says.

      But as other countries develop science programs that compete with the
United States for students and as tightened security makes it more difficult to
get US visas, the number of foreign scientists in the United States is expected
to drop.

      "The nation's economic welfare and security are at stake," the report
warns.

      National scientific progress could stall if the trends continue,
specialists said.

      "Is there a science crisis?" said Shirley Malcom, head of education and
human resources programs at the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. "Not right now, but one is looming."

      It is in the nation's schools that an interest in science can either
flower or fade, but the Research Science Institute students painted a bleak
portrait of American science education.

      They said they had teachers who told them that telekinesis, moving objects
with one's mind, was a proven phenomenon or that they should make up lab data
instead of performing the experiment. In an entire year, several students said,
their science classes spent four hours or less conducting laboratory
experiments.

      "The way labs are taught is so bad," Reinhold said. Rather than explain
the science behind an experiment, she said, teachers ask students to follow the
directions by rote. "It's like an arts and crafts project," she said.

      Labs are essential for cultivating scientific curiosity, said Gerry
Wheeler, executive director of the National Science Teachers Association.

      But budget cuts, increased standardized testing, and national learning
standards that focus heavily on English and mathematics mean that science
education gets put "on the back burner," he said.

      "We're doing our students a disservice," he said.

   In Massachusetts, students are required to pass 10th-grade MCAS tests in
English and math to graduate, but do not yet have to pass similar tests in
science.

      So summer programs such as the one at MIT and others that place Boston
high school students in local labs have stepped in to fill the gap. Last week,
more than 100 Boston students from nine of the city's summer science programs,
some of which aim to increase minority representation in the sciences, gathered
at Harvard Medical School. "You all are the future of our country," Harvard's
president, Lawrence H. Summers, told the students.

      There are indications that such programs do spur more students to become
scientists.

      Most of the Research Science Institute's students end up in research
careers, Paschke said, and many in this year's group said they were leaning that
way.

      "This has shaped my entire perception of research," said Joline Fan, 16,
of her experience researching the use of nano particles for gene therapy.

      But supplementary science programs are only part of the solution,
specialists say. For one, many students opt out of research once they reach
college, even at a science powerhouse like MIT.

      "At some four-year liberal arts colleges, students don't always get to see
what a life in research is really like," said Frank Solomon, an MIT biology
professor. "But our guys do. And they walk away."

   Solomon said his students worry about the lack of job security, the long
hours, and the long road to independent research. Few get graduate degrees in
science. Solomon advocates overhauling graduate-student training and employment
so the best students don't stray.

      That nearly happened to Scott Fruhan, 23, of Newton. Fruhan began working
in a Harvard immunology lab in high school and became a finalist in the
prestigious Intel Science Talent Search. But as an undergraduate at Harvard, he
was exposed to new fields that competed with his scientific interests.

      Going to college was "a kid-in-a-candy-store effect," he said.


LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2004


                             389 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 29, 2004 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 2265 words

HEADLINE: Nobelist, colleagues cracked DNA code

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The man who helped discover the secret of life is dead.

   Francis Crick, who was 88, died last night at Thornton Hospital in San Diego
after a long battle with colon cancer. Along with James Watson, Crick was best
known for discovering the structure of DNA -- the mysterious molecule that
defines and determines every form of life.

   Crick's name became scientific legend in 1953 when he and Watson, then just
36 and 24 years old, respectively, cracked the DNA code, revealing the structure
and nature of the now-famous double helix of deoxyribonucleic acid.

   The discovery, reported in the journal Nature, earned the two men the 1962
Nobel Prize for medicine, which they shared with Maurice Wilkins. More
profoundly, it arguably altered the state of human existence, inevitably
touching almost every aspect of modern life.

   The biotechnology industry, for example, is based largely upon Crick's and
Watson's discovery. So, too, are genetically engineered foods like bigger
tomatoes and innovative medical technologies like gene therapy. Law enforcement
agencies now routinely collect and test DNA from crime scenes, either to convict
the guilty or set the innocent free. Social issues such as whether to have
children are now often affected by expanded knowledge of DNA and its role in
heredity.

   "History will judge him certainly as one of the influential biologists of the
20th century, if not the most influential," said Richard Murphy, president of
the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, which Crick joined in
1976.

   "He set the standard, not only the importance of the DNA work, he set the
standard for being a true scientist, just totally dedicated to understanding
science and the truth about biology."

   For many years before his death, Crick devoted his scientific life to
understanding the biological foundations of consciousness.

   He had been playing a significant role in the development of a new research
center at Salk that will bear his name. The Crick-Jacobs Center for
Computational and Theoretical Biology, which is also named for its benefactor,
the Joan and Irwin Jacobs family, will study how genes in human DNA regulate
brain activity, as well as how networks of nerve cells influence the way the
brain works.

   "He felt that this was going to be a center with tremendous potential for
understanding the brain," Murphy said, "and he was thrilled with the planning of
that."

   o o o

   In the beginning, of course, he was just Francis Harry Compton Crick, born
June 8, 1916, in Northampton, England, to Harry Crick, a shoe factory owner, and
Anne Elizabeth Wilkins Crick. Early in life, the young Crick chose a life in
science. His first recorded experiment, at age 10 or 12, was an attempt to
create artificial silk, which failed. He had more success electrically igniting
bottles of a homemade explosive. His parents eventually ordered him to at least
first put the bottles in pails of water, lest he destroy himself or their home.

   Asked once about how best to teach science in schools, Crick said: "It's
really important to appeal to the imagination. I taught myself a lot of science
when I was a kid because that's the best way in some ways."

   In 1937, Crick graduated from University College in London with a bachelor of
science degree. His continued studies, however, were interrupted by World War
II, which Crick spent in the British navy. In 1940, he married Ruth Doreen Dodd.
(They were divorced seven years later.) After the war, he resumed research at
Cambridge University in England, where he earned his Ph.D. in 1954. He married
Odile Speed, an artist, in 1949, and met a visiting American biologist named
Watson.

   The names of Crick and Watson are permanently intertwined. Their story is a
sort of literary double helix and the telling of it recalls a time when science
was still pursued by individuals rather than biotech corporations with acronyms
that usually included the letter X.

   Crick and Watson were distinctively different individuals. Crick was older,
English to the core and, according to Watson, something of a know-it-all
physicist. Watson was American, boisterous and, according to Crick, a biologist
prone to Yankee overstatement. Yet somehow, the two hit it off. In fact, their
ability to communicate with each other was so effective and so profuse that
colleagues eventually stuck them in an office together so they would stop
disturbing everyone else.

   Conversation was Crick's and Watson's chief scientific tool. By talking
endlessly and building many models, they solved first the structure of DNA, a
question that had attracted the attention of many others, including Linus
Pauling at Caltech and a group of English researchers that included Wilkins.

   Crick's and Watson's answer took the shape of a twisting ladder with
backbones of sugar and phosphate atoms and rungs of hydrogen linking four
chemical bases: adenine with thymine, cytosine with guanine. Thus each single
strand of DNA represented a template for the other, a critical necessity for
reproduction.

   When it came time to announce their findings, however, it was the boisterous
Watson who balked. Recalling that time, Crick said Watson was worried they might
be wrong. The less said, the better, he advised Crick.

   "Jim was very nervous about saying anything," Crick recalled. "And I said,
`Well, we've got to say something!' Otherwise people will think these two
unknown chaps are so dumb that they don't even realize the implications of their
own work."

   Thus, Crick penned one of the great understatements of literature, scientific
or otherwise, said the journal Science. It was just 900 words long, not much
more than what you've read so far. In the paper, he wrote: "It has not escaped
our notice that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a
possible copying mechanism for the genetic material."

   The illustration for the double helix, now instantly recognizable, was drawn
by Crick's wife, Odile. "I tell her it's her best-known work," he joked in 1993.
"She normally draws nudes."

   o o o

   Crick was not content to rest on the laurels of his DNA work. In fact, he
mentioned it in public only reluctantly, joking that people never knew what to
say to a Nobel laureate. He was content to reduce DNA references to his license
plate, which read ATCG -- the initials of adenine, thymine, cytosine and
guanine.

   While Watson remained in molecular biology, eventually becoming the longtime
director of the respected Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York and first
head of the Human Genome Project, Crick chose to explore the brain, with side
trips to outer space and elsewhere.

   In the 1970s, for example, he postulated that Sigmund Freud was wrong about
dreams, that dreams did not possess deep psychological meaning but rather were
simply the result of some middle-of-the-night cerebral housecleaning, the
reshuffling of thoughts and images so that the memory could store information
more efficiently.

   In 1981, Crick wrote "Life Itself," a controversial book that introduced the
theory of "directed panspermia," which suggested that life on Earth may have
been introduced as microorganisms planted by a more advanced alien civilization.
Panspermia means "seeds everywhere."

   The book aroused much comment, some of it caustic, though he noted repeatedly
that directed panspermia was just an hypothesis.

   "In a way, it was probably a mistake to write the book," Crick said in a 1995
interview. "Not everybody really read it, which if you did pointed out that
directed panspermia was just an idea, something to be considered. The book was
actually quite reserved about the whole thing. Of course, if you only glanced at
it, you could have gotten the idea that I was a bit nutty."

   Not that he regretted the fuss. Ideas, he said, were the currency of science.

   "The important thing is that you have lots of ideas and that you learn most
are going to be wrong," he said. "The trick is to figure out which are the most
promising and work on those. A man who is right every time is not likely to do
very much. It's the person with just one idea who is a menace because he won't
give his idea up."

   In 1994, Crick created a new intellectual ruckus by writing "The Astonishing
Hypothesis," in which he and colleague Christof Koch, a neurobiologist at
Caltech, proposed that all manifestations of the human "soul" -- a person's
joys, sorrows, memories, ambitions, sense of self and free will -- were in fact
the result of complex chemical reactions in the brain.

   "Most people are aware of consciousness," Crick said in a 1993 interview with
The San Diego Union-Tribune. "They can see the difference. At a crude level, it
can be described as what's going on in your brain when you see something. The
real questions are: Which nerve cells produce this consciousness? How are they
firing?"

   Human behavior, he suggested, probably doesn't involve a higher authority, a
mystical god. It is more likely the cumulative effect of 100 billion interactive
neurons and associated molecules.

   Crick was, according to New York Times columnist Nicholas Wade, "an unabashed
reductionist, confident that no insurmountable barrier exists to stop scientists
from understanding the mind in terms of the properties and organization of its
neurons."

   The "Astonishing Hypothesis," of course, remains to be proved -- or
disproved. And doing so, he conceded, will be difficult.

   "My work with DNA was much easier and that wasn't really accepted for many
years," he said. "There, we were looking at what was happening at the molecular
level, basic processes of life. This is far more complicated, involving whole
systems we don't fully understand."

   o o o

   Despite his penchant for raising eyebrows and uproars, Crick was famously
publicity-shy.

   "It's just the way I am," he told Time magazine in 1993 on the 40th
anniversary of the discovery of DNA's structure. "For a long time, I refused to
let people put my photo in textbooks. Unfortunately, I have a very good press
agent (referring to Watson, who is markedly less shy of publicity). Now it's
hopeless."

   Nonetheless, he steadfastly declined attempts to honor him, refused all
honorary doctorates and preferred to stick close to home, either at his house in
La Jolla or his getaway in Borrego Springs. It was only reluctantly that he
traveled to England in 1991 to accept the Order of Merit from the Queen, an
honor greater than knighthood and limited to only 24 people at any time.

   He said he went only because his wife and secretary insisted.

   Nonetheless, if cornered in an interview, Crick was invariably charming,
witty and courtly. His voice was soft, cultured and distinctly English. He loved
to talk, to startle listeners with ideas, then follow up with a wide, knowing
smile that made his blue eyes crinkle and lifted great, bushy white eyebrows
heavenward.

   Except for a short stint at Harvard, Crick never taught as a full-time
university professor. He avoided the traditional classroom, which he found
stultifying, and in later years, the laboratory, which he said was best left to
"better experimentalists."

   Scientific method for Crick involved thinking, pure and simple. He was a
theorist who preferred to look at the big picture in search of big answers. He
liked to develop ideas, propose experiments, predict outcomes and then try to
figure out what they all meant.

   His usual methodology involved inviting colleagues to stay with him for a
week, a month, perhaps several months. Most of that time was spent in
discussion, intensive talks that dominated the days and often the nights.

   A colleague, one Crick story goes, asked Odile once whether her husband
worked a lot. "No," she replied, "I don't think he works a lot. But he thinks a
lot."

   Crick kept his door -- and mind -- open to everything. Scientists often
bounced ideas off him. He was a voracious reader and a great assimilator,
consuming huge amounts of information, then processing it in new ways.

   Contrarily, he never gave much thought to how he worked -- or why it was
successful.

   "People who do this sort of thing are not very keen on examining very
carefully how they do it. They're afraid it will interfere with the process.
There are lots of things going on in the brain that you're not aware of, so it's
probably better to adopt a sort of Zen attitude: Don't press. Don't try too
hard. Let it happen. Don't analyze it too much."

   Some critics of Crick -- he had his share -- dismissed this way of doing
business (though rarely publicly). They said thinking about a problem wasn't the
same as solving it, that he had become an outsider, irrelevant because he wasn't
actively doing his own research.

   Crick was unmoved by such observations. He worked this way, he said, because
he had earned the right by lasting so long.

   Plus, it was cheaper.

   o o o

   It was Jonas Salk's offer of research resources and room to think that drew
Crick to La Jolla and the Salk Institute for Biological Studies in 1976. There,
ensconced in a large, book-cluttered office with an expansive view of the
Pacific Ocean, he spent most of his time reading, writing and, of course,
thinking.

   He also served when needed. Occasionally he acted as host for high school
tours of science students, many of whom, he ruefully noted, were surprised to
find their textbook icon was still alive. In addition, Crick served as interim
president of the Salk Institute, from October 1994 to September 1995, when he
stepped down due to health problems.

   The reduced duties, he said, gave him more time to think -- something he
always did well.

   Crick is survived by his wife; their two daughters, Gabrielle and Jaqueline,
and a son, Michael, from his previous marriage.

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Francis Crick won the 1962 Nobel Prize for
medicine. 2. Francis and Odile Crick at the Salk Institute in La Jolla on Feb.
17, 2003, to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the discovery of DNA structure.;
PHOTOBY: 1. Associated Press 2. Marc Lieberman / Salk Institute / New York Times
News Service file photo

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2004


                             390 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             July 29, 2004 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Rare heart tumors may be more common

BODY:

   Scientists studying a rare genetic disorder have made a surprising discovery
that helps explain why certain heart tumors develop and suggests they may be
more common than had been believed.

    Doctors should look more broadly for signs of such tumors, which aren't
cancerous but are dangerous because they can break off and cause strokes,
researchers say.

    "This may be more widespread than we had ever thought," said Jil Tardiff, a
cardiologist at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York who reviewed the
research that was reported in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

    The work was led by Craig Basson, a cardiologist at Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, and involved four other hospitals in the United States and
two in Belgium.

    They studied a large Belgian family with 18 members who had a muscle
disorder that caused spotty skin pigmentation, tight or clenched hands and feet,
and an inability to open their jaws fully. Three also had heart tumors called
myxomas, which affect one of every 100,000 people each year.

    "Anybody who's a cardiologist has seen one," Basson said of such tumors.

    No one had connected them to muscle disorders, but Basson suspected a link.
He surprisingly found it in myosin, a group of proteins with an array of
important jobs, including making muscles contract.

    Defects in myosin genes are known to cause disorders such as Usher syndrome,
the leading cause of blindness and deafness in young children. A decade ago,
they were linked to sudden cardiac death in young people.

   The gene defect Basson identified is very similar to some of the mutations
that cause sudden cardiac death - an "unexpected and exciting" discovery,
Tardiff wrote.

    "It makes us think more broadly" about who may have heart tumors, and to
suspect the condition in people with other muscle disorders or unusual
orthopedic symptoms like the clenched hands, Tardiff said. "Many people think
it's underdiagnosed."

    Now that the cause of such tumors is known, scientists can try to design
treatments such as drugs and gene therapy as alternatives to surgery, the only
treatment for them now, Basson said.

    The discovery also could have implications for the field of stem cell
biology. The myosin defect Basson identified is in a gene that was thought to
stop functioning shortly after birth. His work shows it may keep going to some
degree in some people, which he views as evidence that there's a type of stem
cell in the adult heart, a widely debated theory.

    The National Institutes of Health funded the study.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             391 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             July 29, 2004 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Montgomery Extra; T08

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: Biotech Firms Want to Overturn Federal Funding Ban;
Capital Shortage Has Worsened, Companies Say

BYLINE: Annys Shin, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Local biotechnology entrepreneurs are seeking to overturn a Small Business
Administration ruling that prohibits companies backed by venture capital from
receiving federal grants for early-stage research. In May, Sens. Olympia J.
Snowe (R-Maine), Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) and Christopher S. Bond (R-Mo.)
cosponsored a bill that would reverse the Small Business Administration's
action.

   The focus of the lobbying effort is the Small Business Administration's
21-year-old Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Program. The program
requires certain federal agencies to set aside about 2 percent of their research
and development budgets for competitive grants to U.S. companies with 500 or
fewer employees that are owned by individuals, not institutions or companies.
Federal agencies award peer-reviewed grants of about $75,000 for six months to
test the feasibility of an idea and grants of $750,000 over two years to
evaluate a product's commercial potential.

   Last year, the Small Business Administration ruled that to qualify for a
grant, a company must be at least 51 percent owned by "individuals," defined as
excluding venture capitalists, said agency spokeswoman Tiffani Clements.

   Small Business Administration officials said they are merely restoring the
program to its original intent: to help startup companies develop innovative
technologies.

   But since the ruling took effect, local biotechnology entrepreneurs and
investors said, it has exacerbated a shortage of capital for biotech companies,
and  agencies have applied  the policy unevenly.

   The Biotechnology Industry Alliance in the District and the National Venture
Capital Association in Arlington are leading the lobbying effort. Local
executives have written members of Congress outlining their concerns. Rep. Chris
Van Hollen (D-Md.) is a cosponsor of the House version of the legislation to
repeal the Small Business Administration ruling.

   Many local biotechnology and information technology companies survive on SBIR
grants dispensed by the National Institutes of Health. Some agree with the Small
Business Administration's decision to limit research grants to companies without
venture capital funding. The grants "should be for companies with basically
friends-and-family funding," said Chris Charuhaus, president of Frederick-based
Visibooks, which makes computer textbooks for the learning disabled. "If you've
got an institution behind you . . . you've had your shot, you don't need SBIR
funding. Leave some for the rest of us who couldn't get funded any other way."

   David Krausman, vice president and chief executive of Individual Monitory
Systems, a 14-year old company in Arnold that makes monitoring equipment for
people with sleep disorders, agreed. "It should be a small company that doesn't
have the external resources of venture capital" that receives SBIR grants,
Krausman said. "Venture capital is awfully hard to get. Companies that get it,
I'm not sure they need" federal grants.

   However, biotechnology entrepreneurs said venture capital is often not enough
to keep their companies alive until a product is ready to go to market.
"Discovery to commercialization takes 12 years," said John Holaday, founder of
Rockville biotech firm EntreMed and HarVest Bank, a specialty lender to small
biotech companies. "When you can't get venture capital, you rely on [federal
grants]. It's hard to build a biotech company without them."

   Uneven application of the ruling has produced a dog-eat-dog atmosphere among
biotech companies, said Linda F. Powers, managing director of Toucan Capital
Corp., a Bethesda venture capital fund that specializes in financing early-stage
biotech companies. Powers recalled a Salt Lake City company that had received
funding from Toucan as well as a federal SBIR grant. The company lost the
federal grant after a competitor filed an administrative action.

   "We've created carnage and chaos and exacerbated a capital shortage problem
in a sensitive stage of development"  Powers said.

   Powers added that leaving investment of early-stage technologies to venture
capitalists may produce a shortage of innovative treatments in the long term
because venture capitalists tend to be "me, too" investors who see early-stage
technologies as risky investments.

   Carol Nacy, founder and chief executive of Sequella, a Rockville company
developing a tuberculosis diagnostic test, said half of her company's $13.6
million annual budget comes from federal SBIR grants. She said the ruling will
prevent companies from using the competitive application process to evaluate
their work.

   "I'm just appalled we're going to lose that opportunity to have good,
peer-reviewed science as a consequence of this ruling," Nacy said. "There are
not a lot of opportunities to have your work blessed by the scientific
community."

   Local biotechnology entrepreneurs said federal officials needn't worry that
companies will take advantage of looser criteria. The process "is based on the
science," said Gerald McGarrity, president of Intronn, a Gaithersburg company
that is developing gene therapies. "I'm willing to compete with anyone on the
science and peer review."

CORRECTION-DATE: August 26, 2004

CORRECTION:

   An article in the July 29 Montgomery Extra misstated the name of a
District-based group lobbying for changes in a federal research grant program.
The name of the group is the Biotechnology Industry Organization, not the
Biotechnology Industry Alliance.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2004


                             392 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        July 26, 2004 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 1431 words

HEADLINE: Improving a life;
Rare disorder responds to gene therapy

BYLINE: CZERNE M. REID creid@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Four-year-old Ashtyn Fellenz cannot sit up or raise her head or talk. And she
"eats" only through a tube attached to her stomach. The Menomonee Falls girl has
a rare genetic brain disorder known as Canavan disease.

   Ashtyn is one of only 21 participants from the United States, Europe and
South America in an enterprising clinical trial where researchers pump genes
into the brain in hopes of improving motor skills and brain function.

   A floppy head and stiff limbs are trademarks of the disorder. Other symptoms
include mental retardation, blindness, deafness and paralysis.

   Chemical builds up

   In Canavan disease, a malfunctioning gene causes a buildup in the brain of a
chemical called N-acetyl aspartate. The gene fails to produce a protein
responsible for breaking this substance down into the building blocks of the
brain's white matter.

   Also called myelin, white matter is a fatty layer that coats nerves in the
brain and spinal cord. It transmits nerve impulses from the brain to other cells
in the body. In Canavan disease, the white matter becomes spongy and full of
tiny fluid-filled holes.

   Children with the disease usually die by age 4, but in rare cases could live
into their 20s, according to the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke.

   The clinical trial -- which began in April 2003 and will run through summer
2005 -- is testing how gene therapy can improve the odds for children with
Canavan disease.

   "This is a first step; the potential down the road for a cure is a real one,"
said Christopher Janson, principal investigator of gene therapy for Canavan
disease at Cooper Hospital, a branch of the University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey. Researchers from Robert Wood Johnson Medical School -- another
branch of the same university -- and Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania are
also part of the team. The group plans to extend its methods to treating more
common neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and
Tay-Sachs.

   Eight years ago, in New Zealand, the same group performed the first gene
therapy treatment of a genetic brain disorder on children with Canavan disease.
This work ruffled some feathers within the gene-therapy field because the
investigators tested the method on humans without first showing that it was
effective in animals.

   At the time, they delivered genes surgically, using a fat-based molecule to
shuttle genes to the brain.

   These days, the team delivers genes using a different kind of brain surgery
as well as a new vehicle -- an adeno-associated virus.

   But some gene-therapy experts remain cautious because no researchers have
successfully used that kind of delivery method in humans.

   Adding to the uncertainty, in late May, California-based Avigen Inc. -- a
company that develops gene-therapy products -- yanked its support from a
hemophilia gene therapy trial that used this type of delivery to supply genes to
the liver. Two of seven patients in the study -- conducted at Stanford
University, Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania and University of Pittsburgh --
developed mild liver trouble. The researchers feared the toxicity might
interfere with the treatment, said Mark Kay, one of the trial's scientific
advisers based at Stanford. Test animals had not shown any liver damage.

   "You can't always predict what will happen in humans even if you have the
best animal studies," Kay said.

   The Canavan disease researchers are unfazed. Immune responses to a virus used
in the liver do not necessarily forecast what will happen when the virus is used
in the brain. Indeed, in the Canavan disease trial, tests of blood serum and
spinal fluid show that there is little immune response to the virus or to the
gene's protein products, Janson said.

   Furthermore, the difference in gene delivery method between the two trials
will also affect the results, said Paola Leone, co-principal investigator of the
Canavan disease trial. In the hemophilia trial, the virus was administered to an
artery and transported through the bloodstream to the liver. In the Canavan
disease trial, the virus was injected directly into the brain.

   "If they demonstrate that it is effective in Canavan, it would be a
remarkable result," said Roscoe Brady, chief of the developmental and metabolic
neurology branch of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

   "Now we're comfortable that the risk is minimal, and we can think more about
the benefit side of the equation," said Janson. "We want to move a little more
aggressively."

   How gene is delivered

   To try to arrest deterioration of the brain's white matter, the researchers
open a patient's skull and drill six holes into the brain. Into each hole, they
introduce a catheter through which a pump slowly delivers a few drops of
solution with about 900 billion viral particles containing the gene.

   The viral particles make their way inside the brain's nerve cells, where they
disassemble, releasing the gene. The genes make copies of themselves and produce
the protein vital for white matter formation.

   After the two- to three-hour surgery, the young patients in the trial
typically stay in the hospital for three days. Afterward, for at least 24
months, patients go for frequent follow-up visits at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia. There, researchers image the patients' brains to see if -- over
time -- the harmful chemicals and water levels in the brain decrease and some
white matter is restored. They also monitor responses such as changes in muscle
tone and awareness level.

   "It's a huge effort," said Leone.

   Janson said he has seen a wide range of outcomes in patients, depending on
their age and the stage of the disease. While some patients did not show marked
improvement after treatment, others gained better control of their head and
limbs, and had improved sleep patterns, bowel movements and awareness levels.

   "What we are seeing is the best effect that we can have," said Leone,
considering that the patients have already lost up to 40% of their brain mass.

   Seeing progress

   Since her gene therapy treatment one year ago, Ashtyn can now move her head
from side to side and even lift her arms and legs in ways she was unable to do
before. And her facial expressions have a brightness that wasn't there before,
said her nurse, Jacalyn Anderson.

   Ashtyn has come a long way.

   "She used to be just a rag doll," said Ashtyn's mother, Arlo Clark-Fellenz.

   Ashtyn receives physical, occupational and music therapy for up to four days
a week at the School for Blind and Visually Impaired Children on Brown Deer
Road. Twice a month, she also has sessions with speech pathologist Rona
Alexander who treats children with feeding and swallowing difficulties.

   First -- with her hands and a small, gently vibrating rod -- Alexander
stimulates Ashtyn's face, hands and mouth. This prepares the muscles to take on
the task of eating. Alexander waves tiny spoonfuls of chocolate pudding and
yogurt under Ashtyn's nose then places the food inside her mouth, while applying
slight pressure to Ashtyn's chin and lower lip. Ashtyn smiled after swallowing
her pudding. Then she took a small spoonful of water. "You did a great job
today," Alexander told Ashtyn.

   The simple act of swallowing is a chore for children such as Ashtyn who have
Canavan disease, a disorder that affects mainly Ashkenazi Jews and people of
Saudi Arabian descent. Neither of Ashtyn's parents has a known Jewish or Saudi
Arabian heritage. Both parents must carry the culprit gene mutation for
offspring to have the disease. There is then a 1-in-4 chance a child will be
born with the disease. A simple prenatal blood test can reveal if a child is
affected. Parents can be screened to see if they are carriers of the defective
gene that causes the disease.

   In the long term, Leone hopes to be able to do more than just stop the
progress of Canavan disease: She wants to reverse it. She is exploring the
possibility of replacing damaged brain cells with stem cells.

   Although Ashtyn may not benefit from the proposed stem cell work, her
physicians and family are doing their best.

   Clark-Fellenz said: "We all know that we have done our part to give her a
full life."

   CANAVAN DISEASE

   Canavan disease is a rare inherited neurological disorder characterized by
spongy degeneration of the brain and spinal cord. Symptoms that appear in early
infancy may include progressive mental decline accompanied by the loss of muscle
tone, poor head control, an abnormally large head, and/or irritability.

   Source: WebMD

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2004


                             393 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JULY 26, 2004 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1536 words

HEADLINE: The Body Electric;
Deep brain stimulation is effective for thousands with Parkinson's.
One day, electricity may treat such varied ailments as obesity and depression.

BYLINE: Stacey Burling INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   How's this for a bizarre, sci-fi scene?

   Carman Wylie lies on an operating table at Temple University Hospital. Five
metal pins are screwed into his balding head. A black plastic and metal
contraption rises from a dime-sized hole above his right temple. To his right is
a computer screen showing MRI pictures of his brain. To his left is another
computer alight with an X-ray. It reveals a skinny metal wire probing into his
subthalamic nucleus, home of the Parkinson's disease tremors that have made it
impossible for the 64-year-old Muncy, Pa., man to sit or stand still.

   Wylie's eyes are open. For hours, under local anesthesia, he has listened as
neurosurgeon Jack Jallo drilled into his skull, as the OR team discussed how to
put new equipment together, as a device that listens to electrical signals in
his brain helped Jallo guide the wire through the cortex, the white matter and
the thalamus. Wylie is getting jittery.

   Jallo leans close. "This is where it's important to work with us," he says.

   It's time to turn on the deep brain stimulator - four tiny electrodes at the
end of the wire that will release 180 pulses of electricity per second. Wylie
will help the OR team confirm it has found the right spot. Jallo asks Wylie to
raise his arm and repeatedly touch his nose.

   He's not shaking anymore. Wylie says his hand has not been so steady in
years.

   Jallo is satisfied and locks the stimulator in place.

   Cutting-edge as it looks, deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease -
approved by the FDA in 2002 and already in use in 25,000 people worldwide - is
an older form of treatment in a new and rapidly expanding field called
neuromodulation.

   Researchers are exploring various ways of zapping parts of the brain with
small amounts of electricity. The approach also is approved by the FDA for two
other movement disorders, essential tremor and dystonia, and epilepsy. It is
being tested for a host of other conditions: depression, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, anxiety, obesity, bulimia, pain, migraine, stroke, and Alzheimer's,
and even for patients who are in a minimally conscious state, a condition just a
couple steps above coma. Experts believe electrical treatments also hold promise
for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, dyslexia, autism, Tourette's
syndrome and schizophrenia.

   The techniques capitalize on the growing recognition that the brain functions
through electrical and chemical signals. Some neurosurgeons foresee a time when
they will be less likely to cut into the brain with a scalpel. Instead, they'll
deliver drugs, gene therapy, new cells, and corrective electrical stimulation
directly to malfunctioning sections of the brain.

   "I absolutely think this is the future," said Ashwini Sharan, a neurosurgeon
at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital.

   Doctors, who use these treatments only in patients who don't respond to
anything else, don't really know what the electrical stimulation is doing. In
some cases, it makes an area of the brain more active. But it may block signals
or slow activity in others. Hence, the imprecise word "modulation."

   Neuromodulation experts acknowledge that talk of psychiatric treatments that
may alter or disable parts of the brain makes people uneasy. It quickly brings
to mind some relatively recent and unsavory history - the widespread use of
lobotomies and shock treatments.

   But doctors say these new treatments are nothing like lobotomy, which
permanently disconnected the frontal lobes from the rest of the brain, or even
shock therapy, which still hasn't recovered from One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest. They are much more targeted, and the devices can always be turned off.

   Joseph Fins, chief of the division of medical ethics at Weill Medical College
of Cornell University, said the history had been distorted. Lobotomy, which was
prevalent before the advent of antipsychotic drugs, was more helpful than many
people believe, he said. Some hospitals continue to use surgery that removes
much smaller parts of the brain for depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD).

   Any discussion of the new treatments, Fins said, needs to keep in mind that
severe depression or OCD can be as devastating as Parkinson's disease.

   "We're sort of forgetting the burden of illness that people are feeling," he
said.

   Neuromodulation comes in three forms: deep brain stimulation; vagus nerve
stimulation (VNS), in which an electrode is attached to the body's largest nerve
at the neck and sends signals from there into a broad swath of the brain; and
cortical stimulation, in which a paddle-shaped electrode is attached to the
outside of the brain under the skull. All are powered by batteries implanted in
the chest, just like those for heart pacemakers. In fact, doctors often think of
the devices as brain pacemakers.

   Deep brain stimulation is approved for treating Parkinson's and two other
disabling movement disorders, dystonia and essential tremor.

   The results can be dramatic. Jim Evridge, a Pennsville, N.J., man with
Parkinson's, hasn't used his cane since his deep brain stimulator was turned on
at Temple in April 2003. If he turns it off, he said, "within less than 30
seconds, I just become a quivering, trembling mass of muscle."

   Doctors at Pennsylvania Hospital, which has an active program in deep brain
stimulation, are part of a study of whether the technique can reduce epileptic
seizures.

   Ali Rezai, a Cleveland Clinic neurosurgeon who is active in neuromodulation
research, said results of early tests of deep brain stimulation for OCD and
depression were encouraging.

   Cleveland Clinic and Cornell, he said, are also embarking on a clinical trial
of deep brain stimulation for patients in a minimally conscious state after
severe brain injury.

   The device used in cortical stimulation has been approved for deployment on
the spine but is used off-label in the brain. Jeffrey Brown, a Wayne State
University neurosurgeon who is an expert on cortical stimulation, said it had
been effective for treating chronic facial pain resulting from stroke or
injuries. It is being studied for restoring movement in people disabled by a
stroke. In the future, Brown said, it may be used for the chronic pain that
sometimes occurs after a bout of shingles, for phantom limb pain, and for other
types of nerve injury.

   Doctors at the University of Pennsylvania were involved in creating a "smart"
device being tested for epilepsy. It uses an implant in the brain that senses
when a seizure is about to begin and tells a cortical stimulator to fire.

   Vagus nerve stimulation, which was developed by a Temple physiologist, is the
least invasive but also least precise of the approaches. It was approved by the
FDA for treatment of epileptic seizures in 1997. An FDA advisory panel last
month recommended that it also be approved for treating severe depression.
Although not binding, such recommendations are usually accepted.

   Charlie Donovan, a 45-year-old former Wall Street bond salesman who lives in
St. Louis, suffered from depression so severe that he couldn't work and barely
left his house. He had tried shock therapy and at least 10 antidepressants but
still was in "utter despair."

   Donovan tried vagus nerve stimulation in 2001 as part of a clinical trial and
is so happy with the results that he testified in favor of VNS before the FDA.
"I can experience genuine happiness and joy where in the past I had to fake it,"
he said. The only drawback, he said, was that the treatment initially caused
hoarseness.

   Richard Rudolph, chief medical officer for Cyberonics, a Houston company that
makes the vagus nerve stimulator, said there was little evidence that it worked
for anything other than epilepsy and depression. But, he and others familiar
with the device said researchers had either done small studies or were
considering them for Alzheimer's disease, severe headache, anxiety, OCD,
post-traumatic stress disorder, heart rhythm problems, and obesity. The
University of Minnesota recently began a study financed by the National
Institutes of Health to find out whether the treatment can help stop vomiting in
patients with bulimia nervosa, a condition characterized by repeated binge
eating and vomiting. The treatment made news this summer when New Orleans
surgeons used it to successfully treat a man who had suffered through seven
months of constant, stroke-induced hiccups.

   Several experts on neuromodulation said they doubted a single treatment could
dramatically affect so many different conditions.

   "It does not make physiological sense to have applications for all these
different areas," Rezai said.

   Robert Fisher, a Stanford University neurologist who wrote the American
Academy of Neurology's guidelines for VNS in epilepsy, said there was reason for
skepticism but also for hope. Doctors have learned the drugs that work for
epilepsy also often work for depression, bipolar disorder and nerve pain. All
are probably caused by neurons that are firing too rapidly, he said. An
electrical treatment that affects those neurons might affect several diseases,
Fisher said.

   Contact staff writer Stacey Burling at 215-854-4944 or
sburling@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DIAGRAM;
DAVID SWANSON, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Carman Wylie is prepped for surgery at Temple University Hospital. The deep
brain stimulation he receives for treatment of his Parkinson's disease tremors
is in use in 25,000 people worldwide.
DAVID SWANSON, Inquirer Staff Photographer
An awake Carman Wylie, 64, endures as the team at Temple University Hospital
drills into his skull to install a device to calm his Parkinson's tremors.
Inset, Wylie helps neurosurgeon Jack Jallo determine the correct placement for
the device. The Muncy, Pa., man says his hand has not been so steady in years.
DIAGRAM
Deep Brain Stimulation - Electrical stimulation has helped patients with
Parkinsons and other movement disorders. (SOURCE: Medtronic Inc.; KEITA
SULLIVAN, Inquirer Staff Artist)

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2005


                             394 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2004 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                       July 25, 2004 Sunday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 3081 words

HEADLINE: Lung cancer genes identified

BYLINE: By Tim Bonfield Enquirer staff writer

BODY:

   UC study paves way for screening test

   In a stunning medical breakthrough, researchers led by University of
Cincinnati scientists have located a narrow region of genes that can sharply
increase a person's risk of developing lung cancer - America's No. 1 cancer
killer.

   The discovery offers rare good news in the fight against a disease with
abysmal survival rates. It paves the way for research and development of a
genetic screening test for lung cancer and better medicines to treat or prevent
the disease.

   Those advances are still years away. But already, the researchers' work
represents a major step in understanding why some people get lung cancer even if
they never smoked. It also suggests that for people carrying a lung cancer gene,
even a mild smoking habit or exposure to second-hand smoke can threaten their
lives.

   "This is a big development," said Janet Healy, executive director of the
Alliance for Lung Cancer Advocacy Support and Education, based in Vancouver,
Wash.

   "So many people say that if we can just get people to stop smoking, all the
questions about lung cancer would be answered. This study shows that there's
more going on than we assumed."

   The finding ranks among the top scientific advances to come out of UC.

   Funded by the National Cancer Institute, the five-year, $5.9 million project
involved a consortium of a dozen medical centers and top federal health
agencies. The consortium was coordinated by UC researcher Dr. Marshall Anderson.

   The full study has been posted on the Web site of the American Journal of
Human Genetics and will be published in the journal's September edition.

   The results come after a five-year nationwide hunt for genetic data from
families that have suffered three, four, even as many as eight cases of lung
cancer among blood relatives. The project started with more than 26,000 lung
cancer patients, from whom researchers found 52 families that could be studied.

   "When we started out, a lot of people didn't believe lung cancer would have
this kind of gene. By finding these families, we have shown that it does," said
Anderson, the study's principal investigator and UC professor of environmental
health.

   Few other common forms of cancer have so desperately needed some positive
news.

   This year, lung cancer will kill more than 160,000 people in the United
States, including more than 14,600 in Ohio, Kentucky and Indiana. That's more
than the next four leading causes of cancer death - colon, breast, pancreas and
prostate - combined, according to the American Cancer Society.

   Lung cancer also is one of the hardest cancers to beat.

   While the overall five-year survival rate for breast cancer is nearly 87
percent, and the survival rate for prostate cancer is nearly 98 percent, fewer
than 15 percent of people with lung cancer live so long.

   "Unfortunately, the mortality rate for lung cancer hasn't changed very much
since I started in medicine 25 years ago. Now we have an opportunity to make
some meaningful clinical progress," said Dr. William Martin, dean of the UC
College of Medicine, who has treated lung cancer patients during his career.

   The findings


   Anderson and co-investigator Dr. Susan Pinney, an epidemiologist with UC's
department of environmental health, coordinated the work of more than 20
researchers scattered nationwide.  The researchers' report concludes for the
first time that families with multiple cases of lung cancer share an inherited
genetic trait that can make it harder for their bodies to stop tumor growth.
From the estimated 30,000 to 40,000 genes in the human body, researchers traced
the common trait to an area of just 50 genes located along chromosome 6, one of
the body's 22 pairs of chromosomes.

   People carrying this trait would be especially vulnerable to the harm caused
by smoking, and they could pass the trait on to their children, Anderson and
Pinney said.

   More work is needed to pin down the lung cancer gene itself, but the
discovery so far is impressive to geneticists and cancer experts.

   "Narrowing it down that much is the hardest first step," said Dr. Ranjan
Deka, a geneticist at UC who is studying diabetes and obesity. "To identify even
a region of genes in a disease as complex as lung cancer is a very challenging
task."

   UC officials say the research will help lung cancer patients and the
institution.

   "We're feeling very proud to be a part of this. It really showcases the kind
of work we do," said Dr. Jane Henney, senior vice president and provost for
health affairs at the UC Medical Center.

   "People have known for a long time that tobacco smoke is a carcinogen, but
there have been questions about why some people can smoke like chimneys and
never develop lung cancer and some people can get lung cancer who have never
smoked," Henney said. "There's something going on here genetically, and this is
one big piece of evidence about where that genetic variation may be."

   Benefit for relatives?


   For people who have lung cancer now, these findings will have minimal effect
on their chances of survival. It could take years - if ever - to develop new
treatments.

   But for the relatives of people with lung cancer, the discovery raises some
potentially unsettling questions. It suggests, for example, that at least some
of the brothers, sisters, sons and daughters of lung cancer victims were born
with an increased risk of the disease.

   No one knows yet how widely shared this genetic trait may be in the U.S.
population. But even as this project progressed, three relatives in the study
were found to have early-stage lung cancer and went on to begin treatment,
Pinney and Anderson said.

   If nothing else, news of a genetic link to lung cancer could help reduce some
of the stigma people with lung cancer have faced for decades, says Healy, of the
lung cancer advocacy group. That in turn could inspire more political support to
spend money to improve treatment.

   "It isn't just about smoking. For some people, getting lung cancer isn't
their fault," Healy said. "A major factor in why lung cancer research hasn't
gotten as much attention (as other types of cancer) is that we know what causes
most cases: Smoking. And in so many ways, that's where the conversation seems to
stop."

   No one believes tobacco will be banned anytime soon. But even if all smoking
could be banished today, lung cancer would remain a major cancer killer for the
next 20 years, Anderson said.

   "One of the reasons the (National Cancer Institute) funded this study is that
they know they can't lower the national death rates from cancer much further
without getting control of lung cancer," Anderson said.

   Practical limits


   Even after a genetic link to lung cancer is proven, such findings should not
be misinterpreted, Anderson said.

   It won't be safe for people to smoke if they don't have the gene. Most cases
of lung cancer still trace to heavy smoking habits, Anderson said.

   Many of the more than 6,000 patients referred to the study from Greater
Cincinnati were sent by Dr. Richard Levy, a Greater Cincinnati radiation
oncologist, and other partners in Oncology/Hematology Care Inc.

   Levy said the study is clearly valuable to scientists.

   "We need to better understand the molecular biology of lung cancer," he said.
"You can't do gene therapy without identifying the gene."

   In the short term, finding a gene linked to lung cancer won't change
treatment for people who have the disease. "But it does change thoughts about
early detection," Levy said.

   Currently, some studies have reported that CT scans can detect smaller lung
cancer tumors than other methods, such as chest X-rays or collecting sputum
samples. Some people already pay hundreds of dollars to get such scans, even
though many insurers won't cover the costs.

   But it remains unclear whether CT scans detect lung cancer early enough for
treatment to actually improve survival, said Dr. Rebecca Bechhold, an oncologist
with Levy's group.

   Doctors disagree over how widely such tests should be offered. Critics remain
concerned about false positive results triggering unnecessary biopsy tests. But
supporters say the tests may be especially appropriate for high-risk groups.

   Beyond the CT scan debate, treatment and prevention options would be limited
for people with a lung cancer gene.

   For example, some women who have the BRCA-1 or BRCA-2 breast cancer genes
have opted to have double mastectomies as a purely preventive measure.

   In lung cancer, surgery to remove part of the lung remains the best hope of
long-term survival. But performing such surgery as a preventive measure isn't
realistic, Levy and Bechhold said.

   For now, the way for a high-risk gene carrier to avoid lung cancer is to stop
smoking -- something people should already know, Bechhold said.

   "The bottom line is that people need to stop smoking. Period. Whether they
have the gene or not," she said. "I already see patients all the time whose
family members continue to smoke, even after they see what their family members
go through. If watching a loved one die from lung cancer doesn't convince them
to stop smoking, I can't see how knowing they had a genetic risk would make a
difference."

   Other experts take a more optimistic view.

   Dr. John Wiest, a researcher with the National Cancer Institute and a
co-author of the study, said finding new molecular targets has led to new
treatments for other types of cancer. Now that's the hope for lung cancer.

   "The potential for progress is there," he said. "The demonstration of genetic
susceptibility in lung cancer will have an impact on the field."

   E-mail tbonfield@enquirer.com

   Years of detective work tracked genes

   Tracking down the potential location of a lung cancer gene was much like
looking down from orbit and seeing an entire city, and then zooming in on a
single street.

   But finding the correct street was no simple task.

   Getting the breakthrough results, published in the September edition of
American Journal of Human Genetics, required using some of the world's newest,
most sophisticated medical technology and years of painstaking detective work to
track down biological specimens vital to the project.

   It also took screening thousands of people with lung cancer - from Ohio to
Louisiana to Colorado - to find 52 families that had multiple cases of lung
cancer who also were willing and able to provide the blood and tissue samples
needed for analysis.

   The task, which cost nearly $6 million, took five years and required help
from a dozen medical centers and federal agencies.

   Finding families


   How hard was this? The search started with more than 26,000 people with lung
cancer who were referred to eight medical centers nationwide, including more
than 6,400 cases at the University of Cincinnati.

   Of those, 3,500 families were identified as having two or more cases of lung
cancer among blood relatives. Researchers then tried to collect blood and tissue
samples from 771 families who reported three or more lung cancer cases that also
crossed generations.

   Researchers also scoured hospitals nationwide hunting for "tissue blocks"
from deceased lung cancer patients. They finally found enough specimens to study
from 196 families, including a dozen from Greater Cincinnati.

   The search for tissue blocks was so difficult because so many lung cancer
victims died without ever having surgery, so samples were never collected. In
some cases, hospitals that had tissue samples threw them away. In dozens of
cases, experts resorted to using blood samples from spouses and children to
statistically "re-create" the genetic makeup of a deceased parent.

   Extracting the DNA


   From the 196 families, information from 92 families - including blood samples
from nearly 650 people and tissue samples from nearly 90 people - were chosen
for detailed genetic analysis.

   Parts of this work were performed at the National Human Genome Research
Institute in Baltimore, Washington University in St. Louis, the University of
Texas Southwestern, the MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, and the University
of Cincinnati. These and other medical centers nationwide have pumped hundreds
of millions of dollars into DNA processing equipment and powerful computers and
software capable of analyzing massive amounts of genetic data.

   Reporting the results


   So far, full genetic analyses have been completed for 52 of the 92 families.

   From those families, researchers found a powerful, inherited genetic trait,
which has been traced to a tiny area along chromosome 6, one of the body's 22
chromosome pairs. Of the estimated 30,000 to 40,000 genes in the human body,
this area contains about 50 genes, including some known to play a role in
regulating tumor growth.

   In lung cancer families, this area may contain a mutation that allows tumors
to grow. This trait was found in 67 percent of the 52 families, including 78
percent of the families with four relatives with lung cancer and 94 percent of
the families that had at least five lung cancer cases.

   Next steps


   Researchers already have started sifting through the 50 genes to find the
ones that appear most linked to lung cancer, a process that could be complete
within weeks or a few months.

   Once the gene is found, other studies will be needed to determine how many
people might have the gene, and whether it occurs more commonly among various
racial and ethnic groups.

   A genetic screening test to inform people of their risk of developing lung
cancer could be one of the first developments.

   People at high risk also may be urged to get chest CT scans to detect early
signs of cancer. A race also will begin to develop treatments using that gene as
a target.

   Is it safe to smoke if you don't have gene?

   News that some people may be born with an elevated risk of lung cancer raises
almost as many questions as it answers about one of America's biggest public
health issues.

   QUESTION: Does this mean people can find out now if they have a gene that
will cause lung cancer?

   ANSWER: Not right away. No commercially available genetic screening test
exists. Creating such a test will be one of the early goals once specific lung
cancer genes are identified.

   Q: What does this finding mean to people who have lung cancer now?

   A: It won't change how people get treatment, until new drugs are developed,
which remains years away.

   Q: If lung cancer runs in the family, what should relatives do?

   A: In cases where at least two cases of lung cancer have occurred among blood
relatives, it could increase pressure on family members to stop smoking, to get
genetic screening once available, and to consider getting chest CT scans that
can detect early signs of lung cancer.

   Q: If people have the lung cancer gene, will they lose their health
insurance?

   A: This remains a fuzzy area. A federal law passed in 1996 prohibits group
health plans from using genetic information to deny coverage, if a person does
not currently have a disease. In 1995, the definition of "disabled" in the
Americans with Disabilities Act was expanded to include people who carry
disease-linked genes. Several states also have laws against genetic
discrimination. These protections remains largely untested in the courts.

   Q: Is it safe to smoke for people who don't have the gene?

   A: Absolutely not, doctors say. As many as one in six heavy smokers will
develop lung cancer later in life. Only some of them will have the gene. Beyond
lung cancer, smoking also can cause heart disease, emphysema and other forms of
cancer.

   Q: What will researchers do with this finding?

   A: The first step will be to hunt more closely among the 50 most likely
targets for the gene or genes that are linked to lung cancer risk. From there,
efforts can start to develop a genetic screening test and more focused
treatments for lung cancer.

   Q: How many people have the lung cancer gene?

   A: No one knows. But experts speculate that the gene will be about as common
as the BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 genes linked to breast cancer, which were identified in
1994. They account for an estimated 5 percent to 10 percent of cases.

   Q: Does the gene occur more often in men or women or in various races and
ethnic groups?

   A: No one knows. For example, of the 52 families in this study, only two were
African-American. But once a gene is identified, it becomes possible to do
larger population studies.

   Q: What is a CT scan and should smokers get them?

   A: Spiral or helical CT scanners are high-tech X-ray machines that create a
3-D image of a person's lungs in about 15 seconds by taking a series of "slices"
as the rotating device passes over the patient. Some medical groups already sell
this service at prices ranging up to a few hundred dollars. Experts disagree
over whether these tests are effective, and critics remain concerned that the
scans generate too many false positive results. A nationwide study of 50,000
people who got the scans, funded by the National Institutes of Health, plans to
follow cancer patients detected by the tests for several years to see if early
treatment actually improves survival rates.

   The lung cancer study

   Objective: To identify genes that make people more susceptible to lung cancer

   Launch date: May 1999

   Grant amount: $5.9 million, five-year grant from the National Cancer
Institute to the Genetic Epidemiology of Lung Cancer Consortium.

   Principal investigator: Dr. Marshall Anderson, University of Cincinnati and
leader of the lung cancer consortium

   Participating organizations: University of Cincinnati; the National Human
Genome Research Institute, Baltimore; the National Cancer Institute; MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn.; University of Colorado;
Wayne State University Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit; Washington
University, St. Louis; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center;
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center; St. Mary's Hospital
Saccomanno Research Institute, Grand Junction, Colo; and the Medical College of
Ohio, Toledo.

   Families wanted

   The Genetic Epidemiology of Lung Cancer Consortium is still seeking families
with multiple cases of lung cancer to participate in ongoing research. For
information, contact the UC Family Lung Cancer Study at (513) 558-3120, 558-4028
or 558-0559. People also can check the project Web site at www.eh.uc.edu/gelcc
or e-mail adrienne.perez@uc.edu

   The Enquirer/RANDY MAZZOLA

   America's worst cancer killer

   GRAPHIC

   The Enquirer/MIKE NYERGES

   Top killers

   GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2004


                             395 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2004 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                              July 23, 2004 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS In Brief

BODY:

   FDA indicts Herbalife

   SAN DIEGO - Metabolife International Inc. and its founder were indicted
yesterday on federal charges of lying to regulators about the dangers of a
popular diet supplement containing ephedra, a now-banned herbal stimulant linked
to dozens of deaths.

   Metabolife and founder Michael J. Ellis, 51, face six counts of lying to the
FDA and two counts of trying to obstruct attempts to regulate ephedra. - AP

   Drug's use grows

   NEW YORK - Drug tests last year revealed a 68 percent surge in the number of
workers and job applicants who recently had used methamphetamine, the country's
largest test lab said yesterday, citing more than 7 million tests. But Quest
Diagnostics said the proportion of workers who failed tests stayed at 4.5
percent. - AP

   TKT, CEO gets Wells

   Cambridge biotech Transkaryotic Therapies and a former CEO could face civil
charges, the company said yesterday. Transkaryotic said an SEC ``Wells notice''
it received warns that it and ex-CEO Richard Selden could be charged with
securities law violations related to disclosures regarding Replagal, an
experimental drug for a rare enzyme disorder. Selden quit last year after the
FDA rejected the drug. - BLOOMBERG

   Raytheon picked

   Raytheon got a $123 million Army contract to produce more of the antitank
missiles used on Humvees and Bradley Fighting Vehicles during the invasion of
Iraq.

   Also yesterday, the Pentagon said it installed the first Raytheon
missile-interceptor warheads at Fort Greeley in Alaska. The scaled-down
missile-defense system could be used to destroy missiles from North Korea. -
BLOOMBERG

   Gains sought

   WASHINGTON - Federal energy regulators ordered Enron yesterday to forfeit $32
million in ill-gotten gains from Western energy crises in 2000 and 2001, and
ordered a review of the company's profits from 1997-2003. Western states believe
the company overcharged their consumers by billions of dollars through
market-manipulations. - AP

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2004


                             396 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2004 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 21, 2004 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-12

LENGTH: 951 words

HEADLINE: NEW LIVER GIVES BOY, 4, A TASTE FOR LIFE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   When 4-year-old Jakob Jasin walked into his news conference at Children's
Hospital yesterday, he proudly lifted his shirt to show off the Y-shaped scar
from the transplant surgery that gave him a new liver, which he calls "Tommy."

    On May 30, Jakob, of Fairfax, Va., became the first child at Children's and
the sixth in the world to get a successful liver transplant for maple syrup
urine disease, or MSUD, a rare, inherited metabolic condition.

    Thanks to Tommy, "metabolically, he's cured," said Dr. Robert Squires,
clinical director of gastroenterology.

    While Jakob and his mother spoke to reporters, a second MSUD liver
recipient, 3-year-old Grace Haddad, of Silver Spring, Md., and her parents
watched. Meanwhile, a third child with MSUD, Nathan Tomkins, of Anchorage,
Alaska, was undergoing transplant surgery elsewhere in the hospital.

    Children's experts have developed the nation's first comprehensive liver
transplantation protocol for MSUD patients. Worldwide, only a few surgeries have
been done for the condition.

    About 10 years ago in France, a child with the disease got a liver
transplant after her own organ failed due to hepatitis A infection. Much to her
doctors' surprise, the donor liver cured her of MSUD.

    "That serendipity started people thinking about transplant as an option for
the children," Squires explained. The disease is typically treated with a
special diet.

    People with MSUD are unable to properly break down certain kinds of amino
acids, which are the building blocks of proteins. The subsequent buildup of
toxic byproducts can lead to severe neurologic damage, including brain swelling,
and death.

    To get the disease, patients have to inherit copies of defective genes from
both parents. Some newborn screening panels can identify it at birth, but the
MSUD test is not performed at all hospitals.

    Jakob was not screened when he was born in Florida. Only days old, he became
lethargic and was admitted into the neonatal intensive care unit with brain
swelling.

    "I knew it was something with his food, but I couldn't figure out what was
going on," said his mother, Susan Jasin.

    Jakob was quickly diagnosed with MSUD.

    When his mother went home from the hospital, she smelled the distinctive
maple syrup scent associated with the disease coming from his diapers discarded
in the pail. An amino acid byproduct gives body secretions a burnt sugar smell.

    "The urine smells like maple syrup, ear wax smells like maple syrup,"
Squires said. "It's striking."

    Jakob was primarily treated with a strict diet free of the troublesome amino
acids. Potatoes with some ketchup were his staple, along with apple sauce. He
also ate a special formula that provided nutrients and safe amino acids. He'd
never tasted chocolate or ice cream or cake.

    A tenuous balance had to be struck so that he'd have enough protein to grow
on, but not enough to precipitate a neurologic crisis, Squires said.

    But even a simple cold could be a threat. If Jakob lost his appetite while
sick, his body would try to get calories from his protein stores.  That, too,
could make the toxin levels increase and make his brain swell.

    "If it was just a diet, I wouldn't be here," his mother said. "We're talking
no meat, no eggs, no dairy. And everything is weighed and measured."

    And if he refused to eat, they had to put a tube through his nose and into
his stomach to feed him the special formula.

    Jakob didn't develop permanent brain damage despite having about three
metabolic crises annually. During those times, his head drooped to one side and
he didn't walk normally. His mother continually feared that he wouldn't recover
the next time.

    After Jakob was diagnosed, Jasin met an 8-year-old with the disease who one
day was fine and the next day could no longer walk or talk. That fueled Jasin's
efforts to find an alternative for Jakob, especially after she realized that it
would take years to develop a gene therapy to fix the underlying problem.

    So she went to the transplant team at Children's. Squires said many experts
weighed in to develop the protocol to treat Jakob if he went into metabolic
crisis during the presurgical fasting period. The plan remains in place for
other MSUD patients.

    About one out of every 250,000 children is born with the disease. It is more
common among Mennonites, and the community in Lancaster has 40 to 60 children
with it, Squires said.

    According to Dr. George Mazariegos, director of pediatric transplantation,
about 10 to 15 MSUD liver transplants might be performed annually.

    For now, whole livers from unrelated cadaveric donors have been used.
Partial livers from cadavers or unrelated living donors might be acceptable. A
related donor may harbor a copy of the defective gene, and it's not known if
their liver tissue would work effectively in MSUD patients, Mazariegos said.

    Transplants will not correct existing neurologic damage, Squires noted.

    And, "to be fair, there are some families that think they can manage it
dietarily and they do quite well," he said. "Transplant would not necessarily be
for every single child who has maple syrup urine disease."

    A couple of weeks after he got his new liver, Jakob ate a cheeseburger for
the first time in his life. He didn't like it then, his mother said, but now
it's his favorite food, along with Double Stuf Oreos. He wants to have an ice
cream party to see what other treats he's been missing.

    Since the transplant, Jakob seems better able to focus his attention and his
speech, hair and nails have changed, Jasin noted. He has already grown half an
inch. He takes antirejection drugs, which will be gradually reduced to the
lowest possible dose.

NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Darrell Sapp/Post Gazette: BATTLE SCARS/Four-year-old Jakob
Jasin is joined by his mother, Susan, and Dr. George Mazariegoss yesterday as he
shows off his "Y" scar from his liver transplant. Jakob is the first patient at
Children's Hospital to receive a liver transplant for maple syrup urine disease,
a rare, inherited metabolic condition. (Photo, Page A-1)

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2004


                             397 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 21, 2004 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1966 words

HEADLINE: Muscle boundless;
GENE DOPING IS SHAPING UP AS NEXT BIG ISSUE IN DEBATE OVER PERFORMANCE ENHANCERS

BYLINE: Richard A. Lovett, Richard A. Lovett is a science writer from Portland,
Ore., and a frequent contributor to Quest.

BODY:

   Twenty years ago, science-fiction writer Isaac Asimov wrote a story called
"The Super Runner," in which he depicted the athletes of the future:
gene-modified to have lungs like bellows, bulging muscles and immensely
jacked-up metabolisms that allow them to perform feats of endurance and speed
impossible to ordinary humans.

   Think it's merely science fiction? Don't count on it, say scientists on the
forefront of research into the limits of human performance. Even as the sports
world continues to be rocked by the parade of big-name athletes linked to the
Balco scandal, sports officials are bracing for the next wave of high-tech
cheating: gene doping.

   For those who haven't been reading the sports pages, Balco is the Bay Area
Laboratory Co-Operative, a California chemical company that allegedly made
designer steroids for a Who's Who of famous athletes. The scandal came to light
a year ago when an anonymous coach mailed a syringe containing an unknown fluid
to officials at the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency. The fluid proved to contain a
body-building steroid called THG, carefully crafted to be undetectable under
conventional tests.

   Although legal investigations are continuing, the THG story is "essentially
over" from a scientific perspective, says Donald Catlin, a professor of
molecular and medical pharmacology at UCLA. "We know how to find (designer
steroids) and deal with them; it's just a matter of time and energy," he says.
The moment THG came to light, he adds, it immediately went from being the
designer-drug of choice to "a dinosaur."

   This means that forward-thinking drug testers need to be thinking about the
future -- a domain in which gene doping could put non-enhanced athletes at a
tremendous disadvantage.

   Gene doping isn't the creation of mutant children by bioengineering them for
superstar height, strength, speed or bulk. Rather, it's a method of altering the
genes of adults so their cells do things differently from the way they were
programmed at birth.

   Such treatments, called gene therapy when used for legitimate medical
purposes, offer promising treatments for inherited diseases, such as muscular
dystrophy. But most experts believe it is merely a matter of time before they
find an underground market among athletes.

   "We're trying to work with muscular dystrophy," says Lee Sweeney, chair of
the Department of Physiology at the University of Pennsylvania, "but we're
drawing a road map for how the athlete of the future could obtain tremendous
performance enhancement. We need to be aware of what's possible so people can
start to look for it."

   Muscular dystrophy is a devastating condition that involves the gradual
degradation of muscles, usually due to their inability to manufacture a critical
protein. Gene therapists are hoping to use viruses to insert new genes into the
cells of the affected muscles, thereby allowing them to function more normally.
Similar techniques may someday also be able to offset the muscle atrophy that
often accompanies aging.

   One of the most interesting target treatments involves a hormone called
insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). IGF-1 encourages the proliferation of
"satellite cells," a type of stem cell found in muscles. These cells can fuse
with normal muscle fibers, repairing injury or simply helping the muscle to bulk
up -- potentially beneficial for both repairing the damage of muscular dystrophy
or offsetting the atrophy of old age.

   Sweeney and other researchers have demonstrated that it's possible to insert
the IGF-1 gene into selected muscles of rats and mice, and that when this is
done, these cells indeed produce the desired growth factor. In one experiment,
researchers inserted the gene into one leg of middle-aged mice but not the
others. By the time the mice had aged to the equivalent of octogenarian people,
their uninjected legs had lost 25 percent of their strength, but the injected
legs were as strong as ever.

   In another test, the same treatment was given to younger mice, equivalent to
humans in their athletic prime. Even in sedentary mice, there was a 15 to 20
percent increase in muscle strength. "It's the couch potato's dream," Sweeney
says.

   For baby boomers hoping to avoid having to use walkers in their old age, this
is a wonderful finding, although it will take years of testing to determine
whether such fountain-of-youth treatments are free of nasty side effects (such
as cancer).

   But because the mouse experiments used sedentary animals, they didn't answer
the question of whether IGF-1 gives you anything you can't get by ordinary
athletic training. To determine whether IGF-1 gene doping might truly be a
magnet for cheaters willing to risk their health in pursuit of athletic glory,
Sweeney repeated the experiment, this time with rats. He forced the animals to
climb ladders with weights tied to their tails, in an effort to simulate human
workouts.

   The findings were dramatic. In control animals that were not subjected to the
ladder-climbing workouts, the gene-doped legs again got 15 percent stronger. But
in animals that received both the injection and the exercise, the doped legs
grew 30 percent stronger. By comparison, the equally well-exercised, non-doped
legs gained only 14 percent in strength. In other words, gene doping had more
than doubled the effectiveness of the athletic rats' training.

   Hormone tinkering

   IGF-1 doping is merely one possible form of gene doping. Another approach
would be to boost the muscles' metabolism by increasing their component of
mitochondria, the cellular powerhouses that burn fat and carbohydrates to
produce fuel for exercise. More mitochondria would mean more energy, and
presumably greater speed and endurance, without the need to bulk up.

   Or, it may be possible to tinker with a hormone called myostatin, which has
the opposite effect as IGF-1. Its purpose is to keep you from growing larger
muscles than you actually need -- important to our distant ancestors, who would
have had to forage for extra food if their bodies bulked up too strongly.

   There is a breed of cattle called Belgian Blues that has unusually large,
lean muscles because the animals produce lower-than-normal amounts of myostatin.
Myostatin-inhibiting drugs are already under development for use in treating
muscular dystrophy, and Sweeney's team has experimented with gene-doping
techniques to inject a myostatin-inhibiting gene into the livers of mice,
causing all the muscles of their bodies to grow like those of Belgian Blue
cattle. Nobody has a clue what side effects this would have in humans -- but if
it makes stronger mice, it's likely to be tempting to the next generation of
Balcos.

   Sweeney predicts that myostatin-inhibitors will be the next designer drug on
the cheating athlete's shopping list.

   Gene-doping the liver to produce drugs such as myostatin inhibitors will be
no harder to detect than conventional forms of drug administration, such as
pills or injections. That's because, in order to reach the muscles, these
compounds must pass through the bloodstream, where they will show up on blood
tests.

   Much more difficult to detect will be IGF-1 gene doping or other techniques
that work directly within the muscles, bypassing the bloodstream. Detecting this
type of cheating might well require a biopsy of the affected muscles -- a
considerably more invasive (and painful) test than current drug tests.

   As far as anyone knows, gene doping hasn't yet hit the athletic world. But in
2002, Richard Pound, president of the World Anti-Doping Agency, says he received
his first inquiry from a concerned coach. And Theodore Friedmann, a medical
professor at UCSD, notes that the necessary techniques are already within the
reach of the average molecular biology graduate student.

   Still, nobody expects gene doping to be an issue in this summer's Olympic
Games, in Athens, Greece. But if a well-funded national sports program made a
concerted effort at it, as the East Germans did with steroids during the Cold
War, Sweeney believes that gene-doped athletes could be a threat in the 2008
Beijing Olympics.

   Pound thinks its more likely not to be a problem before 2012 but notes that
this makes the threat no less real. "What's important is that we don't lose
track of it," he says. "I want gold medals given to athletes, not to their gene
engineers."

   "It's scary to think that there would be coaches and athletes who would do
that," says Bob Williams, a Portland, Ore., coach who in 2000 trained Lisa Nye
for a world record in the women's 3,000-meter steeplechase. Williams thinks that
the most likely motivator will be the lure of big bucks for top-performing
athletes and their agents.

   "The Olympic Games is one thing," he says, "but making money is more powerful
for athletes who've lost focus on why we're doing this."

   How (or whether) to ban

   Beyond that lies the question of whether the practice ever can be effectively
banned. Thomas Murray, president of The Hastings Center, a leading bioethics
think tank, points out that athletes are accustomed to manipulating their bodies
in all kinds of ways to achieve maximum performance.

   Dietary supplements, minutely planned diets, high-tech equipment -- all of
these are an accepted part of sports. Some athletes now go so far as to live in
low-oxygen "altitude tents" designed to mimic the effects of living on
mountaintops, without ever leaving the comforts (and training facilities) of
home.

   Sweeney suggests that in the long run, society's attitude toward gene doping
will depend on how widely the same techniques are used by nonathletes. If a
treatment is used only rarely, to cure a disease such as muscular dystrophy,
athletes will most likely be prohibited from using it. But if the population at
large is using something like IGF-1 to slow the normal effects of aging, it may
well become an accepted method of boosting athletic performance.

   Sweeney also notes that genetic profiling of elite athletes will probably
demonstrate that they already carry unusual genes. For example, weight lifters
may be genetically like Belgian Blue cattle -- with naturally low levels of
myostatin that make it easier for them to bulk up. Once such factors are
identified, he asks, is it fair to insist that other athletes not be allowed to
give themselves the same genetic advantage?

   "It's not a question I'd like to answer," Sweeney says.

   But someday, probably before Isaac Asimov's story is another 20 years older,
it's exactly the type of question that anti-doping authorities will indeed be
forced to answer.

   QUEST FOR LEARNING

   This study guide is prepared by the Newspaper In Education Department of the
Union-Tribune as an aid for teachers and parents. It is aligned with the
California State Reading / Language Arts Framework, and the Mathematics and
Science Standards. The questions refer to the article on performance
enhancement.

   1. Suggest some changes that might be made in the way athletes are tested for
drugs. Should athletes be required to submit not just to blood and urine tests,
but also to invasive procedures such as muscle biopsies? Should genetic testing
be included? Would such testing violate privacy rights?

   2. Since new doping techniques will continue to be developed, should two
separate sets of athletic competitions be established -- one allowing athletes
to use any and all performance enhancement techniques, and the other not
allowing any?

   3. Reread the question at the end of this article and the closing comment by
Lee Sweeney. How would you answer that question?

   4. Diagram the technique of using viruses to insert new genes into cells. Can
this actually be done now? If so, then what are its present applications? What
medical conditions might benefit from this in the future?

   5. Should all athletes, even including middle school and high school
students, be routinely tested for performance enhancers?

GRAPHIC: 1 ILLUSTRATION; 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 2. Lacking a protein that
limits muscle growth, this infant exhibits dramatic size and development even
though he is just 6 days old. 3. QUEST FOR LEARNING; PHOTOBY: 1. David Mollering
/ Union-Tribune 2. Associated Press / New England Journal of Medicine

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2004


                             398 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2004 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 20, 2004, Tuesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1350 words

HEADLINE: FRAGILE PROMISE
PARENTS PUSH SCIENTISTS TO CURE THEIR SONS'S DISEASE

BYLINE: By Carey Goldberg GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Andy Tranfaglia's parents cannot wait for the usual slow march of science. So
they nudge it along. They plant seed money. They keep scientists up past
midnight brainstorming. They helped a researcher obtain human fetal tissue. They
have even begun contracting out specific experiments that they want done.

      Andy, 15, of West Newbury was born with Fragile X syndrome, an inherited
form of mental retardation that also can include life-threatening seizures,
autism and more. Soon after he was diagnosed, his Harvard-educated parents,
Katie Clapp and Dr. Mike Tranfaglia, created a small research foundation called
FRAXA to find a cure.

           Now, after a decade of effort, they say the best lead yet has
emerged, a theory explaining how the lack of one brain protein gives rise to the
disease. The research is to be published this month by a Massachusetts Institute
of Technology scientist, Mark Bear.


      That work and FRAXA's "huge influence" on it could yield drugs to
alleviate or even eliminate some symptoms of Fragile X within five years, Bear
said; without FRAXA's push, scientists might have done basic research for
another 25 years.

      Call it the "Christopher Reeve Effect."

      Foundations created by desperate family members or patients have been
channeling money into biomedical research for decades. But Reeve, the paralyzed
actor, does much more than that for spinal cord research. He has drawn attention
also for diving into the science and demanding that researchers focus not just
on deciphering nature's ways but on the potential for helping patients.

      More quietly, noncelebrities also have been learning how to work the
scientific re search system toward their own ends.

      A new book, "His Brother's Keeper," chronicles how, from 1999 on, Jamie
Heywood, an entrepreneur from a Newton family, metamorphosed into an amateur
genetic engineer and biotechnology businessman in a driven effort to save his
brother, Stephen, from Lou Gehrig's disease.

      Such direct intervention by laypeople has become more possible because of
advances in the science itself, said Dr. Oswald Steward, a prominent
neuroscientist who chairs the scientific advisory committee of the Christopher
Reeve Paralysis Foundation and also advises FRAXA.

      Scientists have developed a clearer understanding of the genetic and
molecular mechanisms of diseases from Fragile X to Parkinson's and Huntington's,
he said, and now "one can rationally trace a course from a basic discovery to
clinical application in a reasonable time frame."

      Andy's parents do contribute money to research: FRAXA raises and
distributes a little more than a million dollars a year.

      But they do much more.

   They try to speed up information-sharing between researchers, unwilling to
wait the two years it usually takes for journal publication, said Tranfaglia, a
psychopharmacologist.

      They try to induce scientists to override the demands of ego and develop
other scientists' discoveries.

   They sponsor research conferences.

      And they do not hesitate to use their moral authority as parents of an
affected child to encourage good behavior: "Say one big hotshot wants to ask
another hotshot for a research tool," said Clapp, a computer scientist. "They
might do it in front of me, so it's harder to say no."

      FRAXA's enthusiasm for Bear's theory began, Clapp said, when Bear stopped
by the foundation's booth at a major neuroscience conference in 2000 and let
drop that he had the mechanism of Fragile X "figured out," and it was "really
neat because compounds exist that can treat it." Then he walked away only to be
chased down by Tranfaglia for more details.

      Since then, FRAXA has worked to push the theory toward reality funding
other researchers to look into it, enlisting a Columbia University
scientist-friend, Robert Bauchwitz, to test it in mice, and helping to get
animal trials of a promising drug underway.

      Bear's theory, coauthored with scientists Kimberly Huber and Stephen
Warren, is to be published in this month's "Trends in Neurosciences." It goes
something like this: It is already known that the Fragile X mutation blocks a
critical protein. That protein normally dampens signals from a brain-chemical
receptor called MGluR. So, without the protein, some MGluR's become overactive.
That triggers a process that weakens connections between cells, impairing brain
development.

      If the theory is right, a drug that ratchets down some overactive MGluRs
could treat the syndrome.

      The idea that MGluRs are central to Fragile X fits with many of the
disease's symptoms, Bear said. For example, the receptors are implicated in
epilepsy, and Fragile X often involves seizures; they are involved in pain
perception, and Fragile X can bring skin hypersensitivity; and they play a role
in fear memories, and Fragile X often brings anxiety. There are a half-dozen
more such seeming links.

      Other Fragile X researchers are pursuing other avenues, including the
possibility of gene therapy. But the Bear theory has particular appeal because
major drug companies have been working to develop MGluR-blockers for years.

      The trouble is, the drug companies are interested in the blockers to
combat extremely widespread problems like anxiety or pain. Testing them for
Fragile X, which affects only about 100,000 Americans, is not so appealing.

      During a meeting with Fragile X researchers, Bear said, drug company
scientists were "super-sympathetic" but also said "there's no way these drugs
could be used for a Fragile X trial because, if there were a hiccup in those
trials, it could jeopardize the larger market."

      So, Bear, who is cofounder of a biotech firm called Sention, is putting
his company where his theory is.

   In yet another step beyond basic research, he has enlisted the company, in
collaboration with FRAXA, to do the preliminary safety testing in cells and
animals that is needed before MGluR-blocking drugs can be brought to clinical
trials in humans with Fragile X. He is now trying to raise the money for it.

      If an mGluR-blocker had already been approved for some other use, and,
Tranfaglia said, "if I had the stuff in my hands, we'd have a treatment. That's
how close we are."

      Tranfaglia's enthusiasm for the drugs stems in part from the fruits of an
old friendship. He and Clapp asked Dr. Robert Bauchwitz, a neuroscientist at
Columbia and a friend of theirs since freshman year at Harvard to test an
mGluR-blocker in mice.

      Bauchwitz worked with genetically engineered mice that have something
close to Fragile X. In particular, the mice have violent and often fatal
seizures. When he tried an mGluR-blocker called MPEP in them, the seizures
stopped.

   Now, Bauchwitz is working on a line of neural stem cells taken from a human
Fragile X fetus that had been aborted to see whether the drug works in human
brain cells. FRAXA helped connect him with the mother, he said, making the work
possible.

      In egging on everyone from good old friends to Nobel prize winners like
Columbia neurobiologist Eric Kandel, Katie Clapp said she was partly inspired by
the story behind the 1992 movie, "Lorenzo's Oil."

      Young Lorenzo's parents, Augusto and Michaela Odone, refused to accept the
conventional medical wisdom that he would soon die of a rare genetic disease.
Like Andy's parents, they pushed researchers and delved into the science.

   The Odones' work continues now as "The Myelin Project," in hopes of restoring
function to Lorenzo, who, at 26, remains almost totally paralyzed and unable to
speak.

   But his mother, Michaela, who cared for him constantly, died of cancer in
2000. Her death underscores the urgency of FRAXA's work, Clapp said.

      "You can't leave your son helpless like that," she said. "We can't leave
them helpless, that's part of the motivation behind all this. They have to die
before us or be OK."


      Carey Goldberg can be reached at goldberg@globe.com.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2004


                             399 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2004 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              July 19, 2004 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1152 words

HEADLINE: When scientists cheat, the results are sobering

BYLINE: ROBERT COHEN, STAR-LEDGER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A New Jersey scientist seemed to be finding promising clues on how problems
with human brain cells can lead to epilepsy and mental retardation.

    But when a colleague cried foul in 2002 and warned officials that some of
the data were phony, Brand Hoffmann's work on the research, funded by the
National Institutes of Health, fell apart.

    Admitting he fabricated por tions of his study, the assistant professor at
the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey became one of a small
number of scientists - fewer than 20 in an average year - to be caught cheating
and formally barred from federally funded research.

   Many experts believe scientific misconduct is more widespread than those
numbers suggest. And they say the government, which spends tens of billions of
dollars annually on research, has been slow to adopt guidelines issued 3 1/2
years ago to improve reporting and oversight of bad science.

   "Incidents of scientific misconduct are underreported, but how seriously we
don't know," said Chris Pascal, director of the Office of Research Integrity,
which reviews scientific misconduct allega tions for the Department of Health
and Human Services.

    "Some studies suggest 40 to 50 percent of researchers are aware of
misconduct but have not reported it," said Nicholas Steneck, a history professor
at the University of Michigan who has written extensively on the subject. "There
is underreport ing because the scientific community isn't as vigilant as it
ought to be and because the federal definition of misconduct is fairly narrow."

    The government relies on universities and research institutions to report
misdeeds and to conduct their own investigations. Federal authorities then
review findings and issue reprimands or bans on new grants.

    Experts said the willingness to investigate and report improprieties varies
by university, and that the level of scrutiny also varies among government
agencies.

    The Office of Research Integrity, which monitors cheating for HHS agencies
such as NIH, the Public Health Service and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, receives about 150 to 200 reports a year of misconduct and issues
findings of wrongdoing in only about a dozen cases a year.

    The National Science Foundation, another major source of federal money,
receives about 100 misconduct complaints a year, but has banned just 11
individuals from further involvement in government-backed research since 2000.
Unlike the Office of Research Integrity, the NSF does not publicly name the
individuals it bans or their universities. It only does so if there is a
criminal conviction or the case is considered unusually serious.

    David Wright, head of research ethics at Michigan State University, said he
believes the incidence of cheating is relatively low even with the possibility
some cases go undetected. He said the rigorous scientific peer review process
often shines the spotlight on problems and acts as a deterrent.

    But when there is fraud, Wright said, it's a serious matter. It "cor rupts"
the scientific record, undermines public trust and can have "catastrophic"
consequences in some cases, such as distorting the results of a human clinical
trial on a new drug.

   SELF-POLICING

   In the Hoffmann case, a UMDNJ research integrity commit tee received
allegations the scientist used fabricated data in his study of how cell
malformations affect brain development.

   The university began its own inquiry, notified the federal Office of Research
Integrity and issued two reports verifying the charges. The government reviewed
those findings and in February concluded that Hoffmann "engaged in scientific
misconduct by falsifying and fabricating research data."

    It said one falsified manuscript had been submitted but not published in the
Journal of Cell Biology, while another was published in the Journal of
Biological Chemistry.

    Hoffmann, who consented to an agreement barring him from any involvement in
federally funded research for three years, left the university in 2002 and
returned to his native Germany. He could not be located for comment.

    UMDNJ spokeswoman Susan Preston said the university takes the issue of
scientific integrity seri ously, adding the Hoffmann case shows its monitoring
system works.

    In other recent cases, the Office of Research Integrity found:

    University of Florida profes sor Craig Gelband fabricated data to show a
gene therapy treatment for high blood pressure was working when the original
information showed no significant results.

    Justin Radolf, a physician and professor at the University of Connecticut
Health Center, falsified and fabricated data in NIH-supported research that had
"the po tential to mislead grant reviewers and the scientific community about an
area of research that could have led to the prevention of Rocky Mountain Spotted
Fever and other tick-transmitted diseases."

    Vickie Hanneken, a clinical research associate at Decatur Memorial Hospital
in Illinois, falsified or fabricated data involving 35 participants in a
prostate cancer clinical trial supported by the National Cancer Institute. The
falsified data had the potential to cause completely erroneous conclusions on
the effect of treating patients with a new prostate cancer therapy involving
selenium and vitamin E.

    Pat Palmer, an assistant research scientist at the University of Iowa,
fabricated records for at least six interviews of autism patient families
involved in an NIH study. She also fabricated her academic credentials and lied
to the government when she claimed she was the co-author of at 10 published
scientific articles.

    Records made available under the Freedom of Information Act show that of the
11 NSF cases barring scientists from new grants since 2000, six dealt with
plagiarism, one with fabrication of data and four with financial fraud.

   SLOW GOING

   In late 2000, the Clinton administration issued guidelines to create a common
government-wide definition for scientific misconduct and uniform policies to
handle investigations.

    The government now defines research misconduct as "fabrication,
falsification or plagiarism in proposing, performing, or reviewing research, or
in reporting research re sults."

    The rules were supposed to be in place by the end of 2001, but to date only
a handful of agencies have complied. The departments of energy, defense and
veterans affairs as well as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration
are among those behind schedule.

    Clifford Gabriel, a deputy associate director of the White House Office of
Science and Technology, said some departments have had difficulties adopting the
new rules but are now making progress. Even without using these guidelines, he
said, "cases are not falling through the cracks."

    But the University of Michigan's Steneck said the delay shows the issue is
"on the back burner."

   "This is not a high priority for most agencies," Steneck said. "If it were a
priority, it would get done."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             400 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2004 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 18, 2004 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine Desk; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 7-18-04; Pg.
13

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: Curing Casanova

BYLINE: By Walter Kirn.

   Walter Kirn, a frequent contributor to the magazine, is the author, most
recently, of ''Up in the Air,'' a novel.

BODY:

   One of the least persuasive doctrines of the religion I belonged to as a
teenager held that temptation was a gift from God because doing right would have
no meaning if people lacked the freedom to do wrong. The idea, as I understood
it at the time, was that even though it would be a sin to pick up a pretty girl
at the church dance and drive her to the dark abandoned chicken farm known as
''the coop'' where we Mormon kids held our makeout sessions, I should
nevertheless feel grateful for the fact that I desperately desired to do so.
Except I didn't feel grateful; I felt confused. That good actions often felt
deeply frustrating and bad actions supremely pleasurable seemed to me to be
creation's greatest flaw, not its crowning virtue.

    My old confusion came back to me when I read a recent series of articles in
the science journal Nature concerning the genetic and chemical roots of sexual
behavior in the vole. The study in question involved the prairie vole, a rodent
species whose males are naturally monogamous and enjoy spending time with their
partners, and the meadow vole, whose males prefer to mate with many females and
then like to wander off and be alone. What could account for this difference,
the scientists wondered, between the two groups of closely related creatures?
And could the naughty, randy voles be civilized?

     Yes, it turned out, they could be. It wasn't hard, in fact. To make the
meadow voles act like prairie voles when it came to so-called pair bond
formation, the researchers merely injected a gene harvested from the
ideal-husband voles into the forebrains of the rock-star voles. (The forebrain
is the seat of passion? Who knew?) The resulting behavioral modifications were
quantified by recording the amount of time the meadow-vole couples spent ''in
side-by-side contact ('huddling').'' The voles in the control group spent as
much time ''huddling'' with strangers as they did with their initial mates,
while the voles who had received the shot were far more loyal -- a change of
affairs that the scientists attributed to the increased number of receptors for
vasopressin, a neurotransmitter, caused by the new gene.

    Though it's dangerous to personify the meadow vole (or to meadow-vole-ify
human beings), it's hard to ignore the experiments' implications, social,
medical, moral and theological, for our own species. By modifying the brain
through simple genetic therapy -- or, better, a pill -- could Casanova-ism be
cured, the incidence of male adultery reduced and thousands of troubled
marriages repaired? And assuming that such feats were possible, would they be
wished for?

    Unlike depression or bipolar disorder, a tendency toward promiscuity isn't
necessarily painful to the men (or women) who harbor it. Indeed, if they can
find ways to indulge such a predisposition without causing too much romantic
collateral damage, it may even be a solace of sorts. What immediate advantage --
besides a clearer conscience, perhaps, or a more tranquil domestic situation --
would a medical fix offer, particularly once you understand that what was at one
time considered a moral weakness is really a matter of vasopressin receptors?
Don Juans have been waiting for most of human history for such an excuse. If it
comes, I bet they'll take it.

    How would this alter our concept of sexual sin, though? The problem with a
drug that makes us be good (not just feel good, like more traditional drugs) is
that being good, when it comes naturally, isn't that big an achievement, morally
speaking. That's how my old Mormon bishop would see it, at least. For him, what
made a deed a moral deed was its superhuman difficulty. Not only wouldn't he be
impressed by a man who didn't commit adultery because his brain chemistry
basically wouldn't let him, he would no doubt sense that should this treatment
catch on, he'd be out of a job. He wouldn't like this development any more than
old-school Freudian analysts like Prozac.

    The fact that those most in need of a monogamy injection would also be the
least inclined to have one, and that the clergy who might be able to force them
to might feel fundamentally threatened by its existence, doesn't mean, of
course, that such medicine wouldn't be convenient in countless ways. After all,
if women can make men wear sensation-dulling condoms, they can make them take
the meadow-vole treatment, too, even if it never arrives in pill form and
requires the insertion of a needle in the forebrain. Of course, some women might
break ranks and forsake imposing the therapy in order to indulge their bad-boy
boyfriends. But I'd be willing to wager that the majority could lock down the
opposite sex within a month or two by agreeing among themselves to make the
therapy a precondition for intercourse.

    Then again, the study was done on voles. I don't know that I've ever seen a
vole, but if they're like moles, only smaller, with pointier noses (which for
some reason is how I picture them), I doubt that they're subject to the inner
agonies that human males feel regarding sex and love. Most of us -- me, for
example -- are good boys, basically, who occasionally ''huddle around'' and then
feel awful about it. Or maybe we never stray, yet we still feel awful because we
wish we had. Human beings are a self-conscious mess. Even if our sexual
inclinations could be realigned through genetic tinkering, we'd still be free to
decline the treatment, counteract it with another procedure or regret it once
we'd had it. The voles didn't know what was being done to change them, and they
had no choice about whether to let it happen. One day, the temptation to stray
just vanished as if by divine intervention. But we'll have to freely decide
whether to circumscribe our own forbidden desires -- a mental trap no rodent
needs to fear.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Elinor Carucci
 Ricco/Maresca Gallery)Chart: ''VOLING AROUND''''When the males and females of
all three [vole] species were tested for their ability to learn mazes, the
monogamous species showed no sex difference. The male meadow voles, however,
were able to learn their way through seven different kinds of mazes more quickly
than the females, an ability that one expects to be advantageous given the
greater roaming shown by the polygynous males.''   From ''Sexual Selections:
What We Can and Can't Learn About Sex From Animals,'' by Marlene Zuk (2002)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2004
