
                             601 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             October 3, 2003 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1178 words

HEADLINE: Success may still lurk in the genes

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In the battalion of new treatments to fight life-threatening diseases, gene
therapy is conspicuously missing in action. The drug industry has been intrigued
by the technology since 1972, when University of California San Diego gene
therapy pioneer Dr. Theodore Friedmann published a landmark paper describing the
potential of gene therapy.

   But the field has yet to produce a product or a profit. Instead, the
deceptively simple scientific notion -- using DNA as a drug by replacing missing
or defective genes with healthy ones -- has spawned scores of unsuccessful
companies and scientific setbacks. In September 1999, the death of Jesse
Gelsinger, a teenager who died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania, marked a low point in gene therapy research that threatened to
bury the technology. Yet despite the problems and challenges that haunt the
field, gene therapy is beginning to make a cautious comeback. Within the next 12
months, results from a few late-stage clinical trials for gene therapies to
treat cancer and heart disease -- including one devised in San Diego -- are
expected to be made public.

   And the field continues to make strides in creating better and safer vehicles
for delivering therapeutic genes to sick patients. Even the latest gene therapy
setback, the confirmation in January that a treatment inadvertently caused
leukemia in two French children, is tinged with promise, according to Friedmann,
director of the Human Gene Therapy program at UCSD. "It was a big surprise and
shock, and we all thought `here we go again, another disaster in the making,' "
Friedmann said.

   "But while a tragedy for the families of the two children, scientifically the
clinical trials proved to be an epochal step in gene therapy research." In the
French study, nine of 11 children with X-SCID, a rare genetic disorder that
leaves the victim without a functioning immune system, were cured through a gene
therapy that allowed them to lead relatively normal lives. Yet there was a
tragic hitch.

   The therapeutic DNA apparently activated a cancer-related gene in two of the
youngest children, causing them to develop leukemia.

   Both children are undergoing treatment for the cancer. "It worked, at great
cost, but it worked," Friedmann said.

   "With the French studies, the concept of genetic cure is no longer an `if' --
the proof is available." For many gene therapy companies, including a sizable
cluster in San Diego, the checkered success of the French trials provides cold
comfort.

   Though gene therapy continues to make steady scientific strides, the
commercial and the financial sides are suffering. Bob Abbott, chief executive of
Selective Genetics, has had to trim his San Diego company's work force from 55
to 15 to conserve cash.

   He is about to close on "just-in-time" financing that will allow the company
to continue testing a gene therapy to promote wound healing. "I think a lot of
gene therapy companies are working on as fine an edge as we are, or aren't far
off," said Abbott, whose gene therapy product is in the first stage of testing,
known as Phase 1.

   "Until a gene therapy product shows compelling efficacy in a Phase 2 or Phase
3 study, I don't think people will swarm back as investors." So far, the biggest
hurdle for the gene therapy field has been in developing effective vectors, the
vehicles used to deliver corrective genes to problem cells.

   Getting the right amount of gene in the right cell, and keeping it active at
the right level, remains elusive. Vectors used by researchers include a weakened
form of the common cold virus, which is designed to invade a cell and deposit
the therapeutic genetic material.

   But the vector isn't foolproof -- the virus can reactivate, creating serious
health complications, or be destroyed by the body's immune system and rendered
useless. In recent years, researchers have devised improved vectors by
engineering or removing the cold virus' genes, or finding new viral vectors.

   Others have bypassed viruses altogether by enclosing genetic material in a
fatty casing, a technique called "naked" DNA. Today, a handful of companies have
products in Phase 3 or Phase 2 clinical trials, and the results could renew wary
investor interest -- or further reduce it. Among the most closely watched
clinical trials is a Phase 3 study of a gene therapy to treat patients suffering
from angina.

   The treatment was developed by San Diego's Collateral Therapeutics, which was
acquired last year by German drug developer Schering AG. Another Phase 3 study
by a small Texas biotech, Introgen Therapeutics, is also expected to yield data
soon.

   Last month, the Food and Drug Administration gave the company fast-track
designation for its gene therapy Advexin, for the treatment of head and neck
cancers. Meanwhile, several gene therapy companies are moving ahead with
early-stage projects, including San Diego's Ceregene, which has licensed the
rights to a gene therapy developed at UCSD to treat Alzheimer's disease.

   The therapy has been tested on eight patients, and results from the basic
safety study are expected soon. This summer, San Diego's Corautus Genetics
received $10 million in funding from Boston Scientific, which it will use to
launch a Phase 2 study of a gene therapy to treat angina.

   Corautus was formed last year by the merger of two cash-strapped gene therapy
companies, GenStar Therapeutics and Vascular Genetics. The company plans to test
its VEGF-2 gene, delivered by catheter to specific areas of the heart, to
promote the growth of new blood vessels in damaged heart tissue.

   An earlier trial using Corautus' VEGF-2 gene therapy showed promising
improvements in patients, including Richard Hooper, an Escondido man who
received the treatment in December 1999. Before receiving gene therapy, Hooper
had undergone about a dozen angioplasty surgeries to widen blocked arteries and
improve the flow of blood and oxygen to his damaged heart. "Life was terrible.

   I couldn't walk from our bedroom to the living room without taking
nitroglycerine, and I couldn't pick up a bag of groceries and carry it from the
car without severe pain," Hooper said. After two heart attacks, Hooper was
running out of options.

   He wasn't a candidate for bypass surgery because of lung problems, and there
was a long waiting list for a transplant.

   So in early December, Hooper agreed to try the experimental gene therapy. Two
weeks after the procedure, his condition had improved dramatically -- so much so
that Hooper helped his son carry in the family's heavy, eight-foot Christmas
tree without pain. Since the procedure, Hooper said he has never suffered an
episode of angina, and he lives a fairly normal life, complete with household
chores and regular rounds of golf. "I believe that gene therapy is the wave of
the future -- even more so now that they've mapped the human genome," said
Hooper, 63.

   "There will be failures, but I think the body has the capability to
regenerate if the right gene key is found -- it's certainly been a miracle for
me." Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Katrin Holfer, a research associate at Ceregene,
worked on tissue samples at the company's laboratory in La Jolla. 2. Richard
Hopper of Escondido credits a Corautus Genetics therapy for improving his heart
condition. 3. Jeffrey Ostrove, president of Ceregene, oversees the company's
efforts to develop gene therapies to treat Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's
disease. (C-4); PHOTOBY: 1,3. Nelvin Cepeda / Union-Tribune 2. Charlie Neuman /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             602 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           October 1, 2003 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: Health Agency Taking Steps To Speed Results of Research

BYLINE:  By ROBERT PEAR

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 30

BODY:

   The Bush administration announced a new vision for biomedical research on
Tuesday that it said would give patients swifter access to the fruits of
scientific discovery and foster greater collaboration between the government and
private industry.

        Dr. Elias A. Zerhouni, director of the National Institutes of Health,
said the new initiatives would "transform the way we conduct research" by
setting priorities and coordinating the work of an agency known for its highly
decentralized management style.

    "We are turbocharging N.I.H.," Dr. Zerhouni said.

   The institutes' budget has doubled in the last five years, to $27.3 billion,
and Congress is eager to see that the money is well spent. Two Congressional
committees plan to hold a joint hearing on the agency on Thursday.

   After a huge investment in basic science, lawmakers and taxpayers alike are
seeking a tangible payoff: new ways to prevent or treat diabetes, heart disease,
cancer, mental illness, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and scores of other conditions.

   Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, the chairman of the Senate
Appropriations subcommittee responsible for health and human services, called
the initiatives "spectacular" and said agency officials were "fundamentally
reorganizing the way they attack dread maladies, re-engineering clinical
research and developing new pathways to discovery."

   Dr. Zerhouni, who took office in May 2002, said he had developed the "road
map for medical research" after consulting more than 300 experts from
universities, industry, government and consumer groups.

   While the N.I.H. conducts some research at its headquarters in Bethesda, Md.,
most of its money is given away in grants to 212,000 researchers at 2,800
universities, medical schools and other institutions.

   Dr. Zerhouni laid out a master plan so that rather than passively accepting
the priorities of these scientists, the agency will now emphasize specific
fields of study and new technology that might produce major breakthroughs.

   Under the plan, the institutes could be more involved in the earliest stages
of drug development, before drugs are tested in people. In addition, Dr.
Zerhouni said, the institutes will provide training in clinical research to
community doctors, who can help test treatments and disseminate the findings of
biomedical research.

   Mary Woolley, president of Research America, a nonprofit group that wants to
make health research a higher priority, said: "This is long overdue. It means
that more people will be enrolled in clinical trials."

   One goal of the institutes' plan is to catalog the intricate networks that
transmit information among genes, molecules and cells. Scientists believe that
disturbances in these "biological pathways" can cause disease.

   More precise knowledge of the molecular events that lead to health or disease
can "revolutionize the practice of medicine," Dr. Zerhouni said.

   Another goal is to create a picture gallery showing the three-dimensional
structure of all the proteins in the body. Misshapen proteins are the culprits
behind many diseases, including cystic fibrosis and Alzheimer's.

   Dr. Zerhouni said he wanted to get away from the notion that every research
project has one "principal investigator." The future, he said, will require much
more "team science" conducted by interdisciplinary groups of molecular
biologists, chemists, physicists, mathematicians, behavioral scientists,
pharmacologists and epidemiologists.

   In addition, Dr. Zerhouni said he wanted to speed the development of new
drugs by creating a public collection of hundreds of thousands of chemical
compounds that could be tested by scientists, with advanced technology now
available only to pharmaceutical companies.

   Data from testing such compounds would go into "a freely accessible public
database," Dr. Zerhouni said.

   Dr. David Korn, senior vice president of the Association of American Medical
Colleges, welcomed this commitment, saying it would establish "public
repositories of critically important research tools."

   Dr. Zerhouni said his plan would not require additional money, but would rely
on contributions made by units of the institutes from their existing budgets:
$130 million in 2004 and $2.1 billion over five years.

   The "road map" emphasizes research to translate discoveries from the
laboratory to the clinic and then into the everyday practice of medicine. Two of
Dr. Zerhouni's initiatives are potentially controversial.

   He said he wanted to foster more "partnerships between the public and private
sectors." But some members of Congress have expressed concern about such
arrangements, saying that the institutes had allowed drug companies to reap
large profits from drugs like Taxol developed with public money.

   Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said that when the government invested
in drug development, it must get an adequate return in royalties and must ensure
that the drug is affordable to patients.

   Dr. Zerhouni also said he wanted to "streamline federal requirements
pertaining to clinical research," to reduce the burden on researchers. But
members of Congress say the government has not adequately supervised or
regulated some types of research, like gene therapy.

   Alan I. Leshner, chief executive of the American Association for the
Advancementof Science, and Carl B. Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology
Industry Organization, a trade group, praised the initiatives, saying they would
benefit patients and researchers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2003


                             603 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 1, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 2227 words

HEADLINE: FLOW STOPPER; The blood-brain barrier keeps pathogens away, but it
also bars drugs that might ease or cure some neurological ills

BYLINE: Scott LaFee; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Perched atop the highest ground of our bodies, it's easy to imagine the human
brain as a sort of intellectual keep, the castle overseeing everything else, the
repository of all that defines us.

   Our physiology reinforces the image.  While the boney walls of the skull
shield against external forces, a network of blood vessels known as the
blood-brain barrier stands guard against invasion from within, from pathogens
circulating in the body that are capable of disrupting or harming the carefully
controlled chemistry of our brains.

   But the imagery, however compelling, greatly understates the importance and
influence of the blood-brain barrier, or BBB. Not only does it generally fend
off the vast horde of neurological threats, it also keeps out many of the drugs
and medicines that could help when the brain or central nervous system (CNS)
does fall ill.

   This dichotomy both baffles and beguiles medical scientists.  If doctors
could safely breach the barrier, they could deliver medicines in greater
strength directly into targeted regions of the brain.  That ability, they say,
might ease -- and possibly cure -- a range of neurological afflictions from
brain tumors to Alzheimer's disease.

   The question is, how do you safely overcome the very thing that keeps our
brains safe and healthy?

   Heads-up discovery

   Until the late 1800s, no one suspected that a barrier separated the brain's
blood supply from that of the body.  The first clue came from experiments by a
German bacteriologist named Paul Ehrlich, who observed that dyes injected into
the body stained every organ but the brain.  A few years later, a student of
Ehrlich's -- Edwin Goldmann -- revealed the flip side: Dye injected into the
central nervous system stained the brain, but nowhere else.

   Still, the barrier remained mostly a mystery until the late 1960s when
electron microscopy showed that blood vessels in the brain were physically
different from the rest of the body.

   Unlike most of the body's circulatory system, which is relatively porous and
freely allows nutrients, oxygen and other molecules to seep out into surrounding
tissue, the blood-brain barrier is basically leak-proof.  It consists of more
than 400 miles of capillaries constructed of cells so tightly joined together
that most molecules are simply too big to slip between them.

   As a result, the BBB blocks out most circulating toxins, viruses and
bacteria.  To enter actual brain tissue, molecules must cross through designated
gates in the endothelium -- the layer of cells forming the blood-brain barrier.
These gates consist of receptor proteins on individual endothelial cells
designed to transport specific desirable substances, such as oxygen or
fat-soluble nutrients.

   The majority of neurological drugs don't fall into this category.  Their
molecules are too big.  The BBB generally admits only lipophilic (fat-loving)
molecules smaller than 500 daltons, a molecular measurement. (One dalton equals
the mass of one hydrogen atom.) Brain drug molecules typically weigh in the tens
or hundreds of kilodaltons.

   "Ninety-eight percent of central nervous system drugs can't cross the
blood-brain barrier," said William Pardridge, a UCLA professor of medicine.

   But Pardridge and a small group of like-minded scientists are trying to
change that.  Their goal is to learn exactly how the barrier works, and how to
foil it when necessary.

   Breaking down barriers

   The barrier isn't absolute.

   Blood-borne Group B streptococcus (GBS), for example, can breach it, causing
bacterial meningitis, a sometimes fatal inflammation of brain tissues.  GBS is
the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in newborns.

   "With babies, the vulnerability may be a question of maturity.  The immune
system simply isn't fully equipped yet to handle severe infections," said Victor
Nizet, an associate professor of pediatrics at UCSD.

   GBS physically forces its way through the barrier, but to do so it must first
employ a bit of mimicry.  The bacteria encapsulates itself in polysaccharide
membranes studded with receptors designed to latch onto the BBB's endothelial
cells.  This cloak of sugar helps the bacterium resemble myriad other sugar
molecules in the bloodstream and avoid detection by the body's immune system.

   "When the bacteria reach sufficient numbers, very high levels, they begin to
infect (endothelial) cells," said Nizet, "releasing toxins that lyse or poke
holes in cells, causing water to rush in and destroy the cells."

   The bacterium then attacks surrounding brain tissue, causing it to swell.
"Inflammation in the brain is dangerous," said Nizet.  "While other parts of the
body can afford swelling with minor ill effect, the brain cannot.  There's no
place to expand, and swelling causes blood vessels to compress, cutting off
oxygen to cells."

   The barrier does fight back.  In a recent paper published in The Journal of
Clinical Investigation, Kelly Doran, an assistant adjunct professor of
pediatrics at UCSD, and Nizet report that exposure to GBS prompts specific genes
in the blood-brain barrier to release proteins that mobilize neutrophils or
white blood cells.

   Neutrophils are part of the body's immune response, responsible for attacking
and destroying invasive pathogens.  In fact, elevated levels of neutrophils
(taken in spinal taps) are an indication of bacterial meningitis.

   But this proactive defense by the BBB can be counterproductive.  By the time
neutrophils arrive at the infection site, bacteria have usually broken through
and entered tissue.  The neutrophils release chemicals intended to kill the
invader, but these chemicals also damage fragile brain cells, exacerbating the
disease.

   Therapeutic methods

   It is within this complicated and confounding context that researchers are
seeking ways to circumvent the barrier and improve brain therapies without
making matters worse.

   The simplest way to get around the BBB for therapeutic purposes is to
temporarily overwhelm it chemically.  The approach is called blood-brain barrier
disruption (BBBD), and it is notably blunt.  One technique involves exposing the
BBB to a concentrated dose of mannitol, a sugar alcohol.  Mannitol reduces the
amount of fluid in barrier endothelial cells, causing them to shrink for 20 to
30 minutes.

   During this time, therapeutic drugs are administered.  In animal studies, the
amount of drug reaching the brain was 10 to 100 times greater using BBBD than
the alternative injection into a neck artery.

   The first BBBD experiments were conducted 20 years ago, and it has been
tested in Phase I and II clinical trials for safety and efficacy, including some
that are ongoing.  But the prospect for Phase III trials -- the last stage
before the therapy could be approved for general use by doctors -- is not good,
for several reasons.

   First, it appears to be appropriate only for certain, rare forms of brain
cancer.  Second, it is expensive and very hard to do.  And third, it is
extremely risky, said Pardridge.

   Reducing the effectiveness of the barrier leaves the brain vulnerable to
anything else that might be circulating in the blood, including problematic
microbes that would ordinarily be repulsed.  If the therapy was long-term and
required multiple chemical assaults, the chance of unintended infections would
increase unacceptably.

   A variation of BBBD involves targeting the barrier where it contacts a brain
tumor.  Here, brain capillaries tend to be leakier because diseased endothelial
cells are more responsive to a naturally occurring chemical in the blood called
bradykinin, which causes them to pull apart.

   Researchers have tested a bradykinin-like compound called RMP-7 in rats.
When injected into the bloodstream, RMP-7 induces BBB tissue in the tumor to
loosen up.  Anti-cancer drugs are then injected, penetrate the tumor and kill
it.  Being less susceptible to the effects of RMP-7, healthy regions of the
rat's brain repel the anti-cancer toxins and are unaffected.

   Unfortunately, RMP-7 research appears to have stalled.  Alkermes, the
Massachusetts-based biotechnology company that had been leading the research
effort, has abandoned the project, saying the approach was too expensive to
develop given the small number of patients likely to benefit.

   Drugs in disguise

   Another method being explored for getting around the BBB is essentially
disguising therapeutic drugs, then slipping them through the natural pathways
kept open for needed brain nutrients.

   The key is fat.  Endothelial cells that make up the BBB are fat-soluble.
That is, they easily bond with other fat-soluble cells, but repel water-based
compounds.  At the University of Florida's Center for Drug Discovery,
researchers led by director Nicholas Bodor have learned how to attach lipophilic
or fat-like compounds to a variety of potentially therapeutic, water-based
drugs, such as enkephalin, a natural pain-reliever that cannot cross the BBB
unassisted.

   Lipid compounds mask the drug.  Endothelial cells see only the fat and allow
it to pass through.  Once beyond the barrier, inside the brain, enzymes break
down the enkephalin into its water-soluble components, essentially guaranteeing
the drug will not be expelled but will remain inside the head doing its job.

   Pardridge, too, is exploring ways to fool the BBB's gatekeepers.  In studies
with rats, he and colleagues have tricked receptors for transferrin -- a protein
necessary to transport the nutrient iron into the brain -- into carrying an
extra load of neurotrophins, molecules that protect neurons and encourage
growth.

   Such success is notable, if only because the current alternative for
delivering therapeutic neurotrophins into the brain is to drill a hole through
the skull and inject the therapeutic molecules -- a technique that is invasively
dangerous, expensive and may not be effective.  Indeed, the procedure is
primarily used only for experimental programs, such as gene therapy.

   "When you inject drugs directly into the brain, you're only targeting an area
roughly the size of a grain of salt," said Pardridge.  "There are no diseases of
the brain that are the size of a grain of salt."

   Pardridge and his team are testing other so-called "molecular Trojan horses."
They have attached therapeutic neurotrophins to antibodies -- natural proteins
constructed to bind only to a specific substance.  In this case, the antibodies
attach to the transferrin protein receptor.  Scientists then chemically induce
endothelial cells to pull the neurotrophin-antibody-transferrin package into the
brain.

   In experiments, getting the neurotrophins into rats' brains helped reduce the
effect on simulated strokes, reducing the volume of damage by as much as 70
percent when administered one to two hours later.

   Piggybacking on transferrin isn't the only way to get into the brain.
Pardridge has also tested an insulin receptor, and Victor Shashoua, a professor
of biomedical chemistry at Harvard University, has used a fatty acid that forms
a significant portion of the brain's gray matter to sneak in dopamine, a
neurotransmitter involved in regulating movement and balance.

   Pardridge has also employed liposomes -- tiny spheres of fat that can be
filled with as many as 10,000 drug molecules.

   More research needed

   Nonetheless, research efforts to fully understand the BBB and develop drug
delivery technologies to the brain have been surprisingly modest.  Pardridge
estimates there are less than 100 researchers in the world specifically working
on the subject.

   "It's an area that's been underresearched, and its significance hasn't been
recognized," David Begley, a neurophysiologist at King's College London, told
the journal Science.

   "It's outrageous," added Pardridge, "there's not a single drug company
operating a full-scale BBB research program."

   Pardridge blames the situation on a confluence of effects.

   First, brain research has traditionally focused on the mechanisms of learning
and behavior, not on the mechanisms of disease.

   Second, the experimental focus has been on subjects like flies and rats, and
on conducting what Pardridge calls "petri dish science versus what works in
people."

   "The assumption has long been that fundamental research will inevitably lead
to cures, that remedies spontaneously bubble up from basic science.  So far,
that hasn't happened."

   And third, pharmaceutical research has long focused on developing and
perfecting small-molecule drugs, say Pardridge and others.  Large-molecule
drugs, a category that includes most neurological medicines, are much more
complicated and difficult to deal with, and the cost of developing a system to
effectively deliver them into the brain has been deemed too high and risky.

   Besides, until recently, the blood-brain barrier seemed impregnable.

   But times are changing, spurred mostly by academic research.  In fact,
Pardridge says he's ready to move forward, with several therapies ready for
Phase III human trials.  He's simply waiting for somebody to finance the study.

   When that happens, it won't come a minute too soon.

   "Our population is aging.  And the fact is, the organ that will give us the
most trouble is our brain.  The numbers of people in this country with disorders
of the central nervous system -- Alzheimer's, stroke, Parkinson's, mental
illness -- is enormous, much bigger than cancer and heart disease."



GRAPHIC: 1 DIAGRAM | 5 PICS; 1. CRISTINA MARTINEZ / Union-Tribune 2. Crissy
Pascual / Union-Tribune 3,4,5. Victor Nizet et al. / UCSD 6. Victor Nizet, Kelly
Doran / UCSD; 1. Mental block -- The blood-brain barrier is designed to keep
dangerous microbes and toxins out of the brain, while allowing oxygen and other
nutrients to reach neurological tissue via special receptor proteins. The
barrier consists of more than 400 miles of capillaries constructed of
endothelial cells so tightly joined together that most molecules are too big to
squeeze between them. 2. UCSD researchers Victor Nizet and Kelly Doran are
investigating how meningitis bacteria successfully breach the blood-brain
barrier, knowledge that could prove useful in designing new neurological drugs.
3. A transmission electron micrograph, magnified 10,000 times, of a human cell
exposed to Group B streptococcus bacteria. The bacteria have released toxins
that punch holes through the cell's walls, destroying its structural integrity
and killing it. (F-4) 4,5. Group B streptococcus bacteria are able to breach the
blood-brain barrier by forcing their way into and past protective endothelial
cells. The transmission electron micrograph at left, magnified 3,000 times,
depicts GBS bacteria (the small black dots) assaulting the barrier. Some have
already entered a cell. The image at right, magnified 7,500 times, highlights
one detail: a bacterium in the process of penetrating the cell's wall. (F-4) 6.
In this image of a microscopic capillary inside a neonatal rat brain, Group B
streptococcus bacteria can be seen lining or penetrating the endothelial cells
that create the blood-brain barrier. (F-4)

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2003


                             604 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 1, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 2198 words

HEADLINE: FLOW STOPPER;
The blood-brain barrier keeps pathogens away, but it also bars drugs that might
ease or cure some neurological ills

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Perched atop the highest ground of our bodies, it's easy to imagine the human
brain as a sort of intellectual keep, the castle overseeing everything else, the
repository of all that defines us. Our physiology reinforces the image.

   While the boney walls of the skull shield against external forces, a network
of blood vessels known as the blood-brain barrier stands guard against invasion
from within, from pathogens circulating in the body that are capable of
disrupting or harming the carefully controlled chemistry of our brains. But the
imagery, however compelling, greatly understates the importance and influence of
the blood-brain barrier, or BBB. Not only does it generally fend off the vast
horde of neurological threats, it also keeps out many of the drugs and medicines
that could help when the brain or central nervous system (CNS) does fall ill.
This dichotomy both baffles and beguiles medical scientists.

   If doctors could safely breach the barrier, they could deliver medicines in
greater strength directly into targeted regions of the brain.

   That ability, they say, might ease -- and possibly cure -- a range of
neurological afflictions from brain tumors to Alzheimer's disease. The question
is, how do you safely overcome the very thing that keeps our brains safe and
healthy? Heads-up discovery Until the late 1800s, no one suspected that a
barrier separated the brain's blood supply from that of the body.

   The first clue came from experiments by a German bacteriologist named Paul
Ehrlich, who observed that dyes injected into the body stained every organ but
the brain.

   A few years later, a student of Ehrlich's -- Edwin Goldmann -- revealed the
flip side: Dye injected into the central nervous system stained the brain, but
nowhere else. Still, the barrier remained mostly a mystery until the late 1960s
when electron microscopy showed that blood vessels in the brain were physically
different from the rest of the body. Unlike most of the body's circulatory
system, which is relatively porous and freely allows nutrients, oxygen and other
molecules to seep out into surrounding tissue, the blood-brain barrier is
basically leak-proof.

   It consists of more than 400 miles of capillaries constructed of cells so
tightly joined together that most molecules are simply too big to slip between
them. As a result, the BBB blocks out most circulating toxins, viruses and
bacteria.

   To enter actual brain tissue, molecules must cross through designated gates
in the endothelium -- the layer of cells forming the blood-brain barrier.

   These gates consist of receptor proteins on individual endothelial cells
designed to transport specific desirable substances, such as oxygen or
fat-soluble nutrients. The majority of neurological drugs don't fall into this
category.

   Their molecules are too big.

   The BBB generally admits only lipophilic (fat-loving) molecules smaller than
500 daltons, a molecular measurement. (One dalton equals the mass of one
hydrogen atom.) Brain drug molecules typically weigh in the tens or hundreds of
kilodaltons. "Ninety-eight percent of central nervous system drugs can't cross
the blood-brain barrier," said William Pardridge, a UCLA professor of medicine.
But Pardridge and a small group of like-minded scientists are trying to change
that.

   Their goal is to learn exactly how the barrier works, and how to foil it when
necessary. Breaking down barriers The barrier isn't absolute. Blood-borne Group
B streptococcus (GBS), for example, can breach it, causing bacterial meningitis,
a sometimes fatal inflammation of brain tissues.

   GBS is the leading cause of bacterial meningitis in newborns. "With babies,
the vulnerability may be a question of maturity.

   The immune system simply isn't fully equipped yet to handle severe
infections," said Victor Nizet, an associate professor of pediatrics at UCSD.
GBS physically forces its way through the barrier, but to do so it must first
employ a bit of mimicry.

   The bacteria encapsulates itself in polysaccharide membranes studded with
receptors designed to latch onto the BBB's endothelial cells.

   This cloak of sugar helps the bacterium resemble myriad other sugar molecules
in the bloodstream and avoid detection by the body's immune system. "When the
bacteria reach sufficient numbers, very high levels, they begin to infect
(endothelial) cells," said Nizet, "releasing toxins that lyse or poke holes in
cells, causing water to rush in and destroy the cells." The bacterium then
attacks surrounding brain tissue, causing it to swell. "Inflammation in the
brain is dangerous," said Nizet.

   "While other parts of the body can afford swelling with minor ill effect, the
brain cannot. There's no place to expand, and swelling causes blood vessels to
compress, cutting off oxygen to cells." The barrier does fight back.

   In a recent paper published in The Journal of Clinical Investigation, Kelly
Doran, an assistant adjunct professor of pediatrics at UCSD, and Nizet report
that exposure to GBS prompts specific genes in the blood-brain barrier to
release proteins that mobilize neutrophils or white blood cells. Neutrophils are
part of the body's immune response, responsible for attacking and destroying
invasive pathogens.

   In fact, elevated levels of neutrophils (taken in spinal taps) are an
indication of bacterial meningitis. But this proactive defense by the BBB can be
counterproductive.

   By the time neutrophils arrive at the infection site, bacteria have usually
broken through and entered tissue.

   The neutrophils release chemicals intended to kill the invader, but these
chemicals also damage fragile brain cells, exacerbating the disease. Therapeutic
methods It is within this complicated and confounding context that researchers
are seeking ways to circumvent the barrier and improve brain therapies without
making matters worse. The simplest way to get around the BBB for therapeutic
purposes is to temporarily overwhelm it chemically.

   The approach is called blood-brain barrier disruption (BBBD), and it is
notably blunt.

   One technique involves exposing the BBB to a concentrated dose of mannitol, a
sugar alcohol. Mannitol reduces the amount of fluid in barrier endothelial
cells, causing them to shrink for 20 to 30 minutes. During this time,
therapeutic drugs are administered.

   In animal studies, the amount of drug reaching the brain was 10 to 100 times
greater using BBBD than the alternative injection into a neck artery. The first
BBBD experiments were conducted 20 years ago, and it has been tested in Phase I
and II clinical trials for safety and efficacy, including some that are ongoing.

   But the prospect for Phase III trials -- the last stage before the therapy
could be approved for general use by doctors -- is not good, for several
reasons. First, it appears to be appropriate only for certain, rare forms of
brain cancer.

   Second, it is expensive and very hard to do.

   And third, it is extremely risky, said Pardridge. Reducing the effectiveness
of the barrier leaves the brain vulnerable to anything else that might be
circulating in the blood, including problematic microbes that would ordinarily
be repulsed.

   If the therapy was long-term and required multiple chemical assaults, the
chance of unintended infections would increase unacceptably. A variation of BBBD
involves targeting the barrier where it contacts a brain tumor.

   Here, brain capillaries tend to be leakier because diseased endothelial cells
are more responsive to a naturally occurring chemical in the blood called
bradykinin, which causes them to pull apart. Researchers have tested a
bradykinin-like compound called RMP-7 in rats. When injected into the
bloodstream, RMP-7 induces BBB tissue in the tumor to loosen up.

   Anti-cancer drugs are then injected, penetrate the tumor and kill it.

   Being less susceptible to the effects of RMP-7, healthy regions of the rat's
brain repel the anti-cancer toxins and are unaffected. Unfortunately, RMP-7
research appears to have stalled.

   Alkermes, the Massachusetts-based biotechnology company that had been leading
the research effort, has abandoned the project, saying the approach was too
expensive to develop given the small number of patients likely to benefit. Drugs
in disguise Another method being explored for getting around the BBB is
essentially disguising therapeutic drugs, then slipping them through the natural
pathways kept open for needed brain nutrients. The key is fat.

   Endothelial cells that make up the BBB are fat-soluble. That is, they easily
bond with other fat-soluble cells, but repel water-based compounds.

   At the University of Florida's Center for Drug Discovery, researchers led by
director Nicholas Bodor have learned how to attach lipophilic or fat-like
compounds to a variety of potentially therapeutic, water-based drugs, such as
enkephalin, a natural pain-reliever that cannot cross the BBB unassisted. Lipid
compounds mask the drug.

   Endothelial cells see only the fat and allow it to pass through.

   Once beyond the barrier, inside the brain, enzymes break down the enkephalin
into its water-soluble components, essentially guaranteeing the drug will not be
expelled but will remain inside the head doing its job. Pardridge, too, is
exploring ways to fool the BBB's gatekeepers.

   In studies with rats, he and colleagues have tricked receptors for
transferrin -- a protein necessary to transport the nutrient iron into the brain
-- into carrying an extra load of neurotrophins, molecules that protect neurons
and encourage growth. Such success is notable, if only because the current
alternative for delivering therapeutic neurotrophins into the brain is to drill
a hole through the skull and inject the therapeutic molecules -- a technique
that is invasively dangerous, expensive and may not be effective.

   Indeed, the procedure is primarily used only for experimental programs, such
as gene therapy. "When you inject drugs directly into the brain, you're only
targeting an area roughly the size of a grain of salt," said Pardridge.

   "There are no diseases of the brain that are the size of a grain of salt."
Pardridge and his team are testing other so-called "molecular Trojan horses."

   They have attached therapeutic neurotrophins to antibodies -- natural
proteins constructed to bind only to a specific substance.

   In this case, the antibodies attach to the transferrin protein receptor.

   Scientists then chemically induce endothelial cells to pull the
neurotrophin-antibody-transferrin package into the brain. In experiments,
getting the neurotrophins into rats' brains helped reduce the effect on
simulated strokes, reducing the volume of damage by as much as 70 percent when
administered one to two hours later. Piggybacking on transferrin isn't the only
way to get into the brain. Pardridge has also tested an insulin receptor, and
Victor Shashoua, a professor of biomedical chemistry at Harvard University, has
used a fatty acid that forms a significant portion of the brain's gray matter to
sneak in dopamine, a neurotransmitter involved in regulating movement and
balance. Pardridge has also employed liposomes -- tiny spheres of fat that can
be filled with as many as 10,000 drug molecules. More research needed
Nonetheless, research efforts to fully understand the BBB and develop drug
delivery technologies to the brain have been surprisingly modest.

   Pardridge estimates there are less than 100 researchers in the world
specifically working on the subject. "It's an area that's been underresearched,
and its significance hasn't been recognized," David Begley, a neurophysiologist
at King's College London, told the journal Science. "It's outrageous," added
Pardridge, "there's not a single drug company operating a full-scale BBB
research program." Pardridge blames the situation on a confluence of effects.
First, brain research has traditionally focused on the mechanisms of learning
and behavior, not on the mechanisms of disease. Second, the experimental focus
has been on subjects like flies and rats, and on conducting what Pardridge calls
"petri dish science versus what works in people." "The assumption has long been
that fundamental research will inevitably lead to cures, that remedies
spontaneously bubble up from basic science.

   So far, that hasn't happened." And third, pharmaceutical research has long
focused on developing and perfecting small-molecule drugs, say Pardridge and
others.

   Large-molecule drugs, a category that includes most neurological medicines,
are much more complicated and difficult to deal with, and the cost of developing
a system to effectively deliver them into the brain has been deemed too high and
risky. Besides, until recently, the blood-brain barrier seemed impregnable. But
times are changing, spurred mostly by academic research.

   In fact, Pardridge says he's ready to move forward, with several therapies
ready for Phase III human trials.

   He's simply waiting for somebody to finance the study. When that happens, it
won't come a minute too soon. "Our population is aging.

   And the fact is, the organ that will give us the most trouble is our brain.

   The numbers of people in this country with disorders of the central nervous
system -- Alzheimer's, stroke, Parkinson's, mental illness -- is enormous, much
bigger than cancer and heart disease."

GRAPHIC: 1 DIAGRAM; 5 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Mental block -- The blood-brain barrier
is designed to keep dangerous microbes and toxins out of the brain, while
allowing oxygen and other nutrients to reach neurological tissue via special
receptor proteins. The barrier consists of more than 400 miles of capillaries
constructed of endothelial cells so tightly joined together that most molecules
are too big to squeeze between them. 2. UCSD researchers Victor Nizet and Kelly
Doran are investigating how meningitis bacteria successfully breach the
blood-brain barrier, knowledge that could prove useful in designing new
neurological drugs. 3. A transmission electron micrograph, magnified 10,000
times, of a human cell exposed to Group B streptococcus bacteria. The bacteria
have released toxins that punch holes through the cell's walls, destroying its
structural integrity and killing it. (F-4) 4,5. Group B streptococcus bacteria
are able to breach the blood-brain barrier by forcing their way into and past
protective endothelial cells. The transmission electron micrograph at left,
magnified 3,000 times, depicts GBS bacteria (the small black dots) assaulting
the barrier. Some have already entered a cell. The image at right, magnified
7,500 times, highlights one detail: a bacterium in the process of penetrating
the cell's wall. (F-4) 6. In this image of a microscopic capillary inside a
neonatal rat brain, Group B streptococcus bacteria can be seen lining or
penetrating the endothelial cells that create the blood-brain barrier. (F-4);
PHOTOBY: 1. CRISTINA MARTINEZ / Union-Tribune 2. Crissy Pascual / Union-Tribune
3,4,5. Victor Nizet et al. / UCSD 6. Victor Nizet, Kelly Doran / UCSD

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             605 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 30, 2003 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFS

BYLINE: MEG NUGENT, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Angina study   Angina is pain that results from blocked or narrowed arteries
leading to the heart. It's usually a sensation of uncomfortable pressure,
fullness, squeezing or pain in the center of the chest. But pain may also be
present in the neck, jaw, shoulder, back or arm. If you are eligible, you can
take part in a study that could lead to a new therapeutic option for people with
angina. Researchers at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, and Robert Wood
Johnson University Hospital are seeking participants for an investigational gene
therapy trial. The gene therapy product, known as Ad5FGF-4, may eventually prove
to be a help in relieving angina. Researchers plan to examine the efficacy and
safety of Ad5FGF-4, which is believed to increase blood flow in the heart
through the growth of new blood vessels. Physician Abel E. Moreyra, director of
the Heart Center of New Jersey, is the principal study investigator. This study
should be especially important for people with recurring or persistent angina
despite previous medical treatment, including angioplasty or bypass surgery.
Volunteers need to be between ages 30 and 75. There is no charge of
participation in the study.

    For more information, call Michael Cargill, cardiology research coordinator,
at (732) 235-6130.

    Unbalanced world

    Laurie Garrett, writer and winner of the Pulitzer, Peabody and Polk awards,
will talk about "The Plague: Bioterror, Emerging Diseases and a World Out of
Balance," at a free lecture she will deliver at 8 p.m. Oct. 7 at Montclair State
University's Memorial Auditorium. The university is located at the intersection
of Valley Road and Normal Avenue in Upper Montclair. The campus is one mile
south of the junction of Routes 3 and 46. The lecture is free to Montclair
students, faculty, staff and alumni. The public is also invited, and tickets are
$10.

   For more information, or to order tickets, call the University Box Office,
(973) 655-5112, or visit online at http://csam.montclair.edu.

    Aging pets

    Got a beloved, aging pet? It's nice to know that as with the lifespans of
human beings, the lifespans of pets have been extended with scientific and
medical advances. But because of these advances, aging pets can develop many
common illnesses. Recognizing the signs and symptoms of these common illnesses,
and knowing the treatment choices available, can help you keep your pet healthy
and active.

   A free lecture, "Common Illnesses in Aging Pets," will be hosted at 10 a.m.
Oct. 8 at the Community Medical Center's Lighthouse at Toms River. Veterinarian
Todd Werkmeister, of Small Animal Veterinary Associates, will present the
lecture. The Lighthouse is located in Toms River in the Cory Building, 599
Highway 37 West. Registration is required by calling (800) 621-0096.

    - Compiled by Meg Nugent

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             606 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           September 26, 2003 Friday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: CD-ROM brings history to computers;
Disc contains images from La. Purchase

BYLINE: By Coleman Warner; Staff writer

BODY:

   Drawing on the work of 29 historians and archivists from the United States
and Europe, a Tulane University center has published a CD-ROM that offers an
illustrated timeline of the Louisiana Purchase, with more than 100 digital
images of historical maps, paintings and legal records.

   The CD serves needs of educators and researchers and joins a wave of new
publications that interpret events surrounding the 200th anniversary of the land
deal that doubled the size of America.

   Published by Tulane's Deep South Regional Humanities Center, it is being sold
by the Louisiana State University Press for $24.95.

   "The images illuminate the human history of time," said Sylvia Frey, a Tulane
colonial historian and director of the Louisiana Purchase Multimedia Timeline
Education Project. "They also situate the purchase itself in the context of
commerce and culture including -- in addition to those in the U.S.  --
developments in Europe, the Caribbean and the larger Atlantic world."

   The timeline includes details about the Ursuline Convent and the work of its
nuns; slave auction records; accounts of the raising of the American flag in New
Orleans on Dec. 20, 1803; transcripts from a U.S. Senate debate about the land
purchase; and bits of analysis on many topics.

   One entry touches on the importance of steamboats in the years after the
Louisiana Purchase.

   "Steamboats stocked with pork, hams, whiskey, linseed oil and finished goods
of various kinds traveled from the Ohio Valley to New Orleans, where local
merchants sold the goods," says the section, researched by Frey. "In addition to
cargo, steamboats also had staterooms for passengers. The 'ladies cabin' was
below deck for privacy. It was carpeted, elegantly furnished with sofas, chairs,
tables, mirrors and had curtained windows."

   . . . . . . .

MORE STUDENTS: Enrollment at Louisiana's state universities, community colleges
and technical schools this fall has set a new record of 210,635, an increase of
3 percent over a year ago, the Louisiana Board of Regents reported this week.
The largest enrollment jump, 11 percent, was seen in Louisiana's growing
community college system; four-year institutions recorded a 2 percent increase.
Enrollment rose by 3 percent in medical and law schools but dropped by 4 percent
in the state's technical school system.

   . . . . . . .

EDUCATIONAL TALKS: Margaret Montgomery-Richard, newly appointed chancellor of
Louisiana Technical College, a system of 40 state technical schools, is meeting
with business owners, educators and local government officials as she tours New
Orleans-area campuses this week. The former Delgado Community College
administrator today will visit the Sidney N. Collier Campus at 3727 Louisa St.,
in New Orleans, from 8:15 a.m. to noon, and the Slidell Campus at 1000 Canulette
Road from 1 to 4 p.m.

   . . . . . . .

NASA GRANTS: Southern University in Baton Rouge is one of 16 institutions
serving a predominantly minority population that will receive special grants
from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to expand research,
teaching and public outreach related to the space program. Under the program, a
university may qualify for up to $275,000 a year for three years.

   Physics professor J. Gregory Stacy, who holds a joint appointment at Southern
and LSU in Baton Rouge, will direct efforts to strengthen the universities'
existing partnership with the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in
Cambridge, Mass. Southern plans to develop a new astrophysics course, improve
training in laboratory methods and broaden its outreach work at Baton Rouge's
Highland Road Park Observatory.

   . . . . . . .

ANIMAL AID: The National Institutes of Health recently awarded Tulane
University's National Primate Research Center a $2.5 million grant to pay for
renovations to a veterinary clinic and animal housing. Founded in 1964 and
located on 500 acres north of Covington, the center focuses its research efforts
on infectious diseases, gene therapy and reproductive technology.

   . . . . . . .

INTO THE FOREST: A public workshop titled "Trees, Trees, Trees," sponsored by
Jefferson Beautification Inc. and Parkway Promenade, will be held Nov. 15 from 8
a.m. to 1 p.m. at the City Park Campus of Delgado Community College. The LSU
AgCenter, Louisiana Master Gardeners and Delgado's Horticulture Technology
Program are assisting in the program, which will offer ideas for selection and
care of native trees.

   The event is free, but registration is required. Those interested in
attending should send their name, address and phone number to
Jefferson@agcenter.lsu.edu or call 838-1170.

   . . . . . . .

Coleman Warner covers higher education and can be reached at
cwarner@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3311.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO COURTESY OF LOUISIANA STATE MUSEUM This painting depicts James
Monroe, U.S. special envoy to France, during the negotiations in the spring of
1803 that led to the Louisiana Purchase. A new CD-ROM published by Tulane
University's Deep South Regional Humanities Center contains images of historical
maps, paintings and legal records. [146858]

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2003


                             607 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           September 26, 2003 Friday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: CD-ROM brings history to computers;
Disc contains images from La. Purchase

BYLINE: By Coleman Warner; Staff writer

BODY:

   Drawing on the work of 29 historians and archivists from the United States
and Europe, a Tulane University center has published a CD-ROM that offers an
illustrated timeline of the Louisiana Purchase, with more than 100 digital
images of historical maps, paintings and legal records.

   The CD serves needs of educators and researchers and joins a wave of new
publications that interpret events surrounding the 200th anniversary of the land
deal that doubled the size of America.

   Published by Tulane's Deep South Regional Humanities Center, it is being sold
by the Louisiana State University Press for $24.95.

   "The images illuminate the human history of time," said Sylvia Frey, a Tulane
colonial historian and director of the Louisiana Purchase Multimedia Timeline
Education Project. "They also situate the purchase itself in the context of
commerce and culture including -- in addition to those in the U.S.  --
developments in Europe, the Caribbean and the larger Atlantic world."

   The timeline includes details about the Ursuline Convent and the work of its
nuns; slave auction records; accounts of the raising of the American flag in New
Orleans on Dec. 20, 1803; transcripts from a U.S. Senate debate about the land
purchase; and bits of analysis on many topics.

   One entry touches on the importance of steamboats in the years after the
Louisiana Purchase.

   "Steamboats stocked with pork, hams, whiskey, linseed oil and finished goods
of various kinds traveled from the Ohio Valley to New Orleans, where local
merchants sold the goods," says the section, researched by Frey. "In addition to
cargo, steamboats also had staterooms for passengers. The 'ladies cabin' was
below deck for privacy. It was carpeted, elegantly furnished with sofas, chairs,
tables, mirrors and had curtained windows."

   . . . . . . .

MORE STUDENTS: Enrollment at Louisiana's state universities, community colleges
and technical schools this fall has set a new record of 210,635, an increase of
3 percent over a year ago, the Louisiana Board of Regents reported this week.
The largest enrollment jump, 11 percent, was seen in Louisiana's growing
community college system; four-year institutions recorded a 2 percent increase.
Enrollment rose by 3 percent in medical and law schools but dropped by 4 percent
in the state's technical school system.

   . . . . . . .

EDUCATIONAL TALKS: Margaret Montgomery-Richard, newly appointed chancellor of
Louisiana Technical College, a system of 40 state technical schools, is meeting
with business owners, educators and local government officials as she tours New
Orleans-area campuses this week. The former Delgado Community College
administrator today will visit the Sidney N. Collier Campus at 3727 Louisa St.,
in New Orleans, from 8:15 a.m. to noon, and the Slidell Campus at 1000 Canulette
Road from 1 to 4 p.m.

   . . . . . . .

NASA GRANTS: Southern University in Baton Rouge is one of 16 institutions
serving a predominantly minority population that will receive special grants
from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to expand research,
teaching and public outreach related to the space program. Under the program, a
university may qualify for up to $275,000 a year for three years.

   Physics professor J. Gregory Stacy, who holds a joint appointment at Southern
and LSU in Baton Rouge, will direct efforts to strengthen the universities'
existing partnership with the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in
Cambridge, Mass. Southern plans to develop a new astrophysics course, improve
training in laboratory methods and broaden its outreach work at Baton Rouge's
Highland Road Park Observatory.

   . . . . . . .

ANIMAL AID: The National Institutes of Health recently awarded Tulane
University's National Primate Research Center a $2.5 million grant to pay for
renovations to a veterinary clinic and animal housing. Founded in 1964 and
located on 500 acres north of Covington, the center focuses its research efforts
on infectious diseases, gene therapy and reproductive technology.

   . . . . . . .

INTO THE FOREST: A public workshop titled "Trees, Trees, Trees," sponsored by
Jefferson Beautification Inc. and Parkway Promenade, will be held Nov. 15 from 8
a.m. to 1 p.m. at the City Park Campus of Delgado Community College. The LSU
AgCenter, Louisiana Master Gardeners and Delgado's Horticulture Technology
Program are assisting in the program, which will offer ideas for selection and
care of native trees.

   The event is free, but registration is required. Those interested in
attending should send their name, address and phone number to
Jefferson@agcenter.lsu.edu or call 838-1170.

   . . . . . . .

Coleman Warner covers higher education and can be reached at
cwarner@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3311.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO COURTESY OF LOUISIANA STATE MUSEUM This painting depicts James
Monroe, U.S. special envoy to France, during the negotiations in the spring of
1803 that led to the Louisiana Purchase. A new CD-ROM published by Tulane
University's Deep South Regional Humanities Center contains images of historical
maps, paintings and legal records. [146858]

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2003


                             608 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          September 25, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 3; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: PRO FOOTBALL: The Case for Clarett ... and Against Him;
His Lawyer Sees Abuse Of Power by Pro Football

BYLINE:  By MIKE FREEMAN

DATELINE: PENNSAUKEN, N.J., Sept. 24

BODY:

   Alan C. Milstein has had his share of emotionally charged legal cases. There
was the lawsuit he filed against the University of Pennsylvania on behalf of the
family of a young woman who died after undergoing a gene therapy experiment. And
there was the suit against the manufacturer of an anthrax vaccine after an
American soldier who had received injections died.

         These were tragic tales involving power and its use. In reciting them,
Milstein makes what seems to be an unusual connection, comparing them to his
current high-profile client: the suspended Ohio State running back Maurice
Clarett.

   Of course, they do not compare directly, Milstein said in an interview today
at his law office. Clarett is trying to be declared eligible for the N.F.L.
draft; the other cases involved life and death.

    "I see Maurice's case as a league trying to make certain players, young
players, who are often poor, wait on earning a living, while the N.F.L. and
colleges, either directly or indirectly, make millions off of them," Milstein
said. "To me, his situation is about another huge entity trying to take
advantage of a smaller group of people who don't necessarily have powerful
voices themselves."

    Like one of his legal idols, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., Milstein has become
rich defending the poor, and his aggressive tactics, part Terminator, part
flamethrower, have unnerved hardened defendants. Milstein has sued medical
schools and powerful research institutions, and some opponents have accused him
of being motivated only by money.

    "There's plenty of lawyers who know what they're talking about, and they
don't have this sort of ambulance-chasing ethic," Glenn McGee, a bioethics
specialist at the University of Pennsylvania, said in the February 2002 issue of
The American Lawyer.

    Milstein is undeterred by the criticism. He said his actions were rooted in
a belief that people should question authority. That may explain why his
favorite football team is the Oakland Raiders -- a maverick lawyer rooting for a
maverick owner.

    Now Milstein, 49, who is a former newspaper art critic and a former
professor of American studies who can quote Kurt Vonnegut and Jackson Pollock,
is again taking on an establishment target: the hallowed National Football
League.

    Milstein is suing pro football over its eligibility bylaws, which prohibit a
player from entering the N.F.L. draft until he has been out of high school at
least three years. Clarett, a sophomore who was suspended for the season by Ohio
State for rules violations, is suing to become eligible for the league's draft
next April.

    In his office, a neatly framed photo of John F. Kennedy is on the wall.
Milstein is a tall, slender man who looks as if he might still be more
comfortable in bell-bottom jeans than a suit and tie. He has had a taste of how
some people feel about his lawsuit against the N.F.L., which was filed in
Federal District Court in Manhattan on Tuesday. He said he had received an
anti-Semitic e-mail message that night. Milstein said he had never received such
a hateful response before.

    Milstein called Clarett as worthy of his representation as many of his past
clients. He described as erroneous the sentiment that Clarett is a spoiled
problem child who thumbs his nose at authority. Say a bad word about Clarett to
Milstein, and you will suddenly be engaged in a verbal sparring match.

    Milstein contends that the suit against the N.F.L. is eminently winnable,
although the league begs to differ.

    Some experts agree with Milstein. The main problem with the league's rule is
that it is arbitrary, said Jerome Hoffman, an antitrust lawyer with the firm of
Holland & Knight in Jacksonville, Fla. There is no specific age limit cited by
the N.F.L., and that, Hoffman said, is inherently suspicious under antitrust
laws.

    "Why is it that one day Maurice Clarett is not able to play in the N.F.L.
and just a short time later he is?" Hoffman asked. "That's what a judge will
examine."

    The N.F.L. maintains that the rule exists to protect young players from the
physical rigors of professional football.

    If Milstein is correct and the N.F.L.'s rule can be easily struck down in
court, why has no one challenged it until now? Hoffman speculated that few, if
any, elite players have been in Clarett's position. "He's been basically
banished from Ohio State and has few options," Hoffman said.

    Milstein said he had tremendous respect for the N.F.L., but he laughed when
he was asked if he was nervous about going against a powerful sports league.

    "I think it's safe to say," he said, "that I've already gone against some
pretty tough opponents."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alan C. Milstein (pg. D3)

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2003


                             609 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                         September 24, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 300 words

HEADLINE: Schering to cut about 30 jobs here

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 German drug company Schering AG will lay off a large portion of the work force
at its San Diego gene therapy unit.

   About 30 employees of the former Collateral Therapeutics, a local gene
therapy company that Schering acquired last year in a $140 million stock swap,
will lose their jobs Sept. 30, according to Cathy Keck Anderson, a spokeswoman
for Berlex Laboratories, Schering's U.S. affiliate.

   Anderson said a "small contingent" of employees will remain for a "period of
time" in San Diego to complete work.  Anderson declined to say how many
employees will remain or whether Schering will continue to operate a facility
here after the work is finished.

   Collateral had employed 75 in San Diego at the time of the Schering
acquisition in March 2002, but it is not known how many employees the Schering
unit currently employs.

   The job cuts come a week after Schering established a new regenerative
medicine research center in Kobe, Japan.  The Nihon Schering Research Center
will focus on gene and cell therapies.

   "Some employees will remain in San Diego for the foreseeable future to
continue work with Berlex Laboratories and the larger Schering global research
organization on consolidating their technologies into Berlex and the new
research center in Japan," Anderson said.

   Schering's Collateral unit developed Generx, an experimental gene therapy to
treat patients suffering from angina, a painful disorder that occurs when the
heart doesn't get enough oxygen, usually because arteries to the heart are
clogged.

   The therapy consists of a disabled virus that delivers a human growth-factor
gene to the heart, stimulating the growth of new blood vessels.  The treatment
is in last-stage, Phase 3 clinical trials.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2003


                             610 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 24, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Schering to cut about 30 jobs here

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   German drug company Schering AG will lay off a large portion of the work
force at its San Diego gene therapy unit. About 30 employees of the former
Collateral Therapeutics, a local gene therapy company that Schering acquired
last year in a $140 million stock swap, will lose their jobs Sept. 30, according
to Cathy Keck Anderson, a spokeswoman for Berlex Laboratories, Schering's U.S.
affiliate. Anderson said a "small contingent" of employees will remain for a
"period of time" in San Diego to complete work.

   Anderson declined to say how many employees will remain or whether Schering
will continue to operate a facility here after the work is finished. Collateral
had employed 75 in San Diego at the time of the Schering acquisition in March
2002, but it is not known how many employees the Schering unit currently
employs. The job cuts come a week after Schering established a new regenerative
medicine research center in Kobe, Japan.

   The Nihon Schering Research Center will focus on gene and cell therapies.
"Some employees will remain in San Diego for the foreseeable future to continue
work with Berlex Laboratories and the larger Schering global research
organization on consolidating their technologies into Berlex and the new
research center in Japan," Anderson said. Schering's Collateral unit developed
Generx, an experimental gene therapy to treat patients suffering from angina, a
painful disorder that occurs when the heart doesn't get enough oxygen, usually
because arteries to the heart are clogged. The therapy consists of a disabled
virus that delivers a human growth-factor gene to the heart, stimulating the
growth of new blood vessels.

   The treatment is in last-stage, Phase 3 clinical trials. Penni Crabtree:
(619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             611 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                 September 21, 2003 Sunday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01D

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: GENE SEEN AS KEY TO HELPING HEART HEAL ;
Ohio State researchers think their discovery means tissue damaged in an attack
can recover

BYLINE: Mike Lafferty, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Ohio State University scientists have identified genes that could help heal
the heart after an attack.

   The discovery that some genes react to a sudden increase of oxygen and create
healing cells could lead to drugs or gene therapy that speed recovery.

   Americans suffer 1.1 million heart attacks a year, and coronary heart
disease, which leads to heart attacks, is the leading cause of death, the
American Heart Association says.

   "We have identified a couple of hundred (genes), of which there is one set
that orchestrates all the others," said Chandan Sen, associate director of the
Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute at Ohio State.

   The heart has two kinds of cells: connecting cells called fibroblasts and
muscle-contracting cells called myocytes.

   Sen and his co-workers screened about 10,000 genes in heart cells to identify
the genes that can transform fibroblasts into cells that resemble myocytes.
These cells, called myofibroblasts, are crucial to healing.

   While Sen was working with fibroblasts in his lab, he was shocked to find
them changing into myofibroblasts. "The moment I brought them to room air, they
changed," he said. "That gave us the idea that oxygen is the trigger."

   Scientists believe that the myofibroblasts help tissue grow, replacing tissue
damaged by a heart attack.

   Sen said the discovery will force some doctors, many of whom believe that
damaged heart tissue cannot recover, to rethink existing therapy.

   "That really is a new insight," said Dr. Philip Binkley, a cardiologist at
OSU Medical Center. "We knew the fibroblasts were there but thought they were
making scar tissue.

   "He (Sen) has shown they can have a role in heart muscle function and
repairing the heart."

   Heart attacks occur when an artery becomes clogged and cuts the blood flow
and oxygen supply to the heart. The first step in treatment is to remove the
clog, but the resulting sudden rush of oxygen often damages the heart further.

   "The injured tissue is like a bull's-eye," Sen said. "This area is the most
shocked by a rush of oxygen-rich blood."

   However, oxygen also switches on the healing genes in a band of cells around
the damaged area.

   Researchers say this work could lead to drugs that more quickly turn on these
genes and keep fibroblasts alive after a heart attack.

   Research already has spun out a number of drugs that mimic or boost
body-repair mechanisms, Binkley said.

   A heart attack can occur over 24 hours or more. Recognizing symptoms early
has enabled doctors to stop heart attacks before they become severe.

   "The critical time is the first four hours when the vessel has started to
close down," Binkley said.

   mlafferty@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, SHARI L. LEWIS FOR THE DISPATCH,, Chandan Sen, associate
director of the Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung, Research Institute at Ohio
State, found that oxygen triggers cells crucial to, healing the heart.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2003


                             612 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                           September 21, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 008

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN-GENE OP MAY FLOP; PARKINSON'S DOCS RIP 'RISKY' SURGERY

BYLINE: SUSAN EDELMAN

BODY:

   Critics are questioning whether a pioneering brain-altering experiment being
conducted by a young surgeon at New York-Presbyterian Hospital can halt
Parkinson's disease.

   Last week, Dr. Michael Kaplitt bore a hole through the skull of a 51-year-old
Parkinson's patient and inserted virus particles carrying 3 billion synthetic
genes deep into the man's brain. Kaplitt thinks the genes can stop the brain
from causing Parkinson's symptoms like shaking, muscle tightness and wobbly
walking.

   It was the second of 12 planned surgeries at Presbyterian, the first time
genes have been put into a live adult brain to change the way it works.

   "I feel like an astronaut," said an elated Bruce Holland of Hempstead, L.I.,
on Friday, a day after his operation. "Instead of exploring outer space, I'm
exploring the inner brain."

   Parkinson's forced Holland to quit his job as a fund-raiser six years ago and
move into a nursing home. His surgery last week came a month after the same
operation was performed for the first time on Nathan Klein, 55, of Port
Washington, L.I.

   Klein told The Post last week he "feels fine," but still has the same
symptoms - arm tremors, difficulty walking and a weak voice - although Kaplitt
said improvement could take weeks or months.

   "I'd like to wake up one day and not shake and sway," Klein said.

   While patients dream of a cure, some prominent Parkinson's experts call
Kaplitt's experimental surgery potentially dangerous, although it has Food and
Drug Administration approval to test its safety.

   "He's raising hopes in people with minimal evidence of benefits," said
Michael Zigmond, a Pittsburgh researcher and member of the scientific advisory
committee of the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research. The
Manhattan-based foundation formed in 2000 after the actor quit his TV sitcom,
"Spin City," because of the crippling disease.

   The foundation and other Parkinson's groups say they are excited about
Kaplitt's work, but warn it is far too early to say if it's safe or effective.

   Zigmond said the results that Kaplitt seeks can be gained with electrical
brain stimulation, a common Parkinson's treatment. He also questioned why the
surgeon has proceeded to test it on humans before publishing the results of his
experiments on monkeys. Kaplitt so far has reported success only with rats.

   Dr. Warren Olanow, chief of neurology at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, said
he supports gene therapy, but called Kaplitt's study "ill-advised," because the
added genes could cause other illnesses or jerking movements.

   Kaplitt says he has backup treatments to deal with that, if necessary. "I
wouldn't do anything I didn't hope had the chance for real benefit to these
people," he said.

   The 38-year-old has staked his reputation on the experiment. He and a fellow
researcher formed a company, Neurologix, to develop the gene therapy. The
company, run by Kaplitt's father, is paying for the clinical studies with
investor money.

   To avoid a conflict of interest, two neurologists at North Shore-Long Island
Jewish Hospital are referring patients to Kaplitt and gauging the results.

   Kaplitt plans to do all 12 operations within a year. If the first four
patients suffer no adverse affects, the next four will get three times as many
new genes and the final four three times as many again.

   Brain teaser

   1. The patient's head is clamped and doctors drill a hole the size of a
quarter through the skull.

   2. Patient is awake and must respond to commands to help doctors identify the
correct part of the brain.

   3. A catheter is inserted into a lobe deep inside the brain and billions of
synthetic genes are injected.

   4. It is hoped the genes will calm an over-excited area of the brain that
causes Parkinson's symptoms.


GRAPHIC: Surgeons at New York-Presbyterian perform the gene-therapy surgery,
which patient Bruce Holland (below) says makes him feel like a pioneer.
Lawrence Ciniglio

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2003


                             613 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           September 21, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1568 words

HEADLINE: Family Service to honor 10 civic volunteers;
30th annual gala is Oct. 23 in N.O.

BYLINE: From staff reports

BODY:

   Outstanding achievements through volunteer, charitable and civic service will
be honored when Family Service of Greater New Orleans sponsors its 30th annual
Ten Outstanding Persons Gala on Oct. 23 at the Audubon Tea Room.

   This year's honorees are:
   -- Dr. Nicolas Bazan, a researcher, teacher, mentor, community leader and
entrepreneur. He was born in Tucuman, Argentina, and moved to New Orleans in
1981. As the founder and director of the Louisiana State University Health
Sciences Center Neuroscience Center of Excellence, Bazan's research has led to
advances in the understanding of retinitis pigmentosa and age-related macular
degeneration. He has also unraveled key events of brain cell survival in stroke,
epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease and head trauma, and these discoveries have led to
new medications. Bazan has been one of New Orleans' most effective advocates,
Family Service said, and serves on several boards, including the Lighthouse for
the Blind, the Willwoods Community, the New Orleans Hispanic Heritage
Foundation, the University of New Orleans Research and Technology Park
Foundation and the Southern Dominican Province Advisory Board.

   -- Michael B. Bruno, managing partner of Bruno & Tervalon LLP, Certified
Public Accountants. In 1971, Bruno joined the Jackson, Miss., office of Ernst &
Young, where he became the first African-American employed on the professional
staff of a public accounting firm in Mississippi. After a move to Memphis,
Tenn., he returned home in 1977 and a year later started Bruno & Tervalon, now
the largest African-American-owned accounting firm in Louisiana and Mississippi.
Bruno is on the board of directors of Covenant House New Orleans, the New
Orleans East Economic Development Foundation and the Catholic Foundation of the
Archdiocese of New Orleans. Past honors include the Society of Louisiana
Certified Public Accountants' Public Service Award, the Liberty Bank & Trust
Liberty Torch Award and a 2001 Role Model award from the Young Leadership
Council.

   -- Norma Lewis Freiberg, whose passion for serving others has been recognized
many times during the past 20 years. She has received the Hannah G. Solomon
Award from the Council of Jewish Women, was selected as a YWCA role model, was a
Young Leadership Council Role Model and received the YWCA's Women Who Have Made
a Difference Award. Freiberg worked for the New Orleans Neighborhood Development
Foundation, a nonprofit education and advocacy program for low- and
moderate-income home-buyers, for more than seven years. She also worked for the
city of New Orleans and the New Orleans Police Department. Currently, Freiberg
volunteers as vice president of the Second Harvesters Food Bank, as a member of
the board of trustees of the Ochsner Medical Foundation, as an advisory council
member of St. Augustine High School and as a board member of the Metropolitan
Crime Commission.

   -- Amy S. Goodman, vice president and assistant branch manger of the Federal
Reserve Bank Branch in New Orleans. She became involved in the YMCA of Greater
New Orleans as a teenager and spent her high school and college years directing
and leading after-school programs and day camps. She obtained a
special-education degree in 1978, taught special-needs children in Jefferson
Parish and directed an Uptown YMCA youth center before joining the Federal
Reserve Bank. Goodman speaks at many civic and charitable functions promoting
the importance of investing in children. She has served as director of the board
of the YMCA of Greater New Orleans since 1990 and was the YMCA's board
chairwoman and chief volunteer officer in 1999 and 2000. She also served in a
leadership position within the United Way's allocation committee structure and
is currently a member of the operations and administration committee.

   -- Carey Hammett, board member and president of the Metairie Club Gardens
Association who worked to establish the Old Metairie Conservation District. She
has worked with clubs, schools, businesses and residents on issues including
tree preservation, traffic and drainage problems, and new construction. Hammett
is a founding member of the Old Metairie Commission, served on the advisory
board of the Louisiana Urban Forestry Council from 1994 to 2000 and assisted in
the creation of Jefferson Parish's tree preservation ordinance. Hammett is a
founding member of Friends of Jefferson the Beautiful. She also created an
award-winning annual seminar on the threats to urban trees. Hammett received the
Most Outstanding Citizen Award from the Louisiana Department of Agriculture &
Forestry's Urban Forestry Council for her work.

   -- John Koerner III, a native New Orleanian and president and co-owner of
Barq's for almost 20 years. After Barq's was sold to the Coca-Cola Co. in July
1996, Koerner formed a new enterprise, Koerner Capital Corp. Koerner is a member
of several civic boards, including the Nature Conservancy of Louisiana, the
Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium and the Country Day School. He is
chairman of the New Orleans Teleplex Capital Campaign. He remains actives at his
alma mater as immediate past chairman of the Tulane University board of
trustees, and he also served as chairman of the dean's council at the A.B.
Freeman School of Business, where he has been an adjunct professor of
entrepreneurship for several years. Koerner was chairman of the New Orleans
Business Council for 2002-03 and has served as chairman of the New Orleans
Regional Chamber of Commerce and its Metrovision economic development arm.

   -- Gloria Normann, a volunteer for more than 30 years with numerous community
and civic causes and organizations. She has served on many boards and
committees, including her current tenure as a member of the Family Service board
of directors. Normann was a volunteer for the United Way for the Greater New
Orleans Area for more than 20 years, where she served as a campaign volunteer
and chaired various committees. She was also active with the New Orleans Museum
of Art for more than 10 years, where she chaired the volunteer committee and the
Odyssey Ball and served as facilitator chairwoman of the "Treasures of
Tutankhamun" exhibit. Normann also volunteers with the Preservation Resource
Center, where she has been president, vice president and chairwoman of the
Heritage Club, the New Orleans Symphony, WYES Television, the Institute for
Human Understanding and the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   -- Dick H. Piner Jr., a Korean War veteran and mechanical engineer. Piner
co-founded in 1970 Total Engineering Services Team Inc., which designed,
installed, tested and maintained safety and anti-pollution instrumentation
systems for offshore oil and gas production facilities. Piner became the sole
owner in 1988 and sold the company in 1991. His charitable endeavors include
serving on numerous boards, including the local and national chapters of Young
Life, the Trinity Christian Community, Faith Family Ministries, Desire Street
Ministries and the Louisiana Family Forum. He is an elder at Woodland
Presbyterian Church and received an award as Honored Presbyter of South
Louisiana Presbytery in 1999. Piner is on the board of the Metropolitan Crime
Commission, serving as chairman for two years, and is president-elect of the
Salvation Army board.

   -- Robert R. "Bob" Quintana Jr., who in June completed a 34-year career at
Family Service, serving almost 24 of those years as executive director. Under
his leadership, Family Service grew from one office to seven, and services and
financing were diversified and became more rooted in local communities. During
his tenure, Family Service received the Managing for Excellence Award. Quintana
has served on the boards of the Association for Retarded Citizens, Family Life
Apostolate, the Blue Ridge Institute, various committees of BoardsWork! and
United Way of Greater New Orleans. He has been active with the national Alliance
for Children and Families and the Council of United Way Agencies, and he helped
start the Families and Schools Together program. Quintana is a licensed clinical
social worker.

   -- Eddy Rosen, a wardrobe consultant for Doncaster who also has worked as a
lecturer for the American Trial Lawyers Association, as a faculty member in the
paralegal schools of Tulane University and the University of New Orleans, and as
a case worker for Family Service. As a volunteer, Rosen has been active in the
National Council of Jewish Women since 1977 and was a member of the council's
national board of directors for five years. She has also served on the boards of
the Metropolitan Area Committee, the Volunteer and Information Agency, the
Jewish Welfare Federation, the Sierra Club and the Louisiana Nature and Science
Center. Rosen has been a United Way volunteer since 1989, is a board member of
the Children's Bureau and was on the Make-A-Wish Foundation's board for three
years. In 1998, she received both the Hannah G. Solomon and St. Elizabeth
Community Activist awards.

   Tickets to the black-tie gala start at $125, with the money going to Family
Service, a nonprofit organization that has offered parent-education groups,
community support services, employee assistance and counseling programs since
1896.

   The evening begins with cocktails at 7 p.m., with the awards ceremony and
dinner at 8 p.m. For ticket information, call Andrea Lee Meyer at 822-0800, ext.
226.

GRAPHIC: Nicolas Bazan Founded LSU's Neuroscience Center of Excellence Michael
B. Bruno Founded Bruno & Tervalon accounting firm Norma Lewis Freiberg Vice
president of Second Harvesters Food Bank Amy S. Goodman Vice president of local
Federal Reserve Bank Branch Carey Hammett President of Metairie Club Gardens
Association John Koerner III Former Barq's president and co-owner Gloria Normann
Community, civic volunteer of 30 years Dick H. Piner Jr. Co-founder of
engineering firm Robert R. Quintana Jr. Retired head of Family Service Eddy
Rosen Longtime civic, community activist

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2003


                             614 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                          September 18, 2003 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: LOUDOUN EXTRA; Pg. T30

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Leesburg Police Cited The In ...

BODY:

   The International Association of Chiefs of Police and the Virginia
Association of Chiefs of Police has recognized the Leesburg Police Department
for its efforts to reduce traffic crashes, injuries and fatalities.

    In an annual competition to develop new ideas and programs to increase
safety belts and child safety-seat usage and to reduce speeding and drunken
driving, the Leesburg department received a first-place award from the Virginia
chiefs and a third place from the international group.

   Winners of the poster contest in the Loudoun County public library summer
reading program are Rooney DeButts (3-5 age group) from Middleburg Library,
Katie Juneau (6-10) from Rust Library and Sahr Gohar (11 and older) from
Sterling Library.

   Winning designs will be made into a framed poster and displayed at each
library branch until December.

   The Loudoun Academy of the Arts Foundation recently elected executive
committee officers -- President Jill Beach, Vice President Roberta Comrie,
Secretary Peggy King, Recording Secretary Gale Waldron and Treasurer Simon
Bland.

   Caroline Liddick, Paul Pemberton and Nick Styles, sixth-graders at Loudoun
County Day School, participated in the John Hopkins University Center for
Talented Youth national talent search, taking above-grade-level exams in verbal
and mathematical reasoning. The three were among the highest scoring
participants in Virginia.

   Officer T. R. "Bob" Thompson received the Leesburg Police Department's O'Neal
H. Stewart Employee of the Quarter award for the second quarter of 2003. The
award is named for a former Leesburg police lieutenant who died in 1999 and
recognizes department employees who demonstrate outstanding work in their
day-to-day activities.

   Thompson, a patrol officer, was recognized for working closely with
homeowners associations in northeast Leesburg. He also works with the Virginia
ABC board and the Loudoun County fire marshal's office to ensure that area
restaurants comply with fire codes and safety regulations.

   Sarah Horning, a biology teacher at Stone Bridge High School, was among 33
teachers from throughout the United States who attended the Woodrow Wilson
Biology Institute, a four-week summer program in Lawrenceville, N.J., on
genomics, medicine and evolution. The institute included hands-on training in
DNA sequencing and research, gene therapy, ethical decision-making and the role
of technology in science.

   Jim Barnes, Loudoun County's director of public information, has been elected
to a second term as president of the City-County Communications & Marketing
Association (3CMA), an international organization representing more than 800
local government communications professionals.

   Barnes has served on the 3CMA board of directors since 1997 and as treasurer,
vice president and president-elect. He is the first president in the 15-year
history of the association to be elected to a second term.

    -- Compiled by Leslie Shepherd

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2003


                             615 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    September 16, 2003 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BYLINE: From Staff Reports, Plain Dealer

BODY:

   BIOTECHNOLOGY

   Copernicus licenses

   delivery patent

   Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. of Cleveland said it has sublicensed patents for
a drug-delivery method to Arizeke Pharmaceuticals Inc. of San Diego. Arizeke
said having access to the technology could help it adapt certain drugs to
delivery by mouth or in a spray rather than through a needle, the current
method. Terms were not disclosed. Privately held Copernicus is using the same
technology, developed at Case Western Reserve University, to find a gene therapy
for cystic fibrosis.

   TECHNOLOGY

   OAI gets grant

   for film capacitor

   The Ohio Aerospace Institute's Advanced Film Capacitor Consortium has been
awarded $5.2 million for a three-year project to develop a film capacitor that
would be less expensive and more sophisticated than the ones that exist today. A
film capacitor is an electrical storage device that is used in everything from
lighting to defibrillators to automobiles. The award comes from the National
Institute of Standards and Technology's Advanced Technology Program. The Ohio
Aerospace Institute in Brook Park is a nonprofit collaboration between several
education, industry and research institutions.

   Listen! That sounds

   like our shampoo

   Cleveland's 5iTech has launched a Cleveland-based company, Aria Analytics,
based on work by Russian scientists who have found a way to characterize the
acoustic properties of complex liquids. The technology is expected to have
industrial and biomedical applications. For example, a shampoo manufacturer
might use the method to spot unauthorized use of its shampoo formula. Leon
Polott, president and founder of 5iTech, says he expects to recruit a U.S.
management team for Aria Analytics in the next six months.

   MANUFACTURING

   Dueling filings

   over ADLT trustee

   A shareholders group opposes the appointment of a trustee in the bankruptcy
case of Advanced Lighting Technologies Inc. The equity committee, which
represents shareholders of the Solon lighting maker, filed papers in opposition
to a creditors committee's request that a Chicago bankruptcy court appoint a
trustee. The equity committee said appointing a trustee would not address the
best interests of creditors and shareholders or benefit the reorganization
process. Advanced Lighting filed for bankruptcy protection in February.

   ECONOMY

   Weak hiring seen

   for local employers

   Only 10 percent of employers in Cleveland and the Lorain-Elyria area expect
to hire workers during the closing months of 2003, according to a quarterly
survey by Manpower Inc. Among those responding, 18 percent plan to reduce their
staff and 52 percent expect no change, while 20 percent are uncertain of their
plans. A year ago, the picture was worse - just 8 percent of those surveyed
planned to hire. For the coming quarter, prospects appear best in
wholesale/retail trade, while cuts are forecast for construction, durable and
nondurable goods manufacturing, and public administration.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2003


                             616 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                          September 10, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO (SB NM B); Pg. 3

LENGTH: 2217 words

BODY:

   WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 10, 2003 THE TIMESPICAYUNE B3 M E T RO G METRO BRIEFS
METRO BRIEFS ................................................................
MEMORIAL PARK PROGRESS BODIES OF EVIDENCE WEST BANK Jurors being chosen for
rapper s trial Jury selection in the Jefferson Parish murder trial of rapper
Corey Miller, who goes by the stage name CMurder, proceeded slowly Tuesday as
many prospective jurors expressed their distaste for rap music and the defendant
s industry moniker. Miller, 31, is accused of killing a 16yearold boy last year.
Miller is the younger brother of rap superstar Master P, whose real name is
Percy Miller. Although more than half of the prospective jurors expressed
reservations about rap, many said they could put aside their feelings and give
Corey Miller a fair trial. He is accused of shooting Steve Thomas on Jan.

   12, 2002, at the nowdefunct Platinum Club in Harvey. Judge Martha Sassone of
the 24th Judicial District Court told jurors Tuesday that she hopes to seat a
panel by Thursday afternoon. The trial could last three weeks, attorneys have
said. Several prospective jurors said they ad no negative feelings about rap and
could be fair to both sides. Jury selection continues today.
................................................................ EAST JEFFERSON
Parish to observe Sept. 11 anniversary A show of community spirit and national
solidarity is planned in Lafreniere Parkon Thursday, the second anniversary of
the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks against the United States. Jefferson Parish is
hosting the 7 p. m. event to celebrate U. S. freedom and remember the lives lost
when jetliners were crashed into the World Trade Center, the Pentagon and the
Pennsylvania countryside. The gathering at the Metairie park s pavilion will
feature the playing of taps and a 21gun salute by the Marine Corps, the New
Orleans Bagpipers Club performing Amazing Grace, and the presentation of colors
by the Jefferson Parish Sheriff s Office honor guard. Special tributes will be
paid to local soldiers, law enforcement officers, firefighters and emergency
services personnel. The night will conclude with a candlelight vigil. Free water
and snacks will be provided.
................................................................ ST. TAMMANY
Primate Center gets $ 2.5 million grant The Tulane National Primate Research
Center near Covington has received a $ 2.5 million federal grant to renovate a
veterinary clinic used to study infectious diseases. The renovation will make
the facility stateoftheart and increase our ability to perform cuttingedge
research, director Andrew Lackner said. The project, which includes upgrading
the clinic s heating and cooling systems, is being financed by a grant from the
National Center for Research Resources, Lackner said. Located on 500 acres along
Three Rivers Road southeast of Covington, the facility is the largest of eight
federally financed primate research centers. The facility has more than 5, 000
monkeys used to research diseases such as cancer, HIV, malaria, Lyme disease and
leprosy. The center also studies gene therapy and assisted reproductive
technologies. ................................................................
RIVER PARISHES Woman washing car robbedat gunpoint The St. John the Baptist
Parish Sheriff s Office is searching for a man who robbed a 43yearold LaPlace
woman at gunpoint as she was washing her car, authorities said. The woman told
detectives she was cleaning her car Sept. 3 about 8: 20 p. m. at an outdoor car
wash on Fairway Drive. She said she turned her backfor a minute, and when she
turned around a man was pointing a handgun at her, said Capt. Mike Tregre, a
spokesman for the Sheriff s Office. The woman told detectives the robber reached
in her car and tookher purse and a medical bag. He got a small amount of cash,
her identification and some medical supplies. To win a fitness challenge, New
Orleans police officers haul in their overweight, doughnutmunching image and
lock it away By Gordon Russell Staff writer Hold the doughnut jokes, please.
Let's just say that it's not always easy for police officers to stay in tiptop
physical shape, thanks to the long hours riding on patrol and the poor eating
habits that often go with it. So when the New Orleans Police Department was
invited recently to take on three other urban police squads in a fitness and
weightloss challenge, department officials jumped at the chance. The rules: Each
poli ce department -- Tampa, Denver, Detroit and New Orleans -- picked five cops
and one alternate for the 12week program, called the "Body for Life Challenge"
and sponsored by EAS, a maker of nutritional supplements. The winner would be
determined by mathematics, for the most part: pounds of fat lost, pounds of
muscle gained and percentage of body fat whittled away. But there were
subjective criteria, too: a couple of essay questions, and "before" and "after"
photos of the participants. The winning team's prize would be a generous $10,000
to the charity of its choice. The idea was so popular that 29 New Orleans
officers signed up to participate. But EAS would take only six officers, so
local fitness guru Mackie Shilstone said he would sponsor the rest. "Mackie said
any officer who wanted help should not be turned down," said Bob Young, who
coordinated the program for the Police Department. Shilstone's job, with help
from his staffers, was to design an exercise plan for group members, advise them
on how to eat and help with the measurements. He also gave them food supplements
and complimentary memberships at Elmwood Fitness Center for the duration of the
program. Apparently, it worked. When results were tabulated last month, New
Orleans had tied Denver for first place. The team donated its $5, 000 share of
the prize to the New Orleans Police Foundation. Superintendent Eddie Compass was
among team members who posted impressive numbers. Compass lost about 30 pounds,
Young said. That put him third to the department's most successful team member,
Lt. David Benelli, who dropped 35 pounds. The department's No. 2 finisher was
Detective Joe Goines, who lost the most weight -- 37 pounds -- but was barely
bested by Benelli in other categories. "My body fatwasat like 30 percent and now
it's down to 18 percent," Benelli said. "And I went from size 42 pants to size
38. "But more importantly, my endurance picked up. I'm running 3 1 /2 miles four
days a week, where before I couldn't walk up the stairs without huffing and
puffing." Goines, too, said he feels the difference. "It used to be I was a
little sluggish; I was about ready for bed when I got home," he said. "Now, I
get off work, I go to the gym and do some work around the house before I even
think about going to bed." The rigors of weight reduction were no picnic,
Benelli conceded. "But the results were fun. There was a pride factor, because
you felt good about being able to accomplish something." Benelli, 53, said he's
optimistic the cops who participated will be able to hold on to their hardwon
gains -- or losses, as the case may be. They'll be especially motivated for the
next couple of months, because they made a friendly bet to extend the
competition within the department by another 12 weeks. "On Nov. 4, we'll check
the weight and body fat and see who wins," Benelli said. "I love Chief Compass,
but he's going to owe me some money." Goines was confident as well, saying he
has lost another few pounds since the official competition ended. Benelli
wouldn't say what the stakes are. "It's an undisclosed amount that a police
officer can afford, so it's not that much," he said. He also had a warning for
wouldbe criminals who buy into the stereotypes of tubby police officers. "Those
perpetrators better watch out, 'cause we're going to chase them down," he said.
Gordon Russell can be reached at grussell@ timespicayune. com or ( 504) 8263347.
PHOTO BY MARK GLEASON, BELLE CHASSE NAVAL AIR STATION T e roofs of concrete
buildings that make up a fivepointed star at the Louisiana Medal of Honor Park
are expected to be finished in the next two weeks. Retired Gen. James
Livingston, one of 135 living Medal of Honor recipients, toured the Belle C asse
site Tuesday with the project s coordinator and several supporters. A s the
Louisiana Medal of Honor Park in Belle Chasse nears completion, Louisiana's own
retired Gen. James Livingston, a recipient of the medal, toured the site. The
project will eventually honor all 3,420 recipients, 31 of whom were either born
in or enlisted from Louisiana. Fund raising for those phases of the park is
ongoing. Retired Gen. James Livingston, an early supporter of the park project,
wore his Medal of Honorashe toured the Belle Chasse site Tuesday. Livingston
stressed the importance of completing the project and pointed out that the
average age of living MedalofHonor recipients is 70 or older. STAFF PHOTO BY
SUSAN POAG Suspect killed by N. O. cop linked to several crimes 2 armed
robberies, theft reported in Jeff By Paul Purpura West Bankbureau A Bridge City
man, suspected of robbing a cabdriver before he was shot and killed by a New
Orleans police officer in Algiers on Monday, was wanted in two other recent West
Bank robberies and a theft involving taxi drivers, police said. Investigators in
Orleans and Jefferson parishes were trying to determine Tuesday if Kendrick
McGowan, 26, of 648 Wiegand Drive, was connected to any other crimes in the
area, said Capt. Marlon Defillo of the New Orleans Police Department. McGowan
was shot once in the chest by officer Alton Lanoix at the Riverview apartment
complex near Timber Ridge Lane after McGowan fought with and threatened to kill
Lanoix, police said. The confrontation came after McGowan was accused of putting
a knife to the throat of a 59yearold West Bank Marrero Cab Co. driver and
robbing him of his cash, identification and wedding ring, police said. The
Jefferson Parish Sheriff's Office was seeking McGowan in two armed robberies and
a theft in West Jefferson, Defillo said. McGowan is accused of robbing a
cabdriver in Harvey about 3: 15 a. m. Thursday, Defillo said. McGowan also was
wanted for not paying a cab fare early on Sept. 1, after he displayed a gun and
jumped out of a cab in the 300 block of Wiegand Drive. That same morning,
McGowan is suspected of robbing a business in Bridge City, Defillo said. Details
of those crimes, however, were not available. The Jefferson Parish Sheriff's
Office declined to comment. Lanoix, who was treated Monday at a New Orleans
hospital for a leg injury from the scuffle with McGowan, has been placed on
administrative leave pending an internal investigation, police said. Police ask
anyone who has information about McGowan to call Crimestoppers at 8221111. Paul
Purpura can be reached at ppurpura@ timespicayune. com or ( 504) 8263791. Man
released from life sentence Search for drugs illegal, court rules From staff
reports A New Orleans man with three felony convictions was released from a life
sentence Tuesday when a divided state Supreme Court threw out the defendant's
fourth conviction -- for cocaine possession -- because police officers conducted
an illegal search of a companion. By a 43 vote, the high court upheld an earlier
appeals court ruling that overturned Derek Temple's 1997 conviction for
possession of cocaine with intent to distribute. In a rare elaboration on the
nuances of search and seizure law, the court issued a 10page opinion agreeing
with a 4th Circuit Court of Appeal ruling that officers did not have probable
cause to conduct a search that netted 141 pieces of crack cocaine and 60 bags of
powdered cocaine. Temple was detained along with three companions on an Uptown
porch in October 1996. Officers said they saw a woman accept a white object from
Temple and place it in her pocket. Officers searched her and found the cocaine,
and the woman said Temple gave her the drugs "to hold it for him." Although the
woman and two other companions were released, Temple was tried and convicted. He
was sentenced to life as a habitual offender based on his three earlier felony
convictions. But the high court ruled that the officers' suspicions were not
sufficient to conduct the search. On behalf of the majority, Justice Bernette
Johnson wrote that all citizens are protected from illegal searches, "including
the persons who socialize on steps and street corners in urban America.
Reasonable suspicion for a stop is more than looking nervous" and "sitting on a
porch in a high crime area." Justice Jeffrey Victory, in a twopage dissent,
wrote, "The evidence was sufficient to put a trained officer on notice that,
more probably than not, a crime had just been committed in his presence."
Joining Johnson in the majority were Chief Justice Pascal Calogero and Justices
Jeanette Theriot Knoll and Catherine Kimball. Joining Victory in dissent were
Justices John Weimer and Chet Traylor. POLICE DEPARTMENT PHOTOS Police
Superintendent Eddie Compass was among team members w o posted impressive weig
tloss numbers. Compass, shown in before and after photos, lost about 30 pounds,
said Bob Young, w o coordinated the program for t e Police Department. That put
the superintendent third to t e department s top winner, er, loser, Lt. David
Benelli, who dropped 35 pounds.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2009


                             617 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          September 10, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 143 words

HEADLINE: Tulane primate center awarded $2.5 million;
Federal cash to fund renovation of clinic

BYLINE: St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   The Tulane National Primate Research Center near Covington has received a
$2.5 million federal grant to renovate a veterinary clinic used to study
infectious diseases.

   "The renovation will make the facility state of the art and increase our
ability to perform cutting-edge research," center Director Andrew Lackner said.

   The project, which includes upgrading the clinic's heating and cooling
systems, is being financed by a grant from the National Center for Research
Resources, Lackner said.

   Located on 500 acres along Three Rivers Road southeast of Covington, the
facility is the largest of eight federally financed primate research centers.

   The facility has more than 5,000 monkeys used to research diseases such as
cancer, HIV, malaria, Lyme disease and leprosy. The center also studies gene
therapy and assisted reproductive technologies.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2003


                             618 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  September 10, 2003, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: 'Brilliant 10' rise to the top of the 'Popular' list

BODY:
How many shapes can you make by folding a piece of paper as many times as you
like, snipping off a corner and unfolding it? What can blood analysis of living
populations tell us about the origins of human life? p The scientists who spent
years coming up with the answers are among Popular Science's second annual
"Brilliant 10." p The 10 scientists, ages 22 to 49, were selected by editors who
scoured the halls of academia, think tanks and award-giving organizations for
young thinkers who are causing a stir and whose work is admired by colleagues.

   Erik Demaine, 22

   Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   Computational origami: As a graduate student, Demaine worked on the math of
paper folding. His theorem helped launch the computational origami field; it has
helped engineers figure out how to unfold a telescope lens in space and fold an
airbag in a steering column.


   Tejal Desai, 31

   Boston University

   Tissue engineering: For her doctorate, Desai built an implantable device to
eliminate daily insulin injections for diabetic rats; now she's working on
building artificial blood vessels.

   Deborah Estrin, 43

   UCLA

   Embedded networks: Estrin directs a $ 40 million research center, devising
systems in which our surroundings monitor themselves. She was working on
security applications, but while vacationing in Costa Rica, she theorized that
embedded sensors could monitor an ecosystem.

   Xiahui Fan, 31

   University of Arizona-Tucson

   Cosmology: Fan, who got hooked on astronomy using his Beijing high school's
rooftop telescopes, created software to analyze deep space; he and his Sloan
Digital Sky Survey team have discovered 10 of the oldest objects in the cosmos.

   Michael Manga, 35

   University of California-Berkeley

   Geophysics: To understand planetary evolution, Manga helps build model
planets; one compressed a billion-year geological phenomenon to one hour.

   Betty Pace, 49

   University of Texas-Dallas

   Molecular medicine: Pace lost a friend to sickle cell anemia and vowed to
find a cure. Instead of traditional gene therapy, she is trying to unlock
genetic on/off switches to fool the body into healing itself.

   Stephen Quake, 34

   Caltech

   Microfluidics: Quake makes microfluidic chips that have both biological and
computer applications.

   Sarah Tishkoff, 37

   University of Maryland-College Park

   Molecular anthropology: By testing blood and determining the frequency of DNA
mutations in different populations, Tishkoff concluded that African lineages are
the oldest on Earth and a small group of people migrated out of Africa and
populated the rest of the world.

   Victor Velculescu, 33

   Johns Hopkins University

   Genomics: Instead of identifying genes and figuring out their role,
Velculescu uses RNA to catch cancer genes and identify them. His method is 30
times faster than the old way.

   Sae Woo Nam, 33

   National Institute of Standards and Technology

   Quantum cryptography: Nam recently built the world's most sensitive photon
detector, which could make coded messages impossible to decipher.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, Color (3); PHOTOS, B/W (2); PHOTO, Color, Donna Coveney, MIT;
PHOTO, Color, Boston University; PHOTO, Color, John B. Carnett; PHOTO, Color,
Huy Nguyen; PHOTO, Color, Zuhair Kareem

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2003


                             619 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                                Los Angeles Times

                            September 7, 2003 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Features Desk; Part R; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 2318 words

HEADLINE: Breeding only the best;
American Eugenics: Race, Queer Anatomy, and the Science of Nationalism Nancy
Ordover, University of Minnesota Press: 240 pp., $18.95 paper War Against the
Weak: Eugenics and America's Campaign to Create a Master Race, Edwin Black, Four
Walls Eight Windows: 550 pp., $27

BYLINE: Tony Platt, Tony Platt, emeritus professor of social work at Cal State
Sacramento, is researching the history of eugenics.

BODY:

   How is it that the once obscure history of eugenics -- the pseudoscientific
belief in the biological origins of social success and failure -- has become a
hot topic for academics, reporters and investigative journalists? Any story that
involves a combustible mix of reproduction, race and class is bound to spark
attention, but there's more going on here than intellectual prurience.

   First, there's the specter of reparations looming over recent grass-roots
efforts to wring public apologies from various state governments for their role
in compelling patients and the "socially unfit" to undergo forced sterilization
during the first half of the 20th century. "Our hearts are heavy for the pain
caused by eugenics," noted Gov. Gray Davis in March, acknowledging that the
victimization of some 20,000 people in state hospitals marked "a sad and
regrettable chapter" in California's history. In the 1920s, the Golden State's
leading civic reformers -- including Sacramento banker Charles M. Goethe, Nobel
Prize-winning physicist Robert Millikan and real estate tycoon Ezra S. Gosney --
lobbied nationwide for the eugenics agenda. And in the 1930s, as board members
of Pasadena's Human Betterment Foundation, they enjoyed a mutually appreciative
relationship with the advocates of "race hygiene" in Nazi Germany.

   Then there are the cautionary lessons the past offers about the unregulated
use of genetic engineering and reproductive technology. Such contemporary issues
as pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, gene therapy and reproductive and
research cloning promise the same kind of moral and political quagmires as
sterilization, birth control and immigrant screening did in the United States
between the world wars. Similarly, our current interest in the biological roots
of cognitive ability echoes early 20th century debates about IQ tests.

   Public concern today is directed not only at the reliability of research and
the dangers posed by scientists going into the business of social engineering
but also at how market forces drive the new genetics. As biotech companies take
the initiative in research and development, who will get to decide, for example,
whether prospective parents can customize their babies or whose identities
should be maintained in DNA databanks?

   In the eugenics movement of the 1920s and 1930s, enterprising academics and
professionals, backed by government support and corporate philanthropy (W.
Averell Harriman, Andrew Carnegie, John D. Rockefeller Jr.), led the campaign
for "human betterment" through applied biology. Their expertise determined, for
example, which unmarried, sexually active women and "feebleminded" adolescents
should be sterilized. But, as demonstrated in these two very different books --
Nancy Ordover's theoretical monograph "American Eugenics" and Edwin Black's "War
Against the Weak," a muckraking history -- eugenics was much more than a
short-lived, crackpot crusade.

   Ten years ago the historical literature on eugenics was sparse, with the
foundational studies of Mark Haller's "Eugenics" (1963) and Daniel Kevles' "In
the Name of Eugenics" (1985) providing our basic knowledge of its rise and fall.
More recently, feminist historians -- including Laura Briggs, Angela Davis,
Linda Gordon, Wendy Kline, Regina Kunzel and Alexandra Minna Stern -- have
deepened our understanding about the scope and cultural significance of eugenics
as a site of struggle over the politics of reproduction and race. As a
contribution to this genre, "American Eugenics" explores governmental attempts
to use eugenics to impose "technological fixes" on the underclass "in lieu of
meaningful correctives to economic inequity."

   Ordover, who is a Rockefeller fellow in the Program for the Study of
Sexuality, Gender, Health and Human Rights at Columbia University, is less
interested in eugenics as public policy or science than in its "extremely nimble
ideology." In this compact, far-ranging cultural critique, she invites us to
make connections between anti-immigrant panics, sterilization campaigns and the
search for the genetic roots of sexual desire. Eugenics, she argues, is like a
"scavenger" that collects and exploits anxieties about national identity,
consigning the politically disenfranchised to the garbage dump. It uses the
value-free language of "science" and "public health" to mask its political
agenda: "[W]herever biologism and public policy have intersected, they have
extracted a terrible price from the poor, physically and politically." Ordover's
conclusion is certainly true for the hundreds of thousands of mostly poor women
who, before World War II, were required to acquiesce to sterilization to gain
release from mental hospitals, homes for the feebleminded and other such
institutions, and who in the 1950s and '60s were tricked or coerced by social
and public health workers into sterilization or untested birth control regimens
as a condition for receiving public assistance.

   Missing from Ordover's study is any sense of what this experience was like
for its victims. The problem for historians is getting around the reluctance of
public bureaucrats to open their files to scrutiny, especially given their
concern about the slippery slope from symbolic contrition to compensatory
lawsuits. In Canada, the government of Alberta recently settled for $55 million
with mentally ill patients who had been sterilized between 1928 and 1972; in
Sweden, the government paid $21,250 to each person unlawfully sterilized between
1941 and 1975.

   So we should be grateful to the authors of "Against Their Will: North
Carolina's Sterilization Program" -- Kevin Begos, Danielle Deaver, John Railey,
Ted Richardson and Scott Sexton -- writing in the Winston-Salem Journal, for
achieving what has eluded academics: giving voice to those who have been hidden
from history. In a model of investigative journalism, "Against Their Will"
(available through the newspaper's Web site, against theirwill.journalnow.com,
or by mail for $2) brings us heartbreaking stories from some of the 7,600 mostly
African American women in North Carolina whose forced sterilization left
enduring emotional scars. "Why didn't they just sew me up, just sew me up
period," asks one woman, 35 years after she was sterilized at age 14. "Contrary
to common belief," writes Begos, "many of the thousands marked for sterilization
were ordinary citizens, many of them young women guilty of nothing worse than
engaging in premarital sex." In addition to personal testimony, the Journal's
hard-hitting five-day series names those responsible for this gross misuse of
state power, including the state's medical school, political and philanthropic
leaders -- and even the newspaper itself (known then as the Winston-Salem
Journal & Sentinel), which endorsed and promoted North Carolina's eugenics
program. "The danger is in the moron group," one 1948 story warned. "Among other
things, they breed like mink."

   "War Against the Weak" is a much more ambitious undertaking. Edwin Black is
on a mission to disclose "many explosive revelations and embarrassing episodes
about some of our society's most honored individuals and institutions...." His
pitch may be sensational and the prose occasionally purple, but he's written a
serious, thoroughly documented study. The scope of the book is impressive -- it
spans 150 years and reaches into the archives of four countries -- and it
contains some remarkable new data and sharp insights. But "War Against the Weak"
promises more than it delivers and has a tendency to exaggerate its own
importance.

   Black has the right credentials to "tear away the thickets of mystery
surrounding the eugenics movement around the world." An experienced Holocaust
investigator and journalist, he has written two books on related topics: "The
Transfer Agreement" (1984), which explored the pact between the Third Reich and
Jewish Palestine, and "IBM and the Holocaust" (2001), an expose of how the
corporate pioneer in data processing helped Hitler's Germany run its trains on
time. The author brings a critical sensibility to his work, morally anchored in
his parents' harrowing escape from the Nazis.

   As with his previous books, Black recruited a large team of researchers and
consultants, mostly volunteers, who assembled roughly 50,000 documents. "I
functioned as a traffic cop, managing editor and travel coordinator," he writes
of the logistical complexities of the project. As a result, the book is richly
detailed, with examples of eugenic initiatives from all over the United States.
Black has surprisingly little to say about California, despite acknowledging
that it "led the nation in sterilization and provided the most scientific
support for Hitler's regime."

   Black imposes a strong point of view on his chronological narrative, which is
driven by two major arguments. First, he proposes that eugenics in the United
States was a prestigious enterprise -- bankrolled by big business, studied in
the finest universities and embraced by the professions. He aims his populist
fire at the "alliance between biological racism and mighty American power,
position and wealth," which he sees as having been united for one purpose: the
creation of "a superior Nordic race." This is not an original argument -- for
example, see Elof Axel Carlson's "The Unfit" (2001) -- but Black provides new
kinds of damning evidence about "corporate philanthropy gone wild." He shows how
the eugenics movement of the 1920s and '30s actively lobbied for "overseas
eugenic screening," anti-miscegenation legislation, and the sterilization of
people suffering from a variety of physical disabilities, not all of them
heritable, including blindness. Moreover, as Black notes, "the idea of sending
the unfit into lethal chambers was regularly bandied about" in American eugenic
circles long before the Nazis murdered 100,000 mental patients.

   Black's second argument is that "[i]n eugenics, the United States led and
Germany followed." We know from previous studies -- in particular, Stefan Kuhl's
"The Nazi Connection" (1994) and Benno Muller-Hill's "Murderous Science" (1998)
-- that there was a great deal of collaboration between Nazi and American
"racial scientists." But Black goes further, asserting that the "scientific
rationales that drove killer doctors at Auschwitz were first concocted at the
Carnegie Institution's eugenic enterprise" at Cold Spring Harbor, Long Island.
Eugenics, claims Black, "infected our society and then reached across the world
and right into Nazi Germany." Later he backtracks, observing that Hitler did not
develop his racist and anti-Semitic views "from anything he read or heard from
America."

   "War Against the Weak" also asserts that until the United States entered the
war, the Nazi regime's "eugenical courts, mass sterilization mills,
concentration camps, and virulent biological anti-Semitism ... enjoyed the open
approval of leading American eugenicists and their institutions." This may have
been true, but Black doesn't have the evidence to back up his claim. Moreover,
he doesn't need to pile on the hyperbole when he's dug up so many compelling
examples of the love affair between American eugenicists and German race
scientists: for example, that Corporal Hitler read his favorite American
eugenicists while in jail in 1924 and later sent a fan letter to Madison Grant,
author of "The Passing of the Great Race"; or the strange case of Edwin
Katzen-Ellenbogen, a Jewish psychiatrist, eugenicist and naturalized American
citizen, who was found guilty by the Nuremberg tribunal for committing war
crimes in Buchenwald.

   Black's relentless focus on the Nazi connection means that he pays little
attention to other thorny issues, such as why important segments of the left
(Fabian socialists, Progressive reformers and feminist activists, for example)
from time to time joined forces with right-wing moralists on matters relating to
eugenic reproduction. Witness, for example, the successful courting of Margaret
Sanger by leading eugenics groups in the 1930s. Black minimizes the extent to
which the battle between leftists, moderates and rightists has often been fought
within as well as over eugenics.

   "War Against the Weak" might as well end in 1945, because it skips over the
last half century in about 20 pages. After World War II and the demise of the
Nazi regime, Black loses interest. This leads to some lazy, facile predictions
of the withering away of "racist ideology and group prejudice" and an assertion
that from the 1960s to the 1980s "the racist old guard of eugenics and human
genetics died out, bequeathing its science to a new and enlightened generation
of men and women." He concludes on an appropriate note of caution, warning of
the dangers that lurk in our "precocious new genetic age," when "people are once
again defined and divided by their genetic identities." But, again, he's too
quick to reduce complex issues to one root cause. Next time around, he says,
"[i]f there is a new war against the weak it will not be about color, but about
money." Can't we expect, though, that existing social inequalities will figure
prominently in decisions about who will be able to pay for the genetic
enhancement of future generations? And isn't "The Bell Curve" (1994) -- Richard
Herrnstein and Charles Murray's influential, pseudoscientific search for genetic
explanations of racial inequality -- essentially a eugenics tract?

   As Nancy Ordover suggests, issues of race and gender, operating within and
not apart from economics, were very much evident after World War II, when
eugenics reinvented itself, first in population control and later in
sociobiology. Now, with muscular conservatives throwing their weight around in
Washington, D.C., and economic inequality returning to levels reminiscent of the
Gilded Age, it is not surprising that restricting the birthrate of the poor is a
mainstay of the administration's welfare policy.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER: Susan Tibbles For The Times

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2003


                             620 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    September 5, 2003 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1030 words

HEADLINE: OHSU LOSES BID TO BE U.S. BIODEFENSE CENTER

SOURCE: ANDY DWORKIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: The University of Washington is among eight regional centers picked
by the U.S. government to look into infectious diseases

   The U.S. government on Thursday rejected Oregon Health & Science University's
request for $40 million to fund a center for studying diseases that terrorists
might use.

   The National Institutes of Health picked eight institutions -- among them the
University of Washington -- to develop new, regional centers that will seek
better ways to detect, stop and treat infectious disease outbreaks. It rejected
five such bids, including one led by OHSU.

   The loss is a blow to the Portland institution's ongoing bid to bolster its
national reputation and enter the top echelon of U.S. medical research
universities.

   Several OHSU officials also think the loss hurts their chances of winning
either of two grants that would underwrite the construction of new labs,
including a top-security disease-research facility in Hillsboro. Those grant
requests seek about $160 million. The National Institutes of Health plans to
announce the winners late this month.

   "We feel that, following today's announcement, our chances of receiving the
other two grants are low," OHSU spokesman Jim Newman said Thursday.

   The eight institutions picked Thursday to lead Regional Centers of Excellence
for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases Research will split $350 million
in federal money over five years.

   Congress ordered the new centers and labs to bolster the nation's ability to
deal with biological terrorism following the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks and
subsequent mailings of anthrax spores.

   Later this month, the NIH will name four to eight sites where it will pay for
regional labs for infectious disease testing. It will also pay for one or two
new national labs at "Biosafety Level 4" -- the highest security level -- where
workers can study the deadliest diseases, such as the Ebola virus.

   Newman said many at OHSU think that those institutions leading the new
regional centers have a leg up in winning grants to build labs.

   But Rona Hirschberg, an institutes' official who is helping oversee the
biological defense programs, Thursday said, "nobody should conclude anything
about who will get (the labs) based on today's announcement."

   She said Thursday's eight grant winners were picked for the importance and
practicality of the research they proposed, as judged by fellow scientists. The
NIH will award lab grants based on different criteria, including "the strength
of the design and their ability to pull off construction," as judged by a panel
of engineers, architects and lab safety experts.

   In addition, not every institution chosen as a regional center on Thursday
has applied to build a lab. For instance, UW did not ask for the lab grant,
spokesman Walter Neary said.

   Each winning group was led by one institution, usually a university, but
included workers at several medical research sites. Hirschberg said winners were
picked based on their scientific proposals and proposals on how to run the
centers, train new scientists and start up small-scale research projects.

   Hirschberg said that officials "considered the regional distribution" of the
eight centers but that geography was not a main factor in the choice.

   UW is only center in West The group led by UW in Seattle is the only regional
center in the West. The other centers are led by researchers in Massachusetts,
Maryland, New York, North Carolina, Illinois, Missouri and Texas.

   Two other schools won planning grants, which the NIH said "could lead to the
future establishment of a regional center." They were the Universities of Iowa
and Minnesota.

   Once they are running, the eight centers' work will include "developing new
vaccines against anthrax, plague, tularemia, smallpox and Ebola," as well as
finding ways to screen for those diseases and treat anyone infected by them,
according to an NIH document.

   Hirschberg said each center has a different focus, based on its scientists'
strengths. The institutes will help coordinate their work to make sure that
overall the group tackles all the diseases the government has targeted for
study. For example, UW's group, which includes researchers in Wyoming, Alaska,
Montana and Idaho, will study how airways become infected and inflamed. It will
also focus on certain bacteria that cause diseases including the plague and
tularemia. The UW consortium won $50 million over five years.

   In February, OHSU unveiled a consortium it developed to pursue the grants,
calling it the Pacific Rim Biodefense Center. The center's researchers said they
would focus on diseases including West Nile and Dengue fever. And they proposed
studying why some people, such as the elderly or those on chemotherapy, are more
susceptible to catch diseases and have bad reactions to vaccines.

   Besides OHSU, the Pacific Rim center included Oregon State University,
Princeton University, the universities of Hawaii, Idaho and Nevada-Reno, and the
Pacific Northwest National Lab in Richland, Wash.

   OHSU will continue research Despite losing out on the regional grant, OHSU
will work to continue the research the Pacific Rim Biodefense Center's
scientists proposed, Provost Lesley Hallick said in a written statement
Thursday.

   "While OHSU is of course disappointed in today's announcement, we plan to
move forward with our research projects involving SARS, West Nile virus,
monkeypox and other infectious diseases that threaten Northwest residents and
other Americans," Hallick said. "We feel the research to generate new vaccines
and treatments for these diseases cannot wait."

   Much of that work is being done at OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute
in Hillsboro, which recently produced evidence that smallpox vaccinations may be
partly effective for decades longer than previously thought.

   Newman noted that OHSU can still get about $2.5 million to form a National
Center for Research on Bioterrorism Agents. U.S. Rep David Wu, D-Ore., helped
get that funding approved by the House of Representatives; it is waiting to be
considered by the Senate.

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2003


                             621 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 3, 2003 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: PICTURE CAPTION; Pg. C02

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH JUMP

SOURCE: FREDRICK D. JOE/The Oregonian

GRAPHIC: ;BW photo: ; Scott Hansen (left) and Tiffany Gromlich work with viral
cultures in a Biosafety Level 3 lab at the Oregon Health & Science University
Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute in Hillsboro in February. The university
proposes building a Level 4 lab to study the most deadly diseases.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2003


                             622 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 3, 2003 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1917 words

HEADLINE: BIOTERROR DEFENSE

SOURCE: TOM DETZEL - The Oregonian

DATELINE: FORT DETRICK, Md.

BODY:

   Summary: Fort Detrick studies deadly germs, a job OHSU wants

   "You don't go in here if you're hung over. You don't go in if you're ADR if
you ain't doin' right. You don't try to rush things." -- RANDY SCHOEPP,
MICROBIOLOGIST AT FORT DETRICK, MD. Microbiologist Randy Schoepp slips his left
leg through a slot in the powder-blue biocontainment suit, yanking at heavy
plastic fabric that looks as if it could have been cut from an old backyard
pool.

   "To put these on, you still have to be somewhat of a contortion artist," says
Schoepp, 48, who's experienced enough at the task to be a trainer at the U.S.
Army's storied biodefense lab, about an hour northwest of the nation's capital.

   The short, stocky scientist works his arms into the sleeves, then fits the
hood and clear plastic faceplate over his head. Double-gloved hands seal a
diagonal zipper across his chest. Finished, Schoepp stands erect, looking
incongruously part astronaut, part saggy blue Gumby.

   "As you can see, it's not a fashion statement," he cracks, the joke muffled
by the suit's airtight seal. "Your visual field is impaired. Your hearing is
impaired. All of these make you have to rely on heightened senses."

   Heightened indeed. Inattention could be fatal in the Biosafety Level 4 lab at
the Army's Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, where Schoepp and
colleagues suit up to study the world's deadliest viral and bacterial agents.

   There are Ebola and Marburg hemorrhagic fever viruses, the gruesome bleeding
diseases popularized in the book "The Hot Zone"; arenaviruses such as Lassa
fever, which can kill half its victims; and hantavirus, the deadly rodent-borne
illness first identified in the Southwest and since found in half the states.

   Since 1969, when its mission switched from researching bioweapons to
shielding troops from germ attack, Fort Detrick has been at the center of the
biodefense universe. But that is about to change with the government's
unprecedented, multibillion-dollar expansion of biodefense research.

   Fort Detrick now has the country's largest Biosafety Level 4 lab -- the
highest biocontainment level -- and one of only three that get significant use.
Since this spring, however, Oregon Health & Science University and a handful of
other institutions are vying for federal contracts to build two more of the
airtight labs.

   In addition, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases will
build new BSL 4 labs at Fort Detrick and in Montana, while the Army institute
plans to replace its 33-year-old Fort Detrick facility in the next few years.

   OHSU won't know until later this month whether its $205 million bid for the
BSL 4 lab, some lower-security lab space and related research receives
financing. The proposal is before the National Institutes of Health, which will
spend $375 million on lab space this year as part of a push to create biodefense
centers in 10 regions nationwide. Biodefense spending at the NIH increased
fivefold, to $1.55 billion this year from $290 million in 2002.

   OHSU does Level 3 studies

   As it stands, OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute in Hillsboro does
regular BSL 3 studies, including work on SARS, or severe acute respiratory
syndrome, and monkeypox. That level of work, however, doesn't require
containment suits or airtight labs.

   Should OHSU land a BSL 4 contract, it would bring a quantum leap in research
opportunities -- and the risks that come with the deadliest germs.

   Jay Nelson, a virologist who heads the institute, says OHSU's Oregon National
Primate Research Center and its stock of more than 3,500 pathogen-free research
animals provide a big advantage in testing vaccines and therapies.

   Moving up to the deadliest agents "is a big jump," says Nelson, because SARS,
Ebola and arenaviruses can spread easily by air. "Especially with animals that
are secreting this stuff, you really need high containment," he says.

   Details about how OHSU would ensure safety and security at a new lab are in
the grant proposals, which OHSU officials declined to release. They said NIH
policy discourages the release, and doing so could put the university at a
competitive disadvantage as well as jeopardize intellectual property and
security.

   But they promise a state-of-the-art lab, with high-tech touches such as
retinal scanners for security, 24-hour guards, constant video surveillance and
seismic undergirding to withstand an 8.5-magnitude earthquake.

   "I was told it could take a bunker missile," Nelson says.

   Grande dame of labs

   By comparison, Fort Detrick's lab is the grande dame of BSL 4 labs. Part of
the aging facility is undergoing security upgrades and fixes to water systems
and such basic tools as the heat-and-pressure vaults used to sterilize
contaminated materials that must leave the lab.

   The building site will become a parking lot once the Army's new BSL 4 lab is
built, Schoepp says. But if a little worse for wear, it shows the basic design
features for "hot" labs, where the idea is to keep microbes in and workers safe.

   The Army institute's headquarters on the guarded military base houses 10,000
square feet of BSL 4 space, split into two suites amid a warren of BSL 3 areas
for studying anthrax, West Nile virus and other less exotic pathogens.

   Guards screen anyone entering the building, and packages are X-rayed.
Electronic access cards are required to enter the lab area, and researchers can
enter only areas where they are trained to work or, if applicable, properly
vaccinated. In hallways and the labs, video cameras scrutinize all comings and
goings.

   Outside a BSL 4 suite that's down for renovation, Schoepp flips a toggle
switch next to the word "male" -- a courtesy that lets anyone inside know who is
about to enter. He presses his keycard against a pad, then punches in his ID.

   Signs on the door warn: "Infectious Area Authorized Personnel Only" and "This
Facility Protected By An Alarm System." Sensors can detect whether more than one
person tries to piggyback into the lab at the same time.

   Numerous precautions

   The door opens into a small dressing room, with lockers on one side and a row
of blue containment suits hanging on the other. Here lab workers strip and don
colored scrubs -- only white scrubs are allowed outside the BSL 4 areas.
Schoepp, demonstrating standard practices, snaps on latex gloves and tapes them
to his sleeves; he tapes his socks to the green pants as well.

   "You're always thinking about safety in here. You don't want anything moving
inside that suit," he says. "It's the big things; it's also the little things to
make you safe and comfortable."

   A double-door shower/ air lock separates the locker and actual lab space. On
entering the lab, workers pull a chain that unleashes a disinfectant shower in
the air lock behind them; on exiting, they take a mandatory six-minute shower
with the suit on in the air lock. Another shower is required before leaving the
dressing area.

   Inside the "hot" zone, Schoepp pulls yellow rubber boots over his suited
stocking feet and shuffles down the hallway into a lab room. Coiled yellow air
hoses snake from the ceiling. He grabs one and plugs in his suit with a whoosh.

   Positive air pressure guards against any pathogens entering the suit if there
is a tear or leak. Air pressure throughout the lab is negative, designed to flow
directionally from the outside into "hot" areas. Filters capable of screening
out the smallest microbes scrub lab air before it is released to the outside
world.

   Heavy suits, awkward gloves

   The constant whoosh from the air hose makes it hard to hear co-workers,
Schoepp says. The 12-pound containment suits get heavy in a long shift, and
researchers lose dexterity wearing double gloves, requiring extra care.
Otherwise, working in a BSL 4 lab isn't much different than a BSL 3, he says.

   Incubators, water baths, sinks, centrifuges, refrigerators and other lab
equipment are the same, with sharp corners rounded off to prevent punctures.
Scientists work under the same hooded biosafety cabinets used in BSL 3 labs. The
cabinets are engineered with walls of air to block pathogens from escaping.

   Schoepp says only workers with long experience at a BSL 3 level get access to
the BSL 4 lab. Even then, they receive training and work with a mentor the first
few times.

   "You don't go in here if you're hung over. You don't go in if you're ADR --
if you ain't doin' right," he says. "You don't try to rush things."

   The facility has its own hospital suite. Called the "slammer" because of the
crash made when the suite's gray-metal submarine doors are shut, the unit is
prepared to go "hot" in minutes during an emergency. OHSU's plans also call for
a medical isolation area in case of accidental exposure.

   "We've had exposures and potential exposures where people have had to be
monitored," says Charles Dasey, a Fort Detrick spokesman. "There haven't been
any serious illnesses result."

   Some problems at lab

   The Fort Detrick institute has had other problems, though. Last year, in an
embarrassing breach of procedure, a small number of anthrax spores was detected
in a locker area, hallway and office, all outside containment areas.

   The lab also came under scrutiny after a former employee, Dr. Steven Hatfill,
was called a "person of interest" in the 2001 anthrax mailings that killed five
people. Critical news reports followed, with former workers claiming weak
inventory controls could have allowed scientists to walk off with deadly agents.

   Schoepp says workers are now subject to random searches when they leave. And
Col. Erik Henchal, named the institute's commander last summer, says the
institute has undergone "enormous changes in our security systems . . . what we
call surety systems to make sure you know exactly where the agent is. "

   Maintaining high-level security will be "an enormous challenge for academia,"
he says, as the NIH-sponsored lab expansions take root in the next couple years.

   None of the research conducted at Fort Detrick is classified. The institute's
scientists aim to publish their work in the top journals.

   Most recently, Fort Detrick researchers worked on a study published in Nature
last month that found an effective two-stage vaccine against Ebola virus in
monkeys. If it proves effective in humans, the work holds promise for containing
outbreaks of Ebola, other deadly hemorrhagic fever viruses and SARS.

   The drive to dramatically expand the nation's high-containment lab space is
prompting worries about proliferation of deadly germs. Some scientists argue
that a modest expansion at Fort Detrick could satisfy the true need.

   But at OHSU, virologist Nelson says there is an immediate need for BSL 4
space. Scientists at the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute are already using a
BSL 4 lab in Winnipeg, Canada. Were OHSU to win the NIH grant, more BSL 4 work
would flow to Oregon from regional labs, he says.

   Lesley Hallick, OHSU provost, says the lab proposal incorporates multiple
levels of security to guard against any release of germ agents. A far greater
risk, she says, is being undefended against them when the intellectual capacity
and scientific tools exist to safely develop life-saving vaccines and therapies.

   "I don't know about you, but I very much want to see these vaccines available
to me and my children and my grandchildren," she says. "We're in a terribly
vulnerable position right now as a world to defend against these." Tom Detzel:
503-294-7604; tom.detzel@newhouse.com

GRAPHIC: 2 color photos by TYRONE TURNER/Special to The Oregonian; Color photo
-- RICHARD EBRIGHT - Balance need with security; Photo by FREDRICK D. JOE/The
Oregonian; Sidebar text -- BIOSAFETY LABS; Sidebar text -- BIOTERROR BUGS

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2003


                             623 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     September 1, 2003 Monday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1375 words

HEADLINE: Hopkins striving to make industry a partner in research;
 University seeks funding, revenue from discoveries

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Boro Dropulic had the rapt attention of about 40 Johns Hopkins University
students and faculty as he spoke recently on a subject scientists at the
venerable research institution once considered anathema: how to start a
biotechnology company.

   "An entrepreneurial scientist really has to be an optimist," said Dropulic, a
former Hopkins researcher who founded the gene-therapy company VIRxSYS Corp. "If
you look at your own technology with cynical eyes, you'll never get funded" by
venture capitalists.

   It isn't hard to find signs that many at Hopkins are interested in
relationships with industry, a prospect once considered an unseemly conflict of
interest -- if it was considered at all.

   The Hopkins Biotech Network, a new student-industry networking club,
regularly draws dozens to events such as Dropulic's talk. At such forums, eager
young scientists drawn to the university because of its academic reputation
nonetheless talk about leaving for dream jobs in industry. And they mingle with
Nora Zietz, a former venture capitalist who now works for Hopkins as a sort of
corporate matchmaker.

   Part of her job involves introducing companies and financiers to scientists
with potentially valuable inventions.

   "We want industry to think about us when they think about intellectual
property," Zietz said.

   Despite being a perennial powerhouse when raising research dollars, Hopkins
lags behind most other top research institutions when it comes to bringing in
revenue from the licensing of its scientists' discoveries to companies. But the
vast majority of the money for research at Hopkins comes from the federal
government. Hopkins is now making a concerted effort to gain more backing from
industry, which accounted for 9 percent of its $1.3 billion research budget in
fiscal 2002.

   "Everyone agrees, including people at Hopkins, that they're not doing as much
as they can and should to get technology into the marketplace," said Phillip
Singerman, executive director of the Maryland Technology Development Corp.

   Hopkins is taking steps to address the problem. When the university hired
Zietz early this year, it combined the licensing offices of all eight of its
schools in hopes of patenting and marketing discoveries more efficiently. It has
invited at least 15 leading medical research institutions -- including the
University of Michigan and the University of California, Los Angeles -- to
co-found a brokerage that could market and license their technologies.

   The moves come amid pressure on research institutions nationwide to enhance
connections with industry, spurred by state and local business development
officials who see biotechnology as the next big driver of new jobs.

   In Baltimore, for example, the city is pressing ahead with plans to build a
business park for biotechnology companies next to Hopkins' east-side medical
campus. The University of Maryland, Baltimore is working on a smaller one near
its campus.

   "Everyone around the country is grappling with this issue right now," said
Thomas Hagerty, who markets technologies for Washington University in St. Louis.
"You're dealing with the fine line of industry and academia. It's tricky.
Looming over all of us is the issue of conflict of interest."

   Universities that conduct human testing of drugs and medical devices must be
careful not to allow corporate interests to unduly influence research, Hagerty
said.

   Still on the minds of many university officials across the country is the
death of Jesse Gelsinger in 1999 from an experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania's gene-therapy institute. The institute's director was the
co-founder of a company that hoped to market discoveries made there.

   Despite the potential for conflict, universities increasingly feel they can't
simply turn their backs on collaboration with companies. The Bayh-Dole Act of
1980, which allowed universities to patent and profit from federally funded
inventions, also obligated institutions to actively seek ways to get resulting
drugs or other inventions into public use. Since companies actually make the
products, universities need their help.

   Critics say universities can alert industry to their discoveries through
traditional means, such as publishing or announcing them at scientific meetings.
But a recent survey of 62 U.S. universities by researchers at Emory University
in Atlanta and the Georgia Institute of Technology showed that most inventions
need further development, with only 12 percent ready for practical use when
they're licensed to a company. And companies, the argument goes, are more likely
to develop something if it's patented and they have the exclusive license.

   Universities also are feeling financial pressures. Grants from the National
Institutes of Health have leveled off after years of increases, funding is being
cut for public education, and the cost of research is rising, said Dr. David
Korn, senior vice president of the Association of American Medical Colleges.

   And drug companies, many of them facing the expiration of blockbuster
patents, are clamoring to search university laboratories -- where automated
research tools have set a blistering pace of discovery -- for ideas that could
lead to new products.

   "Opportunities to make money out of education and research have really
grown," said Derek Bok, a former Harvard University president whose latest book,
Universities in the Marketplace, explores the risks inherent in academia's
reliance on corporate money. "The pressures have always existed, but the
opportunities have never been as numerous as they are at present."

   Bok said it is possible for universities to take in more corporate dollars
while also protecting the independence of their researchers. But "I think it's
very hard," he said. "And the temptations to get off track are very substantial.
There's no big, bright clear line that's obvious when you're starting to
compromise things you shouldn't."

   Theodore O. Poehler, Hopkins' vice provost for research, said the university
is well aware of how carefully it needs to tread. But he said Hopkins is also
aware of its responsibility to see that the public reaps the benefits of its
research. And he said the university is sensitive to criticisms from business
people and economic development officials who have long found it unapproachable.

   Poehler said the establishment of Zietz's new office, the Enterprise
Development Organization, "was done at least in part to make it a little easier
to find your way in here, to find the right people to talk to."

   The new office can help win corporate backing for Hopkins research or develop
agreements for companies to acquire rights to inventions resulting from
research. But Zietz's deal-making role is likely to be broader than that,
involving Hopkins in start-up companies or joint ventures.

   "We'll gladly partner," said Zietz, who noted that her office has discussed
collaborations with Battelle Memorial Institute, a prolific technology developer
with laboratories near Aberdeen.

   William P. Tew, director of Hopkins' recently combined Office of Licensing
and Technology Development, contends the university isn't doing anything much
different to attract corporate partners.

   "We are just doing more of the same," he said. But he acknowledged that
Hopkins is taking "a more active role, whereas a decade ago we were more
passive."

   Tew has just completed a survey of other universities' technology offices. He
declined to discuss the results but said they show that his office operates much
like its competitors.

   Nonetheless, Hopkins' licensing efforts have brought in significantly less
licensing revenue than some. Hopkins brought in adjusted gross license income of
$6.7 million in fiscal year 2001, compared with $66.7 million for the University
of California System -- the only institution that raised more in research
dollars, according to the Association of University Technology Managers.

   But Tew said the difference is often a matter of luck, that it is the rare,
blockbuster invention that brings in millions of dollars in licensing cash.

   "More money is always the goal," he said. "But licensing technology is like
going to Las Vegas. ... Most of what we do is nickel and dime stuff."

NOTES:
SEE HARD COPY FOR CHART

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Nora Zietz (center), head of Hopkins' Enterprise
Development Organization, talks with Dr. Adityaa Polsani (right) and Matt Weaver
at a meeting of the Hopkins Biotech Network.; 2. HOW UNIVERSITIES COMPARE; 1.
GENE SWEENEY JR. SUN STAFF; 2. SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2003


                             624 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 31, 2003 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: COSMO'S WORLD; A toen once boring is increasingly bold

BYLINE:  by Cosmo MAECERO, jr.

BODY:

   So enough already with David E. Kelley.

   Sure, the guy is married to Michelle Pfeiffer and he's a TV drama hit machine
in Hollywood.

   But since when did Hollywood even matter that much to the folks in Kelley's
hometown of Belmont, which for some reason has become synonymous with the
creator of "The Practice" and "Ally McBeal"?

   After all, another local newspaper years ago suggested Belmont was the most
boring town in Massachusetts.

   And boring is something they know well.

   These days, however, Belmont is anything but boring.

   They've got cable.

   And a lighted football field.

   And for a while a couple of guys were actually dispatching hookers out of an
apartment building near Butler Elementary School.

   As for star power? Well, you don't need to go to Hollywood to find
high-wattage heavies from Belmont.

   Gov. Mitt Romney, a resident for some 30 years, tops the list of locally
notable Belmontians.

   There's one degree of separation between Romney, who has nice hair, and Leon
DeMagistris, who actually DOES Mitt's hair. Leon's salon in Belmont Center is
noteworthy for its famous hair colorings.

   His adjacent home is noteworthy for the roof-deck garden overlooking Leonard
Street.

   Then there are the developers:

   Don Chiofaro - he of International Place - is a Belmont lifer and one of
Romney's neighbors. Chiofaro was a football standout at Belmont High School who
went on to similar glory at Harvard.

   Joe Fallon is a Belmont guy when he's not working hotel deals in South Boston
and chumming around with Mayor Thomas M. Menino.

   And Joe O'Donnell, of Boston Concessions, a partner with Fallon on several
deals, also calls Belmont home.

   Lois Pines isn't actually from Belmont. But I am reliably told the former
state senator spent part of her youth working at the Belmont Filene's, which is
across the street from Leon's place.

   Belmont has its share of pointy heads and policy wonks, too.

   Steve Stark has been described as a "social commentator." He's also a lawyer
and author of the oft-cited "Glued to the Set," a 1997 book about the influence
of television.

   Don't leave Michael Widmer off your Belmont list. You'll find the chief
honcho of the Massachusetts Taxpayers Foundation there, too.

   Widmer for a time was on the outs with the Romney administration. Perhaps he
and Mitt can talk about it over coffee and a doughnut at Olin's in Cushing
Square.

   Prime Computer pioneer William Poduska and his philanthropist wife, Susan,
are Belmontians.

   Harvard Business School dean Kim B. Clark - Belmont.

   Former Bush 41 economic adviser Roger Porter - Belmont.

   Joe Nolan the Nstar mouthpiece - Belmont.

   Transkaryotic Therapies honcho Michael Astrue just missed getting appointed
as commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   Belmont would have been proud.

   The Belmont Police Department recently went through a transitional period.

   That is, the chief was transitioned into retirement for helping cover up the
alleged sexual misdeeds of one of his lieutenants.

   The community is now in a period of healing.

   Media strategist and Romney adviser Rob Gray says one episode of "The
Practice" really gave his wife the creeps. It featured a grisly murder in Grove
Street Park, which is near the Grays' home.

   In Belmont.

   Mary Murnane is not your typical Belmontian.

   She just coughed up $ 50,000 to a former MIT professor for refusing to rent
him a house because he was black.

   Outrageous? Yes.

   Boring? Hardly.

   Even the media is represented in Belmont.

   Political analyst Jon Keller pipes his morning WBZ commentaries in from a
remote unit inside his Belmont home.

   But he still has to fight traffic to get to the WB56 studios.

   Mike Winn from "The Die Hards" on 1510 The Zone grew up in Belmont.

   And heck, even I have a history with this very special town.

   Belmont High School - Class of 1985.

   Now tell me, are you bored?

   Cosmo Macero Jr. now lives down the road in Cambridge.

   Belmont: A little slice of Babylon just minutes from Boston

   1. Power!

   High-wattage residents: Mitt Romney; Don Chiofaro; Joe O'Donnell; Kim B.
Clark

   2. Style!

   Leon & Co. proprietor Leon DeMagistris is world renowned as artistic director
for Tocco Magico - the oldest hair-coloring company in Italy.

   3. Scandal!

   The Belmont Police Department has been rocked by revelations of alleged
sexual misconduct by former Lt. Robert Mee. One cop he allegedly harrassed as a
youth filed a lawsuit. The scandal led to the ouster of Belmont's police chief.
Mee's victims even hit the talk-radio airwaves.

   4. Money!

   Median household income is more than $ 80,000 - $ 30,000 more than the
statewide median. Of 41 recent house listings, 20 percent were over $ 1 million;
73 percent were over $ 600,000.

   5. Sex!

   It's called Burnham Street, not to be confused with Bourbon Street. The
little hamlet outside Waverly Square was briefly host to a most un-Belmontian
enterprise - a rip-roaring $ 250-an-hour brothel. Police shut it down while the
FBI searched for links to a na

   tionwide prostitution ring.

   6. Outrage!

   Toney Belmont has been tainted by a taste of discrimination. Three years
after she refused to rent her house to a black MIT professor, landlord Mary
Murnane paid the prof $ 50,000 under a settlement with Attorney General Tom
Reilly's office.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2003


                             625 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 22, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 38 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

        A front-page article on Tuesday about a gene therapy experiment for
Parkinson's disease misstated the given name of a University of Auckland
professor who helped develop the experiment. He is Dr. Matthew During, not
Michael.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2003


                             626 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 20, 2003 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: PIONEERING PARKINSON'S GENE THERAPY CONDUCTED

BYLINE: JAMIE TALAN, NEWSDAY

BODY:

   Preparation for this week's pioneering surgery that delivered genes into the
brain of a man with Parkinson's disease began almost a year ago, when the Food
and Drug Administration gave permission for the experimental procedure in up to
a dozen patients.

    Scientists at the FDA and the National Institutes of Health had scrutinized
such experimentation in rats, which was successful in reversing movement
problems associated with Parkinson's. Research involving monkeys was recently
completed and is still being analyzed.

    Nathan Klein, 55, on Monday became the first human recipient of gene therapy
targeted directly at an adult brain disease, said Dr. Michael G. Kaplitt, a New
York Weill Cornell Center neurosurgeon who performed the operation. During the
procedure, which he helped develop, Kaplitt infused billions of genes, packed in
particles of a virus, into the target area of the brain.

    Weill Cornell doctors had prepared in collaboration with North Shore-Long
Island Jewish Health System. The technique is being developed and tested by
Neurologix, a New Jersey-based company started by Kaplitt's father, Martin, a
cardiac surgeon who started the open-heart surgery program at North Shore
University Hospital. His son, the neurosurgeon, is a nonpaid consultant to the
company and will not be involved in the patient follow-up or the analysis of the
results.

    Parkinson's patients have long been willing to step up to the operating
table for relief from the tremors, stiffness and rigidity that characterize the
disease.

    Decades ago, surgeons began to make lesions in parts of the brain involved
in the disease, which lessened symptoms. Fetal stem-cell surgery was pioneered
in Parkinson's patients. And in the past decade, stimulating electrodes placed
in the brain's subthalamic nucleus have brought some relief to as many as 70
percent of patients who have opted for the surgical procedure. If it doesn't
work, the electrodes can be removed.

    The New York doctors say the gene therapy procedure could be a more natural
way to treat the disease in lieu of deep brain stimulation, which requires
surgically implanted hardware and long-term maintenance.

    The gene therapy technique was developed by Dr. Matthew During of the
University of Auckland in New Zealand and Kaplitt, director of stereotactic and
functional neurosurgery at Weill Cornell.

    Fifteen years ago, Kaplitt, then a graduate student at Rockefeller
University in Manhattan, began experimenting with different gene delivery
techniques. He went on to medical school to become a neurosurgeon. Kaplitt
completed a fellowship at the University of Toronto, where he learned surgical
techniques for Parkinson's.

    In 1993, Kaplitt teamed up with During, who also was working on gene therapy
techniques for brain diseases. Together they performed the animal studies that
would lead them to their goal of treating humans.

    Parkinson's is a movement disorder caused by a progressive depletion of the
brain chemical dopamine in an area of the brain called the substantia nigra.
These dopamine-containing cells control movement. When 70 percent to 80 percent
of these cells are destroyed, a person develops the first symptoms of disease:
tremors, slowed movement, muscle rigidity and problems with balance.

    The main medication used in Parkinson's is L-dopa, which replaces dopamine
in cells that are still functioning. But over time, the cell death is so massive
that the effects of the medication disappear.


LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2003


                             627 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 19, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 40 words

HEADLINE: QUOTATION OF THE DAY

BODY:

        "I do hope that it does something, whether it will be 10 percent better,
25 percent, 50 percent or more, I hope that this will work. But I'm the first
and I'm their monkey."

NATHAN KLEIN, undergoing gene therapy for Parkinson's disease.  A18

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2003


                             628 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 19, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1106 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:

        INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Israel Fears Terror Attacks By Jews on Palestinians
Investigators are looking at the possibility that a violent Israeli underground
group has emerged, something that Israel has not confronted for nearly 20 years.
The worry over potential attacks by Jews on Palestinians is growing as peace
efforts opposed by many right-wing Israelis are struggling.   A1

Heat Blamed for 5,000 Deaths
The withering heat of the last several weeks in France has been responsible for
as many as 5,000 deaths, the government said. Experts said many of the deaths
were elderly relatives left at home to fend for themselves while their families
were on vacation. The director general for health, Dr. Lucien Abenhaim, resigned
after disputes over the government's handling of the heat crisis.   A1


   North Korea Lashes Out
Amid signs of growing diplomatic and military isolation, North Korea lashed out
at the United States, South Korea and Japan barely a week before the scheduled
start of international talks over North Korea's nuclear program.   A10

14 Hostages Released in Mali
Fourteen European tourists held hostage in the North African desert for about
six months were released, said officials in Mali. The hostages -- nine from
Germany, four from Switzerland and one from the Netherlands -- were seized by
Islamic militants in Algeria in February and March. Reports that the German
government paid a ransom had not beenconfirmed.   A11

Liberian Rebels Sign Accord
The Liberian government and two rebel groups signed an accord in Ghana aimed at
ending the war by sharing power in an interim government. Past peace agreements
have been broken soon after they were set, but some think the agreement offers
hope.   A9

Journalists Demand Inquiry
International journalists' groups and Reuters demanded that the United States
military hold a full public inquiry into the death of Mazen Dana, a Reuters
cameraman who was shot to death by American soldiers in Iraq on Sunday while he
filmed outside a prison.   A11

NATIONAL   A14-19

Congress Unlikely to Pass Separate Power Grid Bills
As it tries to respond to the biggest blackout in the nation's history, Congress
is unlikely to pass separate proposals to improve the power grid, instead
keeping those plans within a broader energy initiative that has been stalled,
lawmakers said.   A1

Defending Sept. 11 Legislation
The Bush administration is beginning an unusual counteroffensive this week in an
effort to shore up support for the prized legislation that grew out of the Sept.
11 attacks.   A1

Judge Delays Recall Ruling
A federal court judge promised that he would rule on a lawsuit seeking to delay
California's recall election because some counties will still be using outdated
punch-card machines.   A14

Old Team Seeks New Sniper
With three people dead in similar single-shot sniper attacks in West Virginia,
federal agents who investigated the serial sniper case in the Washington area
last year have joined the investigation, officials said.   A14

Battle Over Death Penalty
Mark Robertson, who is to be executed in Texas, is among a small group of death
row prisoners who were sentenced from 1989 to 1991 by juries under a procedure
that the United States Supreme Court has held to be unconstitutional.   A16

Paying for Prescription Plan
President Bush and Congress have agreed to spend $400 billion on prescription
drugs for the elderly over 10 years. But they rarely address a basic question:
Where does the money come from?   A19

Ridge Addresses State Leaders
Tom Ridge, Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, told the nation's
governors that the department was taking added steps to make sure they were
given all necessary intelligence to respond quickly and completely to a
terrorist attack.   A19

Bush Campaign Hits the Web
The Bush-Cheney '04 campaign, which has already raised more than $30 million
this year, is opening its official Internet site in an effort to raise even more
money from among more than 133 million Americans who use the Internet.   A18

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Money Meant for Shelter Was Misused, Officials Say
Federal officials say $2.2 million intended for a nationally recognized shelter
for homeless youths that closed last year was mishandled, and they have
suspended further aid to the agency that ran it.   B1

A Dearth of Transplant Organs
As the demand for organs continues to climb, the transplant field has been hit
by a decline in deaths among the ideal donors, young people.   B1

Water Cooler War Stories
Over the long weekend, the tales grew in the telling. Miles heroically crossed
on foot. A night on the sidewalk. So when many New Yorkers finally saw their
co-workers again, it was time to brag -- and complain.   B1

SPORTS   D1-7

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Parkinson's Gene Therapy
Yesterday, at New York-Presbyterian Hospital, Nathan Klein became the first
person to undergo gene therapy for Parkinson's disease, when Dr. Michael G.
Kaplitt infused 3.5 billion viral particles into Mr. Klein's brain.   A1

Millions of Naked Years
Solutions to the questions of why and when human body hair disappeared and when
people first started to wear clothes have now been proposed by two research
groups. The result implies we were naked for more than a million years.   F1

Health & Fitness   F5

FASHION   B8

ARTS   E1-8

Humorous Fakes on Display
Shakespearean fraud can be good material for comedy, and "Fakes, Forgeries and
Facsimiles," an exhibition that is about to open at the Folger Shakespeare
Library in Washington, shows it.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

Blame Cast on FirstEnergy
Last week's blackout was traced to failures at FirstEnergy's transmission lines
in Ohio. FirstEnergy admitted an alarm had failed, but cited other electrical
system problems.   A1

Rethinking Contingency Plans
Many companies that had their own disaster recovery plans found that their
backup site was within the blackout area. Now disaster recovery firms are
re-evaluating their plans.   C1

Exemption for Airline
The Labor Department issued an exemption to federal pension rules to allow
Northwest Airlines to use the stock of an airline subsidiary to cover a $1
billion shortfall.   C1

Cloudy Future for Auto Plant
Ford Motor plans to build plants in Canada and Mexico to produce a new sedan and
a new sports wagon, instead of making them at its Hapeville, Ga., factory,
putting the futures of 2,300 workers in doubt.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

OBITUARIES   C13

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: Of grids and gridlock; political money to the test; one bright day;
Ethan Bronner on the obscenely easy exile of Idi Amin.

Column: Paul Krugman.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E7
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2003


                             629 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 19, 2003 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1684 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY USED TO TREAT PATIENT WITH PARKINSON'S

BYLINE:   By DENISE GRADY and GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   "Do I have a hard head?" asked Nathan Klein. "My wife always says I have a
hard head."

        "No, it's pretty average," said Dr. Michael G. Kaplitt. "This is one of
the few situations in life where you want to be average."

    Dr. Kaplitt had just bored a hole about the size of a quarter through the
top of Mr. Klein's skull, in preparation for an ambitious experiment: the
infusion deep into the brain of 3.5 billion viral particles, each bearing a copy
of a human gene meant to help relieve the tremors, shuffling gait and other
abnormal movements caused by Parkinson's disease.

   Yesterday at New York-Presbyterian Hospital, Mr. Klein, 55, an independent
television producer from Port Washington, N.Y., became the first person to
undergo gene therapy for Parkinson's. Despite the checkered history of gene
therapy experiments, the Food and Drug Administration approved this procedure
for 12 people with severe Parkinson's.

   The experiment is a Phase 1 trial, meaning that its main goal is to determine
safety, not efficacy. But of course the researchers and their subjects will also
be looking for signs that the treatment works. That should become clear within
three months, said Dr. Kaplitt, who is an assistant professor at Weill Cornell
Medical Center and director of stereotactic and functional neurosurgery at New
York-Presbyterian Hospital. "My goal is not to try to cure Parkinson's disease,"
Dr. Kaplitt said. "It's to provide a better treatment that we can build on to
make the next advance."

   But some leading experts in gene therapy and Parkinson's disease expressed
concern.

   They said the experiment was going forward without evidence in monkeys that
it could work and that it held the possibility of harm: viruses spreading in the
brain, or gene-treated cells churning out huge quantities of proteins that
inhibit brain cells from firing.

   "This is a crazy experiment," said Dr. C. Walter Olanow, who is a professor
and the chairman of the department of neurology at Mount Sinai School of
Medicine.

   In an interview before the operation, Mr. Klein said he had been fully
informed of potential risks.

   "I do hope that it does something, whether it will be 10 percent better, 25
percent, 50 percent or more, I hope that this will work," he said. "But I'm the
first and I'm their monkey."

   About 1.5 million Americans have Parkinson's disease. Tremors are its
hallmark, familiar to anyone who has seen the shaking limbs of people with the
disorder, like the actor Michael J. Fox or former Attorney General Janet Reno.
But other symptoms can be just as troubling, if not more so: people become stiff
and can suddenly freeze, unable to move, and many find that they can walk only
by shuffling along in tiny steps, which sometimes accelerate beyond their
control and send them sprawling. Some develop cognitive problems or dementia.

   The disease occurs because nerve cells die in a part of the brain, the
substantia nigra, leading to a shortage of dopamine, a chemical messenger that
helps carry signals between various brain regions involved in movement.

   Drugs can help to control the abnormal movements for a time. The best known,
L-dopa, turns to dopamine in the body. But all drugs have side effects. Mr.
Klein, for instance, who has had Parkinson's for 10 years and tried 8 or 10
drugs, has suffered from constipation, weight gain, insomnia, dry mouth and
fatigue. Other patients develop new movement disorders from L-dopa. And over
time, the drugs can lose their effectiveness.

   Surgery to destroy bits of the brain that touch off tremors can help, but has
its own risks. Fetal cell implants have not helped patients overall and have led
to severe movement problems in some. Pacemaker-like devices known as deep brain
stimulators have shown promise for some patients who have run out of drug
options. But implants pose a risk of infection, and devices can fail.

   Dr. Kaplitt and Dr. Michael During, a professor of molecular medicine at the
University of Auckland, in New Zealand, with whom he has been collaborating for
10 years, saw plenty of room for improvement in treating Parkinson's.

   They and their colleagues suspected that dopamine was not the best target for
gene therapy, because patients would probably have been taking dopamine for
years and might be resistant to it.

   They decided that it made more sense to provide a gene that would enable
cells in an overactive region of the brain, the subthalamic nucleus, to make a
different messenger chemical, one that would calm the cells themselves and other
overstimulated brain regions. The gene they chose is called GAD, for glutamic
acid decarboxylase, an enzyme that helps produce a chemical messenger called
GABA, for gamma aminobutyric acid.

   Genes alone cannot get into cells, but viruses can, and in gene-therapy
experiments viruses are commonly used to carry genes to their destination. Dr.
Kaplitt and Dr. During chose the virus AAV, or adeno-associated virus. It does
not cause disease in people, Dr. Kaplitt said, and its genetic material is
removed.

   In experiments in mice with a disorder that is intended to mimic Parkinson's,
the gene therapy helped all the animals somewhat and helped about half of them a
great deal, Dr. Kaplitt and Dr. During reported last October in the journal
Science. They have also tested the treatment in monkeys but have declined to
discuss the results, because they have not yet been published.

   Dr. Kaplitt and Dr. During founded a company, Neurologix, to produce the gene
therapy. The company, run by Dr. Kaplitt's father, is paying for the Phase 1
study. Dr. During is a paid consultant to the company. Dr. Kaplitt is not,
though he was in the past. He and Dr. During do not recruit patients for gene
therapy. Patients are referred by -- and followed by -- Dr. David Eidelberg and
Dr. Andrew Feigin from North Shore-Long Island Jewish Hospital. Neither has any
connection to Neurologix.

   Many researchers have had qualms about gene therapy since 1999, when a
teenage boy, Jesse Gelsinger, died in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania. More recently, several children in France who were
successfully treated with gene therapy for an immune disorder later developed a
leukemia-like disease.

    In this case, some experts say a gene therapy experiment is particularly
questionable because Parkinson's patients could have brain stimulators implanted
instead.

    "You don't have to take the risk of putting in a virus and you don't have to
take the risk that it's uncontrollable," Dr. Olanow said. "The danger is that if
you inhibit too much you can induce wild, flinging movements which people have
been reported to die from." Once the virus is in the brain, there is no way to
get it out or turn it off, he and others pointed out.

   But Dr. Kaplitt said the study was being limited to patients who did not like
the idea of having a device put in their brain.

   Another potential danger is that the virus could spread to other areas of the
brain, wreaking destruction, said Dr. Inder Verma, a gene therapy researcher at
the Salk Institute, in San Diego, and past president of the American Society of
Gene Therapy.

   Animal studies indicate that the virus can spread from nerve to nerve, said
Dr. Howard Federoff, the director of the Center for Aging and Developmental
Biology at the University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry. "That's
one thing I felt personally needed to be carefully examined to make sure there
weren't going to be any adverse effects," he said.

   Even if the virus does not spread in the brain, it could elicit an immune
reaction. "You may get a brain inflammation and swelling," Dr. Verma said. "You
may lose some neurons."

   But Dr. Kaplitt said there was no evidence of any adverse effects in the
animal studies except a few transient fevers -- no brain inflammation, and no
signs of overproduction of brain chemicals.

   Other experts not involved in the trial doubted that the gene therapy would
do anything at all.

   Dr. Ole Isacson, a professor of neuroscience at Harvard Medical School, said
he was not convinced that changing just a single enzyme, with gene therapy,
could fundamentally change a nerve cell's nature.

   Yet, Dr. Isacson said he was ambivalent about the experiment. "I agree about
the many questions," he said. But, he added, "one can say that unless you try
bold things in clinical trials it will be very difficult to find what are the
most useful paths in the clinical world."

   Others, however, said flatly that the experiment was ill advised.

   "As a careful and very rigorous person approaching clinical trials, I'd like
to see a great deal more data in a nonhuman primate model that the treatment is
efficacious and very safe," Dr. Federoff said. He worried that an experiment
gone awry could set back gene therapy for years.

   So do others.

   "I have real theoretical concerns," said Dr. J. William Langston, director of
the Parkinson's Institute in Sunnyvale, Calif. "This is really terra incognita,
and I'm not sure we're ready to go there yet, particularly with this strategy."

   Mr. Klein did not see it that way. As soon as his doctor told him about the
study, he said, he wanted to participate. He found the side effects of the drugs
intolerable, his Parkinson's was worsening and a deep brain stimulator did not
appeal to him because he did not much like the idea of hardware being left in
his brain. He called his doctor every few weeks to check on the project, and did
not give up until he was in.

   During the procedure yesterday, he was wide awake and in good spirits, joking
with doctors and nurses despite having had a metal scaffolding screwed into his
head and bolted to the operating table to keep him still and aid in the mapping
of his brain. The procedure took about five hours, including an hour and a half
to pump the genes into his brain. Soon after it was over, Mr. Klein was settled
into a regular hospital room, eating fruit salad, asking for ice cream and
getting ready to stroll the corridors.

   And hoping for results in the months ahead.

   "If it helps me out that's great," Mr. Klein said. "If it helps other people
with Parkinson's that's even better."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 9, 2004

CORRECTION:

   A front-page article on Tuesday about a gene therapy experiment for
Parkinson's disease misstated the given name of a University of Auckland
professor who helped develop the experiment. He is Dr. Matthew During, not
Michael.

   A front-page article on Aug. 19, 2003, about an experimental gene therapy
treatment for Parkinson's disease at New York-Presbyterian Hospital misstated
the given name of a neurology professor at Mount Sinai School of Medicine who
criticized the experiment. He is Dr. C. Warren Olanow, not Walter. (The error
was reported to The Times's public editor this week by a reader who said an
e-mail message about it in September had gone unacknowledged.)

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Michael Kaplitt injected particles into the brain of Nathan
Klein at New York-Presbyterian Hospital yesterday. The experiment made Mr. Klein
the first person to undergo gene therapy for Parkinson's disease. (Photo by
Amelia Panico)(pg. A18)

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2003


                             630 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                     AUGUST 19, 2003 Tuesday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: Gene test begins on Parkinson's patient

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER AP Science Writer

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Researchers slipped billions of copies of a gene into the brain of a
Parkinson's disease patient yesterday, marking the first attempt to test gene
therapy in a person with that disease.

   The 55-year-old patient had dinner afterward and was doing fine, Dr. Michael
Kaplitt of Weill Cornell Medical College said a few hours after completing the
procedure.

   The man, whom the surgeon did not identify, is the first of 12 patients
earmarked for a study focusing on the procedure's safety, rather than whether it
relieves symptoms.

   "Our whole goal here is to prove this is safe before we move on," Kaplitt
said.

   Kaplitt said it could take a couple of months before any effect could be
expected from the procedure. With 12 patients participating at perhaps one a
month, it could take a year before any effect of the overall study would be
apparent, he said.

   Parkinson's affects more than a half-million Americans. Key symptoms include
a tremor in the hands, arms and elsewhere; rigidity of the limbs; slowness of
movement, and impaired balance and coordination. Patients can have trouble
walking or talking. Drugs can relieve symptoms, but they cannot stop the
progression of the disease.

   Surgery can ease symptoms by quieting certain overactive areas of the brain.
The new gene-therapy approach is designed to do the same.

   The brain areas become overactive because they lose their normal supply of a
calming chemical called GABA. The experimental procedure is aimed at making one
of those areas, the subthalamic nucleus, produce more GABA. The chemical should
not only quiet that area but also be released to the other overactive brain
areas, Kaplitt said.

   For the surgery, a tiny tube about the width of a hair was threaded through a
hole about the size of a quarter on top of the patient's skull. The tube
delivered a dose of a virus engineered to ferry copies of the gene into cells of
the subthalamic nucleus. The gene will let the cells pump out GABA.

   The patient was awake during the procedure and "making jokes most of the
time," Kaplitt said.

   In recent years, scientists have delivered gene doses to children's brains in
a study of treating a condition called Canavan's disease.

   A different strategy is being pursued in a current gene-therapy experiment
for Alzheimer's disease in California. There, scientists have taken skin cells
from eight patients, equipped them with a gene to pump out a particular protein,
and then implanted the modified cells into the brain. No results have been
released yet.

   Kaplitt is doing the new study in collaboration with Matthew During of the
University of Auckland in Australia. *

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2005


                             631 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 19, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 376 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy is tested for first time in Parkinson's patient

BYLINE: Malcolm Ritter; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 NEW YORK -- Researchers slipped billions of copies of a gene into the brain of
a Parkinson's disease patient yesterday, marking the first attempt to test gene
therapy in a person with that disease.

   The 55-year-old patient had dinner afterward and was doing fine, Dr. Michael
Kaplitt of Weill Cornell Medical College said a few hours after completing the
procedure.

   The man, who wasn't identified, is the first of a planned 12 patients for a
study focusing on the procedure's safety, rather than whether or not it relieves
symptoms.

   "Our whole goal here is to prove this is safe before we move on," Kaplitt
said.

   Kaplitt said that with 12 patients participating at perhaps one a month, it
could take a year before any effect of the overall study would be apparent.

   Parkinson's affects more than a half-million Americans.  Key symptoms include
a tremor in the hands, arms and elsewhere, rigidity of the limbs, slowness of
movement and impaired balance and coordination.

   Patients can have trouble walking or talking.

   While drugs can relieve symptoms, they can't stop the progression of the
disease.

   Surgery can ease symptoms by quieting certain overactive areas of the brain.

   The new gene therapy approach is designed to do the same.

   In a related development, researchers said regular use of over-the-counter
pain relievers might help delay or prevent Parkinson's disease.

   The risk of developing the disease was 45 percent lower in people who used
drugs such as ibuprofen and naproxen at least twice weekly than it was in
nonusers, according to a review of two large studies.

   If replicated in more rigorous research, the findings are potentially
significant, said lead author Dr. Honglei Chen, a Harvard School of Public
Health instructor.

   The results, however, are too preliminary to warrant recommending painkillers
to prevent Parkinson's, Chen said.

   His research appears in August's Archives of Neurology, published yesterday.

   The report echoes laboratory research in animals suggesting that drugs known
as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories, or NSAIDS, might help protect against
Parkinson's.

   The new data, based on an analysis of two studies of health professionals,
are the first to suggest similar results in humans, Chen said.


LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2003


                             632 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      August 18, 2003 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: Old vaccinations may help ward off smallpox;
New study finds some limited immunity up to 75 years after shots

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE mmarchione@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Some people may still be partially immune to smallpox as long as 75 years
after they were vaccinated, contrary to earlier beliefs that protection is
pretty much gone within five years, a study suggests.

   Partial immunity doesn't mean that such people wouldn't get smallpox or be
able to spread it to others, such as children who haven't been vaccinated.

   But it could lessen the sickness and deaths that a bioterrorist attack might
cause, especially if one were to occur before a new and hopefully safer smallpox
vaccine becomes available.

   "I think it's fair to suggest that there is a degree of immunity," but it's
not known whether the signs of immunity that researchers observed in the blood
would translate to true protection if people actually were exposed to the germ,
said Anthony Fauci, the National Institutes of Health's top vaccine and
infectious disease scientist.

   The findings also don't change the need to re-vaccinate emergency workers,
who need full immunity to be able to respond to a smallpox crisis, Fauci said.

   "Although this is interesting, it does not at all change our philosophy," he
said of the study.

   The study was led by Mark Slifka of the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute at
Oregon Health & Science University. Slifka is in Milwaukee this week to conduct
a study of immune system responses to monkeypox, a viral cousin of smallpox, and
vaccinia, the germ used in the smallpox vaccine.

   Results of the smallpox study were published online Sunday by the journal
Nature Medicine.

   Smallpox no longer occurs naturally anywhere in the world, and routine
vaccinations against it ended in the 1970s. About half of Americans never
received smallpox shots, and the protection from shots that the other half
received as children is thought to have waned long ago.

   Support for that view came from the recent monkeypox outbreak, in which some
people who had received smallpox shots during childhood got sick from monkeypox
this summer. If the vaccine were still protective, they most likely wouldn't
have gotten monkeypox.

   Slifka's study suggests there may be wide variability in the amount of
protection left over from childhood smallpox shots.

   He and colleagues studied blood samples from 306 people who got shots 25 to
75 years ago and found that more than 90% showed some signs of retained
protection.

   The immune system fights a germ in two major ways: by producing antibodies
that keep it from entering and infecting cells, and by having germ-specific
cells called T cells attack it directly.

   Half of such T cells are gone within eight to 15 years of vaccination, but
antibody responses remained strong.

   "It all depends on how you look at it. The glass can be half-empty or
half-full," Slifka said.

   For such people, "even though they get infected, their ability to transmit
the illness would be lower. There appears to be a relationship between the
severity of disease and the ability for it to spread person to person. So even
partial immunity would be helpful," he said.

   Rafi Ahmed, director of the Emory Vaccine Center at Emory University in
Atlanta, agreed.

   "Severity of infection would be less in these individuals. I think we can say
that much," he said. "Does this mean we'd be fully protected? I don't think we
know the answer to that."

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2003


                             633 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 17, 2003, Sunday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: PERSPECTIVES / Q[A]
LYDIA VILLA-KOMAROFF, WHITEHEAD INSTITUTE, ON DRUG PRICES

BODY:

   GOVERNOR MITT ROMNEY DELIVERED A BLUNT MESSAGE TO PHARMACEUTICAL EXECUTIVES
GATHERED AT THE DRUG DISCOVERY TECHNOLOGY 2003 CONFERENCE IN BOSTON LAST WEEK:
DROP RETAIL PRICES OR FACE MORE CRITICISM FROM AN ANGRY PUBLIC. AMONG THE
CONFERENCE PARTICIPANTS WAS LYDIA VILLA-KOMAROFF, VICE PRESIDENT FOR RESEARCH
AND CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER OF THE WHITEHEAD INSTITUTE, A GENETICS RESEARCH
FACILITY IN CAMBRIDGE THAT RECENTLY RECEIVED A DONATION OF $100 MILLION TO STUDY
THE NEXT GENERATION OF GENE-BASED CURES. VILLA-KOMAROFF TALKED WITH GLOBE
BUSINESS REPORTER CHRISTOPHER ROWLAND ABOUT HOW TENSIONS OVER PRICING BETWEEN
GOVERNMENT AND INDUSTRY MIGHT AFFECT THE FUTURE OF DRUG RESEARCH.

   Q. The costs of prescription drugs are at a record high, and consumers and
Congress and employers are looking for ways to reduce costs. On the other side
is industry demand for revenues, in part to pay for new drug study. How would
decreased industry revenue affect future drug discoveries?

   A. I think it would have a profound effect for the following reason: If you
lower the margin for an industry, that much less money is available for
research. This means the pipeline would be affected.

      Drug companies, like any other industry, think fairly short term, so it
would be awfully hard for them to not reduce research budgets in such an event.
In the past, we have had a component of government support for basic research,
which was able to be fed into the pipeline. That is being reduced now that the
[National Institute of Health] budget is not going to be able to grow as rapidly
as it has.

   Q. The pharmaceutical industry says it has dramatically increased spending on
research and development to about $32 billion, way up from the 1980s. What are
the factors leading to such heavy spending?

   A. One of the components is that the cost of getting the drug to market
includes not just the cost of that particular drug, but the whole infrastructure
that is set up to develop all drugs. Something like 1 out of 50 prospective
drugs make it to market.

   It's hard for society to understand, but the development costs have to
include the cost of the failures. That's part of the business.

   Q. How much will financial demand for research grow for the United States to
realize the promise of cutting-edge gene therapies?

   A. It's expensive research. Right now, a lot of it is going forward because
of the generosity of private donors. That's not enough. You need
government-funded research because its undirected, basic inquiry. I worry about
the pipeline. If industry is going to fund research, they want a fairly short
turnaround time. We're talking about two-to-five-years' time horizon. Those
things that are 15 to 20 years down the road I think are not appropriately being
supported at this point.

   A great deal of what we see hitting the hospital beds now really came from
work some time ago.

   Q. There has been criticism leveled at the drug industry that research into
new areas is taking a back seat to pursuing highly lucrative markets in
heartburn, depression, cholesterol and allergies, where there are already
treatments available. Is that fair?

   A. There's two points of view. I tend to wonder if there's too much attention
to those "me-too" areas, but it can be argued that competition will bring prices
down . . . There's relatively recent information that says more people ought to
be on [anticholesterol] statins sooner, that lowering cholesterol would have
impact on morbidity and mortality. But the statins are not inexpensive.

   So how much do we save by people taking these? We need to consider how much
less the system pays for adverse events if people do have drugs. If people don't
get sick and don't miss work, the pharmaceutical companies don't get credit for
that, but we all benefit.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Lydia Villa-Komaroff / GLOBE PHOTO / MARK OSTOW

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2003


                             634 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             August 17, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: SPORTS; Zephyrs notes; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: Z's Fatheree gets clearance to continue his career;
Disorder won't keep catcher on bench

BYLINE: Peter Barrouquere

BODY:

   Zephyrs catcher Danny Fatheree came back from Dallas with good news.

   Fatheree went to see a specialist Monday after being diagnosed with Factor
II, a hereditary blood-clotting disorder that has already claimed the lives of
two of his uncles.

   "The doctor just pretty much talked to me about the disorder," Fatheree said.
"He told me I don't have to have another checkup until after I get through
playing baseball. I don't need any medication or any kind of blood thinners as
of right now. He said the disorder doesn't usually affect you until later.

   "I felt really relieved. I'd been at home for four days. You have a lot of
time to think about it, and I was just really relieved that it's going to be OK
for right now. He said I could play ball, and that's the best thing I can do
right now because it'll keep my blood circulating real well. I was worried that
I would never get to play again, and that put an end to that."

   Fatheree's father, Danny Sr., and his brothers, Jeremy, 22, and Timmy, 21,
have been diagnosed with the disorder. The news was good for them, too.

   "They put my dad on regular blood thinners, and they had to reduce the dosage
because the other one was too strong," Fatheree said. "So that's good. They
won't put my brothers and me on medication until later, so we don't have to
worry about that now."

   There was also concern about whether the disorder would affect any children
Fatheree and his wife, Jennifer, might have.

   "The doctor said there was a 50-50 chance our children might have it,"
Fatheree said. "He also said that with the way things are progressing in gene
therapy, it might be able to be cured within the next five or 10 years.

   "So you never know. I feel so relieved right now. It was just a good visit.
I'm glad I went."

CATCHING UP: Another Z's catcher is hoping for good news from a doctor.

   John Buck, Houston's top prospect going into this season, will visit the
Astros' physician Thursday to see if he can get the OK to play.

   Buck suffered a chip in the novicular bone in his right wrist when he got his
feet tangled with Albuquerque Isotopes first baseman Derek Wathan in the second
inning June 26. Buck went on the disabled list the next day.

   "I think I will be cleared to play, since I've been taking batting practice
and infield and catching bullpens every day," Buck said. "I've done everything
but playing in a game."

   The cast on Buck's wrist was removed two weeks ago. He says he feels no
discomfort.

   "Nope, no pain or stiffness or anything," he said. "I've been doing my Cybex
exercises with (trainer Mike Freer), all my stretches, everything. I'm really
encouraged that I don't feel anything during my normal day's activities, when I
go lift weights."

   Buck batted .267 in 68 games, with two homers and 38 RBIs, before the injury.

   "Obviously, it's going to take a little bit to get my timing back," he said.
"I think the lifesaver I've had through this is (hitting coach) Gary Gaetti. I
don't think most coaches probably would do the things he did for me.

   "He would take time between batting practice, even on the road, whenever we
had time. He would take me out, and we would do one-hand drills to help me stay
back. We would work on the things we were working on when I started swinging
well at the end, so I could kind of keep these things fresh in my mind."

PAYBACK: The Zephyrs are donating more than 5,000 tickets for Monday night's
game against the Iowa Cubs to local charities and nonprofit organizations.

   "This is our way of giving something back to the fans in the New Orleans
area," Zephyrs general manager Dan Rajkowski said. "Fans in this area have
supported the Zephyrs for over 10 years, and we would like to say thanks to all
of those who have supported this organization through the years."

   For information, call (504) 734-5515.

   . . . . . . .

Peter Barrouquere can be reached at pbarrouquere@timespicayune.com or (504)
826-3803.

GRAPHIC: Danny Fatheree: Disorder is not an immediate threat John Buck:  Hopes
to return to field soon

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2003


                             635 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     August 14, 2003 Thursday FINAL Edition

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: 'Most fun' memories have Funk pumped;
 In a down period on tour, he'd love a repeat of 2002;
 Notebook;
 PGA Championship

BYLINE: Don Markus

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, N.Y.

BODY:

   ROCHESTER, N.Y. -- As he walked off the 18th green at Oak Hill yesterday
after finishing his last practice round for the 85th PGA Championship, Fred Funk
pulled out his Sharpie and pulled the legs of a few of the fans asking for his
autograph.

   "Uh-oh," Funk said, "I just ran out of ink."

   He was kidding, of course, as he obliged many of those asking him to sign.
Funk became something of a cult figure in last year's PGA Championship at
Hazeltine, and his newfound status led to a PGA Tour television commercial, a
story in Golf Digest and a higher profile among the fans.

   "They're saying things like, 'Do it again,' " Funk said. "It's the one-year
anniversary of my coming-out party."

   Funk hopes to celebrate that anniversary with a performance equal to -- or
better than -- last year, when he took a share of the first-round lead with Jim
Furyk, led after two rounds and stayed in contention the rest of the week,
finishing tied for fourth. It was the highest Funk has finished in a major.

   "That was the most fun I've ever had playing golf, short of winning," said
Funk, who played the last round with Tiger Woods. "The crowd, the way I played,
the way I was reacting."

   To recreate that kind of atmosphere this week, he will have to play a lot
better than he has lately. After a string of strong performances that included a
tie for second in the Capital Open at Avenel in Potomac, Funk went to the
British Open and missed the cut with rounds of 75 and 80.

   He then came home and missed the cut in the Greater Hartford Open. After
finishing tied for 24th in the Buick Open, he missed the cut last week in The
International and spent the weekend in Austin, Texas, working with his teacher,
Bill Moretti.

   "I'm playing good again," said Funk, 47.
Encouraging news

   Last week's news out of Baltimore that doctors at Johns Hopkins have made
progress in the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was encouraging to
Tom Watson, whose longtime caddie, Bruce Edwards, was diagnosed with the
illness, also called Lou Gehrig's Disease, last November.

   "What we are hoping for is a cocktail, much like the AIDS victims take to
solve their problem," Watson said. "That's the kind of direction that people are
pointing."

   Watson is playing here while Edwards, along with former PGA Tour player Jeff
Julian, who also has the disease, are in the Bahamas undergoing some type of
unconventional treatment.

   "I'm going to miss him (this week)," said Watson, whose play in this year's
U.S. Open brought attention to Edwards' condition. "As far as his condition,
he's basically holding in there, getting a little bit worse as far as the
disease is concerned."

   Scientists last week announced a potential breakthrough, reporting they had
greatly slowed the deterioration of lab mice with the ailment through gene
therapy.

   The treatment involves using a virus to deliver a therapeutic gene to nerve
cells in the spinal cord that are under attack. The researchers, at Johns
Hopkins and the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif., said human trials could
begin as early as next year.

   Sun staff writer Jonathan Bor contributed to this article.

NOTES:
SEE HARD COPY FOR TEE TIMES

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2003


                             636 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 14, 2003, Thursday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 25 Metfront

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: Study eyes research panels;
Raises concerns over possible faculty conflicts of interest

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN

BODY:

   Institutional boards that look out for patients' interests are populated by
faculty with potential conflicts of interest, a study says.

   The conclusions of the 2001-02 study come a year after the University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center was criticized for not disclosing its
president's financial stake in an experimental drug it tested.

   The study, which provides the first national data on the personal,
professional and research characteristics of faculty on such boards, found that
nearly half of such faculty serve as consultants to industry, a situation it
called "reason for concern."

   "Our previous research with faculty has showed us that ties to industry can
affect scientific behavior, leading to such things as trade secrecy and delays
in publishing research," said Eric Campbell, lead author of the study and
professor of medicine at the Institute for Health Policy at Massachusetts
General Hospital.

   "It's possible similar relationships with companies could affect such board
members' activities and attitudes."

   The study appears in today's Academic Medicine. A companion piece in the
journal found that fewer than half of investigators at two institutions with
different conflict-of-interest policies could accurately describe their campus's
policy.

   Concerns about conflicts of interest have been rife in the medical world in
the last few years.

   A University of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment led to a teenager's
death, and patients in a trial at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in
Seattle weren't told of the risks or the center's financial interest.

   And at M.D. Anderson, participants in a trial of the drug Erbitux weren't
told that President John Mendelsohn owned large amounts of stock in a company
sponsoring its development. After the trial's conclusion, the center changed its
policy to require such disclosure.

   Representatives of local boards set up to protect people participating in
clinical research, known as institutional review boards, called the latest study
interesting but said they don't think it will change their policies.

   "We think we have the checks and balances in place to prevent industry ties
from causing problems," said Dr. Iman Buzdar, chairman of M.D. Anderson's review
board. "You have to have such ties to carry out research and have expertise. The
important thing is to make sure potential conflicts are transparent."

   Dr. Anne Dougherty, chair of the review board at UT Health Science Center at
Houston, and James Patrick, dean of research at Baylor College of Medicine,
agreed. They noted that their boards also are populated by laypeople whose lack
of knowledge and experience in such matters might lead them to ask questions not
posed by jaded faculty members.

   But Campbell is not convinced that all review boards had thought out the
implication of so many members having ties to industry. He said a faculty
member's relationship with a company might influence him or her to approve an
otherwise questionable trial or hold up a trial involving a competing company.

   The study, which surveyed 2,989 faculty members from 125 U.S. medical schools
between October 2001 and March 2002, found that underrepresented minorities were
3.2 times more willing than white faculty to serve on a review board and that
clinical researchers were 1.64 times more likely to serve than faculty who
conduct nonclinical research.

   Of those surveyed who served on review boards, 73 percent were male, 81
percent white, 8 percent Asian and 11 percent underrepresented minorities.

   The study follows new guidelines issued by two major medical bodies.

   In April, the American Society of Clinical Oncology said it will require
clinical cancer researchers to disclose virtually all financial ties involving
trial sponsors and restrict the financial interests of principal investigators
and other clinical trials leaders. It also called for independent regional
boards, rather than institutional review boards, to provide oversight and review
of clinical trials.

   And last September, the Association of American Medical Colleges discouraged
institutions from participating in clinical trials when the school or a school
official stands to benefit financially from treatments being tested. Its report,
however, stopped short of prohibiting the practice.





   STUDY HIGHLIGHTS


   Questionnaires were mailed to 4,694 faculty members in 121 four-year U.S.
medical schools.

   2,989 faculty members responded.

   11 percent reported serving on institutional review boards three years before
the study.

   47 percent served as consultants to industry.


GRAPHIC: Graph: STUDY HIGHLIGHTS (TEXT); Source: The journal of Academic
Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2003


                             637 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 14, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 25 Metfront

LENGTH: 764 words

HEADLINE: Conflicts on medical panels;
Faculty on review boards report ties to industry, study finds

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN

BODY:

   Nearly half the faculty members who serve on institutional boards that look
out for patients' interests also are consultants to industry, creating potential
conflicts of interest and "reason for concern," a study published today says.

   "Our previous research with faculty has showed us that ties to industry can
affect scientific behavior, leading to such things as trade secrecy and delays
in publishing research," said Eric Campbell, lead author of the study and
professor of medicine at the Institute for Health Policy at Massachusetts
General Hospital.

   "It's possible similar relationships with companies could affect such board
members' activities and attitudes."

   The conclusions of the 2001-02 study come a year after the University of
Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center was criticized for not disclosing its
president's financial stake in an experimental drug it tested.

   The study, which provides the first national data on the personal,
professional and research characteristics of faculty on such boards, appears in
today's Academic Medicine. A companion piece in the journal found that fewer
than half of investigators at two institutions with different
conflict-of-interest policies could accurately describe their campus policy.

   Concerns about conflicts of interest have been rife in the medical world in
the last few years.

   A University of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment led to a teenager's
death, and patients in a trial at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in
Seattle weren't told of the risks or the center's financial interest.

   And at M.D. Anderson, participants in a trial of the drug Erbitux weren't
told that President John Mendelsohn owned large amounts of stock in a company
sponsoring its development. After the trial's conclusion, the center changed its
policy to require such disclosure.

   Representatives of local boards set up to protect people participating in
clinical research, known as institutional review boards, called the latest study
interesting but said they don't think it will change their policies.

   "We think we have the checks and balances in place to prevent industry ties
from causing problems," said Dr. Iman Buzdar, chairman of M.D. Anderson's review
board. "You have to have such ties to carry out research and have expertise. The
important thing is to make sure potential conflicts are transparent."

   Dr. Anne Dougherty, chair of the review board at UT Health Science Center at
Houston, and James Patrick, dean of research at Baylor College of Medicine,
agreed. They noted that their boards also are populated by laypeople whose lack
of knowledge and experience in such matters might lead them to ask questions not
posed by jaded faculty members.

   But Campbell is not convinced that all review boards had thought out the
implication of so many members having ties to industry. He said a faculty
member's relationship with a company might influence him or her to approve an
otherwise questionable trial or hold up a trial involving a competing company.

   The study, which surveyed 2,989 faculty members from 125 U.S. medical schools
between October 2001 and March 2002, found that underrepresented minorities were
3.2 times more willing than white faculty to serve on a review board and that
clinical researchers were 1.64 times more likely to serve than faculty who
conduct nonclinical research.

   Of those surveyed who served on review boards, 73 percent were male, 81
percent white, 8 percent Asian and 11 percent underrepresented minorities.

   The study follows new guidelines issued by two major medical bodies.

   In April, the American Society of Clinical Oncology said it will require
clinical cancer researchers to disclose virtually all financial ties involving
trial sponsors and restrict the financial interests of principal investigators
and other clinical trials leaders. It also called for independent regional
boards, rather than institutional review boards, to provide oversight and review
of clinical trials.

   And last September, the Association of American Medical Colleges discouraged
institutions from participating in clinical trials when the school or a school
official stands to benefit financially from treatments being tested. Its report,
however, stopped short of prohibiting the practice.





   STUDY HIGHLIGHTS


   Questionnaires were mailed to 4,694 faculty members in 121 four-year U.S.
medical schools.

   2,989 faculty members responded.

   11 percent reported serving on institutional review boards three years before
the study.

   47 percent served as consultants to industry.


GRAPHIC: Graph: STUDY HIGHLIGHTS (TEXT); Source: The journal of Academic
Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2003


                             638 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    August 14, 2003, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NORTHEAST, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: Film Series, Discussion Opens

BYLINE: Staff report

BODY:

   6-WEEK PROGRAM STARTS TONIGHT AT MOSI LIBRARY

   TAMPA - Research Revolution: Science and the Shaping of Modern Life, a free
six-week film series and discussion, begins tonight in the Science Library at
the Museum of Science & Industry.

   Sponsored by the American Library Association, National Video Resources and
the National Science Foundation, the series is intended as a springboard for
group discussion of key social and political themes. Sessions are facilitated by
local scholar Jan Gilliland.

   The Thursday programs begin at 7 p.m. with a 45-minute video. Following a
15-minute break, there will be a 45-minute discussion.

   Participants may attend one or all sessions:

   Tonight, "Our Genes, Our Choices: Who Gets to Know," a thought-provoking
discourse on the far-reaching ethical, social, legal end economic implications
of genetic testing.

   Aug. 21, "Gene Squad" traces development of forensic DNA sampling and
profiling from its 1986 debut in England to its evolution as a modern police
tool.

   Aug. 28, "They Made the Bomb" chronicles the Manhattan Project, the
scientists who worked on it and how it altered public perception of science.

   Sept. 4, "Global Warming: What's Up with the Weather?" examines weather
versus climate, global warming, burning fossil fuels and the benefits and
problems of various alternative energy forms.

   Sept. 11, "Robotics: Into the Body" examines robotics, gene therapy,
artificial intelligence, genetically modified foods, cochlear and other
implants, and their potential to change our species.

   Sept. 18, "Biodiversity: Natural Connections" examines stewardship of our
planet and the interweaving of plants, humans and other animals.

   MOSI is at 4801 E. Fowler Ave. For details, call (813) 987-6378.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2003


                             639 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            August 14, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: UPTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 571 words

HEADLINE: Tulane, Taiwan ally in stem cell research

BODY:

   Tulane University and the Industrial Technical Research Institute of Taiwan
recently signed an agreement to collaborate in adult stem cell research.

   The agreement was signed by Dr. Paul Whelton, senior vice president for
Health Sciences at Tulane University, and Johnsee Lee, executive vice president
of ITRI and general director of the Biomedical Engineering Center in Taiwan.

   Among those who attended the June signing at the Tidewater Building on Canal
Street were Dr. Ian Taylor, dean of Tulane School of Medicine; Dr. Darwin
Prockup, director of Tulane Center for Gene Therapy; Ted Chen, director of
Asia/Pacific Health Promotion/Development of the Tulane School of Public Health
and Tropical Medicine; Chao-Ying Kuo, director, and Stan Yang, deputy director
of the ITRI division of Biomaterial and Tissue Engineering Center; Janet Huang
of the Show Chuan Medical Group; and P.T. Chen, associate director of the
Health, Welfare & Environmental Council, Legislative Yuan in Taiwan.

   "One of the goals of Tulane University Health Sciences is to make New Orleans
a hub for biological research and a center for adult stem cell research,"
Whelton said. "The Tulane Center for Gene Therapy not only is recognized
internationally for its high-tech research but also designated by National
Health Institute as adult stem cell supplier worldwide. The agreement with ITRI
is another step toward our goal."

   Tulane University recently was awarded a $4.3 million federal grant from the
National Health Institute to replicate, test and distribute adult stem cells.
Researchers are investigating the potentials of adult stem cells -- which are
undeveloped human cells made in bone marrow and deployed throughout the body to
make muscles, nerves, cartilage and various other types of cells -- for new
treatments of spinal-cord injuries, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and
other ailments. The stem cells tend to seek out damaged areas and repair them.

   Ted Chen initiated and has implanted the Master of Medical Management Program
at Tulane University; and helped to build and strengthen relationships between
the university and other institutions in Taiwan for many years.

   Taiwan will send senior scientists to Tulane University for training this
month; and Tulane University will send one or two professors to Taiwan for short
term consultation in the fall.

   "Both institutions have the complimentary strengths that we learn from each
other," Whelton said.

   "The agreement with ITRI is one of the fruits of many previous meetings,
seminars, workshops and exchange of visits in biological and health science
arena," said Dr. Brian Bucher, associate director of Tulane Gene Center. "We
expect this agreement to be a beginning of a long and productive collaboration
between the two institutions."

   . . . . . . .

   Subhash Kulkarni was honored recently by the New Orleans Chapter of the
American Society of Civil Engineers as "Outstanding Engineer of the Year 2003."

   Among other honors, Kulkarni is former chairman of the Asian Pacific American
Society and past district governor of Rotary District 6840. He has been elected
as chairman of Host Organization Committee for the Rotary International
Convention to be held in New Orleans in 2007.

   . . . . . . .

Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

GRAPHIC: Tulane University and the Industrial Technical Research Institute of
Taiwan recently signed an agreement to collaborate in adult stem cell research.
Among those at the signing are, front row, from left: Chao-Ying Kuo, Johnsee Lee
Darwin Prockup and Paul Whelton. Back row: Janet Huang, Brady P.T. Chen, Stan
Yang, Ted Chen and Ian Taylor.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2003


                             640 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     August 12, 2003 Tuesday FIRST EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS In Brief

BODY:


   Gillette buys into China battery co.

   Gillette Co., maker of Duracell batteries, said yesterday that it bought a
majority interest in a leading Chinese battery company with annual sales of more
than $ 80 million.

   Boston-based Gillette did not disclose terms of its purchase of control of
Fujian Nanping Nanfu Battery Co. Gillette said the deal would nominally add to
its earnings this year. - STAFF

   Genome shares jump

   Shares of Genome Therapeutics rose nearly 24 percent, to $ 3.22, after the
Waltham company announced a milestone payment for an undisclosed amount from
Amgen Inc. The two have an agreement worth up to $ 104 million to develop bone
disease therapies.  - STAFF

   TKT regains drug rights

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said yesterday that it regained from Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals the European rights to a treatment it is developing for
hemophilia. The Cambridge company will also get a $ 500,000 termination fee from
Wyeth.  - STAFF

   Abiomed loss shrinks

   Artificial-heart maker Abiomed Inc. narrowed its first-quarter loss to $ 3.1
million, or 15 cents a share, from $ 5.5 million, or 26 cents a share, in the
previous year's same period. For the quarter, which ended in June, the Danvers
company reported revenue of $ 5 million, compared with $ 5.1 million a year
earlier. - STAFF

   EBay takes charge

   NEW YORK - EBay Inc. said yesterday that it took a $ 30 million charge in the
second quarter due to a court judgment against the online auction company,
reducing its second-quarter earnings.

   A judge ordered eBay to pay MercExchange $ 29.5 million last week for
infringing an e-commerce patent. EBay said it would appeal the ruling. - REUTERS

   Mass. tax revenue up

   State tax revenue for July was $ 18 million more than initially thought,
Revenue Commissioner Alan LeBovidge reported yesterday. LeBovidge said the
updated total of $ 1.066 billion was 5.9 percent more than July 2002 and $ 39
million more than was anticipated under the state's spending plan. Most of the
increase came from state income and withholding tax collections.  - STAFF

   Multisystems is bought

   Transportation-industry consultant TranSystems Corp., of Kansas City, Mo.,
said yesterday that it bought Cambridge public-transit consulting firm
Multisystems Inc. for undisclosed terms. Adding Multisystems, founded by a group
of Massachusetts Institute of Technology professors, will bring TranSystems
established offices in Toronto, Ontario, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and in Vermont
and New Jersey, the company said.  - STAFF

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2003


                             641 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     August 12, 2003 Tuesday THIRD EDITION

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS In Brief

BODY:


   Gillette buys into China battery co.

   Gillette Co., maker of Duracell batteries, said yesterday that it bought a
majority interest in a leading Chinese battery company with annual sales of more
than $ 80 million.

   Boston-based Gillette did not disclose terms of its purchase of control of
Fujian Nanping Nanfu Battery Co. Gillette said the deal would nominally add to
its earnings this year. - STAFF

   Lawyer rule changed

   Lawyers who learn that a client is cooking the books or looting a company's
till could snitch to authorities with a clear conscience under changes to
lawyers' ethical rules approved 218-201 yesterday by the American Bar
Association's policy-making board.

   The ABA rejected nearly identical changes two years ago, before scandals at
Enron, Tyco, WorldCom and other companies. - AP

   Genome shares jump

   Shares of Genome Therapeutics rose nearly 24 percent, to $ 3.22, after the
Waltham company announced a milestone payment for an undisclosed amount from
Amgen Inc. The two have an agreement worth up to $ 104 million to develop bone
disease therapies.  - STAFF

   TKT regains drug rights

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said yesterday that it regained from Wyeth
Pharmaceuticals the European rights to a treatment it is developing for
hemophilia. The Cambridge company will also get a $ 500,000 termination fee from
Wyeth.  - STAFF

   Abiomed loss shrinks

   Artificial-heart maker Abiomed Inc. narrowed its first-quarter loss to $ 3.1
million, or 15 cents a share, from $ 5.5 million, or 26 cents a share, in the
previous year's same period. For the quarter, which ended in June, the Danvers
company reported revenue of $ 5 million, compared with $ 5.1 million a year
earlier. - STAFF

   Mass. tax revenue up

   State tax revenue for July was $ 18 million more than initially thought,
Revenue Commissioner Alan LeBovidge reported yesterday. LeBovidge said the
updated total of $ 1.066 billion was 5.9 percent more than July 2002 and $ 39
million more than was anticipated under the state's spending plan. Most of the
increase came from state income and withholding tax collections.  - STAFF

   Multisystems is bought

   Transportation-industry consultant TranSystems Corp., of Kansas City, Mo.,
said yesterday that it bought Cambridge public-transit consulting firm
Multisystems Inc. for undisclosed terms. Adding Multisystems, founded by a group
of Massachusetts Institute of Technology professors, will bring TranSystems
established offices in Toronto, Ontario, Fort Lauderdale, Fla., and in Vermont
and New Jersey, the company said.  - STAFF

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2003


                             642 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 12, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-5

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: RICHARD OTTO

BODY:
 Title: Chief executive officer

   Age: 53

   Company: Corautus Genetics

   Richard Otto is known in San Diego biotechnology circles as a turnaround
specialist, an investor who can identify and nurture promising but troubled
companies.  From 1995 to 1998, Otto led the successful revitalization of
CardioDynamics International after it emerged from a Chapter 11 reorganization.

   Otto's latest challenge is Corautus Genetics, a new gene therapy company that
was formed from the merger of two cash-strapped companies.  In the current tough
climate for biotech financing, the complex field of gene therapy has been a
particularly hard sell -- but Otto last month forged a $10 million alliance with
Boston Scientific that buys the company time to raise new financing and pursue a
Phase 2 clinical study of a gene therapy to treat heart disease.

   Why does your company exist?

   My company was Vascular Genetics, which had a wonderful piece of gene therapy
technology for growing new vessels in diseased hearts.  GenStar Therapeutics had
infrastructure for manufacturing and some renowned scientists.  Combining the
two companies made sense, the two were stronger than either would have been
alone.

   What about your job keeps you up at night?

   I want to make sure our clinical trial is as high standard and as efficient
as it can be.  The management of our Phase 2 clinical trial and the way we
conduct it will ultimately determine the future of our company.  But biotech is
biotech: a lot of promise on the front end -- but getting in there and executing
a plan, you can get distracted very easily if you don't pay attention.

   What aspects of your job do you brag about?

   Talking about our therapeutic.  I recently met a patient who received our
gene therapy in an earlier trial three years ago.  He had heart disease in his
30s, and had already had 19 stents implanted in his heart.  Brushing his teeth
gave him chest pain.  But after he received the gene, he was gardening again and
hauling bags of dirt around.  That is extremely exciting to me.

   You have a reputation as a fix-it executive.  How do you pick the companies
that you want to spend time on -- weeding out the losers from the potential
Seabiscuit?

   Companies typically fail because of management, so if I can't be involved
from the top down, have freedom to operate, if I have a board that doesn't
recognize hard decisions need to be made, I can't be involved with that type of
turnaround.  If you look at companies that haven't made it, in most cases it was
because management lost focus or mismanaged its resources.  Maybe not
intentionally, but at the end of the day, after the autopsy, that's what the
patient died from.

   Tell us something interesting about yourself.

   I've retired three times successfully, trying to make my golf game better.
But as soon as I get it down to an almost respectable handicap, I come out of
retirement and take on another project.  My game is up to a 22 now.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Richard Otto

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2003


                             643 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      August 11, 2003 Monday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1724 words

HEADLINE: Taking science in new directions;
Area researchers finding formulas for success in high-tech endeavors

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Northeast Ohio might be known for its steel mills and manufacturing plants,
but the region's expertise has also given rise to a generation of promising,
high-tech industries.

   Some fields, such as medical imaging, medical devices, fuel cells and liquid
crystal technology, got their start here decades ago.

   Other areas, like gene therapy and regenerative medicine, are newer. But
researchers working within these fields are also building on local know-how.
Here are some of the most promising sectors that hold hope for the region's
future, and a sampling of companies making fast-track starts.

   Medical imaging

    NeoMed Technologies Inc. Marc Umeno, who runs NeoMed, spent four years on
active duty with the Army after getting his doctorate at American University in
Washington. When he realized he was better suited to start a high-tech business
than to analyze the effects of weapons of mass destruction, Umeno headed to
Cleveland to get a degree from Case Western Reserve University.

   He started NeoMed while still at CWRU. The depth of experience in the local
medical imaging community helped persuade Umeno to keep NeoMed here. His
2-year-old business is developing a system that tests for heart disease quickly,
more accurately and more cheaply than some other tests.

   With the help of a special liquid that's injected into a patient, NeoMed's
technology deciphers whether the blood vessels to the heart are blocked. Early
data show the system accurately tracks heart disease 85 percent of the time,
Umeno says.

   The company plans to start another trial next month, and NeoMed recently
received patents for its method of testing and the technology it uses for the
procedure.

    Imalux Corp. Another medical imaging company, Imalux scans for diseases like
cancer. New Hampshire native Paul Amazeen sold a former company he ran to Frantz
Medical Development Ltd., in Mentor, in the 1980s but kept his fingers in the
medical imaging community here.

   In 2001, Amazeen took the helm at Imalux, which was founded in Cleveland with
technology from Russia.

   Last month the company hired a new chief executive, Lloyd Breedlove, who had
been a senior vice president of Steris Corp. until he retired in 1999. When
Breedlove became CEO, Amazeen became executive vice president and chief
technology officer.

   Imalux, which expects to have a product on the market next year, tries to
instantly capture images of tissue with such high resolution that cancer
screening can be done in a few minutes during an office visit.

   Using infrared light, the technology can show where healthy cells end and
diseased cells start. Once perfected, the technology could eliminate the need to
take biopsies for tissue samples, usually done in a hospital.

   Fuel cells

    Technology Management Inc. This Cleveland-based firm is also working on
getting a product to market - something it has been at for more than 13 years.
The fuel cell company has notched successes, however.

   In February, it won almost $2 million in state grants. That's almost half of
what the state gave in total to fuel cell research and projects.

   Fuel cells provide power without pollution. They make electricity by
combining hydrogen and oxygen.

   Headed by Benson Lee, Technology Management is working on a prototype
fuel-cell generator system to power businesses. The system is the size of a
four-drawer filing cabinet. Several could be connected and used together,
depending on the power required.

   Manufacturers in Northeast Ohio could produce highly engineered products like
these. The fuel cell industry is "one of the few large, emerging, high-tech
industries that will be carried on the shoulders of manufacturing," Lee said.

   Regenerative medicine

    Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine. Local research institutions
have a commanding presence in regenerative medicine, which deals with growing
cells and tissues and developing therapies in the lab to restore health and cure
disease.

   Stanton Gerson, a professor of medicine at CWRU who heads the oncology and
hematology division at University Hospitals of Cleveland, began researching stem
cells years ago. Other scientists in Cleveland are also known for their work
with the technology. Athersys Inc. is the local company leading the way.

   "As a group, we're as good as any center in the country," Gerson said.

   Discoveries suggest stem cells might morph into almost every cell type in the
body. Researchers believe stem cells might be used to repair or replace damaged
tissue in the body.

   In Cleveland, researchers are working primarily with stem cells that come
from mice, adult humans or from blood in the umbilical cords of infants. That
allows scientists to sidestep the controversy associated with working with stem
cells gathered from embryos.

   Work in Cleveland in regenerative medicine is on track to accelerate. Gerson
has been selected as the director of the new Center for Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine in Cleveland. The center has been backed by $20 million of
state money. Supporters now plan to go after federal funds.

   Partners include CWRU, the Cleveland Clinic Foundation, UH, Athersys,
BioEnterprise Corp. and others in Ohio.

   Medical devices

    Cleveland Medical Devices Inc. This company is old compared with some peers:
The developer and manufacturer of rehabilitation and physiological monitoring
equipment for the medical and research communities got its start in 1990.

   Several years ago, Cleveland Medical Devices developed a wireless instrument
called the Crystal Monitor 16. The portable machine measures activity in the
brain and other body functions, such as muscle movement. The monitor gives
emergency room doctors information about seizures, whose physical signs might
not be evident otherwise.

   The data could be particularly useful for patients who have suffered heart
attacks. Research shows that fewer seizures following a heart attack means
better recovery, says Robert Schmidt, the Cleveland Heights native who owns this
company and two other high-tech firms.

   In June, the company launched another wireless device to monitor eye
movement, brain waves, breathing and other physiological signs that indicate
sleep apnea - when breathing temporarily stops during sleep - which can cause
problems for, and even kill, those affected. It's called the Crystal Monitor
16-S.

    AxioMed Spine Corp. Entrepreneurs Charles Birchall and James Kuras, natives
of Northeast Ohio, founded AxioMed in 2001 to create spinal implants for
patients with degenerative disc disease.

   They had worked at AcroMed Corp., a Cleveland spine implant company that was
sold in 1998.

   AxioMed's technology targets a pervasive problem. Almost 400,000 people in
this country will have spinal fusion surgery this year. Those patients give up
mobility in the hope of ending back pain.

   Awaiting patents now for the technology, Axi oMed aims to stop the pain
without compromising movement and function by replacing damaged discs with a
device called the Free dom Lumbar Disc. The device acts and looks like a real
vertebral disc, Birchall said.

   The company gets re search help from the Cleveland Clinic and got a boost
this year when it rais ed $2.75 million from Ohio- based venture capital firm s.
That money should let the company complete development of the device, Birchall
said.

   Gene therapy

    Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. This spring, Copernicus unveiled promising
results from a year-long clinical trial with gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, a
common genetic disease.

   The genetic defect causes mucus to build up in the lungs. Over many years,
the disease kills.

   Gene therapy involves either manipulating genes responsible for the
development of the disease or treating it by introducing a gene or protein into
patients' bodies. In the Copernicus trial, 12 patients with cystic fibrosis
received the corrected gene in a saline solution dripped into their nasal
passages.

   CRWU Professors Mark Cooper and Richard Hanson founded the company with other
colleagues in the mid-1990s. A longtime board member, Robert Moen, is CEO.

   The company is working on an aerosol, or mist, to offer treatment for the
entire lung that would be quick and easy to administer. Moen and his team
believe they can treat other genetic defects through a mist, too.

   New data show that the gene therapy the company created has a shelf life -
when it's kept in the refrigerator - of more than a year. That time frame, which
the company says is much longer than many kinds of gene therapy, should bolster
the treatment's usefulness.

   And, the company recently found that adding another substance to the product
can help make the treatment's effect on patients last weeks longer. That means
patients should need a dose every few weeks instead of every several hours.

   Cleveland-based Copernicus is scouting for about $15 million to get
regulatory approval for its cystic fibrosis treatment and to begin work on
others. It will start by trying to raise $1.5 million of that locally.

   Liquid crystal displays

    AlphaMicron Inc. In 1997, three former faculty members from Kent State
University's Liquid Crystal Institute founded AlphaMicron, which specializes in
liquid crystal applications for eyewear.

   The Institute at Kent State, almost 40 years old, was the first, and is the
largest, U.S. academic center focused on liquid crystal research. Scientists are
developing liquid crystals for various flat-panel display uses, including
computers, television sets and mobile phones - multibillion-dollar markets.

   AlphaMicron is developing sunglasses, ski goggles and visors whose tints can
instantly change to adjust for the level of light in the environment.

   Several years ago, the Air Force asked Kent-based AlphaMicron to help design
a helmet to display information for pilots on the visor's inner surface that
would remain visible in any light. Tamas Kosa, vice president of research and
development, said the company is still working on the project.

   AlphaMicron has received about $5 million in grants and has not had to rely
on venture capital. Last year, Ohio gave it $1.1 million to help get products to
market. With 15 employees, AlphaMicron is within two years of doing that. "We
grow slowly, but steadily," Kosa said.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2003


                             644 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      August 8, 2003 Friday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 928 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers treatment hope for Lou Gehrig's disease;
 Hopkins, Salk Institute report method doubled life span of afflicted mice

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Scientists say they may be on the threshold of a new treatment for Lou
Gehrig's disease, reporting today that a novel gene therapy nearly doubled the
life span of mice afflicted with the fatal, nerve-wasting disease.

   Researchers at the Johns Hopkins University and the Salk Institute in La
Jolla, Calif., said the treatment caused the mice to bulk up and slowed the
destruction of nerve cells - called motor neurons - that control practically all
movement, including breathing.

   But the scientists were equally excited about the way the treatment works -
through simple, one-time injections into weakened muscles. Once there, viral
particles armed with protective genes migrate to the neurons in a spinal cord
and brain that are under attack.

   This could remove a major stumbling block on the road to treating amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, a devastating ailment that afflicts 30,000 Americans. It
could deliver a treatment to the central nervous system without performing risky
surgery or injecting anything into sensitive nerve centers.

   "I think this is a significant breakthrough," said Dr. Marinos C. Dalakas,
chief of the neuromuscular disease branch at the National Institutes of Health.

   "The key thing to me is the way they have found the means for delivering
these (protective) factors to the motor neurons. You can easily give these
injections to the muscles that have been weak, and target the areas of the
spinal cord that have been affected."

   Results of the study appear in today's issue of the journal Science. The
experiment was led by Fred H. Gage and Brian Kaspar at the Salk Institute and
Dr. Jeffrey D. Rothstein at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.

   Rothstein, a neurologist who heads a large research team at Hopkins, says a
clinical trial involving humans could begin within a year. The trial, requiring
government approval, would be conducted at Hopkins and possibly Harvard
University.
Not a cure alone

   Doctors treating humans might inject the virus into muscles throughout the
body, including those in the arms, legs and trunk as well as others in the
throat that control swallowing and speech.

   Scientists in the study cautioned that the therapy alone is not a potential
cure because it does not reverse the cell death that paralyzes and eventually
kills victims. It also remains to be seen how powerfully the treatment acts in
humans.

   But ultimately, said Rothstein, the best therapy might be a "cocktail" that
combines this type of treatment with other therapies aimed at reversing the
disease. He and others hope to find a way to harness stem cells to replace dying
nerve cells.

   ALS, the disease associated with Gehrig, the New York Yankees first baseman
who succumbed in 1941, kills most of its victims within two to five years after
symptoms appear. Victims lose the ability to lift a hand, walk, swallow or
speak. Death usually comes when the muscles that control breathing shut down.

   In a cruel twist, the disease affects the neurons, but not the mind itself,
so victims remain knowing witnesses to their decline. Doctors diagnose about
5,000 cases of the disease each year in the United States.

   The therapeutic substance is a gene that serves as a factory for insulin
growth factor-1, a protein that interferes with cell death. Scientists inserted
copies of the gene into an adeno-associated virus. This is a noninfectious
particle which, they noticed, can travel from muscles to the motor neurons that
trigger them.

   The protein had been injected into animal and human muscle before, with
little effect. But in those cases, it had no way to cross the blood-brain
barrier. In the latest attempt, the virus provides a stealthy path to the
neurons.
'Quite potent'

   In the mouse experiment, scientists injected the viral package into muscles
in the hind legs and in the chest. The chest muscles were important targets
because they power the lungs.

   Mice that received the gene therapy at 60 days of age developed symptoms of
Gehrig's disease at 152 days - 31 days later than the untreated mice. On
average, they also lived 40 days longer. The treated mouse that survived the
longest lived 265 days, compared with 140 days for the untreated mouse.

   "It's a new way to deliver therapies to ALS patients, and looks to be quite
potent," Rothstein said.

   Mice used in the experiment were manipulated to carry a human gene that
triggers the wasting disease. The rodents are often used to test therapies
because diseases occur faster in their compressed lives, and are easily observed
by scientists.

   According to Gage, the virus carried the genes right into the affected nerve
cells. Once there, the genes not only protected the cells from within, but also
secreted growth factor into the surrounding tissue.

   "This is best therapy we've ever seen in mice," said Rothstein, who cautioned
that better therapies would probably emerge as research progresses. Though it is
impossible to say whether the gene therapy will succeed in humans, scientists
hope it will prove better than the drug Rilutek, which adds only a few months of
survival. In mouse studies, that drug increased survival by only 14 days.

   The research was funded, in large part, by Project ALS, a New York nonprofit
organization founded by Jenifer Estess, a former theater producer who suffers
from the disease, and her sisters.

   "We haven't put it into people but we're thrilled about what it's doing for
animals," said Valerie Estess, who has recruited many of the scientists involved
in funded research. "The clinical applications seem within reach."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Hopkins doctor Jeffrey D. Rothstein holds a mouse paralyzed
by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease.; BARBARA HADDOCK
TAYLOR : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2003


                             645 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       August 8, 2003 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 008

LENGTH: 245 words

HEADLINE: MGH to try gene therapy for Lou Gehrig's patients

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital hope to try a gene therapy
experiment in patients with Lou Gehrig's disease after a study in mice showed it
delayed symptoms and prolonged the lives of mice with the illness.

   "Will the observations seen in mice translate into humans? We don't know,"
said Dr. Robert Brown, a neurologist at MGH. "But there is so little else
available that the prospect of finding something that offers some benefit is
exciting."

   In the mouse study, researchers from the Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif.,
and Johns Hopkins University used a virus to carry a gene that produces a
protein that acts to improve the viability of motor nerve cells to the spinal
cords and muscle cells of mice with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or ALS.

   Mice in the study lived 25 percent longer than expected and were able to walk
better, says the study published in today's issue of the Journal Science.

   Brown said researchers at MGH, Hopkins and elsewhere are trying to design a
human study that would start in about a year or so.

   "We're so excited about it," said Valerie Estes of Project ALS, which funded
the study.

   The virus delivers copies of a gene that produces a protein known as insulin
growth factor - which is in short supply in ALS patients. ALS is marked by the
degeneration of spinal and brainstem motor nerve cells. Currently, there is no
effective therapy.

   About 5,000 Americans are diagnosed as having the disease each year.

LOAD-DATE: August 08, 2003


                             646 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 8, 2003, Friday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: WITH GENE THERAPY IN MICE A SUCCESS, RESEARCHERS SEE HOPE FOR ALS
PATIENTS

BYLINE: By Carey Goldberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Scientists yesterday said they had found the most effective treatment yet for
lab mice with Lou Gehrig's disease, a fatal nerve disorder that afflicts 30,000
Americans, and researchers at Massachusetts General Hospital said they hoped to
start trying the technique in humans in about a year.

   The treatment relies on gene therapy, which has been known to cause serious,
even fatal, complications in humans.

      Nevertheless, the results in mice are so striking, and the disease -
formally known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS - is so terrible that
human trials are justified, researchers and patient advocates said. They also
noted that the virus to be used in the gene therapy has a good safety record.

   "There's not one effective treatment for this uniformly fatal disease - it's
just crazy," said Valerie Estess, research director of Project ALS, a nonprofit
group that largely financed the research.

   ALS attacks the motor neurons, nerve cells that control movement, but usually
leaves thinking processes intact, so patients find themselves trapped inside a
body that slowly loses the ability to move, to speak, even to breathe.

   Death generally comes in two to five years, though with exceptions, like the
famous theoretical physicist, Stephen Hawking, who has had the disease since
college and is now 61. Lou Gehrig, the baseball superstar after whom the disease
is named, died of it in 1941 at age 37.

   The new therapy, published in this week's edition of the journal Science,
slowed the degeneration in mice that had been genetically altered to have ALS,
and extended their maximum life span to 265 days from 140 days.

   Researchers at the Salk Institute and Johns Hopkins University injected the
so-called adeno-associated virus into the legs and torsos of the mice. The virus
had been engineered to carry a gene for "insulin-like growth factor-1," which
can fight the neuron-killing effects of ALS. The virus migrated right into the
central nervous system, a notoriously difficult target.

   The technique "provides a novel way of delivering potent therapy directly to
the heart of the disease - the dying or at-risk motor neurons in the spinal
cord," said one researcher, Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, director of the Packard
Center for ALS Research at Johns Hopkins.

   Drugs and another gene therapy have shown some effect in mice with ALS,
Rothstein said, but they have generally been administered when the mice were
babies; this latest therapy worked even when it was given to adult mice with
ages parallel to the adult ages at which humans come down with ALS.

   Still, he cautioned, even in mice, "It's not a cure."

   Plans are already underway for initial safety tests of the new gene therapy
in human patients at Johns Hopkins and Massachusetts General Hospital. The rough
timetable is to get them going in a year or so, said Dr. Robert Brown, director
of the Day Neuromuscular Research Laboratory at MGH.

   "As the day approaches, we'll be looking for candidates," Brown said.

   Gene therapy remains controversial, acknowledged Fred H. Gage, another author
of the paper published in Science. But whether the treatment will work in humans
"can only be determined by doing human experiments," he said.

   To run trials on humans, the researchers must get approval from the Food and
Drug Administration; so far, researchers said, the agency has been easy to work
with and shown deep awareness that ALS is an otherwise hopeless disease.

   With an estimated 5,000 people diagnosed with ALS each year, there are likely
to be many volunteers for trials.

   Dr. Mickey McGrath, a 52-year-old doctor in Troy, N.Y., who has ALS, said he
is confident the gene technique could stop the progression of his disease. He
learned two years ago he has ALS, and these days walks with a walker and
breathes with the aid of a tracheotomy tube. Speaking through his wife, Aileen,
he said in a phone interview he is not worried about possible side effects of
gene therapy.

   "He doesn't think the side effects could be as bad as the disease," she said.

   Carey Goldberg is can be reached at goldberg@globe.com SIDEBAR:

   GENE THERAPY FOR LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2003


                             647 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 08, 2003, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   New breakthrough claimed against ALS


   WASHINGTON - A new type of gene therapy doubled the life of mice with a
laboratory form of Lou Gehrig's disease and researchers said they are the
planning to test the technique on human patients.

   In a study published this week in the journal Science, researchers at the
Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif. and Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore report that injecting mice with a gene that makes a
nerve cell stimulating protein delayed symptoms of Lou Gehrig's disease, or
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and extended the life span in laboratory mice.

   The gene makes a molecule called insulinlike growth factor, or IGF-1, a type
of protein that has produced marginal results against Lou Gehrig's disease in
human clinical trials.





   Breast-feeding driver set cruise control at 65 mph


   RAVENNA, Ohio - A woman on trial for breast-feeding her baby while driving on
the Ohio Turnpike testified Thursday that she nursed behind the wheel because
her husband told her to.

   Catherine Donkers, 29, said she had stopped at a highway rest stop May 8 to
feed her 7-month-old daughter, but realized the baby was still hungry after she
got back on the road, headed to Michigan from Pennsylvania.

   "I called my husband, and he directed me to continue on, to drive to Michigan
and nurse my child in the car. We did not feel we were breaking any law,"
Donkers said. "I had the cruise control on at 65 mph."

   Donkers, who is representing herself on several misdemeanor charges, called
herself to the witness stand Thursday afternoon in Portage County Municipal
Court.

   Breast-feeding while driving "certainly isn't a primary choice as a form of
feeding my child," she said. "I certainly had no intent to harm my child. I
never would."





   Book on Ramsey slaying to have 32 blank pages


   DENVER - A former housekeeper for JonBenet Ramsey's parents still plans to
publish a book about the 6-year-old's slaying - but with a blank chapter where
her grand jury testimony would have appeared, her attorney said Thursday.

   A federal appeals court ruled Wednesday that the state's grand jury secrecy
law prevents Linda Hoffman-Pugh from using the testimony in a book as long as
there's a chance another grand jury could be called to investigate the case.

   Hoffman-Pugh's lawyer said the planned book, The Death of an Innocent, would
contain a blank, 32-page chapter in place of the testimony.





   Red Cross seeks help to refill relief coffers


   WASHINGTON - With its disaster relief fund at the lowest level in more than a
decade, the American Red Cross is appealing for help.

   The relief fund, which aims to keep a balance of $ 56 million, had dwindled
to $ 1.2 million by the end of July. The fund has spent $ 114.3 million over the
past year, while donations have totaled less than $ 40 million.

   The organization says hurricane season can be a particularly demanding time,
and some weather experts say this could be an intense year for hurricanes.


GRAPHIC: Mugs: 1. Catherine Donkers; 2. Linda Hoffman-Pugh

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2003


                             648 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 8, 2003, Friday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: Therapy developed to delay Lou Gehrig's; Human clinical trials could
begin in a year

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman; STAFF WRITER | Staff writer Penni Crabtree and The
Associated Press contributed to this report.

BODY:
 Using a virus to deliver a gene to brain cells, scientists have developed a new
way to delay symptoms of Lou Gehrig's disease, a devastating and deadly illness
that has no cure.

   The new therapy, described today in the journal Science, is the first to show
so much benefit after the disease begins.  The novel gene therapy postponed
symptoms and nearly doubled the life span of mice with the disease -- also known
as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS.

   Clinical trials in humans could begin in a year.

   "We're very excited about this," said Dr. Jeffrey Rothstein, director of the
Packard Center for ALS Research at Johns Hopkins University, who worked on the
study with scientists at The Salk Institute in La Jolla.

   "Even in mice, progression of the disease is so rapid that we only test
possible treatments before mice get sick," Rothstein said.  "It is amazing that
this gene therapy can slow progression even after symptoms develop."

   ALS causes the gradual death of nerve cells that control muscle movement,
resulting eventually in paralysis and death.  Its cause is unknown.

   The disease attracted worldwide attention when New York Yankee first baseman
Lou Gehrig announced that he had the disease in 1939, two years before his
death.  ALS affects about 30,000 Americans.

   The gene used in the new study produces a protein called "insulin-like growth
factor-1," or IGF-1. It has been used in clinical trials for people with a
variety of neurological diseases.

   But results have been marginal because the body's blood-brain barrier, which
keep's poisons in the blood from entering the brain, prevents the gene from
reaching brain cells.

   In the new therapy, scientists found that they could deliver the gene by
injecting a virus carrying it into muscle tissue, where it is then taken up by
nerve cells in the muscle and transported to the brain.  The virus, called
adeno-associated virus, is nontoxic to humans.

   "By injecting our viral vector into muscles, the gene could then deliver the
protein into nerve cells that controlled the muscle, resulting in the
preservation of those nerve cells that would otherwise have succumbed more
quickly to ALS," said Salk researcher Fred H. Gage, an author of the study.

   Gage, Rothstein and their colleagues found that they could delay the onset of
ALS in diseased mice by 31 days and increase the animals' life span to a maximum
of 265 days -- compared to 140 days for mice without the therapy.

   The protein, IGF-1, was able to extend the life spans of diseased mice by 22
days -- even after symptoms appeared, scientists said.  The treated mice also
maintained physical movement longer than untreated mice, and the therapy
provided 20 percent more muscle mass.

   "Certainly, the IGF-1 result is the most promising," said Dr. Robert Brown,
director of the Day Neuromuscular Laboratory and Muscular Dystrophy Clinic at
Massachusetts General Hospital and a leading ALS researcher.

   Brown said his lab plans to work with Johns Hopkins to conduct clinical
trials based on the study.  Salk is working with Johns Hopkins and Harvard to
design the clinical trials, Gage said.

   "The use of a viral vector to deliver this protein to the cell body of a
neuron is what's novel, and very hopeful," Brown said.

   Ceregene, the San Diego subsidiary of Cell Genesys, has the option to license
the new technology and is negotiating exclusive commercial rights to the
therapy.  Gage is a member of Ceregene's scientific advisory board.

   "Everyone is very interested in translating this into human clinical trials
as quickly as possible to test for safety and efficacy -- because these patients
have no choice in life," said Jeffrey Ostrove, president of Ceregene.  "There is
no help."

   Other authors of the study, which was funded by Project ALS, the Christopher
Reeve Foundation, the National Institute on Aging and the National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke, included Brian Kaspar and Nushin Sherkat at
Salk and Jeronia Llado at Johns Hopkins.

   Bruce Lieberman: (619) 293-2836; bruce.lieberman@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2003


                             649 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 August 8, 2003 Friday 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 902 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer rate rises with hormones, British study finds

SERIES: IN BRIEF

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A study of 1-million British women has found a higher death rate from breast
cancer among those who took combination hormone therapy than those who did not
use it or took estrogen alone.

   The study is by far the largest to determine the effects of hormones on
breast cancer. The findings, which are being published in London on Saturday in
the journal the Lancet, build on compelling evidence from studies in the United
States that the risks of invasive breast cancer from combination hormone therapy
were greater than many doctors had predicted.

   American experts not connected with the study said the new findings
strengthened recent recommendations against using long-term combination hormone
therapy to prevent chronic conditions like bone fractures from osteoporosis.

   "This is a big study that generally supports everything we have said" about
the risks of hormone therapy, said Dr. Rowan Chlebowski of the Research and
Education Institute at Harbor-University of California at Los Angeles Medical
Center in Torrance, Calif.

   Dr. Valerie Beral of Oxford University led the new study, which involved
about one-fourth of British women between the ages of 50 and 64. Women who took
hormones at the time the study began in 1996 had a 66 percent increased risk of
developing breast cancer and a 22 percent greater risk of dying from it by 2002.


Experts fear measles might become endemic

   WASHINGTON - Measles is posing a growing risk to children in Britain as
parents decide against vaccinations for fear of side effects, and researchers
warn the disease could become endemic, a constant threat to health.

   British researchers report today in the journal Science the level of
vaccinated children in Britain has dropped below 80 percent and the nation is
experiencing more frequent and larger outbreaks of measles.

   Dr. Mary Ramsay of the Health Protection Agency, a co-author of the study,
said the level of vaccination in Britain was 92 percent in 1995, but it has been
falling steadily since.

   "That is why we are concerned that we will have measles re-established in the
U.K.," she said.

   Last year, there were 308 cases of measles, a small number in a country the
size of Britain, but Ramsay said that is about three times the number from 2001.

   Ramsay said the decline in inoculation against measles can be traced to a
series of papers that suggested a link between autism among children and the
combination vaccine for mumps, measles and rubella.

Ebola vaccine works quickly, researchers say

   A single dose of an experimental Ebola vaccine protected lab monkeys from the
deadly virus in less than a month, federal researchers have found, marking the
first time immunity was reached so quickly.

   If the same performance can be obtained in humans, the vaccine might one day
allow public health officials to quickly contain Ebola outbreaks by vaccinating
everyone around an infected group of people.

   Ebola spreads easily from person to person, causes illness quickly and kills
a significant number of those it infects. There is no known treatment for the
disease, and the periodic human outbreaks caused by people hunting great apes in
several African countries have been contained only by quarantine.

   But Dr. Gary Nabel of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, director of the team that developed the new vaccine, described
Thursday in the journal Nature, said the serum might give public health
officials their first real medical tool in battling the epidemics.

   "Ring vaccination might be used to stop the spread of the Ebola virus during
acute outbreaks, just as this strategy has been used to contain smallpox in the
past," Nabel said.

Also . . .

   LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE: A new type of gene therapy doubled the life of mice
with a laboratory form of Lou Gehrig's disease and researchers said they are
planning to test the technique on human patients.

   In a study published this week in the journal Science, researchers at the
Salk Institute for Biological Studies in La Jolla, Calif., and Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore report that injecting mice with a gene that makes a
nerve cell stimulating protein delayed symptoms of Lou Gehrig's disease and
extended the life span in laboratory mice.

   POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER: Doctors have come up with a quick screening
test to help identify which injured kids - and their parents - might be at risk
of developing post-traumatic stress disorder.

   Researchers have estimated that after a traumatic event anywhere from 15 to
45 percent of injured children go on to suffer symptoms and reactions that
persist for at least a month.

   The new test, called the Screening Tool for Early Predictions of PTSD, or
STEPP, includes four yes-no questions that doctors ask the young patient, four
yes-no questions for a parent and four items retrieved from medical records.

   "Until now, health care providers did not have a simple way to tell, early
on, who could be at risk of (post-traumatic stress disorder or, PTSD) after a
child injury," said Dr. Flaura Winston, a researcher at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia. He is co-author of a report on the test published Wednesday in the
Journal of the American Medical Association.

   "We hope that acute-care physicians can use this screening tool to help
determine who should be referred for psychological evaluation and intervention
so that families can avoid PTSD."

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2003


                             650 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 7, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-9:6,7; B-5:1; B-7:2

LENGTH: 2381 words

HEADLINE: DEATH AND FUNERAL NOTICES

BODY:
 BAKER, GEORGE "CLIFF" George "Cliff" Baker passed away suddenly on July 31,
2003 at Coronado Golf Course, his favorite place in the world.  Cliff was born
on May 1, 1937 to George and Wilma Baker.  He was raised and schooled in
Pittsburg, Kansas.  He graduated from Kansas State Teachers College in 1959.
Cliff spent the next 20 years in the Kansas City region.  He left his position
as Vice President of Marketing and Sales at United Computer Systems to start his
own business, Applied Information Science.  He sold this business in 1982, and
relocated to San Diego.  Here he spent the majority of his professional time as
an independent sales and marketing consultant for a number of corporations.
Cliff loved golf.  He dedicated himself to the sport during his last few years.
He enjoyed both the camaraderie of new friends, and the challenge of the game.
Always entertaining and witty, Cliff was the life of the party.  He felt that we
were on this planet to enjoy life, and did his best to make this feeling a
life's philosophy. Cliff is survived by his wife Eva, his daughter Carrie Baker
Dodge, his stepchildren Angela McNeal and David Cardiff, and his grandchildren
Kate and Jack Dodge.  He will be loved and remembered by his family, and many,
many friends.  A celebration and remembrance of his life will be held at The
Coronado Golf Course, 2000 Visalia Row, Coronado, California, on Sunday August
10 from 6-8 p.m. The family suggests donations to the San Diego County Jr. Golf
Association, 3333 Camino Del Rio South, Suite 110, San Diego, Ca., 92108.

   BROWNE KENNETH REMINGTON Ken, 90, a longtime San Diego resident, passed away
July 30, 2003. He was born on September 17, 1912, in Santa Barbara, Ca. At 17,
he joined the Navy and never lost his love of the sea and the military.  Ken was
stationed on the USS Tucker at Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. He served on
several ships during WWII and the Korean War, retiring as a Warrant Officer in
1955. He was a proud member of the San Diego Pearl Harbor Survivors Association,
Carnation Chapter 3. After his retirement from the Navy, Ken worked for the
Federal Civil Service. Ken will always be remembered for his love of
photography, the outdoors and traveling.  He enjoyed people and was always ready
to help out anyone in need.  He will be deeply missed by his family and his many
friends and neighbors. Preceded in death by his beloved wife, Jane; survived by
his daughter, Cindy Williams; his adored granddaughter, Jennifer Williams;
sister, Lois Browne; and his many nieces and nephews.  Following Ken's wishes,
his ashes will be scattered at sea by the U.S. Navy. No other services are
planned.

   FUNK, NORMA ADELAIDE GOLDEN Norma, of El Cajon, died Sunday morning August 3,
2003. She was born in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, May 5, 1920. She came to San
Diego with her family later that year. Norma was raised on the corner of
Bancroft and Campo Rd. in Spring Valley in the 1920's and 30's. She milked cows,
fed chickens, tended the family garden and rode her horse all over the valley.
Norma attended La Mesa Elementary and Grossmont High School, often riding her
horse to Grossmont High with her friend, Clara.  She graduated in 1937. Norma
met Bud (James Raymond) Funk at a St. Andrews Episcopal Church social and they
fell in love.  They were married in 1939 in Prescott, Ariz. and later settled in
a house that Bud built in Spring Valley on Rosedale St. where they had two
children, Joan and Brian.  In 1950 they moved to a home on Bancroft Dr that Bud
also built. In 1955 the family moved to La Mesa where Norma cheered as her son
Brian played football for Helix, and traveled to competitions as her daughter
Joan played the bagpipes. In 1960, Norma and Bud moved to El Cajon.  They
purchased an old home on a dirt road with an acre of property in the "country".
Norma was able to have horses, chickens and geese.  With horses in her life
again Norma not only roamed all over the area locally, she joined the Pine
Valley Mountain Riders and rode through the mountains and deserts.  She always
remembered with great enthusiasm, the 'Death Valley Ride.' Norma loved to sing
and was a member of the 'Generations', a choral group that brought her pleasure
and many new friends. She worked at 'Bud and Rays', the family jewelry store on
Main and Magnolia in El Cajon for many years. Norma's greatest loves in life
were her husband and family.  Bud passed away in November of 2002 after 63 years
of marriage and Norma mourned him inconsolably. Norma joined Bud again on Sunday
August 3, 2003. She leaves behind a large, loving and supportive family
including her son Brian James and daughter Joan Funk-Durkin.  Also missing her
tremendously will be her seventeen grandchildren, thirty six
great-grandchildren, and numerous nieces, nephews and long time friends from
Grossmont High School, Spring Valley and La Mesa, and the Grove Road Gang. The
Memorial Service for this much-beloved mother, grandmother, great-grandmother,
Auntie and friend will be held Sat., August 9, 2003, 2 p.m. St. Andrews
Episcopal Church in La Mesa, 4816 Glen Av. The Reverend Boone Sadler will
officiate.  In lieu of flowers, the family request donations be made to Sharp
Hospice.

   GREENE, NAT Hadassah, The Women's Zionist Organization of America, Inc.
mourns the passing of Nat Greene, beloved husband of Rose. A generous benefactor
of Hadassah, he was devoted to Israel and the Jewish people.  His support of the
Hadassah, particularly in the areas of gene therapy and Young Judaea is just a
part of his legacy.  We extend our deepest condolences to his family.  He will
be missed by all who knew him. June Walker National President

   LOGOMASINI, JOSEPH H. Joseph, 79, died peacefully at home amongst family
members on August 5, 2003. Joseph was born and raised in Brooklyn, NY. He moved
to San Diego in the mid 1950s after serving in the Navy. He was a graduate of
Annapolis Naval Academy and after the Navy worked as a mechanical engineer for
the Navy on Point Loma, retiring in 1980. He is survived by his secondwife
Renee.  His first wife, Margaret, passed away in 1978 from whom he has three
children.  He is also survived by one child and five stepchildren from his
second wife.  We are all saddened by the loss of quiet, intelligent Joe, but we
know he is now in the Lord's Hands. Viewing will be at 4-5 p.m., visitation
5-7:30 p.m., rosary at 7:30 p.m. at Goodbody Mortuary, San Diego.  Funeral Mass
Friday at 10 a.m., St. Therese Catholic Church, San Diego.

   MATTER BARBARA I. THOMPSON Oct. 6, 1928 to August 2, 2003 Barbara, 74, a
resident of El Cajon, Calif. went to be with the Lord on August 2, 2003, she
passed away from congestive heart failure.  She was born in Bradford, Pa., where
she grew up with her four brothers, Hugh Jr., Matthew, Robert and Ferris.  She
graduated from Bradford High School.  She worked for Stricker's Shoe Co. of La
Mesa, Calif., and Handyman of El Cajon, Calif.  She retired in 1976. She is
survived by her loving husband of 23 years, Robert G. Matter of El Cajon,
Calif., daughters, Marsha and husband Wayne Anderson of Temecula, Calif.,
Patricia Ann Sporer of La Mesa, Calif., son Robert E. Sporer of El Cajon, four
grandchildren, two brothers Robert Thompson and wife Sara of St. Petersburg,
Fla., Ferris Thompson and wife Joan of Miami, Fla., and a host of family and
friends.  She will be truly missed. No services will be held.  Interment will be
at McRean Memorial Park Cemetery, Lafayette, Pa. Arrangements through Paris
Frederick Mortuary, El Cajon, Calif. Donations may be made to San Diego Hospice,
4311 Third Ave., SD Ca 92103-1407

   NALIBOFF, CARL R. Carl R. Naliboff died on August 5, at his home in San
Diego, after a long illness.  He was born in Brooklyn, New York on September 29,
1926, son of the late Sidney and Faye Naliboff.  He moved to San Diego at the
age of eight and graduated from Herbert Hoover High School in February of 1944
where he lettered in baseball.  After high school he joined the US Navy were he
served as a radioman on a destroyer escort in both the Atlantic and Pacific
theaters during World War II. After leaving the Navy he worked at the family
hardware store and then in automobile sales until he joined the Fed Mart
corporation.  He worked for Fed Mart for over twenty years and then owned his
own import company until his retirement. He is survived by his wife, Yu Mei Wang
Naliboff; his two sons and their wives, Dr. Jay and Jane Naliboff of Vienna, ME,
and Bruce and Candace Naliboff of Woodland, Calif.; four granddaughters,
Courtney, Lauren, Leah, and Dana; and two brothers, Yale Naliboff of the
Netherlands, and Stuart Naliboff of San Diego. At the request of the family
there will be no visiting hours.  No services have been planned.

   RADFORD RUTH MCINTYRE Ruth McIntyre Radford was called home to her Lord on
August 5, 2003, while living in Greenville, South Carolina, at the age of 87.
The family will gather for a private graveside service at 3 p.m. at El Cajon
Cemetery.  A memorial service will be held at Shadow Mountain Community Church,
2100 Greenfield Drive, El Cajon, Calif, on August 8, at 7 p.m. in the evening.
The family will receive friends and family at that time. She was born on January
2, 1916, in Philadelphia, Pa., to Robert James McIntyre of Ireland and Rebecca
L. McClenaghan McIntyre of Philadelphia. She joined the Navy WAVES on April 15,
1944 and was Honorably Discharged on July 23, 1945 as Yeoman, Third Class.  She
was stationed at Camp Elliott in San Diego, Calif. On May 29, 1945, Ruth married
Ralph Raymond Radford, son of Pearl McClain Radford and Rue Raymond Radford,
born in San Diego, Calif, on October 4, 1920. She resided in San Diego for 56
years. Ruth was the office manager for Radford Overhead Doors and was a helpmeet
to her husband until his Sept. 25, 1999 death. Ruth invested her life in her
husband, her two children and three grandsons.  Surviving are her son, Robert
Randall Radford, of Watertown, Wis, and her daughter, Ronda Radford Preacher of
Lynchburg, Va. Also, her three grandsons: Robert Radford, Jr. of Bristol, Va.,
and Ryan and Reagan Preacher of Lynchburg, Va. In addition to ministering to her
family, she also served in Shadow Mountain Community Church (formerly Scott
Memorial Baptist Church of San Diego and El Cajon) in various capacities as a
Deaconess, as a member of the Board of Christian Education, the Missionary
Board, and as a prayer warrior.  She will be remembered as a devoted wife, a
loving mother, and a friend of many.  Her quiet spirit, kind heart, gift of
hospitality and example as a Godly woman will be her legacy.

   RUSTAY JOANNE V.  "COOKIE" April 7, 1941 to August 4, 2003 Joanne V.
"Cookie" Rustay died peacefully on August 4, after a long illness.  She was born
in New York City and moved to San Diego with her family in 1972. Survivors
include daughters Candy Barak of Santee, Michelle Serrano of Ramona, Jeanine
Hooey of Minnesota, son Ken Rustay of Escondido and ten grandchildren. A Funeral
Mass will be held at 11 a.m., Monday, August 11, at Immaculate Heart of Mary
Catholic Church, 537 E Street, Ramona.  Reception following service at church
hall.  Please send donations to the Elizabeth Hospice 151 W. Crest Street,
Escondido, Calif. 92025.

   TARDO, ANTHONY JOSEPH August 18, 1936 to July 2, 2003 Jay, 66, of New
Orleans, La., passed from this earth to be with the Lord July 2. He is survived
by his sister Rosalie Viola and his brother Laverne "Mickey" Tardo, nieces Jan
Marr, Jill Millet, Jaye Holmes, Tina Tardo and his nephews Joey and Jerry Meyer
and Ron and Brian Tardo.  Jay left behind eighteen great and twelve
great-great-nieces and nephews and his two schnauzers "Max" and "Frankie". No
services have been planned, and his ashes will be scattered at sea. His family
would like to thank his two friends Martin Eddy and Tom Leonard for all their
help and care during Jay's illness.

   ZOMBEK, JULIANA Juliana Zombek, nee Juliana Schuehle, passed away on August
2, 2003. She was 74. Born in Karlsruhe, Germany on December 31, 1928, Juliana
was a vibrant child who loved life.  She was an outstanding student at the
Lessing Gymnasium from 1939-1944 and graduated from the Wirtschaftsoberschule
(business college) in 1947. From 1947-1952, Juliana worked for the U.S. Army in
Germany as an office secretary, then came to the United States in 1955 and
worked for the West Virginia University Comptroller's office as a payroll clerk
until 1957. In 1967, she began working for the San Diego Community Colleges,
working her way up from an intermediate clerk to Secretary to the Dean of
Instruction at Adult Continuing Education and finally, Secretary to the
President at San Diego Mesa College. After her husband of 20 years, Walter
Stanley Zombek, died in 1972, Juliana kept working until she retired in 1989.
Then it was the traveling bug that hit her, and she was off to far-off places.
Her motto was always "do it now while you can!" In 1995, Juliana was one of four
founders of the national organization called War Brides of WWII. She volunteered
her services with Meals on Wheels for many years and was a member with the San
Diego German-American Society.  An avid walker and history buff, she lead tours
to interesting historical sites in downtown San Diego with the local Walkabout
organization. Juliana is survived by her sons, Thomas Zombek, of Vista, Calif.
and Mark Zombek of Huntington Beach, Calif., and two grandchildren, Stephanie
and Zachary Zombek, also of Huntington Beach, Calif. Friends and family will
celebrate Juliana's life on Saturday, August 9, 2003, at the Clairemont Lutheran
Church, 4271 Clairemont Mesa Blvd., beginning at 3:30 p.m. In lieu of flowers,
the family encourages donations to Walkabout International, 4639 30th St., Ste
C, San Diego, CA 92116-3207.

   CARD OF THANKS

   SALAS, RICARDO G. On behalf of the Salas Lim family we thank you for your
support and love during the loss of our beloved Ricardo G. Salas.

   To Place a DEATH AND FUNERAL NOTICE, call (619) 293-1912
funeralnotices@uniontrib.com Weekdays, 8:30am to 4:30pm Saturdays, noon to 4 pm
Death and Funeral Notices submitted may be used in print or digital form in any
publication or service authorized by The Union-Tribune Publishing Co.


GRAPHIC: 5 PICS

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2003


                             651 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 7, 2003, Thursday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1019 words

HEADLINE: Office vacancies hold steady; Despite positive signs, some say it's
too early to predict a rebound

BYLINE: Mike Freeman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 For months, San Diego landlords have been looking for the bottom of the
slumping industrial and office leasing market.

   Now, they think they may have found it, or at least come close.

   Office vacancy rates in San Diego County held steady from the first quarter
to the second quarter at 12.6 percent, according to Burnham Real Estate
Services.  A report by CB Richard Ellis found a similar result, indicating an
end to rising vacancies for office space.

   Vacancy rates for industrial buildings followed the same trend.

   "A lot of our leasing guys are telling us they're starting to see a pickup in
activity from smaller companies," said Stath Karras, chief executive of Burnham
Real Estate.  "Typically, when you start to see a recovery, it begins with the
small users."

   Karras cautioned that it's still too early to predict a rebound.  Local
companies aren't adding jobs.  A glut of sublease space is still bloating many
business parks.  Rents are declining.  And rising interest rates may trip up
investor interest in San Diego commercial properties, which has been one of the
few bright spots in the market.

   Still, there are positive signs.  Carmel Valley, an office market that was
sent reeling by the bankruptcy of Peregrine Systems and the implosion of the
Brobeck Phleger & Harrison law firm, has recovered by luring a host of firms,
including Memec, Fair Isaac & Co., Fish and Richardson, and Paul Hastings.

   Net absorption -- a real estate term for the amount of space leased minus the
amount of space vacated -- is starting to show gains.  And venture capital
investment in local companies rose last quarter for the first time in three
years.

   Real estate officials will be closely watching the vacancy numbers in the
next few quarters to see if the market gains momentum or slips backward.

   "We've had good leasing activity at very low rental rates, which has somewhat
stabilized vacancies," said Brian Driscoll, senior vice president with Colliers
International.  "Net absorption has been flat to somewhat positive.  If we can
sustain that for three or four quarters, I think we would be on much more solid
ground."

   San Diego was never hit as hard by the downturn as many other parts of the
country.  For example, second quarter office vacancy rates were 19.4 percent in
San Francisco and Phoenix, 16.85 percent in Seattle, and 15.6 percent in Orange
County, according to CB Richard Ellis.

   "It's been a little bit of a slow market in office and industrial leasing,
but it's still relatively good," Mark Read, senior managing director for CB
Richard Ellis' San Diego operations, said in a recent interview.

   San Diego has been helped by the fact that its two largest office markets --
downtown and Mission Valley -- didn't attract a lot of technology companies
during the dot-com boom.  Consequently, tenants there weren't hurt as badly when
the tech bubble burst.

   But other business centers such as University City, Sorrento Mesa and
Carlsbad did germinate a host of technology companies.  And they're still
suffering from the fallout.

   "There are bright spots and horror stories," said David Marino, a broker with
Irving Hughes, which specializes in representing tenants.  "The bright spots are
downtown, Mission Valley and Carmel Valley.  But you've got a bloodbath in
markets generally north of State Highway 52."

   Marino said sublease space has depressed leasing rates and pushed up
vacancies in some of these northern San Diego business parks.

   MP3.com illustrates how sublease space has created a hangover in some
markets.  When Internet music was among the stars of the new economy, the online
music company leased 100,000 square feet of office space in University City and
employed more than 300 workers.

   Today, the rapidly shrinking company, which was purchased for $372 million by
Vivendi Universal in 2001, has more than 70,000 square feet of space up for
sublease.  Another round of layoffs occurred last week, although Vivendi
Universal is providing few details about the cuts.

   So far, MP3.com's buildings have had few takers.

   "In the last two years, landlords have had to compete with sublease space,
and it's killing them," said Marino.  "That's not going to change."

   Marino estimates that 2.3 million square feet of office space is available
for sublease in San Diego County, an amount that could take two years to fill
up.

   Companies that sublease surplus space often do so at rock-bottom rates.
Digirad, a San Diego medical equipment company, is moving from several
spread-out office buildings into one 70,000-square-foot structure it subleased
from telecom equipment maker Remec.

   Digirad agreed to rent the building, which is about one-third larger than it
needs, because it's cheaper to sublease a larger building from Remec than to
lease 45,000 square feet directly from a landlord, Marino said.

   Brokers report rental rates in Sorrento Mesa -- a market hit hard by the tech
bust -- are at their lowest levels in years, with some buildings available for
less than $1 a square foot.

   Counting sublease space and buildings that are occupied but being offered for
lease, the office vacancy rate in Sorrento Mesa is 31 percent, according to CB
Richard Ellis.

   Bill Fleck, a broker with The Staubach Co., which also represents tenants,
said the bottom of the market may have been reached in some markets, such as
Carmel Valley.

   But he doesn't think it's close in University City, Sorrento Mesa or other
business parks favored by technology companies.

   And he thinks declining lease rates in these markets will start to lure
tenants from the more stable markets, such as Mission Valley.

   "Mission Valley is getting higher rents than University City," Fleck said.
"That has never happened.  University City has always been considered a more
upscale market."

   He continued, "Corporate America is still overcommitted on space.  Landlords
are reaching farther to make deals than they were 90 days ago.  Rents are lower
and (incentives) are better.  In my mind, that is not a sign of a correcting
market."

   Mike Freeman: (619) 4293-1515; mike.freeman@uniontrib.com


CORRECTION-DATE: August 12, 2003

CORRECTION:

    A story Thursday about San Diego's office market said incorrectly that
Digirad has an agreement to sublease a building from Remec. Although officials
of the two firms have signed a letter of intent, negotiations have not been
completed and no agreement has been reached. The Union-Tribune regrets the
error.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC | 1 GRAPH | 1 CHART; 1. James Baird / Union-Tribune 2,3. SOURCE:
Burnham Real Estate Services | BRIAN CRAGIN / Union-Tribune; 1. Remodeling is
set to begin at a Sorrento Mesa building leased by San Diego biotech Gene
Therapy Systems, which took 16,000 square feet as part of an expansion. The
local commercial real estate market may finally be nearing bottom, brokers say.
2,3. County vacancy -- Office and industrial vacancy rates held firm in the
second quarter, stemming a trend of higher vacancies as regional employers shed
jobs. While it's still too early to draw any conclusions, local real estate
officials say it could signal that the worst is over for local commercial real
estate. 2. VACANCY RATES BY SECTOR 3. OFFICE VACANCY RATES BY COMMUNITY

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2003


                             652 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 7, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: Office vacancies hold steady;
Despite positive signs, some say it's too early to predict a rebound

BYLINE: Mike Freeman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For months, San Diego landlords have been looking for the bottom of the
slumping industrial and office leasing market. Now, they think they may have
found it, or at least come close. Office vacancy rates in San Diego County held
steady from the first quarter to the second quarter at 12.6 percent, according
to Burnham Real Estate Services.

   A report by CB Richard Ellis found a similar result, indicating an end to
rising vacancies for office space. Vacancy rates for industrial buildings
followed the same trend. "A lot of our leasing guys are telling us they're
starting to see a pickup in activity from smaller companies," said Stath Karras,
chief executive of Burnham Real Estate.

   "Typically, when you start to see a recovery, it begins with the small
users." Karras cautioned that it's still too early to predict a rebound.

   Local companies aren't adding jobs.

   A glut of sublease space is still bloating many business parks.

   Rents are declining.

   And rising interest rates may trip up investor interest in San Diego
commercial properties, which has been one of the few bright spots in the market.
Still, there are positive signs.

   Carmel Valley, an office market that was sent reeling by the bankruptcy of
Peregrine Systems and the implosion of the Brobeck Phleger & Harrison law firm,
has recovered by luring a host of firms, including Memec, Fair Isaac & Co., Fish
and Richardson, and Paul Hastings. Net absorption -- a real estate term for the
amount of space leased minus the amount of space vacated -- is starting to show
gains.

   And venture capital investment in local companies rose last quarter for the
first time in three years. Real estate officials will be closely watching the
vacancy numbers in the next few quarters to see if the market gains momentum or
slips backward. "We've had good leasing activity at very low rental rates, which
has somewhat stabilized vacancies," said Brian Driscoll, senior vice president
with Colliers International.

   "Net absorption has been flat to somewhat positive.

   If we can sustain that for three or four quarters, I think we would be on
much more solid ground." San Diego was never hit as hard by the downturn as many
other parts of the country.

   For example, second quarter office vacancy rates were 19.4 percent in San
Francisco and Phoenix, 16.85 percent in Seattle, and 15.6 percent in Orange
County, according to CB Richard Ellis. "It's been a little bit of a slow market
in office and industrial leasing, but it's still relatively good," Mark Read,
senior managing director for CB Richard Ellis' San Diego operations, said in a
recent interview. San Diego has been helped by the fact that its two largest
office markets -- downtown and Mission Valley -- didn't attract a lot of
technology companies during the dot-com boom.

   Consequently, tenants there weren't hurt as badly when the tech bubble burst.
But other business centers such as University City, Sorrento Mesa and Carlsbad
did germinate a host of technology companies.

   And they're still suffering from the fallout. "There are bright spots and
horror stories," said David Marino, a broker with Irving Hughes, which
specializes in representing tenants.

   "The bright spots are downtown, Mission Valley and Carmel Valley.

   But you've got a bloodbath in markets generally north of State Highway 52."
Marino said sublease space has depressed leasing rates and pushed up vacancies
in some of these northern San Diego business parks. MP3.com illustrates how
sublease space has created a hangover in some markets.

   When Internet music was among the stars of the new economy, the online music
company leased 100,000 square feet of office space in University City and
employed more than 300 workers. Today, the rapidly shrinking company, which was
purchased for $372 million by Vivendi Universal in 2001, has more than 70,000
square feet of space up for sublease.

   Another round of layoffs occurred last week, although Vivendi Universal is
providing few details about the cuts. So far, MP3.com's buildings have had few
takers. "In the last two years, landlords have had to compete with sublease
space, and it's killing them," said Marino.

   "That's not going to change." Marino estimates that 2.3 million square feet
of office space is available for sublease in San Diego County, an amount that
could take two years to fill up. Companies that sublease surplus space often do
so at rock-bottom rates. Digirad, a San Diego medical equipment company, is
moving from several spread-out office buildings into one 70,000-square-foot
structure it subleased from telecom equipment maker Remec. Digirad agreed to
rent the building, which is about one-third larger than it needs, because it's
cheaper to sublease a larger building from Remec than to lease 45,000 square
feet directly from a landlord, Marino said. Brokers report rental rates in
Sorrento Mesa -- a market hit hard by the tech bust -- are at their lowest
levels in years, with some buildings available for less than $1 a square foot.
Counting sublease space and buildings that are occupied but being offered for
lease, the office vacancy rate in Sorrento Mesa is 31 percent, according to CB
Richard Ellis. Bill Fleck, a broker with The Staubach Co., which also represents
tenants, said the bottom of the market may have been reached in some markets,
such as Carmel Valley. But he doesn't think it's close in University City,
Sorrento Mesa or other business parks favored by technology companies. And he
thinks declining lease rates in these markets will start to lure tenants from
the more stable markets, such as Mission Valley. "Mission Valley is getting
higher rents than University City," Fleck said. "That has never happened.

   University City has always been considered a more upscale market." He
continued, "Corporate America is still overcommitted on space.

   Landlords are reaching farther to make deals than they were 90 days ago.

   Rents are lower and (incentives) are better.

   In my mind, that is not a sign of a correcting market." Mike Freeman: (619)
4293-1515; mike.freeman@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 GRAPH; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Remodeling is set to begin at a
Sorrento Mesa building leased by San Diego biotech Gene Therapy Systems, which
took 16,000 square feet as part of an expansion. The local commercial real
estate market may finally be nearing bottom, brokers say. 2,3. County vacancy --
Office and industrial vacancy rates held firm in the second quarter, stemming a
trend of higher vacancies as regional employers shed jobs. While it's still too
early to draw any conclusions, local real estate officials say it could signal
that the worst is over for local commercial real estate. 2. VACANCY RATES BY
SECTOR 3. OFFICE VACANCY RATES BY COMMUNITY; PHOTOBY: 1. James Baird /
Union-Tribune 2,3. SOURCE: Burnham Real Estate Services | BRIAN CRAGIN /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             653 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      August 3, 2003 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 05B

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: Research may help fight smallpox;
Scientists look for people with monkeypox who did not become ill

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE mmarchione@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Oregon researchers are coming to Wisconsin to do an unprecedented scientific
study of monkeypox to see whether people were infected without getting sick and
to gather information that could help protect against smallpox in the future.

   In particular, the study could give important information about how much
protection people have today from smallpox shots they got as children.

   The smallpox vaccine helps protect against monkeypox, a less deadly virus in
the same family of germs. The monkeypox outbreak that began in Wisconsin in May
is a "natural experiment" that can show what might happen if people who got
childhood shots for smallpox were exposed to it today, said Mark Slifka, the
researcher leading the study.

   "It's a real unique opportunity," he said.

   He and another scientist from the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute at
Oregon Health & Science University will come to Wisconsin in two weeks, seeking
100 people who developed no symptoms even though they were exposed to prairie
dogs or to people with monkeypox.

   People who did get sick from documented cases of monkeypox will be a
comparison group in the study.

   Researchers will visit homes to take blood samples and interview study
subjects, who will be paid $100 to participate.

   Blood will be checked for antibodies specific to monkeypox and also two types
of white blood cells that are involved in mounting the body's defense against
novel germs.

   "They're different arms of your immune system, and we'll see which arm was
mounted the strongest," Slifka said.

   In people who were infected with monkeypox but didn't get sick, "it would be
very interesting to know what their immune system looks like to know what it
takes to be fully protected" against the disease, he said. That could help guide
efforts to develop a new and hopefully safer smallpox vaccine.

   The university is funding the study and hopes to use its results to leverage
federal bioterrorism funds for more vaccine research involving pox viruses, said
Jay Nelson, director of the university's vaccine institute.

   "We have a major thrust in looking at monkeypox at our institute," which has
a large and well-known primate research facility, he said. "The hypothesis would
be that the outbreak was greater than the symptomatic cases that have come to
light already."

   The monkeypox study also might reveal whether person-to-person spread
occurred. Finding signs of infection in the blood of someone who had no contact
with infected animals would suggest that had happened.

   The Oregon researchers have been in contact with Wisconsin public health
officials who are planning their own monkeypox study with other states and the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

   People wanting to participate in the Oregon study can call (800) 330-MPOX
(6769) or e-mail Matthew Lewis at lewismat@ohsu.edu.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2003


                             654 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       August 3, 2003 Sunday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1218 words

HEADLINE: Sky the limit for biotech group;
BioEnterprise basks in successful initial year

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

   BioEnterprise Corp. boldly claimed last year that its clients would raise $20
million in 12 months. The group, whose roots first took hold only in late 2000,
beat that goal.

   Now, it's just $465 million away from its five-year target of $500 million
for clients.

   Tucked near University Circle in a plain, four-story concrete building, the
nonprofit is one of the biggest economic development experiments attempted in
this region in recent years. The mission? Transform Northeast Ohio into a
nationally recognized engine that churns out companies making drugs and medical
devices and sucks in bioscience businesses from other places.

   The investment in BioEnterprise is significant, too. The founders, Case
Western Reserve University, the Cleveland Clinic Foundation and University
Hospitals of Cleveland, poured in $3 million to the venture (the money
sustaining the group is totally separate from funds BioEnterprise's clients
raise). The state of Ohio gave $10.5 million. The Cleveland Foundation, which
has stepped up its emphasis on economic development investments, kicked in $4
million and promised another $2 million.

   BioEnterprise is taking off as the region also tackles several other economic
development initiatives. For example, Ohioans will vote this fall on a $500
million bond issue to back projects that spur high-tech, high-paying jobs. And
local chambers of commerce are creating a regional organization called Team Neo
with broad roles for business retention and attraction.

   For now, Cleveland's bioscience sector hovers in the middle of the industry's
pack, based on measurements such as the venture capital and federal research
money a region garners or how many big biotech firms a city has. Yet, in part
because of efforts linked to BioEnterprise, Northeast Ohio resembles "a team on
a winning streak," said Brad Whitehead, senior fellow for economic development
at the Cleveland Foundation. For BioEnterprise, he said, "this has been a
terrific first year."

   Last summer, the organization recruited several senior executives: Matt
Jennings, who spent two decades as a founder, chief executive and director of
various medical device companies; Jim Scozzie, who co-founded local drug
development services company Ricerca; and Baiju Shah, a former McKinsey & Co.
consultant who advised technology companies. Jennings was named president in the
fall.

   To decide which clients to serve - striving to divine the companies that will
burst into the bio big leagues - the group poked around 213 companies from four
countries. One-third of them had dropped by unsolicited.

   Picture a pipeline. Get that primed, Jennings reasons, and deals will flow
like a tapped reservoir of oil.

   "Our goal, no matter who comes to us, is to send them back with something
constructive that advances their business," he said. "In some cases, the best
answer we can give them is a well-informed 'This is a bad idea. Don't waste your
time.' "

   After closely evaluating 26 companies out of the 213, BioEnterprise selected
nine to work with. Such pickiness is prescribed by the group's business plan,
which calls for it to concentrate on companies likely to ring up sales of more
than $50 million. Half of those businesses should be lured to Northeast Ohio
from elsewhere, the plan says.

   Choosing is as much art as science. BioEnterprise acts as a management
consultant: It can, for example, take equity stakes in the companies it helps or
get fees for providing services and helping companies find a chief executive,
cobble together a business plan or track down an affordable accountant. But the
group's roles also include those of prognosticator, personal trainer, parent and
promoter.

   Tissue-imaging company Imalux Corp. of Cleveland - founded with technology
developed in Russia - is using BioEnterprise's help to decide which markets to
crack and to arrange distribution channels.

   Paul Amazeen, an Imalux executive, said the group "has become an important
resource for companies like ours." BioEnterprise Chairman Bill Sanford was an
early investor in Imalux and chairs the board. Lloyd Breedlove, a former
colleague of Sanford at Mentor-based sterilization company Steris, was just
named Imalux chief executive.

   BioEnterprise won't actually create the developments required to boost the
region's bioscience stature. But it will help Northeast Ohio lure public and
private money to advance the innovation going on here by evaluating technology
and financial prospects and collaborating with partners, says board member and
UH President Fred Rothstein.

   For instance, BioEnterprise played an important role in establishing the
region's stem cell center, which recently received nearly $20 million from the
state of Ohio, said William "B.J." Lehmann, an executive vice president of
gene-therapy company Athersys Inc., which got about $5 million of that.

   Now, Jennings and his team are pushing ahead with plans to form a venture
fund and to spread the group's influence.

   Almost every state has at least one group like BioEnterprise. They are not
officially ranked, but the regions with the biggest bioscience industry - such
as San Diego and the Research Triangle Park area of North Carolina - also have
the most successful advocacy groups, according to research from Biotechnology
Industry Organization, a national association based in Washington, D.C.

   It appears to be too early to measure BioEnterprise's impact on job growth.
The money the stem cell center won, however, is expected to create about 500
jobs in five years, the group predicts.

   The true effectiveness of groups like BioEnterprise is impossible to gauge
unless the analysis also looks at the eventual track records of the companies
turned away, said David Deeds, assistant professor of entrepreneurship at CWRU.

   Over time, what matters most is whether BioEnterprise backs the right
companies most of the time, Jennings says. "We're not going to get it right all
of the time. We just have to get it right more often than we get it wrong. And
we need to get it right in a big way when we do."

   Hopes are huge. "I'm looking for a home run," says board member A. Malachi
Mixon, chief executive of Invacare Corp., the Elyria-based manufacturer of
wheelchairs.

   That means the kind of success story many believe that Athersys could become:
big enough to have not only a large payroll, but also to attract layers of
talent, suppliers and customers.

   To do that, BioEnterprise plans to keep on the track it has set by combing
through companies and conducting thorough corporate and market research.

   "I'm very pleased with what we've done," Jennings said. "I've always been
taught that you learn as much from your failures as your successes, but we're
only 11 months into this. . . . The day will come when a company we chose to
work with does not move forward and that should not be a surprise to any one. It
certainly won't be a surprise to us."

   There are limits, of course, to BioEnterprise's reach. "We're not going to
try to save Northeast Ohio in terms of its economic problems," Jennings says.

   But with a strong pipeline, "we'll be able to continue to move forward and be
successful."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2003


                             655 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       August 3, 2003 Sunday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Sky the limit for biotech group;
Some say organization taking too much credit

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   BioEnterprise Corp. isn't shy about claiming credit.

   Of the $35 million the group counts so far, BioEnterprise includes almost $20
million Northeast Ohio won recently from the state of Ohio for stem cell
research.

   The successful proposal hinged on BioEnterprise's work and research, says
Matt Jennings, the group's president, who organized crucial meetings and helped
usher the winning project through the process.

   Stan Gerson, the stem cell center's director, says BioEnterprise was
"involved and engaged." And Athersys Inc., which is working with the center,
said the group's role in establishing the center and getting the grant was
important.

   Privately, however, some participants downplay BioEnterprise's hand in
crafting the actual proposal.

   When BioEnterprise reflects in its ledger the capital a company has secured,
it doesn't signal BioEnterprise actually raised the money, Jennings said. It
only means BioEnterprise has a relationship that supported the company's
business growth. The group's business plan says that, "to measure its success,
BioEnterprise will track the amount of capital raised, public or private, by the
companies it attracts, forms and accelerates."

   But some companies imply the group's claims are ambitious.

   For instance, BioEnterprise lists Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. as a client
and counts the more than $2 million the company raised in 2002 toward the tally
of its first fiscal year, which ended June 30. Robert Moen, the Cleveland-based
company's president, says BioEnterprise's help certainly made it easier for the
gene-therapy company to raise money.

   Copernicus, however, accomplished the feat "entirely from internal sources,"
he says. And while the company is working toward a formal agreement with
BioEnterprise, none has been signed, he said.

   BioEnterprise's Web site also lists AxioMed Spine Corp., a Cleveland-based
company that's developing a spine implant to restore mobility and eliminate back
pain. Four Ohio-based venture capital firms invested $2.75 million in the
company at the start of this year.

                Over the past 18 months, founders Charles Birchall and James
Kuras met a couple of times with BioEnterprise, which conducted research and
provided other services for investors that ultimately committed to the company,
Birchall said.

   After the deal closed, BioEnterprise lent a hand with some publicity.

   "I felt they were pretty helpful," said John DeFord of Early Stage Partners,
an AxioMed investor.

   Yet, Birchall says, "while BioEnterprise listed us as one of its clients, we
are still searching to find a direct benefit that will help AxioMed."

   Cleveland needs to do much more to help entrepreneurs start companies,
especially bioscience companies that may not have turned a profit for years,
Birchall said.

   Such companies, he says, need either money, including grants or loans, or
deeply discounted services and facilities.

   "No one offered this to us."

   Some other local medical device and bioscience companies also say they cast
about for help with networking, marketing and, most importantly, fund-raising.

   No effective group exists that can give most start-up bioscience firms in
this region what they need, they say.

   The region's infrastructure to support entrepreneurs is shifting right now,
in part to address this gap.

   "What kind of organization do we need to pick up those pieces?" asks Dorothy
Baunach, director of NorTech, which helped get BioEnterprise off the ground.

   "I'm not sure how we get it done." NorTech is helping to form an initiative
called Neopreneur, aimed at addressing these issues.

   Some discord among groups focused on creating companies is inevitable - even
between BioEnterprise and its founding partners, board members say, who hail the
group's progress, nonetheless.

   After all, Case Western Reserve University and the Cleveland Clinic
Foundation also are scurrying to identify and develop commercially promising
technology their researchers invent. Elbows are out in this race.

   The organizations need to find ways their work can complement, instead of
compete, with each other, said James Wagner, CWRU provost and BioEnterprise
board member. For instance, he said, universities should focus on transferring
technology and look to BioEnterprise to help take things from there. Wagner
concedes, however, "that's a border that will always be fuzzy . . . and have
friction."

   Ultimately, dissension just proves the seeds of success have been sown, said
Brad Whitehead, senior fellow for economic development at the Cleveland
Foundation, who helped draw up the business plan for BioEnterprise while
previously working with McKinsey & Co. "If we're grumbling about credit," he
said, "then that means there's credit there."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   bgaylord@plaind.com, 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2003


                             656 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 31, 2003, Thursday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 113 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF / THE REGION;
BOSTON SCIENTIFIC IN GENE THERAPY DEAL

BYLINE: (Naomi Aoki(Naomi Aoki

BODY:

   Boston Scientific Corp. is teaming up with a San Diego biotechnology firm to
develop and market a gene therapy for heart disease. The Natick medical device
maker said it will pay $9 million for a 10 percent stake in Corautus Genetics
Inc. and $1 million in licensing fees. Boston Scientific also agreed to buy up
to $15 million of convertible debt from Corautus as it reaches certain goals.
Corautus plans to begin clinical trials this year to test the effectiveness of
its gene therapy, which is intended to produce new blood vessels in heart
tissue. If successful, the treatment may ease the pain, shortness of breath, and
nausea associated with angina.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2003


                             657 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 31, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 Lawsuit names reporter, lawyer

   The company that marketed a weight-loss supplement containing ephedra has
sued a San Diego Union-Tribune business reporter and a lawyer, charging they
worked together to publish stories that defamed the company.

   Nutraquest, formerly known as Cytodyne Technologies, claims reporter Penni
Crabtree was biased in her coverage of a class-action lawsuit filed against
Cytodyne.  The lawsuit charged that Crabtree had a conflict of interest because
her husband is an executive at Amylin Pharmaceuticals, a San Diego biotechnology
company.

   The lawsuit also claimed the lawyer who filed the California lawsuit, Todd
Macaluso, leaked information to Crabtree to "publicize his name and reputation
to drum up continued clientele to file further legal action against Cytodyne."

   The case, which seeks unspecified damages, was filed Tuesday in U.S. District
Court in Newark, N.J.

   Macaluso's co-counsel on the San Diego case, James Frantz, called the lawsuit
"frivolous, unsubstantiated and without any merit."

   Crabtree was on vacation yesterday and could not be reached for comment.

   In the class-action case, a San Diego judge ordered Cytodyne to pay $12.5
million to California consumers, ruling it misled them by making exaggerated and
false claims about the safety and effectiveness of Xenadrine RFA-1. The company
denied the charges and said it would appeal.

   Corautus, Boston Scientific link

   San Diego-based Corautus Genetics announced that it agreed to a $25 million
collaboration with Boston Scientific Corp. to develop and commercialize gene
therapy for the treatment of cardiovascular disease.

   The companies said they plan to focus initially on patients with severe
ischemic heart disease who haven't responded to conventional therapies.  The
Natick, Mass.-based company is investing $9 million in exchange for 10 percent
of Corautus' equity.  Included among other agreements is a commitment to
purchasing up to $15 million of convertible debt from Corautus based on
achievement of certain milestones.

   Cypress seeks charter changes

   Cypress Bioscience is seeking shareholder approval to end the ability of
shareholders to take action through a written consent without a stockholder
meeting.

   According to a regulatory filing Monday, the San Diego-based company is
seeking to update its charter to reflect developments in Delaware law and
corporate governance procedures.  The company said the changes will make it more
difficult to initiate actions such as a merger, tender offer or proxy contest.

   Shareholders can vote on the proposals at the Sept. 15. annual meeting.

   Vical sued by university unit

   The University of Wisconsin-Madison's patent agency sued San Diego-based
Vical Inc. in federal court Tuesday for breach of contract.  The Wisconsin
Alumni Research Foundation claims it is owed license fees by Vical for use of a
gene therapy technique commonly called "naked DNA."

   The lawsuit claims Vical owes the foundation more in royalties under the
license agreement than it has paid.  But Vical argues the foundation owes it a
refund of $1.35 million in such fees and it should not have to pay, according to
the lawsuit.

   Elan wins time from creditors

   Elan Corp., the Irish drugmaker whose accounting is being investigated by
U.S. regulators, said it won time from some creditors as it tries to stave off a
possible default on as much as $2 billion in debt.  The debt holders waived
their right to demand early repayment until Aug. 8, giving Elan more time to
file its annual report with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Bloomberg
News


LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2003


                             658 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 31, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Lawsuit names reporter, lawyer The company that marketed a weight-loss
supplement containing ephedra has sued a San Diego Union-Tribune business
reporter and a lawyer, charging they worked together to publish stories that
defamed the company. Nutraquest, formerly known as Cytodyne Technologies, claims
reporter Penni Crabtree was biased in her coverage of a class-action lawsuit
filed against Cytodyne.

   The lawsuit charged that Crabtree had a conflict of interest because her
husband is an executive at Amylin Pharmaceuticals, a San Diego biotechnology
company. The lawsuit also claimed the lawyer who filed the California lawsuit,
Todd Macaluso, leaked information to Crabtree to "publicize his name and
reputation to drum up continued clientele to file further legal action against
Cytodyne." The case, which seeks unspecified damages, was filed Tuesday in U.S.
District Court in Newark, N.J. Macaluso's co-counsel on the San Diego case,
James Frantz, called the lawsuit "frivolous, unsubstantiated and without any
merit." Crabtree was on vacation yesterday and could not be reached for comment.
In the class-action case, a San Diego judge ordered Cytodyne to pay $12.5
million to California consumers, ruling it misled them by making exaggerated and
false claims about the safety and effectiveness of Xenadrine RFA-1. The company
denied the charges and said it would appeal. Corautus, Boston Scientific link
San Diego-based Corautus Genetics announced that it agreed to a $25 million
collaboration with Boston Scientific Corp. to develop and commercialize gene
therapy for the treatment of cardiovascular disease. The companies said they
plan to focus initially on patients with severe ischemic heart disease who
haven't responded to conventional therapies.

   The Natick, Mass.-based company is investing $9 million in exchange for 10
percent of Corautus' equity.

   Included among other agreements is a commitment to purchasing up to $15
million of convertible debt from Corautus based on achievement of certain
milestones. Cypress seeks charter changes Cypress Bioscience is seeking
shareholder approval to end the ability of shareholders to take action through a
written consent without a stockholder meeting. According to a regulatory filing
Monday, the San Diego-based company is seeking to update its charter to reflect
developments in Delaware law and corporate governance procedures.

   The company said the changes will make it more difficult to initiate actions
such as a merger, tender offer or proxy contest. Shareholders can vote on the
proposals at the Sept. 15. annual meeting. Vical sued by university unit The
University of Wisconsin-Madison's patent agency sued San Diego-based Vical Inc.
in federal court Tuesday for breach of contract.

   The Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation claims it is owed license fees by
Vical for use of a gene therapy technique commonly called "naked DNA." The
lawsuit claims Vical owes the foundation more in royalties under the license
agreement than it has paid.

   But Vical argues the foundation owes it a refund of $1.35 million in such
fees and it should not have to pay, according to the lawsuit. Elan wins time
from creditors Elan Corp., the Irish drugmaker whose accounting is being
investigated by U.S. regulators, said it won time from some creditors as it
tries to stave off a possible default on as much as $2 billion in debt.

   The debt holders waived their right to demand early repayment until Aug. 8,
giving Elan more time to file its annual report with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             659 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 29, 2003 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 212 words

HEADLINE: Trial Set in Amgen Patent Dispute

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. will go to trial in October to determine whether Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. can sell a drug that would rival the Thousand Oaks-based
company's $2-billion-a-year anemia medication Epogen.

   The date was set Monday as a federal judge in Boston heard arguments on the
scope of the case.

   Amgen claims Transkaryotic's drug Dynepo would infringe four patents.

   Transkaryotic, based in Cambridge, Mass., has been blocked from selling
Dynepo because of patent litigation.

   "There are significant differences in the process" of making Dynepo,
Transkaryotic lawyer Herb Schwartz told U.S. District Judge William G. Young at
Monday's hearing.

   "They point to no difference in the product that's produced," countered Amgen
lawyer Lloyd R. Day. "It's identical."

   The dispute centers on a method of producing the human protein
erythropoietin, or EPO, from mammal cells in a way that has therapeutic uses.
Amgen says its scientists invented the method that can be used to increase red
blood cells and treat anemia.

   Transkaryotic argues that EPO occurs in nature and that Amgen's patents cover
only a method of processing it from certain mammals.

   In Nasdaq trading, Amgen shares rose $1.18 to $69.89 and Transkaryotic's fell
64 cents to $11.35. The news came after the market closed.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2003


                             660 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 29, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 4184 words

HEADLINE: Embracing life; Liz and Adam show that what's held in the heart is
what matters most

BYLINE: Jenifer Goodwin; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Adam is sitting in the waiting room of the House Ear Institute in Los Angeles.
At 8 a.m., the office gears up for the day.

   Phones ring.  Keyboards click-clack.  Patients murmur.  Doctors brush by,
depositing snippets of conversation in the air.  Adam's parents, aunt and uncle
talk about the morning's traffic.

   Adam hears none of it.

   At 21 years old, he's been deaf all his life, shut off from the world's
spontaneous polyphony of chitchat, shouts, whispers, beeps, clicks, thumps and
rumbles.

   That's about to change.  In just a few short hours, Adam will have his
cochlear implant turned on.  If all goes well, he will hear his mother's voice
for the first time.

   Adam's nerves are on edge when audiologist Doreen Boettcher leads him and his
family into an ordinary exam room, a little box with white walls and no windows.

   Boettcher attaches a small, black device to a magnet embedded under the skin
above Adam's right ear.  The device contains a microphone that will pick up
sounds in the room.  "You may not like this," she warns.  "It may take you time
to get used to it."

   She taps a few keys on a computer, sending the first sound -- beep, beep,
beep -- to Adam's brain.

   Adam looks stricken.  He grabs the side of his head.  "I think I hear
something.  I'm not sure if it's my imagination."

   She taps a few more keys.  Adam squeezes his eyes shut.

   "I'm getting a little dizzy."

   More adjustments, then Boettcher asks Adam to speak.  "Hello?" he says.

   After so many years in silence, the sound of his voice explodes in his head,
so loud he feels it shaking.  He grips the sides of his chair to steady himself.
"Down, down!" he says, imploring Boettcher to turn down the sensitivity of the
microphone.

   His intensity only makes things worse.  A sharp pain shoots through his
brain.  He grimaces.  His eyes tear.  "It hurts," he mouths to his mother, Jill.

   For the next few moments, no one speaks or moves.  Adam can hardly stand even
the softest sounds, rustling paper or his family shifting in their seats.

   He breathes deeply, relaxing his grip on the chair.  He smiles at his mother,
reassuring her that he's OK.

   Gently, the audiologist asks Adam if he wants to hear his mother and father
speak.

   Jill's cheeks are streaked with tears.  In her lap, she holds a little black
book, a journal she's been keeping since Adam and Liz decided to get the
implants.

   "Adam, can you hear my voice?" Jill says.

   His father pans the room with the camcorder.  "It's 9:37. We're at the House
Ear Institute, and you're hearing for the first time."

   "What?" Adam says.

   "Dad just said, 'You're hearing for the first time.' "

   That afternoon, Adam walks out of the clinic onto the city streets.  The
family piles into two cars, headed for a celebratory lunch.  Doors close with a
thud.  Engines rev.  Adam's father cranks up the Eagles' "Hotel California."

   Adam turns to his Dad.

   "What is that?" he says.

   "It's music, Adam! Music!"

   It's a medical miracle, in a way, curing deafness with microsurgery and
computers.

   If only it were that simple.

   For Adam and his sister Liz, whose appointment is a few weeks later, turning
on the implant marks the end and the beginning of a long journey.  It's the end
of their lives in silence.  It's the beginning of learning what all those sounds
mean.

   In some ways, Adam and Liz are like newborns, just beginning to sort out the
noise swirling and screaming around them.

   Except Liz and Adam are at a distinct disadvantage.

   Infants' brains are exquisitely prepared for learning to make sense of
sounds, especially the complex acoustics of language.  For adults like Adam and
Liz, recognizing speech will be much harder -- and maybe impossible.

   To even have a chance, years of auditory training lie ahead.

   Jill understands Adam won't recognize her voice immediately, won't
differentiate it from ice rattling in a glass or a cell phone ringing.  All
morning, watching her son's face react to the new sensation of sound, she tried
to clamp down on her euphoria.  Keep your expectations low, she told herself,
just like the doctor said.

   But by the time they arrive at the diner, Jill is giddy.  The lunchtime rush
is in full swing -- plates clatter, utensils clink, waitresses take orders over
the roar of a hundred conversations.

   Jill and Adam slide into the booth next to each other.  When Adam's back is
to her, Jill calls his name.

   "Adam," she says.

   He doesn't respond.

   "Adam," she says, more loudly.  "ADAM!"

   He doesn't turn to her.

   Jill sighs.  Her shoulders slump.  She knew to expect this.  But her heart
was wishing for something else.  How can a mother not get her hopes up that her
child will know her voice?

   During the first few weeks, Adam is shocked by the annoyingly loud world.

   He turns the implant off periodically, just to take a break from the
disorienting clamor.

   Even so, by the end of the day, his head throbs.  He can't wait to unhook the
implant and relax in peace.

   But with each passing day, sound gets a little easier on his ears.  Soon,
curiosity keeps him from turning off the implant.  Every day holds some amazing
discovery or unexpected thrill.

   He hears a rhythmic thump, thump, thump, looks up, and sees a helicopter.

   He dozes in class and awakens to a strange racket -- applause at the end of
the lecture.

   He can hardly believe that running water makes a sound.

   Soon, Adam doesn't like having the implant turned off.  Without it, the world
is too quiet.

   Back at Rochester Institute of Technology, Adam begins twice-weekly auditory
training offered by the university's National Technical Institute for the Deaf.

   The sessions are grueling.  Listening requires supreme concentration, more
taxing than his toughest midterm.

   During one session, his audiologist, Catherine Clark, shows Adam three
pictures: a vacuum, a TV, a piano.  She then plays a recording of one of the
three sounds.

   After a few months with the implant, Adam can tell a sewing machine from a
saxophone from a hammer; a toilet flushing from a washing machine from an
electric razor.

   It's an amazing achievement.  Yet, understanding these "environmental sounds"
is only the very beginning of what he needs to learn to reach his ultimate goal:
understanding speech.

   No one knows exactly how Adam perceives sound -- he has no frame of reference
to describe it.

   What's certain is that he's not hearing what a person with a normal sense
would hear.

   Adults with cochlear implants, whose hearing loss came later in life, say at
first, voices sound staticky, like a radio that's not quite tuned in, or like
Daffy Duck. In time, voices sound like they did before the hearing loss.
Doctors believe the brain's auditory memory takes over, adjusts to the implant
and essentially fills in the gaps.

   Adam has virtually no auditory memory.

   Audiologists believe he's able to tell a helicopter from, say, an electric
razor, by rhythmic differences -- the thump of helicopter blades compared with
the drone of a razor.  He can also hear changes in volume, such as the sound of
an engine fading as the car drives away.

   But the rapid, intricate variations in pitch that create human speech are far
more difficult to master.

   He begins with baby steps.

   In one exercise, Adam and Clark stand about 30 feet apart, facing away from
each other.  She tells Adam to turn around when he hears her call his name.

   At the six-month mark, Adam detects her voice every time.

   Adam probably doesn't recognize the actual sounds of his name, Clark
explains.  In the quiet of the office, what he can hear is the one-two rhythm of
the syllables.

   But in the jumble of sounds in the real world, Adam still struggles to
recognize his name.  He says it sounds similar to a closing door.

   In therapy, they also begin working on recognizing the "mmm," "sh," "eee,"
"ah" and "ooh" sounds, which represent the full range of frequencies of speech.

   With a black screen covering her mouth, Clark asks Adam to tell her if she's
saying "eee" or "sh." Adam can't tell the difference yet.

   The pace of progress frustrates him.  He leaves the sessions mentally
exhausted, overwhelmed by how far he still has to go.

   "I was really hoping for more," Adam says.  "I want communication to be
effortless."

   You can go your whole life without something and never know what you're
missing.  Then you get a taste of it, and you can't imagine your life without
it.

   Falling in love is like that.  Having a child is like that.

   For Adam, hearing is like that.

   Now that he can hear, he's so much more aware of what he doesn't know.

   When he feels discouraged, he'll honk the horn of his car, relishing the
simple pleasure of knowing what it is.  "Every time I hear a car honk, it's a
reminder that I can hear."

   Liz's initial reaction to sound is much the same as Adam's -- first, she
feels a searing pain shooting through her skull.  Over time, hearing gets
easier, if not quite pleasant.

   Back at work in Seattle, Liz is sitting in a business meeting when she hears
a funny sound -- her co-workers laughing.

   The sound makes Liz laugh, too.  Soon, everyone in the meeting is cracking
up, which makes Liz laugh even harder.

   Like Adam, she wishes she could make more sense of the din that accosts her
every morning.  Even months later, when she switches on her implant, the sound
jolts her, like a bright light flipped on in a dark room.

   At the theater one evening, the yearning brings tears to her eyes.

   Thinking she hears something coming from the stage, she closes her eyes to
listen.  The sound evokes something powerful, making her at once joyful and
wistful.  "It was beautiful," Liz says.  "I wanted more."

   But the excitement of hearing coincides with something more worrisome: Her
vision seems to worsen.

   She pages Adam. Yes, he tells her, he noticed it, too.

   Adam flies home to see Dr. John Heckenlively, the ophthalmologist at the
Jules Stein Eye Institute in Los Angeles who'd diagnosed him with Usher syndrome
nine years ago.  Tests show Adam's field of vision has continued to shrink since
his last appointment, four years earlier.

   Heckenlively assures him there's no link to the implants -- Usher can
stabilize, then inexplicably deteriorate.  The good news, Heckenlively says, is
that Adam's central vision remains mostly unchanged.

   It is of little comfort.  "I know I've lost something," Adam says.

   Adam is one of 35 students at RIT who have Usher syndrome.  He sees them
around campus.  When they enter a room, they sweep their head from side to side.
They have an unusual, shuffling gate.  They walk unsteadily, with their legs far
apart, because of the narrowed visual field and balance problems associated with
the disorder.

   Seeing them bothers him.  "I wonder, 'Do I look like that?' "he says.

   A handful of students with Usher started a deaf-blind social club.  They
organize rock-climbing and shopping trips.  The student who runs it e-mails
Adam, asking him to join.

   Adam deletes the messages.

   He's not ready yet.

   Most of the kids with Usher, even those whose vision is far worse than
Adam's, aren't ready to consider themselves deaf-blind, says Josara Wallber, an
audiologist who runs a campus vision screening for deaf freshmen.

   She knows of one young man who can no longer drive.  Rather than give up his
car, he lets his friends drive it in exchange for dropping him off where he
needs to go.

   When Wallber started in the job eight years ago, she tried to get the
students with Usher to keep a white fold-up cane in their backpack, at least for
use at night because night vision is often the first to go.

   None of them will.  "Now, I'm happy if I can get them to use a flashlight,"
she says.

   Adam doesn't carry a flashlight, and he doesn't shuffle.

   He sprints, as if he's always in a hurry, as if he's afraid of running out of
time.

   He zips from class to class -- Philosophy, Freedom of Expression, then Wines
of the World.  Today's topic: champagne, which to the students' delight,
includes samples of Dom Perignon.

   From there, he's off to a staff meeting at The View, a college newspaper for
deaf students.  He's managing editor.

   In between, he's resident assistant of his dorm floor and writing a monologue
for a college play.  One night last semester, he and his friends spent all night
in the library, competing in an intellectual scavenger hunt.

   On weekends, they like to hang out at Jillian's, a restaurant, dance club,
bowling alley and arcade in a converted factory in downtown Rochester.

   Adam is a conscientious student, almost obsessive about his grades.  Being
great, being perfect, he believes, is his only chance of getting a job when he
graduates.  "I want to be so good they have to hire me."

   Even then, he worries about his prospects.

   The 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act prohibits discrimination against
deaf people in employment.  But more subtle discrimination persists, says Gerry
Buckley, the 48-year-old associate dean for student affairs at RIT's National
Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID), who surprised many on campus when he
got a cochlear implant last year.  "They (employers) won't refuse to interview
them, but they can and do refuse to hire them."

   NTID vigorously pursues companies to recruit on campus and offers workshops
to help employers understand how to include deaf workers.

   But in a weak economy, when many companies aren't hiring anyone, it's more
difficult.

   Adam's major is technical and professional communications, a liberal arts
degree that includes classes on creative writing, journalism, speech-writing and
public relations.

   This summer, Adam holds an internship in the marketing department on campus.
In the deaf community, it's perfectly acceptable to tap people to get their
attention.

   Adam asks his co-workers to call his name instead -- give him a chance to
hear it.

   Approaching one year after having the implants activated, Adam no longer
thinks his name sounds like a closing door.  His co-workers usually have to call
him a few times, but he eventually tunes in and responds.

   Every few days, Adam also calls his mom or dad.  He can detect when the
ringing stops and they say "hello." Beyond that, he can't understand a word
they're saying, but he likes to hear their voices anyway.

   If Adam sprints, Liz moves with grace and confidence.  Her friends rib her
about her tendency to veer into them when they're walking together.  She laughs
it off, as if her faulty equilibrium is a part of her charm.

   A few months after she got her implants activated, Liz moved to Washington,
D.C., to take classes at Gallaudet University.  Of Gallaudet's more than 2,000
students, all but a smattering are deaf or hard of hearing, as are about 40
percent of the employees.  Everyone who works there must know American Sign
Language or immediately enroll in classes to learn.

   Whereas RIT is about bridging the deaf and hearing worlds, Gallaudet is about
preserving deaf culture and maintaining a distinct identity.  A forbidding,
wrought-iron fence surrounds the campus, reinforcing the notion of separation.

   In 1988, Gallaudet was the site of a watershed moment for the nation's deaf
community: Students and faculty took over the campus to protest the hiring of a
hearing university president over two deaf candidates.

   After several days of negotiations, university trustees capitulated and hired
I. King Jordan, the first deaf president in the university's more than 100-year
history.

   The Deaf President Now movement thrust deaf issues into the national
spotlight.  But more importantly, it showed deaf people the power in unity, says
MJ Bienvenu, a protester and now an assistant professor who teaches a deaf
culture class at Gallaudet.  "It was the greatest week of my life," Bienvenu
says.

   Liz felt intimidated when she first stepped onto the campus.  Here she was,
in the nation's deaf mecca, with a cochlear implant tucked behind her ear.

   She felt even more strange when a few students mistook her for a hearing
person.  She wasn't sure whether to feel flattered or insulted.

   Still, she forged ahead with auditory therapy.

   Audiologists predicted Adam would do somewhat better with the implants than
Liz because he got hearing aids younger and wore them longer, meaning he
probably had slightly more access to sound at a critical age.

   So far, their predictions are right.

   Liz can recognize a few environmental sounds, like a phone ringing and a
doorbell, but not much beyond that.

   And Liz is less confident than Adam that she'll ever learn to understand
speech.

   When her vision goes, she'll learn Braille.  She'll also learn tactile
signing, a modified form of American Sign Language in which the deaf-blind
person holds the hands of the person signing and feels the hand and finger
movements.

   The drawback to tactile signing is that it lacks the facial expressions that
reveal so much emotion and meaning.

   But communicating with deaf people will still be easier than communicating
with hearing people who don't sign.  Without a tactile interpreter, the only
option will be tracing, letter by letter, words on the palm of her hand.

   That deaf people will remain the easiest to communicate with is one reason
that Liz is certain the deaf community is where she most belongs.

   When she has to rely on tactile signing, Liz believes some of her friends
will drift away.  But she believes others will embrace her.

   Deaf-blind people aren't uncommon in the deaf community.  She's seen her
friends reach out to include them.  "I'll probably lose some friends," she says.
"But I will gain some, too."

   As she looks ahead, knowing she has dozens of friends around the world brings
her more comfort than recognizing some new sound.

   It's ironic, really.  Even though Liz can hear, in her heart, she feels more
deaf than ever.

   In the spring, Liz's parents and a committee of their closest friends
organized a fund-raiser at The Lodge at Torrey Pines to benefit the Foundation
Fighting Blindness, one of the few sources of funding for Usher research.  As
with so many rare disorders, it's a constant scramble for research dollars.

   Some of the work looks promising.  Scientists in labs around the world are
experimenting with artificial retinas.  Though bringing the products to market
is still years away, one blind man who received a test device on a silicon chip
reported seeing fuzzy shapes and lights.

   Another, probably further-off treatment, is genetic therapy that would
replace the mutated gene.  But before they can even begin to develop a method of
doing this, scientists need to figure out precisely what goes wrong in the
affected cells.

   David Williams, an adjunct professor at University of California San Diego,
recently discovered a cellular mechanism in mice with an Usher-like syndrome
that causes the decay of the retina.  "In two years we could have a cure,"
Williams says.

   But other researchers say genetic therapy is still only a distant dream.
"It's still a pie in the sky," says Thomas Friedman, an Usher researcher and
chief of the Laboratory of Molecular Genetics at the National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders in Bethesda, Md.

   Evan would like to believe optimists like Williams, but he doesn't.  "The
medical profession can't even tell them whether or not they should take vitamin
A," he scoffs, referring to conflicting studies about whether megadoses of the
supplement protect or harm vision in people with retinitis pigmentosa.

   Evan rarely lets anyone see his pessimistic side.  More often, he deflects
his worry with humor, sometimes awkward humor, like when he asks the surgeon
about to operate on his kids if he had a drink to calm down.

   But sitting at his dining room table a few weeks before the fund-raiser, when
the topic of Usher research comes up, his mood grows dark.

   "Their lives are going to be majorly impacted when the darkness descends,"
Evan says.

   "It can affect their career choices," Jill says.

   "It affects every choice," Evan says, bitterly.  "There is no driving, no
walking around, no communication except through touch.  We think there's
barriers now.  They will need an interpreter all the time."

   Jill looks at him like she wishes he'd shut up.

   He gets the hint and lightens up.

   "I taught two deaf kids to drive," he says, smiling.  "There's nothing more
difficult than that."

   Jill laughs.  They have an easiness that comes from 31 years of marriage.

   They hope 200 people show up for their event.  More than 300 come, raising
$95,000.

   Adam and Liz come home to speak at the fund-raiser.  Adam's eyes are as blue
as Liz's are green.  He looks dashing in his dark suit, though Jill and Evan are
not thrilled with the diamond stud on his nostril and the puka shell necklace.

   When Liz and Adam begin to speak, the audience chokes up at the thought of
this gorgeous, charismatic young man and woman facing such a devastating loss.

   "The good thing about having a brother with Usher is that we can even joke
about it," Liz says.

   "Get out of my blind spot," Adam says.

   "It's like the blind leading the blind," Liz says.

   They deliver their lines with perfect comic timing, so that the crowd
gathered around the lectern finds itself smiling through the tears.

   From just a few words, they can see there's so much more to Adam and Liz than
their disease.

   In the audience, Jill weeps.

   If young Jill and Evan could have foretold the future, had known what fate
and genetics had in store for their children, would Evan have asked Jill to go
with him to that tie-dying party?  Would Jill have accepted?

   "Oh yes," Evan says.  "I can't imagine anything that's better than being the
parents of Adam and Liz."

   When their children were babies, Jill and Evan delighted in each new tooth,
each new word, each step forward on the road to growing up.

   Now, they admire their accomplishments, their drive.  "Sometimes I'm amazed
they're my children," Jill says.

   It would have been completely understandable if the Stone family had heard
the devastating diagnosis and caved in on itself, had sunk slowly into sadness.

   But the Stones weren't willing to give into their grief.

   As young parents, they learned that there is more to a person than a
disability, and that a family, when they face things together, can survive
life's harshest blows.

   They passed on their resilience to their children.  Liz and Adam grew into
bright and independent young adults who thrived in spite of their disorder --
and at least somewhat, because of it.

   And now, as they get closer to the day when their eyes will be of little use
to them, Liz and Adam are teaching their parents a lesson about living -- that
determination, spirit and the love of family and friends are perhaps more
essential to happiness than being able to hear or see.

   Liz, now 28, just got word she's been accepted to American University's
master's degree program in public administration.  She hopes it will bring her
one step closer to her dream of starting a foundation for deaf people, run by
deaf people.  One of the first projects: a deaf history museum.

   In her spare time, she goes to foreign films (because of the subtitles),
plans themed parties with her friends, and goes salsa dancing.  One night, a
hunky guy swirled her around the dance floor, sending her cochlear implant
flying.  "I was so embarrassed," Liz says.

   She motioned to a friend to pick it up, and kept right on dancing.

   "I know 40 years from now I'll be blind as a bat, but I'll still have the
same personality.  I'll still be curious," Liz says.

   Next month, Adam, 22, will begin his senior year at RIT. He's planning to
apply to the Peace Corps and for a Fulbright scholarship.  When Adam tells
people he's going blind, he sees their eyes well with tears.  He wishes they
wouldn't. He never, ever wants to be pitied.

   "I've had people say to my face, 'That's so sad.' People start crying in
front of me.  They say, 'You have so much spirit.  So much life.' They make it
sound like if I go blind, I'm dead.  Well, I'm not dead.  I am still Adam."

   Their children's strength helps Jill and Evan keep their own fears at bay.
They try not to dwell on what they've lost, and what they will lose.  As a
family, they celebrate each accomplishment, each bit of good news.

   "People ask me all the time, 'Are they hearing?' " Evan says.  "Well, they're
not hearing what you or me are hearing, but they are hearing.  And that is a
miracle."

   Adam and his dad recently met at Evan's mother's house in Easton, Pa., for
her birthday.  The crowd belted out "Happy Birthday."

   Afterward, Adam took his dad aside.  "Dad, I could hear that," he said.  "I
didn't know exactly what they were saying, but I knew it was something."

   Evan couldn't wait to call Jill. He knew his words would thrill her.

   SUNDAY

   PART 1: UNBREAKABLE LIVES

   Facing a genetic time bomb, the Stone family meets the challenge head-on,
embarking on a journey not just to cope, but to transcend and thrive.

   YESTERDAY

   PART 2: FATE AND FORTITUDE

   When another crushing obstacle tests the Stone family, Liz and Adam must find
a way to persevere.

   For the complete series, visit signonsandiego.com


GRAPHIC: 8 PICS | 1 DIAGRAM; 1. Carol Kron 2,3,5,6,7,8,9. Nancee E. Lewis /
Union-Tribune photos; 1. Dr. William Luxford examines Adam the day he had his
cochlear implant activated at the House Ear Institute. The implant enables Adam
to hear out of his right ear only. Adam's sister, Liz, who is also deaf, had her
implant activated a few weeks later. During her appointment, Adam text-messages
her words of encouragement: "I think about you constantly." 2. From left, Holly
Schroeder, Adam, and Amanda Montgomery react to a teacher's joke at Rochester
Institute of Technology. "I have a lot more things to be happy about than sad
about," Adam says. "I learned that from my family." 3. Adam follows along as
audiologist Catherine Clark reads a story to help Adam begin to understand the
rhythm of speech. (E-4) 4. A sound idea -- The Nucleus 24 attempts to replicate
the sound ocllection capabilities of the outer and middle ear and the hair cells
within gthe snail-like cochlea by bypassing the middle ear with a transmitter,
receiver and an electrode array. (E-4) 5. As part of his therapy, Adam practices
using a new phone technology, Cap-Tel. A third party listens in and transcribes
the spoken words, which appear on the screen. (E-4) 6. Adam, a voracious reader,
spends many hours in the college library to maintain his 3.7 GPA. After the
Usher diagnosis, he considered learning Braille. Then he decided to wait. "I try
not to think about what life would be like if I was blind. I have more important
things to think about now." (E-5) 7. "My sister is like my role model for
everything in life," says Adam about Liz. (E-5) 8. From left, Adam, Jill, Evan
and Liz at a Foundation Fighting Blindness fund-raiser. "Finding a cure for our
children is the most important thing in our lives," Jill says. (E-5) 9. (Liz and
Adam Stone) (A-1)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2003


                             661 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 29, 2003 Tuesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 4104 words

HEADLINE: Embracing life;
Liz and Adam show that what's held in the heart is what matters most

SERIES: UNBREAKABLE LIVES. LAST OF A THREE-PART SERIES.

BYLINE: Jenifer Goodwin, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Adam is sitting in the waiting room of the House Ear Institute in Los
Angeles.

   At 8 a.m., the office gears up for the day. Phones ring.

   Keyboards click-clack.

   Patients murmur.

   Doctors brush by, depositing snippets of conversation in the air.

   Adam's parents, aunt and uncle talk about the morning's traffic. Adam hears
none of it. At 21 years old, he's been deaf all his life, shut off from the
world's spontaneous polyphony of chitchat, shouts, whispers, beeps, clicks,
thumps and rumbles. That's about to change.

   In just a few short hours, Adam will have his cochlear implant turned on.

   If all goes well, he will hear his mother's voice for the first time. Adam's
nerves are on edge when audiologist Doreen Boettcher leads him and his family
into an ordinary exam room, a little box with white walls and no windows.
Boettcher attaches a small, black device to a magnet embedded under the skin
above Adam's right ear.

   The device contains a microphone that will pick up sounds in the room.

   "You may not like this," she warns.

   "It may take you time to get used to it." She taps a few keys on a computer,
sending the first sound -- beep, beep, beep -- to Adam's brain. Adam looks
stricken.

   He grabs the side of his head.

   "I think I hear something.

   I'm not sure if it's my imagination." She taps a few more keys.

   Adam squeezes his eyes shut. "I'm getting a little dizzy." More adjustments,
then Boettcher asks Adam to speak.

   "Hello?" he says. After so many years in silence, the sound of his voice
explodes in his head, so loud he feels it shaking.

   He grips the sides of his chair to steady himself.

   "Down, down!" he says, imploring Boettcher to turn down the sensitivity of
the microphone. His intensity only makes things worse.

   A sharp pain shoots through his brain.

   He grimaces.

   His eyes tear.

   "It hurts," he mouths to his mother, Jill. For the next few moments, no one
speaks or moves.

   Adam can hardly stand even the softest sounds, rustling paper or his family
shifting in their seats. He breathes deeply, relaxing his grip on the chair.

   He smiles at his mother, reassuring her that he's OK. Gently, the audiologist
asks Adam if he wants to hear his mother and father speak. Jill's cheeks are
streaked with tears.

   In her lap, she holds a little black book, a journal she's been keeping since
Adam and Liz decided to get the implants. "Adam, can you hear my voice?"

   Jill says. His father pans the room with the camcorder.

   "It's 9:37. We're at the House Ear Institute, and you're hearing for the
first time." "What?"

   Adam says. "Dad just said, 'You're hearing for the first time.' " That
afternoon, Adam walks out of the clinic onto the city streets.

   The family piles into two cars, headed for a celebratory lunch.

   Doors close with a thud.

   Engines rev.

   Adam's father cranks up the Eagles' "Hotel California." Adam turns to his
Dad. "What is that?" he says. "It's music, Adam! Music!" It's a medical miracle,
in a way, curing deafness with microsurgery and computers. If only it were that
simple. For Adam and his sister Liz, whose appointment is a few weeks later,
turning on the implant marks the end and the beginning of a long journey. It's
the end of their lives in silence.

   It's the beginning of learning what all those sounds mean. In some ways, Adam
and Liz are like newborns, just beginning to sort out the noise swirling and
screaming around them. Except Liz and Adam are at a distinct disadvantage.
Infants' brains are exquisitely prepared for learning to make sense of sounds,
especially the complex acoustics of language.

   For adults like Adam and Liz, recognizing speech will be much harder -- and
maybe impossible. To even have a chance, years of auditory training lie ahead.
Jill understands Adam won't recognize her voice immediately, won't differentiate
it from ice rattling in a glass or a cell phone ringing.

   All morning, watching her son's face react to the new sensation of sound, she
tried to clamp down on her euphoria.

   Keep your expectations low, she told herself, just like the doctor said. But
by the time they arrive at the diner, Jill is giddy.

   The lunchtime rush is in full swing -- plates clatter, utensils clink,
waitresses take orders over the roar of a hundred conversations. Jill and Adam
slide into the booth next to each other.

   When Adam's back is to her, Jill calls his name. "Adam," she says. He doesn't
respond. "Adam," she says, more loudly.

   "ADAM!" He doesn't turn to her. Jill sighs.

   Her shoulders slump.

   She knew to expect this.

   But her heart was wishing for something else.

   How can a mother not get her hopes up that her child will know her voice?
During the first few weeks, Adam is shocked by the annoyingly loud world. He
turns the implant off periodically, just to take a break from the disorienting
clamor. Even so, by the end of the day, his head throbs.

   He can't wait to unhook the implant and relax in peace. But with each passing
day, sound gets a little easier on his ears.

   Soon, curiosity keeps him from turning off the implant.

   Every day holds some amazing discovery or unexpected thrill. He hears a
rhythmic thump, thump, thump, looks up, and sees a helicopter. He dozes in class
and awakens to a strange racket -- applause at the end of the lecture. He can
hardly believe that running water makes a sound. Soon, Adam doesn't like having
the implant turned off.

   Without it, the world is too quiet. Back at Rochester Institute of
Technology, Adam begins twice-weekly auditory training offered by the
university's National Technical Institute for the Deaf. The sessions are
grueling.

   Listening requires supreme concentration, more taxing than his toughest
midterm. During one session, his audiologist, Catherine Clark, shows Adam three
pictures: a vacuum, a TV, a piano.

   She then plays a recording of one of the three sounds. After a few months
with the implant, Adam can tell a sewing machine from a saxophone from a hammer;
a toilet flushing from a washing machine from an electric razor. It's an amazing
achievement.

   Yet, understanding these "environmental sounds" is only the very beginning of
what he needs to learn to reach his ultimate goal: understanding speech. No one
knows exactly how Adam perceives sound -- he has no frame of reference to
describe it. What's certain is that he's not hearing what a person with a normal
sense would hear. Adults with cochlear implants, whose hearing loss came later
in life, say at first, voices sound staticky, like a radio that's not quite
tuned in, or like Daffy Duck. In time, voices sound like they did before the
hearing loss.

   Doctors believe the brain's auditory memory takes over, adjusts to the
implant and essentially fills in the gaps. Adam has virtually no auditory
memory. Audiologists believe he's able to tell a helicopter from, say, an
electric razor, by rhythmic differences -- the thump of helicopter blades
compared with the drone of a razor.

   He can also hear changes in volume, such as the sound of an engine fading as
the car drives away. But the rapid, intricate variations in pitch that create
human speech are far more difficult to master. He begins with baby steps. In one
exercise, Adam and Clark stand about 30 feet apart, facing away from each other.

   She tells Adam to turn around when he hears her call his name. At the
six-month mark, Adam detects her voice every time. Adam probably doesn't
recognize the actual sounds of his name, Clark explains.

   In the quiet of the office, what he can hear is the one-two rhythm of the
syllables. But in the jumble of sounds in the real world, Adam still struggles
to recognize his name.

   He says it sounds similar to a closing door. In therapy, they also begin
working on recognizing the "mmm," "sh," "eee," "ah" and "ooh" sounds, which
represent the full range of frequencies of speech. With a black screen covering
her mouth, Clark asks Adam to tell her if she's saying "eee" or "sh."

   Adam can't tell the difference yet. The pace of progress frustrates him.

   He leaves the sessions mentally exhausted, overwhelmed by how far he still
has to go. "I was really hoping for more," Adam says.

   "I want communication to be effortless." You can go your whole life without
something and never know what you're missing.

   Then you get a taste of it, and you can't imagine your life without it.
Falling in love is like that.

   Having a child is like that. For Adam, hearing is like that. Now that he can
hear, he's so much more aware of what he doesn't know. When he feels
discouraged, he'll honk the horn of his car, relishing the simple pleasure of
knowing what it is.

   "Every time I hear a car honk, it's a reminder that I can hear." Liz's
initial reaction to sound is much the same as Adam's -- first, she feels a
searing pain shooting through her skull.

   Over time, hearing gets easier, if not quite pleasant. Back at work in
Seattle, Liz is sitting in a business meeting when she hears a funny sound --
her co-workers laughing. The sound makes Liz laugh, too.

   Soon, everyone in the meeting is cracking up, which makes Liz laugh even
harder. Like Adam, she wishes she could make more sense of the din that accosts
her every morning.

   Even months later, when she switches on her implant, the sound jolts her,
like a bright light flipped on in a dark room. At the theater one evening, the
yearning brings tears to her eyes. Thinking she hears something coming from the
stage, she closes her eyes to listen.

   The sound evokes something powerful, making her at once joyful and wistful.

   "It was beautiful," Liz says.

   "I wanted more." But the excitement of hearing coincides with something more
worrisome: Her vision seems to worsen. She pages Adam. Yes, he tells her, he
noticed it, too. Adam flies home to see Dr. John Heckenlively, the
ophthalmologist at the Jules Stein Eye Institute in Los Angeles who'd diagnosed
him with Usher syndrome nine years ago.

   Tests show Adam's field of vision has continued to shrink since his last
appointment, four years earlier. Heckenlively assures him there's no link to the
implants -- Usher can stabilize, then inexplicably deteriorate.

   The good news, Heckenlively says, is that Adam's central vision remains
mostly unchanged. It is of little comfort.

   "I know I've lost something," Adam says. Adam is one of 35 students at RIT
who have Usher syndrome.

   He sees them around campus.

   When they enter a room, they sweep their head from side to side.

   They have an unusual, shuffling gate.

   They walk unsteadily, with their legs far apart, because of the narrowed
visual field and balance problems associated with the disorder. Seeing them
bothers him.

   "I wonder, 'Do I look like that?' "he says. A handful of students with Usher
started a deaf-blind social club.

   They organize rock-climbing and shopping trips.

   The student who runs it e-mails Adam, asking him to join. Adam deletes the
messages. He's not ready yet. Most of the kids with Usher, even those whose
vision is far worse than Adam's, aren't ready to consider themselves deaf-blind,
says Josara Wallber, an audiologist who runs a campus vision screening for deaf
freshmen. She knows of one young man who can no longer drive.

   Rather than give up his car, he lets his friends drive it in exchange for
dropping him off where he needs to go. When Wallber started in the job eight
years ago, she tried to get the students with Usher to keep a white fold-up cane
in their backpack, at least for use at night because night vision is often the
first to go. None of them will.

   "Now, I'm happy if I can get them to use a flashlight," she says. Adam
doesn't carry a flashlight, and he doesn't shuffle. He sprints, as if he's
always in a hurry, as if he's afraid of running out of time. He zips from class
to class -- Philosophy, Freedom of Expression, then Wines of the World.

   Today's topic: champagne, which to the students' delight, includes samples of
Dom Perignon. From there, he's off to a staff meeting at The View, a college
newspaper for deaf students.

   He's managing editor. In between, he's resident assistant of his dorm floor
and writing a monologue for a college play.

   One night last semester, he and his friends spent all night in the library,
competing in an intellectual scavenger hunt. On weekends, they like to hang out
at Jillian's, a restaurant, dance club, bowling alley and arcade in a converted
factory in downtown Rochester. Adam is a conscientious student, almost obsessive
about his grades.

   Being great, being perfect, he believes, is his only chance of getting a job
when he graduates.

   "I want to be so good they have to hire me." Even then, he worries about his
prospects. The 1990 Americans With Disabilities Act prohibits discrimination
against deaf people in employment.

   But more subtle discrimination persists, says Gerry Buckley, the 48-year-old
associate dean for student affairs at RIT's National Technical Institute for the
Deaf (NTID), who surprised many on campus when he got a cochlear implant last
year.

   "They (employers) won't refuse to interview them, but they can and do refuse
to hire them." NTID vigorously pursues companies to recruit on campus and offers
workshops to help employers understand how to include deaf workers. But in a
weak economy, when many companies aren't hiring anyone, it's more difficult.
Adam's major is technical and professional communications, a liberal arts degree
that includes classes on creative writing, journalism, speech-writing and public
relations. This summer, Adam holds an internship in the marketing department on
campus.

   In the deaf community, it's perfectly acceptable to tap people to get their
attention. Adam asks his co-workers to call his name instead -- give him a
chance to hear it. Approaching one year after having the implants activated,
Adam no longer thinks his name sounds like a closing door.

   His co-workers usually have to call him a few times, but he eventually tunes
in and responds. Every few days, Adam also calls his mom or dad.

   He can detect when the ringing stops and they say "hello."

   Beyond that, he can't understand a word they're saying, but he likes to hear
their voices anyway. If Adam sprints, Liz moves with grace and confidence.

   Her friends rib her about her tendency to veer into them when they're walking
together.

   She laughs it off, as if her faulty equilibrium is a part of her charm. A few
months after she got her implants activated, Liz moved to Washington, D.C., to
take classes at Gallaudet University.

   Of Gallaudet's more than 2,000 students, all but a smattering are deaf or
hard of hearing, as are about 40 percent of the employees.

   Everyone who works there must know American Sign Language or immediately
enroll in classes to learn. Whereas RIT is about bridging the deaf and hearing
worlds, Gallaudet is about preserving deaf culture and maintaining a distinct
identity.

   A forbidding, wrought-iron fence surrounds the campus, reinforcing the notion
of separation. In 1988, Gallaudet was the site of a watershed moment for the
nation's deaf community: Students and faculty took over the campus to protest
the hiring of a hearing university president over two deaf candidates. After
several days of negotiations, university trustees capitulated and hired I. King
Jordan, the first deaf president in the university's more than 100-year history.
The Deaf President Now movement thrust deaf issues into the national spotlight.

   But more importantly, it showed deaf people the power in unity, says MJ
Bienvenu, a protester and now an assistant professor who teaches a deaf culture
class at Gallaudet.

   "It was the greatest week of my life," Bienvenu says. Liz felt intimidated
when she first stepped onto the campus.

   Here she was, in the nation's deaf mecca, with a cochlear implant tucked
behind her ear. She felt even more strange when a few students mistook her for a
hearing person.

   She wasn't sure whether to feel flattered or insulted. Still, she forged
ahead with auditory therapy. Audiologists predicted Adam would do somewhat
better with the implants than Liz because he got hearing aids younger and wore
them longer, meaning he probably had slightly more access to sound at a critical
age. So far, their predictions are right. Liz can recognize a few environmental
sounds, like a phone ringing and a doorbell, but not much beyond that. And Liz
is less confident than Adam that she'll ever learn to understand speech. When
her vision goes, she'll learn Braille.

   She'll also learn tactile signing, a modified form of American Sign Language
in which the deaf-blind person holds the hands of the person signing and feels
the hand and finger movements. The drawback to tactile signing is that it lacks
the facial expressions that reveal so much emotion and meaning. But
communicating with deaf people will still be easier than communicating with
hearing people who don't sign.

   Without a tactile interpreter, the only option will be tracing, letter by
letter, words on the palm of her hand. That deaf people will remain the easiest
to communicate with is one reason that Liz is certain the deaf community is
where she most belongs. When she has to rely on tactile signing, Liz believes
some of her friends will drift away.

   But she believes others will embrace her. Deaf-blind people aren't uncommon
in the deaf community.

   She's seen her friends reach out to include them.

   "I'll probably lose some friends," she says.

   "But I will gain some, too." As she looks ahead, knowing she has dozens of
friends around the world brings her more comfort than recognizing some new
sound. It's ironic, really.

   Even though Liz can hear, in her heart, she feels more deaf than ever. In the
spring, Liz's parents and a committee of their closest friends organized a
fund-raiser at The Lodge at Torrey Pines to benefit the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, one of the few sources of funding for Usher research.

   As with so many rare disorders, it's a constant scramble for research
dollars. Some of the work looks promising.

   Scientists in labs around the world are experimenting with artificial
retinas.

   Though bringing the products to market is still years away, one blind man who
received a test device on a silicon chip reported seeing fuzzy shapes and
lights. Another, probably further-off treatment, is genetic therapy that would
replace the mutated gene.

   But before they can even begin to develop a method of doing this, scientists
need to figure out precisely what goes wrong in the affected cells. David
Williams, an adjunct professor at University of California San Diego, recently
discovered a cellular mechanism in mice with an Usher-like syndrome that causes
the decay of the retina.

   "In two years we could have a cure," Williams says. But other researchers say
genetic therapy is still only a distant dream. "It's still a pie in the sky,"
says Thomas Friedman, an Usher researcher and chief of the Laboratory of
Molecular Genetics at the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
Disorders in Bethesda, Md. Evan would like to believe optimists like Williams,
but he doesn't.

   "The medical profession can't even tell them whether or not they should take
vitamin A," he scoffs, referring to conflicting studies about whether megadoses
of the supplement protect or harm vision in people with retinitis pigmentosa.
Evan rarely lets anyone see his pessimistic side.

   More often, he deflects his worry with humor, sometimes awkward humor, like
when he asks the surgeon about to operate on his kids if he had a drink to calm
down. But sitting at his dining room table a few weeks before the fund-raiser,
when the topic of Usher research comes up, his mood grows dark. "Their lives are
going to be majorly impacted when the darkness descends," Evan says. "It can
affect their career choices," Jill says. "It affects every choice," Evan says,
bitterly.

   "There is no driving, no walking around, no communication except through
touch.

   We think there's barriers now.

   They will need an interpreter all the time." Jill looks at him like she
wishes he'd shut up. He gets the hint and lightens up. "I taught two deaf kids
to drive," he says, smiling.

   "There's nothing more difficult than that." Jill laughs.

   They have an easiness that comes from 31 years of marriage. They hope 200
people show up for their event.

   More than 300 come, raising $95,000. Adam and Liz come home to speak at the
fund-raiser.

   Adam's eyes are as blue as Liz's are green.

   He looks dashing in his dark suit, though Jill and Evan are not thrilled with
the diamond stud on his nostril and the puka shell necklace. When Liz and Adam
begin to speak, the audience chokes up at the thought of this gorgeous,
charismatic young man and woman facing such a devastating loss. "The good thing
about having a brother with Usher is that we can even joke about it," Liz says.
"Get out of my blind spot," Adam says. "It's like the blind leading the blind,"
Liz says. They deliver their lines with perfect comic timing, so that the crowd
gathered around the lectern finds itself smiling through the tears. From just a
few words, they can see there's so much more to Adam and Liz than their disease.
In the audience, Jill weeps. If young Jill and Evan could have foretold the
future, had known what fate and genetics had in store for their children, would
Evan have asked Jill to go with him to that tie-dying party?

   Would Jill have accepted? "Oh yes," Evan says.

   "I can't imagine anything that's better than being the parents of Adam and
Liz." When their children were babies, Jill and Evan delighted in each new
tooth, each new word, each step forward on the road to growing up. Now, they
admire their accomplishments, their drive.

   "Sometimes I'm amazed they're my children," Jill says. It would have been
completely understandable if the Stone family had heard the devastating
diagnosis and caved in on itself, had sunk slowly into sadness. But the Stones
weren't willing to give into their grief. As young parents, they learned that
there is more to a person than a disability, and that a family, when they face
things together, can survive life's harshest blows. They passed on their
resilience to their children.

   Liz and Adam grew into bright and independent young adults who thrived in
spite of their disorder -- and at least somewhat, because of it. And now, as
they get closer to the day when their eyes will be of little use to them, Liz
and Adam are teaching their parents a lesson about living -- that determination,
spirit and the love of family and friends are perhaps more essential to
happiness than being able to hear or see. Liz, now 28, just got word she's been
accepted to American University's master's degree program in public
administration.

   She hopes it will bring her one step closer to her dream of starting a
foundation for deaf people, run by deaf people.

   One of the first projects: a deaf history museum. In her spare time, she goes
to foreign films (because of the subtitles), plans themed parties with her
friends, and goes salsa dancing.

   One night, a hunky guy swirled her around the dance floor, sending her
cochlear implant flying.

   "I was so embarrassed," Liz says. She motioned to a friend to pick it up, and
kept right on dancing. "I know 40 years from now I'll be blind as a bat, but
I'll still have the same personality.

   I'll still be curious," Liz says. Next month, Adam, 22, will begin his senior
year at RIT. He's planning to apply to the Peace Corps and for a Fulbright
scholarship.

   When Adam tells people he's going blind, he sees their eyes well with tears.

   He wishes they wouldn't. He never, ever wants to be pitied. "I've had people
say to my face, `That's so sad.' People start crying in front of me.

   They say, `You have so much spirit.

   So much life.' They make it sound like if I go blind, I'm dead.

   Well, I'm not dead.

   I am still Adam." Their children's strength helps Jill and Evan keep their
own fears at bay. They try not to dwell on what they've lost, and what they will
lose.

   As a family, they celebrate each accomplishment, each bit of good news.
"People ask me all the time, `Are they hearing?' " Evan says.

   "Well, they're not hearing what you or me are hearing, but they are hearing.

   And that is a miracle." Adam and his dad recently met at Evan's mother's
house in Easton, Pa., for her birthday.

   The crowd belted out "Happy Birthday." Afterward, Adam took his dad aside.

   "Dad, I could hear that," he said.

   "I didn't know exactly what they were saying, but I knew it was something."
Evan couldn't wait to call Jill. He knew his words would thrill her. SUNDAY PART
1: UNBREAKABLE LIVES Facing a genetic time bomb, the Stone family meets the
challenge head-on, embarking on a journey not just to cope, but to transcend and
thrive. YESTERDAY PART 2: FATE AND FORTITUDE When another crushing obstacle
tests the Stone family, Liz and Adam must find a way to persevere. For the
complete series, visit signonsandiego.com

GRAPHIC: 8 PICS; 1 DIAGRAM; CAPTIONS: 1. Dr. William Luxford examines Adam the
day he had his cochlear implant activated at the House Ear Institute. The
implant enables Adam to hear out of his right ear only. Adam's sister, Liz, who
is also deaf, had her implant activated a few weeks later. During her
appointment, Adam text-messages her words of encouragement: "I think about you
constantly." 2. From left, Holly Schroeder, Adam, and Amanda Montgomery react to
a teacher's joke at Rochester Institute of Technology. "I have a lot more things
to be happy about than sad about," Adam says. "I learned that from my family."
3. Adam follows along as audiologist Catherine Clark reads a story to help Adam
begin to understand the rhythm of speech. (E-4) 4. A sound idea -- The Nucleus
24 attempts to replicate the sound ocllection capabilities of the outer and
middle ear and the hair cells within gthe snail-like cochlea by bypassing the
middle ear with a transmitter, receiver and an electrode array. (E-4) 5. As part
of his therapy, Adam practices using a new phone technology, Cap-Tel. A third
party listens in and transcribes the spoken words, which appear on the screen.
(E-4) 6. Adam, a voracious reader, spends many hours in the college library to
maintain his 3.7 GPA. After the Usher diagnosis, he considered learning Braille.
Then he decided to wait. "I try not to think about what life would be like if I
was blind. I have more important things to think about now." (E-5) 7. "My sister
is like my role model for everything in life," says Adam about Liz. (E-5) 8.
From left, Adam, Jill, Evan and Liz at a Foundation Fighting Blindness
fund-raiser. "Finding a cure for our children is the most important thing in our
lives," Jill says. (E-5) 9. (Liz and Adam Stone) (A-1); PHOTOBY: 1. Carol Kron
2,3,5,6,7,8,9. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             662 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       July 28, 2003 Monday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: Study targets chronic misery;
 Relief: Gene therapy tried in rats shows promise for raising the pain
threshold.;
 MEDICINE & SCIENCE

BYLINE: David Kohn

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   In a discovery that could eventually help improve the lives of chronic pain
sufferers, California researchers have found a way to reset the pain
"thermostat" in rats' brains.

   Using gene therapy, they boosted the amount of a key neurotransmitter in a
specific brain region, significantly raising the rats' pain threshold.

   To do this, the researchers injected the rats' brains with a gene that
produces a key brain neurotransmitter called gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA).
This protein acts as an inhibitor, generally dampening all kinds of neural
activity. To limit the neurotransmitter's effect, the scientists injected the
GABA-producing gene into one small cortical region, the rostal agranular insular
cortex (RAIC). They had long suspected that the region plays a role in pain
perception.

   Once their RAICs were inundated, the rats reacted much less strongly to
painful stimuli - a warm probe applied to their paw for several seconds.
Researchers concluded that the increased GABA had dulled the animals' pain
sensitivity.

   Published in last week's Nature, the study is the first work to positively
establish GABA as a crucial pain-modulating neurotransmitter and also the first
to nail down the RAIC as a vital pain perception center.

   The discovery underscores the complexity of pain perception, said Luc Jasmin,
a University of California, San Francisco neuroscientist who led the study.
"Pain is not a crude sensation. It's a higher cognitive experience," he said.

   Other experts called the study an important step in pain research. "This is
huge - even in the rudimentary mammalian brain, the forebrain can modulate the
signals that cause pain behavior," said neuroscientist Bud Craig, who studies
pain at the Barrow Neurological Institute in Phoenix.

   Although the technique has not been tested in humans, researchers say it
could one day help some of the 50 million Americans with chronic pain.

   "We could use this for a number of intractable pain conditions, including
cancer pain and chronic pain," Jasmin said.

   Over that past 10 years, researchers have increasingly realized the crucial
role that the cortex - the most advanced part of the brain - plays in pain
sensation. In the past, scientists thought that the cortex simply registered
signals sent by peripheral nerves. But recent work has revealed that the cortex
decides how much pain a given stimulus is causing.

   "We always thought the cortex was the end of the road," said University of
Minnesota pain researcher George Wilcox. "But ... it's a two-way road."

   The cortex plays an especially large role in chronic pain. As the pain
continues over months and years, the brain often lowers its pain threshold.

   "Most pain starts in the periphery," says Jasmin. "But if it persists for too
long, for some reason the central nervous system resets itself so that the
person is always perceiving pain, even when the real cause goes away. If you
want to treat chronic pain, you have to go where it is, which is in the cortex."

   Because it affects cortical pain perception, GABA gene therapy might help
most with chronic pain - especially cancer pain, which is often not only severe
but diffuse. "By treating the cortex, you affect the whole body," said Jasmin, a
neurosurgeon who also treats pain patients.

   Doctors usually soothe acute cancer pain with large doses of morphine and
other opiates. While these drugs work well, they also have unpleasant side
effects, including drowsiness and appetite loss. Most patients, especially those
with a short time to live, would prefer a treatment that allows them to be alert
and hungry. The gene therapy would probably not create those unwanted side
effects, Jasmin said, because it works through a different neural pathway than
do opiates.

   The gene therapy technique would be a minor procedure, Jasmin said - an
outpatient surgery, using a needle to inject the GABA-producing gene.

   Within three to five years, Jasmin said, he hopes to begin FDA-approved human
clinical trials of the treatment.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2003


                             663 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 28, 2003 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1336 words

HEADLINE: Preview;
WEEK OF JULY 28 -- AUG. 3

BODY:

   GDP, Other Economic Reports Due This Week

   Economists are expecting a passel of reports this week to indicate that the
U.S. economy is on more solid footing.

   Personal spending, continued improvements in manufacturing and strong
momentum in construction spending may be reflected in a modest expansion in the
nation's gross domestic product, which the Commerce Department is set to issue
Thursday.

   The economy "appears to have accelerated through the end of the second
quarter," said Patrick Fearon, an economist at A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc. "That
acceleration is continuing into the beginning of the third quarter. It suggests
a little bit of momentum is building in the economy."

   Economists surveyed by Bloomberg forecast GDP growth to accelerate to a 3.5%
annual pace this quarter and 3.7% in the final three months of 2003. By
comparison, the economy grew at an average 3.6% pace during the 10-year
expansion that ended in 2001.

   The GDP last quarter was paced by a jump in consumer spending to a 3.1%
annual rate of growth, the best performance in nine months, compared with a 2%
rate in the previous three months, economists said. Consumer purchases account
for 70% of the economy.

   Economists expect consumer confidence to remain strong.

   Orders for new equipment and manufacturing purchasing may follow suit,
setting the stage for a strong second half, economists project.

   Here's a summary of key economic reports due out this week:

   Tuesday:

   * The Conference Board releases its index of consumer sentiment in July. A
separate measure of consumer confidence in June by the University of Michigan is
set for release Friday.

   Thursday:

   * The Commerce Department issues its GDP report.

   * The Labor Department posts weekly initial jobless claims. The week ended
July 19 was the lowest in five months. Labor also reports employment costs for
the second quarter.

   Friday:

   * The Commerce Department releases June personal spending data.

   * The Labor Department issues its June unemployment report.

   * The Institute for Supply Management, an industry group, releases its July
manufacturing index.

   From Bloomberg News

   *

   Arguments to Begin in Amgen Patent Case

   Opening arguments are set to begin today in a Boston U.S. District Court over
claims by Thousand Oaks-based Amgen Inc. that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and
Aventis infringed its anemia drug patents.

   In January, a U.S. Court of Appeals ruled that Cambridge, Mass.-based
Transkaryotic, also known as TKT, and French-Swiss drug maker Aventis, which are
developing an anemia drug called Dynepo, infringed two of Amgen's five Epogen
patents. But the case was sent back to the lower court to reconsider the
validity of some of the claims.

   At issue is whether Amgen's patents on Epogen -- a genetically engineered
form of a naturally occurring protein that boosts the body's production of red
blood cells -- cover the protein, as TKT claims, or the methods used to
manufacture it, as Amgen maintains.

   Amgen has said it expected to prove the validity of its patents. "We remain
confident in our patent estate," Chief Executive Kevin Sharer said in a
conference call last week.

   Amgen makes Epogen, which registered 2002 sales of $2.3 billion, by inserting
a human gene into hamster cells, whereas TKT has developed an alternative method
for Dynepo that uses human genes.

   Dynepo is approved in Europe for the treatment of anemia related to dialysis
or chronic renal insufficiency, but TKT and Aventis are awaiting the outcome of
the U.S. patent case before launching European sales of the drug, which is
manufactured in the U.S.

   From Reuters

   *

   World Trade Ministers Gather in Montreal

   Leading trade ministers from every continent will meet in Montreal beginning
today, conscious that talks on a global treaty are in danger of becoming bogged
down unless all sides start making major compromises.

   Meanwhile, Third World and environmental activists have pledged to "shut
down" the gathering, which they say is a prime example of rich nations getting
richer at the expense of the developing world.

   World Trade Organization ministers have not convened in North America since
the 1999 Seattle meeting that was marred by widespread rioting.

   It is the last in a series of informal meetings that are supposed to smooth
the path to a gathering of trade ministers from all 146 WTO members in Cancun,
Mexico, in September.

   The biggest issue facing the WTO is trade in farm goods.

   The European Union is promising to cut back its farm subsidies budget and
reduce import duties, but it stops short of the level demanded by the United
States and major farm producers such as Canada, Australia and Brazil.

   Meanwhile, those countries mostly reject EU demands to include issues such as
animal welfare and consumer labeling, as well as a form of trademark protection
for products known by the region where they are made, such as Parma ham.

   The meeting runs through Wednesday, and WTO negotiators then take a 10-day
break before returning to the body's Geneva headquarters for an intensive,
two-week session.

   From Associated Press

   *

   Citadel Broadcasting, Netgear Plan IPOs

   A fast-growing maker of computer networking products and a top radio
broadcasting company plan initial public offerings this week in a market that
investors have given a second chance.

   Santa Clara, Calif.-based Netgear Inc. plans to sell 7 million shares
Wednesday at $10 to $12 each, raising $77 million. Lehman Bros. is handling the
offering. Netgear's products let small businesses and households share Internet
access and information among multiple personal computers.

   Meanwhile, Las Vegas-based Citadel Broadcasting Corp., the No. 6 owner of
radio stations in the United States, expects to sell 22 million shares at $17 to
$19 each, raising about $396 million. Goldman Sachs & Co. will lead the sale,
slated for Thursday.

   Investors have eaten up many of the recent IPOs, which have come at a rate of
about one or two a week. The optimism for many but not all of the companies
reflects a broader market rally -- and possibly a willingness by issuers to sell
IPOs at a discount.

   "These deals are being offered to investors at a fire-sale price to ensure
that the deal gets done, and to give it a good start in the aftermarket," said
John Fitzgibbon, an IPO analyst with 123Jump.com.

   From Reuters

   *

   OPEC Expected to Hold Oil Output Steady

   The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries is likely to maintain
its current ceiling of 25.4 million barrels per day at a meeting in Vienna on
Thursday because prices have held in its target range, an OPEC oil minister said
Sunday.

   "The likelihood is that the meeting will continue the production ceiling as
it is at present," UAE Petroleum & Mineral Resources Minister Obaid bin Saif
al-Nasseri said. "The market is relatively stable and has moved in a narrow band
of $3, which is inside the price band of $22 to $28 per barrel, only briefing
going over the top end of the ceiling."

   OPEC controls half of world exports.

   Prices have held firm as looting and sabotage have kept Iraq's postwar oil
exports at just a quarter of prewar levels.

   From Reuters

   *

   British Airways Tries to Head Off Strike

   The head of Europe's biggest carrier, British Airways, said Sunday that this
week would be crucial for the airline as it meets with unions in an attempt to
avoid more potentially crippling strikes at its main London base.

   "Next week the future of BA is in the hands of the negotiators, including me,
of the unions and the management," BA Chief Executive Rod Eddington told BBC
television.

   A walkout by BA check-in staff two weeks ago at London's Heathrow Airport,
the world's busiest international hub, disrupted the travel plans of more than
100,000 people.

   The strike was triggered by the introduction of an electronic "clock-in"
swipe card, which employees fear would lead to changes in shift patterns, pay
and conditions.

   But BA denies that the card would change pay and conditions. Eddington has
vowed not to scrap the card, already in use by some other staff.

   From Reuters

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2003


                             664 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              July 25, 2003 Friday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: Chalmette mom first to donate stem cells;
Son's cord, placenta sent off to N.J. lab

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   Moments after Jamie O'Neill gave birth Thursday morning at University
Hospital, the Chalmette woman's new son was bundled off to the nursery and the
umbilical cord and placenta were bundled off to a laboratory in New Jersey.

   The placenta and umbilical cord, which had supplied nutrients to Logan
O'Neill in his mother's womb, will yield stem cells that scientists say may be a
potent weapon in the fight against an array of maladies, including Parkinson's
disease, sickle-cell anemia, leukemia and spinal-cord injuries.

   If things work out the way Jamie O'Neill and her family hope, the stem cells
she provided will make a round trip to help her brother, James Lee Jr., 20, who
suffered disabling brain and spinal-cord injuries three years ago in a highway
accident that killed their uncle.

   "We're pushing for this because we've heard so many good things about it,"
said Katie Lee, mother of James Lee Jr. and Jamie O'Neill.

   Stem cells are made in the bone marrow and sent throughout the body to
develop into many types of cells, including those in bone, cartilage, fat,
muscles and nerves.

   But because little is known about the potential of stem cells from the
umbilical cord and placenta, it is unrealistic to entertain hopes that James Lee
Jr. might benefit from them anytime soon, said Arlene Chiu, a stem-cell expert
at the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke in Bethesda, Md.

   Likening the progress in this field to the evolution of the wheel, she said,
"We're at the wheelbarrow stage, but we're talking about a Ferrari.

   "That doesn't mean it will never happen, but we have to do some serious,
innovative research to span the gulf between where we are and where we want to
go," she said.

   No evidence shows whether stem cells can repair spinal cords in humans, but
they have done so in rats, said Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the Tulane
Center for Gene Therapy.

   But, he said, the length of time that has elapsed since James Lee's accident
could be a complicating factor.

   "Patients within a day or two of injury have the best chance of being
helped," Prockop said. "After a number of months, scar tissue enters the area,
so it might take a neurosurgeon to remove the scar tissue before you can go to
work with stem cells."

   Jamie O'Neill's donation was the first in a program operated by Celgene Corp.
that had been scheduled to start next month at University Hospital. The New
Jersey company had launched a similar project in December at Earl K. Long
Hospital in Baton Rouge.

   When O'Neill announced her desire to give the umbilical cord and placenta to
researchers, Celgene rushed kits to the hospital, where the staff already had
been trained in the procedure, said Gail Gibson, associate nursing administrator
for maternal child services.

   In return for his mother's donation, Logan O'Neill will have free, lifelong
access to the stem-cell bank, saving him the cost of searching for matching stem
cells.

   But for James Lee, the family would have to pay -- at least $5,000 -- because
the benefit is for Logan only, said Pamela Shaver, director of Celgene's
Louisiana Stem Cell Repository in Baton Rouge.

   That would be prohibitive for the Lee family, which went through its $30,000
in savings in the 11 months after James's accident, Katie Lee said.

   "Jamie should be able to give her stem cells to whoever she wants," Lee said.
"Who could be a better match for (James) than his own sister? This really
aggravates me."

   But the prospect of a stem-cell transplant for James Lee isn't out of reach,
Shaver said.

   "Celgene does a fair amount of charitable work," she said, "so we would work
with them."

   Until stem-cell research progresses to the point where such a transplant
could be proved to help him, James Lee Jr. will continue to live in Chalmette
with his parents, who provide around-the-clock care.

   A former high school athlete just over 6 feet tall, he is virtually immobile
and struggles to speak. Lee relies on his parents to lift him out of bed each
morning, feed him and put him through physical and mental exercises.

   "We just got him to the point where he can count to five on his fingers,"
Katie Lee said, "and he can blink as many times as we tell him to. He can move
his left leg on command. He's starting to move his right leg."

   This represents progress, she said, because doctors originally said he
probably wouldn't live more than three days after the July 2000 accident.

   "I tell him all the time, 'You're my little survivor,' " she said.

   . . . . . . .

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2003


                             665 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              July 25, 2003 Friday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: Chalmette mom first to donate stem cells;
Son's cord, placenta sent off to N.J. lab

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   Moments after Jamie O'Neill gave birth Thursday morning at University
Hospital, the Chalmette woman's new son was bundled off to the nursery and the
umbilical cord and placenta were bundled off to a laboratory in New Jersey.

   The placenta and umbilical cord, which had supplied nutrients to Logan
O'Neill in his mother's womb, will yield stem cells that scientists say may be a
potent weapon in the fight against an array of maladies, including Parkinson's
disease, sickle-cell anemia, leukemia and spinal-cord injuries.

   If things work out the way Jamie O'Neill and her family hope, the stem cells
she provided will make a round trip to help her brother, James Lee Jr., 20, who
suffered disabling brain and spinal-cord injuries three years ago in a highway
accident that killed their uncle.

   "We're pushing for this because we've heard so many good things about it,"
said Katie Lee, mother of James Lee Jr. and Jamie O'Neill.

   Stem cells are made in the bone marrow and sent throughout the body to
develop into many types of cells, including those in bone, cartilage, fat,
muscles and nerves.

   But because little is known about the potential of stem cells from the
umbilical cord and placenta, it is unrealistic to entertain hopes that James Lee
Jr. might benefit from them anytime soon, said Arlene Chiu, a stem-cell expert
at the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke in Bethesda, Md.

   Likening the progress in this field to the evolution of the wheel, she said,
"We're at the wheelbarrow stage, but we're talking about a Ferrari.

   "That doesn't mean it will never happen, but we have to do some serious,
innovative research to span the gulf between where we are and where we want to
go," she said.

   No evidence shows whether stem cells can repair spinal cords in humans, but
they have done so in rats, said Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the Tulane
Center for Gene Therapy.

   But, he said, the length of time that has elapsed since James Lee's accident
could be a complicating factor.

   "Patients within a day or two of injury have the best chance of being
helped," Prockop said. "After a number of months, scar tissue enters the area,
so it might take a neurosurgeon to remove the scar tissue before you can go to
work with stem cells."

   Jamie O'Neill's donation was the first in a program operated by Celgene Corp.
that had been scheduled to start next month at University Hospital. The New
Jersey company had launched a similar project in December at Earl K. Long
Hospital in Baton Rouge.

   When O'Neill announced her desire to give the umbilical cord and placenta to
researchers, Celgene rushed kits to the hospital, where the staff already had
been trained in the procedure, said Gail Gibson, associate nursing administrator
for maternal child services.

   In return for his mother's donation, Logan O'Neill will have free, lifelong
access to the stem-cell bank, saving him the cost of searching for matching stem
cells.

   But for James Lee, the family would have to pay -- at least $5,000 -- because
the benefit is for Logan only, said Pamela Shaver, director of Celgene's
Louisiana Stem Cell Repository in Baton Rouge.

   That would be prohibitive for the Lee family, which went through its $30,000
in savings in the 11 months after James's accident, Katie Lee said.

   "Jamie should be able to give her stem cells to whoever she wants," Lee said.
"Who could be a better match for (James) than his own sister? This really
aggravates me."

   But the prospect of a stem-cell transplant for James Lee isn't out of reach,
Shaver said.

   "Celgene does a fair amount of charitable work," she said, "so we would work
with them."

   Until stem-cell research progresses to the point where such a transplant
could be proved to help him, James Lee Jr. will continue to live in Chalmette
with his parents, who provide around-the-clock care.

   A former high school athlete just over 6 feet tall, he is virtually immobile
and struggles to speak. Lee relies on his parents to lift him out of bed each
morning, feed him and put him through physical and mental exercises.

   "We just got him to the point where he can count to five on his fingers,"
Katie Lee said, "and he can blink as many times as we tell him to. He can move
his left leg on command. He's starting to move his right leg."

   This represents progress, she said, because doctors originally said he
probably wouldn't live more than three days after the July 2000 accident.

   "I tell him all the time, 'You're my little survivor,' " she said.

   . . . . . . .

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2003


                             666 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      July 24, 2003 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 208 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic can make drug in-house

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. won European approval to make its Replagal Fabry
disease drug in Cambridge, officials said yesterday.

   The European Commission approval of the plant will let the company save money
by making Replagal itself, officials said.

   "By bringing these manufacturing capabilities in-house, we believe we will be
able to continue improving the efficiency of our manufacturing process," said
David D. Pendergast, a Transkaryotic vice president.

   The rare but deadly Fabry disease affects about 5,000 people worldwide.

   Transkaryotic will make the active ingredient of the product and hire others
to finish it. The company is already making its drug for Hunter syndrome in
Cambridge.

   Transkaryotic has approval to sell Replagal in 26 countries, but not the
United States. Sales topped $ 35 million last year and $ 12 million in the first
quarter. In the U.S. market, Transkaryotic lost out to crosstown rival Genzyme
Corp., which won Food and Drug Administration approval for its Fabrazyme drug
earlier this year.

   The company cut 23 percent of its work force after the FDA rejected its drug
application. No new hires are expected with the manufacturing.

   Transkaryotic shares rose 12 cents yesterday to close at $ 11.90.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2003


                             667 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            July 23, 2003 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: California;
Amgen Says Profit Up, Sales Rising;
The biotech company reports an earnings increase of 47% and raises its full-year
projection again.

BYLINE: Denise Gellene, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. said Tuesday that its second-quarter profit climbed 47% as its
anemia drug Aranesp made strong inroads against a rival medication from Johnson
& Johnson Inc.

   The Thousand Oaks-based biotechnology company said the pace of sales would
continue and added $400 million to its 2003 product revenue forecast. The
company said pro forma earnings would increase by 10 cents a share as a result.
It was the second time Amgen raised its full-year projection.

   Amgen reported net income of $607 million, or 45 cents a share, up from $412
million, or 38 cents, for the year-ago quarter. Revenue climbed 63% to $2
billion, the company said.

   On a pro forma basis, excluding charges related to Amgen's acquisition of
rival Immunex Corp. and other items, second-quarter income was $653 million, or
49 cents a share, beating Wall Street analysts' expectations by 3 cents,
according to Thomson First Call.

   Sales of Aranesp rose to $348 million from $56 million in the year-earlier
quarter, as the injectable drug continued to find a market among patients with
chemotherapy-induced anemia. The medication is a longer-lasting version of
Procrit, an injectable anemia drug marketed by Johnson & Johnson under a license
from Amgen.

   Analysts said the Amgen medication is beginning to hurt Johnson & Johnson,
which this month reported a drop in anemia drug sales and a restructuring of its
Procrit sales force.

   Aranesp grew despite unfavorable reimbursement from Medicare in hospital
outpatient clinics, a segment that accounts for more than $100 million in sales.
Amgen has been lobbying Congress and Medicare for higher reimbursement for the
drug, and Chief Executive Kevin Sharer said Tuesday that he was "optimistic and
hopeful" about a change.

   Outside hospital outpatient clinics, Aranesp has a pricing advantage over
Procrit, analysts said, because of a difference in reimbursement formulas. Amgen
additionally is benefiting from an expansion of the overall anemia drug market,
analysts said.

   "It is a recipe for growth," said Mark Schoenebaum of U.S. Bancorp Piper
Jaffray. "They will continue to take share from Procrit."

   Amgen's anemia drug franchise faces a legal threat, however. Opening
arguments are scheduled to begin Monday in Boston in a patent-infringement suit
against Transkaryotic Therapies of Cambridge, Mass., and Aventis, the French
drug firm, which want to launch a rival anemia drug. A federal appeals court in
January ordered a rehearing on a lower court decision in favor of Amgen.

   Sharer, during a conference call with analysts, said the company "remained
confident" about its hold on the patent.

   "People will take probing shots at our patent estate but we will ultimately
prevail," he said.

   The suit is a threat to Aranesp and to Epogen, a first-generation anemia drug
that Amgen markets exclusively to kidney dialysis patients. Amgen expects sales
of its anemia drugs to range from $3.4 billion to $3.6 billion this year.

   Amgen said full-year total product sales would range from $7.5 billion to $8
billion, buoyed by its anemia drugs and drugs for chemotherapy-induced
infections. Pro forma earnings for the year would range from $1.85 to $1.95 a
share, up from $1.80 to $1.90.

   Amgen announced its results after the market's close. Amgen shares rose as
high as $70.20 in after-hours trading after closing at $68.93, down 15 cents, on
Nasdaq.

GRAPHIC:  UPSWING: Amgen CEO Kevin Sharer. Amgen revenue climbed 63% to $2
billion. PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             668 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 21, 2003, Monday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: CATHY YOUNG;
Cathy Young is a contributing editor at Reason magazine. Her column appears
regularly in the Globe.;
TROUBLING ISSUES IN BIOTECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: BY CATHY YOUNG

BODY:

   THOUGH OVERSHADOWED BY MORE EXPLOSIVE WORLD EVENTS, BIOTECHNOLOGY REMAINS AT
THE CENTER OF ONE OF THE MOST HEATED DEBATES OF OUR TIME. FROM GENETICALLY
ENGINEERED CROPS TO THE POSSIBILITY THAT REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES MAY CHANGE
HUMAN NATURE, THIS DEBATE HAS OFTEN GENERATED BITTER ANTAGONISM. PROPONENTS OF
BIO TECH NOLOGY HAVE BEEN CARICATURED AS CHAMPIONS OF "FRANKEN SCIENCE," WHILE
ITS CRITICS HAVE BEEN ACCUSED OF WANTING TO KEEP HUMANITY MIRED IN DISEASE AND
MISERY.

   Some biotechnology-related issues are fairly simple.  The alarm over "Franken
food" largely boils down to knee-jerk technophobia: genetically engineered food
is, by all indications, no more dangerous than the kind produced through more
old-fashioned selection, and certainly far safer than many chemicals.

   However, advances in cloning and genetic alteration of animals raise
inevitable questions about "designer humans." What will that do to our notions
of freedom, dignity, humanity itself?

      These concerns are expressed in several recent books; the latest, "Enough!
Staying Human in an Engineered Age" by Bill McKibben, comes only a year after
Francis Fukuyama's "Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology
Revolution." Some day, the authors warn, parents will be able to select their
children's personality traits, turning people into "products" and robbing our
lives of true meaning.

   Champions of progress, including libertarians such as Ronald Bailey, my
fellow columnist at Reason magazine, dismiss this as ignorant panic-mongering
that could stand in the way of important breakthroughs in human health and
happiness.  And on many points, the libertarians are correct.  Thus, much of the
hysteria about cloning has been based on false assumptions - for instance, that
cloned humans would be mindless drones.

   It is also true that some would-be defenders of human dignity against the
threat of biotechnology seem to see human beings as slaves to their genes. Even
if a baby could be outfitted with a gene for, say, literary talent, she might or
might not become a writer depending on her life experiences.

   Still, genetic makeup does play an important role. For now, most experts
agree, science is still light-years away from being able to "customize" a human
child for such traits as sensitivity or competitiveness, artistic gifts or
religious piety. But some biotechnology enthusiasts such as UCLA bioethicist
Gregory Stock, author of "Redesigning Humans: Our Inevitable Genetic Future,"
actively cheer such a prospect. Yet it seems to me that in this case,
panic-mongering about the damage to our sense of humanity is not so silly.

   Bailey notes that "to the extent that genes 'program' us, we are already
'pre-programmed' by our randomly conferred genes." He scoffs at McKibben's
belief that the randomness of such selection, as opposed to human design, is the
key to freedom. But I'm not so sure. Suppose your career and your marriage had
been influenced by several chance events that steered you in certain directions.
And suppose you suddenly found out that these seemingly chance events had been
engineered by your parents. Even if you were happy with your life, wouldn't it
make you feel like a puppet?

   There are other troubling implications. One need not be a radical egalitarian
to be troubled by the idea that the affluent may add genetic enhancement to
their children's advantages while the have-nots fall further behind. What's
more, while libertarians speak of parental choice, people could face a great
deal of coercion to make the "right" decisions about their children's DNA.
Suppose genetic intervention can minimize the chances of antisocial behavior,
and some parents refused to take advantage of it. If their child goes on to
commit a crime, could they be charged with negligence?

   None of this is to suggest that research on human genetic engineering ought
to be banned or restricted by law, unless it endangers research subjects. For
one, gene therapy targeting various diseases could alleviate the horrible
suffering caused by diseases such as Alzheimer's.

   But even beneficial changes can have a downside. Moreover, opposition to
government bans on morally problematic uses of biotechnology should not
foreclose a vigorous debate about the moral issues involved. The abdication of
moral judgment invites intrusive laws. There should be, at least, a stigma
against any genetic alteration that amounts to tampering with the self.

   Quite possibly, science may never gain the knowledge and skill required to
truly engineer the soul; the interaction of various genes which produces a
particular trait may be too complex ever to master. But then, those who stress
the perils of the unfettered pursuit of knowledge may have something of a last
laugh. The grounds for optimism, after all, are in the hope that there are
limits to this Promethean quest.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PAUL LACHINE ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2003


                             669 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                     July 17, 2003 Thursday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: WEST ZONER; BEAVERTON; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 775 words

HEADLINE: ON OTHER TOPICS

BODY:

   Bio Level 4 lab not safe enough

   As two of 10 people who attended an OHSU community meeting about the proposed
bio Level 4 lab in Hillsboro, we were not convinced that this facility will be
"absolutely safe" as the experts assured us. The prospect of an accidental
exposure of our community to the deadly pathogens that will be studied on the
Hillsboro campus is not to be so easily dismissed as needless worry.

   An accidental release to the outside has never happened at this type of lab,
but that does not preclude the possibility that it could happen in the future at
this particular facility. While the engineering for multiple levels of safety
seems excellent in theory, no one can say for sure whether its construction will
be perfect in execution. Human error and mechanical failure may occur. Witness
Chernobyl, Three-Mile Island, the Challenger, the Columbia and the releases of
toxics we learn about years later when the government records are no longer
classified.

   Why not locate this type of facility in a more isolated area than on one of
Washington County's busiest, most densely populated thoroughfares? Expediency
and economics. OHSU already owns the real estate -- the primate lab (built when
185th Avenue was a two-lane country road) and the vaccine and gene therapy bio
Level 3 lab built in 1998.

   They say it is not feasible to move their cadre of valuable scientists to an
isolated rural site without the amenities of the city and the support system of
the university. One leading OHSU scientist admitted honestly that he wouldn't
want to work or live in a place such as Umatilla or Hanford. We can't blame him,
but the whole community is affected by this decision to locate here.

   Are the citizens and officials of Hillsboro so desperate for jobs that they
are going to quietly accept this bioterrorism lab without asking any tough
questions about their safety?

   Research the debate over siting that is going on in every other community
where a bio Level 4 lab has been proposed: Davis, Calif.; Hamilton, Mont.; and
Boston, to name three. We should discuss the issue among ourselves and with our
public officials as well as at future community meetings where OHSU will speak.

   OHSU cannot be faulted at all in its attempts to reach out to the community
to inform us and to seek our support, but we have to be ready to ask the most
difficult question at the heart of the matter -- should the most hazardous part
of the project, the bio Level 4 lab, be located in such a densely populated
area? Siting should certainly be an integral part of the maximum safety
equation.

   KAREN and JERRY CRESSA

   Hillsboro

   Revise speed bumps on 87th

   My letter regarding Draconian speed bumps prompted Wolfgang Dempke to agree
with me that traffic is hampered and impaired by the new speed bumps on 87th
Avenue in West Slope. His contention that his annoyance comes from people
slowing down too much, to 5 mph in some cases, I think proves my point. The
majority of drivers will either "slalom course" the bumps or slow so much that
traffic is impeded. In either case, the speed bumps cry out for revision and
replacement.

   STEPHEN GENTNER

   Beaverton

   Carefully consider plans for site

   The difficult decision to be made by the Hillsboro Planning Commission in the
coming weeks will impact this community for generations, and their task has been
made more complicated by the recent planning and zoning hearings board decision
to grant Providence Health System's zone change request.

   We only hope that the Planning Commission will do what the zoning board has
asked them to do -- carefully consider the use of the property, not just the
design elements of the proposal. The zoning board felt their hands were tied in
considering how the land would actually be used when they made their decision,
but they and we urge the Planning Commission to consider the use.

   Providence argues that neither Planning and Zoning Hearings Board nor the
Planning Commission has the authority to consider the use of the land, that
neither body should link their decision to the city's comprehensive plan. During
all of our cumulative years in the mayor's office, we did not rely on a
comprehensive plan with a big hole in it -- a big hole that would allow a huge
public service such as a hospital to slip in without a thorough review by the
community.

   We strongly urge the planning commission to look carefully at the city's
comprehensive plan as part of your decision-making process. When you do, you
will see clearly that an unneeded hospital should not be allowed on prime
industrial land.

   SHIRLEY HUFFMAN and GORDON FABER,

   Former mayors of Hillsboro

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2003


                             670 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      July 16, 2003 Wednesday, Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 926 words

HEADLINE: Researcher develops solution for condition that impairs sight

BYLINE: Roger Mezger, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   As a kid 50 years ago, Louis Dell'Osso refused to accept his doctor's learned
opinion that no medical treatment could keep his eyes from darting side to side.

   Dell'Osso, who was born with nystagmus, an uncontrollable eye wiggle that
impairs sight, set out to prove the doctor wrong. Now he has. The 62-year-old
Cleveland researcher has designed a surgery that minimizes the involuntary eye
movement.

   After results of a successful National Institutes of Health clinical trial
are published this year, the procedure will become a new standard of care for
some with nystagmus.

   "Now there's a whole group of people who can receive an operation that will
significantly reduce their nystagmus, give them an opportunity to see better and
change their lives," Dell'Osso says.

   But Dell'Osso is not an eye surgeon. In fact, he's not a medical doctor at
all. Never even took a course in biology. He's an electrical engineer. And yet,
says Dr. Robert Burnstine, head of pediatric ophthalmology at Akron Children's
Hospital, "in my opinion, he's the world's leading authority on nystagmus."

   Dell'Osso runs the Ocular Motor Neurophysiology Laboratory at the Wade Park
branch of the Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center.

   He also teaches neurology and biomedical engineering at Case Western Reserve
University.

   The 33-year-old laboratory was the world's first dedicated to the study of
eye motion and remains the leader.

   Eye doctors around the world send nystagmus patients to Dell'Osso for
evaluations.

   Dell'Osso proposed the surgery primarily for people with congenital
nystagmus, which appears shortly after birth. The Department of Veterans
Affairs, sponsor of Dell'Osso's research, is not particularly interested in
those patients because their impaired vision is likely to make them ineligible
for military service.

   However, older people, veterans among them, can acquire nystagmus after
suffering head injuries, strokes or brain diseases such as multiple sclerosis.
The surgery can help some of them as well, Dell'Osso says. About one person in
3,000 has nystagmus.

   Doing research 25 years ago, Dell'Osso noticed that an operation in which eye
muscles were cut and reattached in different spots to realign the eye helped
some nystagmus patients more than anyone expected. Somehow, he speculated, the
surgery had altered the circuit that controlled the eye muscle's response to
faulty eye-movement signals from the brain.

   He suggested that simply cutting muscles and tendons away from the eye and
reattaching them in the same spot would help certain other nystagmus patients by
interrupting that electrical feedback loop. Eye doctors were skeptical.

   "I'm an electrical engineer, which some ophthalmologists find mildly
offensive," he said.

   Even Dell'Osso's main research associate, Dr. Richard Hertle, suspected it
would be a waste of time when Dell'Osso persuaded him to try the procedure on a
dog with nystagmus. But the operation worked, and Hertle, then at the NIH's
National Eye Institute in Bethesda, Md., later conducted the successful human
trials in 2000 and 2001.

   Now a children's eye doctor and researcher in Columbus, Hertle has been
calling the surgery "the Dell'Osso procedure." If the appellation sticks, he
thinks it might be the first time that a surgical technique was named for
someone who is neither a surgeon nor a clinician.

   Burnstine at Akron Children's also won clearance a few years ago to try the
procedure on patients. He says the first 25 patients he treated showed an
average 20 percent improvement in central vision and about 50 percent
improvement in peripheral vision. Some teens and adults who could not get
driver's licenses before the surgery now have them.

   Nystagmus patients in other states and countries have discovered the Akron
Children's program by researching their treatment options on the Internet,
Burnstine said. The operation costs as much as $5,000.

   On Monday, Burnstine performed his 26th Dell'Osso procedure, on Justin
Runner, 5, of Green in Summit County. Justin's congenital nystagmus emerged when
he was 6 weeks old, so he does not really know what normal sight is. Still, says
his mother, Stefanie, "He'll say things to us that will just break your heart."

   One day Justin was playing with Yu-Gi-Oh trading cards, popular with kids,
when he came across one bearing the image of a bizarre character with eyes all
over its arms and legs.

   "Justin just looked at the card and said, 'I'll bet he can see a lot better
than I can,' " his mother said.

   Researchers soon will find a way to change the faulty feedback circuit
without surgery, perhaps by giving a drug injection, Dell'Osso believes.

   Meantime, the inventor of the Dell'Osso procedure is busy with another
potentially ground-breaking project. He is teaming with researchers at the
University of Pennsylvania on a gene therapy for Leber's congenital amaurosis,
an inherited disease that causes severe vision loss in newborns.

   Tests on a special breed of dog are under way, and clinical trials with
infants could begin in a couple of years. Down the road, the lessons learned in
Dell'Osso's lab could be applied to help blind veterans and others see again.

   "The VA may save the sight of babies because of work done here," Dell'Osso
says.

   "This laboratory is the only such laboratory in the world, and it lives in a
VA hospital."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   rmezger@plaind.com, 216-999-4446

   GRAPHIC by DORA STANEFF-CLINE / THE PLAIN DEALER:

   The Dell'Osso procedure

   (SOURCE:  Louis Dell'Osso; www.yorku.ca)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID I. ANDERSEN THE PLAIN DEALER Nurse Patrick Conway,
left, and Dr. Faisal Arian, an anesthesiology resident, prepare Justin Runner,
5, for eye surgery at Akron Children's Hospital. Justin was born with nystagmus,
an uncontrollable eye wiggle.  Dr. Robert Burnstine, right, head of pediatric
ophthalmology at Akron Children's Hospital, operates on Justin Runner's eye
muscles. Cleveland researcher Louis Dell'Osso designed the surgery to correct an
involuntary eye movement. Dr. Vit Patel, a second-year resident, observes.
PHOTOGRAPHS BY DAVID I. ANDERSEN THE PLAIN DEALER Nurse Patrick Conway, left,
and Dr. Faisal Arian, an anesthesiology resident, prepare Justin Runner, 5, for
eye surgery at Akron Children's Hospital. Justin was born with nystagmus, an
uncontrollable eye wiggle.  Dr. Robert Burnstine, right, head of pediatric
ophthalmology at Akron Children's Hospital, operates on Justin Runner's eye
muscles. Cleveland researcher Louis Dell'Osso designed the surgery to correct an
involuntary eye movement. Dr. Vit Patel, a second-year resident, observes.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2003


                             671 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 16, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-5

LENGTH: 168 words

HEADLINE: QUEST FOR LEARNING

BODY:
 This study guide is prepared by the Newspaper In Education Department of the
Union-Tribune as an aid for teachers and parents.  It is aligned with the
California State Reading / Language Arts Framework, and the Mathematics and
Science Standards. The questions refer to the article on scarring.

   1. What are the differences between regeneration and scarring?

   2. What are embryonic stem cells?  How are they obtained?  What is the
political and scientific debate about research using these cells?  What is the
most recent government policy regarding embryonic stem cells?

   3. How should you treat a minor wound in order to minimize scarring?

   4. What are the mechanisms by which the body turns on and off the process of
cell growth?  How does the body know where a repair is needed, and when the
repair is completed?

   5. How does gene therapy work?  Do doctors put new genes into a body?  Do
they repair or change the genes already present?  Who are some of the leading
researchers in this field?



LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2003


                             672 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 16, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1770 words

HEADLINE: SCAR WARS; After injury, sometimes the worst enemy is 'exaggerated
healing'

BYLINE: Scott LaFee; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Wound healing is an obvious and fundamental need.  Organisms that repair
injuries quickly and effectively survive; those that don't, don't.

   But the degree to which life displays this talent is wide and diverse.  Some
worms, for example, can rebuild whole portions of their bodies.  Newts are able
to regenerate entire limbs.

   Humans and other mammals lack these superlative restorative skills.  When we
suffer significant injury, healing almost invariably results in scarring --
nature's version of a spot weld.

   In most cultures most of the time, scars are not desirable.  Aesthetics
aside, there are sound health reasons for wanting to avoid being scarred.  Scar
tissue is never as good as the original.  It tends to be coarser, weaker and
less elastic.  It can be disfiguring, disabling or, occasionally, deadly.

   Scarring is mending run amok, the result of "an exaggerated healing process,"
said Dr. Warren Garner, an associate professor of surgery at USC and director of
the Burn Service at the Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center.

   Doctors and medical researchers would like to sever that connection, to make
healing scar-free, or as much as possible.  The challenge is daunting, but the
research is promising.  It ranges from genetic manipulation to block cellular
signals to form scars; to deciphering a healing secret unique to the unborn; to
a growing arsenal of therapeutic treatments that includes wrapping internal
organs in bioabsorbable film, enveloping damaged skin in sheets of silicon gel
and using radiation and cryosurgery.

   The healing process

   "Our understanding of the wound repair has made dramatic progress over the
last 20 years," said Dr. Richard Gallo, an associate professor of medicine at
UCSD and chief of dermatology for the Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare
System.

   "After a wound to the skin, the blood must clot, the immune system must start
fighting against infection, then the wound must close.  Clotting is well
understood.  The immune defense system is now partially understood.  But the
last step of repair is still a relatively underdeveloped science.  A big mystery
is what activates cells to start to heal, organize themselves into a new
structure, then stop the repair process."

   Even stripped down to its simplest description, the biological repair process
is enormously complicated, involving a cascade of overlapping phases and
multiple cellular players.

   Numerous factors can disrupt or alter the normal healing process -- and
result in a more serious or problematic scar.  At the site of the injury, for
example, there must be space for new cells to grow, and effective communication
between them.  The injury must be well-supplied with blood carrying oxygen,
nutrients and hormones.  It must be free of infection.

   There can be complications due to age, general health, how quickly the injury
received treatment, degree of initial infection and genetic predisposition to
scarring.

   "Our knowledge of wound repair and scarring is a bit like that of most people
and cars.  We know that if you put your foot down on the accelerator, the car
moves," said Garner at USC.  "Most of us don't have any real knowledge of how
the engine works."

   Except for teeth, every living tissue in the human body can heal, but not all
heal exactly the same way.  "The general process is pretty much the same, but
there are different factors involved with different tissues," said Dr. Marc
Hedrick, medical director of MacroPore Biosurgery, a San Diego-based company
that produces bioresorbable implants and conducts regenerative therapy research.

   The liver, for example, is capable of completely rebuilding damaged tissue
with no scarring.  Kidneys and lungs possess lesser regenerative abilities and
are thus more susceptible to damage that results in scarring.  Injured heart
tissue almost invariably scars, which may be life-threatening.

   Born without scars

   Gene therapy may ultimately provide a preventive solution to scarring.

   "In my opinion," said Gallo at UCSD, "this is the only real way to make
progress in treating scars.  Once we better understand the genetics behind all
the steps of wound repair, we can design a rational genetic approach.  The goal
is to make repair more like regeneration, and to do this without the risk of
uncontrolled cell proliferation."

   Some researchers are already pursuing this option.  Two years ago, Dr. Mario
Chojkier, a professor of medicine at UCSD, and colleagues at the Salk Institute,
Veterans Administration San Diego Healthcare system and elsewhere, reported that
they had successfully prevented excessive liver scarring in mice by tinkering
with a protein involved in the process.  They are now preparing for human
clinical studies, with several biotechnology companies interested, Chojkier
said.

   Others are taking different approaches, including one that hopes to revive a
remarkable healing ability that all humans possess -- for a time.

   In the 1980s, doctors discovered that unborn humans in the first 20 to 24
weeks of development do not scar.

   "We could conduct in utero surgery where we take the fetus out of the womb,
open its chest to correct a lung problem, then put it back into the womb and
there would be no chest scar," said Hedrick, who specialized in surgery and
pediatrics at UC San Francisco.

   As yet, no one can fully explain why this happens in unborn children, but not
in adults.  There are many confounding variables.

   Specifically, embryonic wounds appear to heal without an inflammatory phase,
and the mechanism of cellular regrowth is different.  Rather than closing cell
by cell, fetal wounds close as a sheet of epithelial cells move forward in
unison, pulled inward like a purse string.

   In addition, the womb is a sterile place, though Hedrick notes that sterile
wounds in adults still scar.  In the womb, fetuses are bathed in high levels of
hyaluronic acid, which helps collagen form in an organized way.  Yet experiments
applying hyaluronic acid to adult wounds have shown no significant ameliorative
effect.

   Researchers have noted that fetal wounds contain greater and lesser amounts
of different forms of Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-b), a family of
proteins linked to scar formation.  And at least one drug designed to inhibit
TGF-b in patients suffering from fibrosis -- scarring of the heart, lungs,
kidneys or limbs -- has begun clinical trials.

   Chojkier says research into replicating fetal healing ability offers great
allure and promise, but it is not without dangers or controversy.

   "Certainly, the risks of having a great regenerative capability could have
consequences for uncontrolled cell proliferation resulting in cancer growth," he
said.  In addition, such research involves using embryonic stem cells, which
remain a subject of heated political and scientific debate.

   In the meantime, researchers have made notable progress in treating -- and
sometimes preventing -- scarring through physical means.  For example, MacroPore
began marketing last year a thin, clear film designed to reduce postoperative
internal scarring in surgery patients.

   SurgiWrap looks like ordinary plastic food wrap, except that it is made from
polymerized lactic acid and is bioabsorbable.  Its purpose is to keep separate
healing tissues after surgery.

   For example, after open-heart surgery, scar tissue will often form between
the heart and the internal chest wall, connecting the two and reducing the
heart's ability to beat freely and fully.  By wrapping the heart in SurgiWrap,
said Hedrick, doctors can block the binding effect.

   "It doesn't affect the scarring process directly," said Hedrick, "but rather,
it tricks it.  The wrap acts like a force field between organs.  Scarring goes
sideways instead of connecting, and over three to six months, longer than the
scarring maturation phase, the wrap is metabolized by the body into water and
carbon dioxide."

   More established treatments for existing scars are improving, too.

   "Basically, a scar is the failure of a tissue, any tissue, to reorganize its
cells in the same pattern as before injury," said Gallo at UCSD.  "The physical
approaches are all essentially giving the skin another chance to heal in a more
cosmetically appropriate way." Surgery -- Almost 5 percent of reconstructive
surgeries in the United States are procedures to redress existing scars.
Surgery, including those using lasers, is only modestly effective.  Surgery
usually replaces a targeted scar with a new scar, albeit one that may be less
visible or troublesome.

   Radiation -- Exposure to X-rays is usually a culprit in scarring, a cause of
fibrosis in internal tissues.  But some research suggests that low-dose,
superficial radiation can reduce the recurrence rate of some scar types after
surgery.  Radiation of scars is controversial, however, due to concerns about
possible long-term side effects.

   Cryotherapy -- There has been some success using liquid nitrogen, with a
temperature of minus 321 degrees.  The nitrogen freezes the scar, causing a
blister that in theory heals better, producing a smaller subsequent scar.

   Steroids -- Steroid injections can soften and flatten scars.  The steroid is
injected into the scar itself to reduce possible side effects caused by the drug
being absorbed into the blood stream.  These are only given under medical
supervision.

   Collagen -- Collagen is injected beneath sunken scars to build up the level
of skin tissue.  The effect, however, is temporary because the collagen is
eventually metabolized by the body, thus requiring repeated, regular injections.

   Pressure garments -- These are only worn under medical supervision, usually
in cases where new scarring (as in a burn) covers a large area of skin.  The
garments are custom-made from a tight, elastic material and work best when worn
24 hours a day for six to 12 months.  How exactly they work is not understood,
though the continuous pressure on surface blood vessels likely plays a part.
Over time, scars beneath pressure garments soften, flatten and become paler.

   Silicone gel sheets -- First developed in the 1980s and now available for
self-treatment, silicone gel sheets look like transparent gelatin.  They are
soft, waterproof and flexible.  Applied to skin, they work by flattening,
softening and fading dark, raised scars.

   Of course, not everyone wants to hide or remove their scars.

   "Children wear them like medals," said the poet Leonard Cohen.  "Lovers use
them as secrets to reveal.  A scar is what happens when the word is made flesh."

   More fundamentally, a scar is proof, whether we like it or not, of being
alive.


GRAPHIC: 1 DIAGRAM | 3 DRAWINGS | 1 PIC; 1,2,3,4. SOURCES: www.wounds1.com;
Union-Tribune research | PAUL HORN / Union-Tribune 5. MacroPore; 1. Wounds that
heal -- The depth, breadth and nature of scarring depends greatly upon the type
of injury and factors affecting the healing process, such as infection, age and
overall health. Healing involves a dynamic cascade of overlapping phases. 2,3,4.
Superficial scar types 5. SurgiWrap, a bioabsorbable film developed by San
Diego-based MacroPore Biosurgery Inc., helps reduce internal scarring by
creating a temporary physical barrier between tissues.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2003


                             673 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 16, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1743 words

HEADLINE: SCAR WARS;
After injury, sometimes the worst enemy is `exaggerated healing'

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Wound healing is an obvious and fundamental need.

   Organisms that repair injuries quickly and effectively survive; those that
don't, don't. But the degree to which life displays this talent is wide and
diverse.

   Some worms, for example, can rebuild whole portions of their bodies.

   Newts are able to regenerate entire limbs. Humans and other mammals lack
these superlative restorative skills.

   When we suffer significant injury, healing almost invariably results in
scarring -- nature's version of a spot weld. In most cultures most of the time,
scars are not desirable.

   Aesthetics aside, there are sound health reasons for wanting to avoid being
scarred. Scar tissue is never as good as the original.

   It tends to be coarser, weaker and less elastic.

   It can be disfiguring, disabling or, occasionally, deadly. Scarring is
mending run amok, the result of "an exaggerated healing process," said Dr.
Warren Garner, an associate professor of surgery at USC and director of the Burn
Service at the Los Angeles County-USC Medical Center. Doctors and medical
researchers would like to sever that connection, to make healing scar-free, or
as much as possible.

   The challenge is daunting, but the research is promising.

   It ranges from genetic manipulation to block cellular signals to form scars;
to deciphering a healing secret unique to the unborn; to a growing arsenal of
therapeutic treatments that includes wrapping internal organs in bioabsorbable
film, enveloping damaged skin in sheets of silicon gel and using radiation and
cryosurgery. The healing process "Our understanding of the wound repair has made
dramatic progress over the last 20 years," said Dr. Richard Gallo, an associate
professor of medicine at UCSD and chief of dermatology for the Veterans Affairs
San Diego Healthcare System. "After a wound to the skin, the blood must clot,
the immune system must start fighting against infection, then the wound must
close.

   Clotting is well understood.

   The immune defense system is now partially understood.

   But the last step of repair is still a relatively underdeveloped science.

   A big mystery is what activates cells to start to heal, organize themselves
into a new structure, then stop the repair process." Even stripped down to its
simplest description, the biological repair process is enormously complicated,
involving a cascade of overlapping phases and multiple cellular players.
Numerous factors can disrupt or alter the normal healing process -- and result
in a more serious or problematic scar.

   At the site of the injury, for example, there must be space for new cells to
grow, and effective communication between them.

   The injury must be well-supplied with blood carrying oxygen, nutrients and
hormones.

   It must be free of infection. There can be complications due to age, general
health, how quickly the injury received treatment, degree of initial infection
and genetic predisposition to scarring. "Our knowledge of wound repair and
scarring is a bit like that of most people and cars.

   We know that if you put your foot down on the accelerator, the car moves,"
said Garner at USC.

   "Most of us don't have any real knowledge of how the engine works." Except
for teeth, every living tissue in the human body can heal, but not all heal
exactly the same way.

   "The general process is pretty much the same, but there are different factors
involved with different tissues," said Dr. Marc Hedrick, medical director of
MacroPore Biosurgery, a San Diego-based company that produces bioresorbable
implants and conducts regenerative therapy research. The liver, for example, is
capable of completely rebuilding damaged tissue with no scarring.

   Kidneys and lungs possess lesser regenerative abilities and are thus more
susceptible to damage that results in scarring.

   Injured heart tissue almost invariably scars, which may be life-threatening.
Born without scars Gene therapy may ultimately provide a preventive solution to
scarring. "In my opinion," said Gallo at UCSD, "this is the only real way to
make progress in treating scars.

   Once we better understand the genetics behind all the steps of wound repair,
we can design a rational genetic approach. The goal is to make repair more like
regeneration, and to do this without the risk of uncontrolled cell
proliferation." Some researchers are already pursuing this option.

   Two years ago, Dr. Mario Chojkier, a professor of medicine at UCSD, and
colleagues at the Salk Institute, Veterans Administration San Diego Healthcare
system and elsewhere, reported that they had successfully prevented excessive
liver scarring in mice by tinkering with a protein involved in the process.

   They are now preparing for human clinical studies, with several biotechnology
companies interested, Chojkier said. Others are taking different approaches,
including one that hopes to revive a remarkable healing ability that all humans
possess -- for a time. In the 1980s, doctors discovered that unborn humans in
the first 20 to 24 weeks of development do not scar. "We could conduct in utero
surgery where we take the fetus out of the womb, open its chest to correct a
lung problem, then put it back into the womb and there would be no chest scar,"
said Hedrick, who specialized in surgery and pediatrics at UC San Francisco. As
yet, no one can fully explain why this happens in unborn children, but not in
adults.

   There are many confounding variables. Specifically, embryonic wounds appear
to heal without an inflammatory phase, and the mechanism of cellular regrowth is
different.

   Rather than closing cell by cell, fetal wounds close as a sheet of epithelial
cells move forward in unison, pulled inward like a purse string. In addition,
the womb is a sterile place, though Hedrick notes that sterile wounds in adults
still scar.

   In the womb, fetuses are bathed in high levels of hyaluronic acid, which
helps collagen form in an organized way.

   Yet experiments applying hyaluronic acid to adult wounds have shown no
significant ameliorative effect. Researchers have noted that fetal wounds
contain greater and lesser amounts of different forms of Transforming Growth
Factor-beta (TGF-b), a family of proteins linked to scar formation.

   And at least one drug designed to inhibit TGF-b in patients suffering from
fibrosis -- scarring of the heart, lungs, kidneys or limbs -- has begun clinical
trials. Chojkier says research into replicating fetal healing ability offers
great allure and promise, but it is not without dangers or controversy.
"Certainly, the risks of having a great regenerative capability could have
consequences for uncontrolled cell proliferation resulting in cancer growth," he
said.

   In addition, such research involves using embryonic stem cells, which remain
a subject of heated political and scientific debate. In the meantime,
researchers have made notable progress in treating -- and sometimes preventing
-- scarring through physical means.

   For example, MacroPore began marketing last year a thin, clear film designed
to reduce postoperative internal scarring in surgery patients. SurgiWrap looks
like ordinary plastic food wrap, except that it is made from polymerized lactic
acid and is bioabsorbable.

   Its purpose is to keep separate healing tissues after surgery. For example,
after open-heart surgery, scar tissue will often form between the heart and the
internal chest wall, connecting the two and reducing the heart's ability to beat
freely and fully.

   By wrapping the heart in SurgiWrap, said Hedrick, doctors can block the
binding effect. "It doesn't affect the scarring process directly," said Hedrick,
"but rather, it tricks it.

   The wrap acts like a force field between organs. Scarring goes sideways
instead of connecting, and over three to six months, longer than the scarring
maturation phase, the wrap is metabolized by the body into water and carbon
dioxide." More established treatments for existing scars are improving, too.
"Basically, a scar is the failure of a tissue, any tissue, to reorganize its
cells in the same pattern as before injury," said Gallo at UCSD.

   "The physical approaches are all essentially giving the skin another chance
to heal in a more cosmetically appropriate way."

   Surgery -- Almost 5 percent of reconstructive surgeries in the United States
are procedures to redress existing scars.

   Surgery, including those using lasers, is only modestly effective.

   Surgery usually replaces a targeted scar with a new scar, albeit one that may
be less visible or troublesome. Radiation -- Exposure to X-rays is usually a
culprit in scarring, a cause of fibrosis in internal tissues.

   But some research suggests that low-dose, superficial radiation can reduce
the recurrence rate of some scar types after surgery.

   Radiation of scars is controversial, however, due to concerns about possible
long-term side effects. Cryotherapy -- There has been some success using liquid
nitrogen, with a temperature of minus 321 degrees.

   The nitrogen freezes the scar, causing a blister that in theory heals better,
producing a smaller subsequent scar. Steroids -- Steroid injections can soften
and flatten scars.

   The steroid is injected into the scar itself to reduce possible side effects
caused by the drug being absorbed into the blood stream.

   These are only given under medical supervision. Collagen -- Collagen is
injected beneath sunken scars to build up the level of skin tissue.

   The effect, however, is temporary because the collagen is eventually
metabolized by the body, thus requiring repeated, regular injections. Pressure
garments -- These are only worn under medical supervision, usually in cases
where new scarring (as in a burn) covers a large area of skin.

   The garments are custom-made from a tight, elastic material and work best
when worn 24 hours a day for six to 12 months.

   How exactly they work is not understood, though the continuous pressure on
surface blood vessels likely plays a part.

   Over time, scars beneath pressure garments soften, flatten and become paler.
Silicone gel sheets -- First developed in the 1980s and now available for
self-treatment, silicone gel sheets look like transparent gelatin.

   They are soft, waterproof and flexible.

   Applied to skin, they work by flattening, softening and fading dark, raised
scars. Of course, not everyone wants to hide or remove their scars. "Children
wear them like medals," said the poet Leonard Cohen.

   "Lovers use them as secrets to reveal.

   A scar is what happens when the word is made flesh." More fundamentally, a
scar is proof, whether we like it or not, of being alive.

GRAPHIC: 1 DIAGRAM; 3 DRAWINGS; 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: 1. Wounds that heal -- The
depth, breadth and nature of scarring depends greatly upon the type of injury
and factors affecting the healing process, such as infection, age and overall
health. Healing involves a dynamic cascade of overlapping phases. 2,3,4.
Superficial scar types 5. SurgiWrap, a bioabsorbable film developed by San
Diego-based MacroPore Biosurgery Inc., helps reduce internal scarring by
creating a temporary physical barrier between tissues.; PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4.
SOURCES: www.wounds1.com; Union-Tribune research | PAUL HORN / Union-Tribune 5.
MacroPore

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             674 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        July 14, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 04G

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find new gene linked to heart defects

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Scientists have identified a third gene that can cause congenital heart
defects, a leading cause of death in newborns.

   A malfunctioning version of the gene, called GATA4, can lead to defects in
the formation of the walls that separate the four chambers of the heart.

   Individuals from families with a history of the common heart defect already
are being screened for the mutated gene. Such screenings can prepare them for
the possibility that their offspring are at risk.

   The discovery also could lead to drug or genetic therapies that could fix the
problem in fetuses, although such treatments are years away, said study
co-author Deepak Srivastava of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas.

   Details of the discovery appeared on the Web site of the journal Nature.

   About 25,000 babies born in the United States each year, or as many as one in
125 births, have a heart defect, according to the March of Dimes. Many defects
require open heart surgery to repair.

   American and Japanese researchers discovered the mutated gene while plumbing
the genetic makeups of two multigenerational families plagued by heart defects.
GATA4 mutations appeared in all family members with defects, but not in those
without, nor did researchers find it in 3,000 unrelated individuals they
screened.

   The gene, which regulates a host of other genes, is the third known to play a
role in heart defects. Researchers think others remain to be discovered.

   Eventually, the gene also could reveal a way of repairing the damage caused
by heart attacks in adults, since it appears to regulate heart tissue growth,
said Roberta Williams, a pediatric cardiologist at the University of Southern
California who was not connected with the research.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2003


                             675 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      July 10, 2003 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Earlier care of hearts studied

BYLINE: By Tim Bonfield The Cincinnati Enquirer, STAFF

BODY:

   By Tim Bonfield

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   Children with muscular dystrophy might live longer - or at least better - if
doctors start treating their failing hearts at earlier ages. But it will take an
expansion of research studies to know for sure.

   So says the organizer of a group of cardiology experts gathering today
through Sunday in Cincinnati to discuss recommending a nationwide set of
standards for caring for young people with muscular dystrophy.

   "It makes sense to begin treatment earlier," says Dr. Linda Cripe, a
pediatric cardiologist with Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. "But
there is no data to say if it is of benefit, nor on which medicines would work
best."

   Cardiologists are gathering in downtown Cincinnati along with many other
experts in muscular dystrophy as part of an annual scientific conference put on
by the Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy. This is the first year the conference
has been in Cincinnati.

   Muscular dystrophy is a term that includes more than 20 related genetic
disorders that gradually destroy muscle function. The most common and among the
most serious forms is Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects one in every
3,000 male births.

   There is no cure. As the disease destroys muscular function, many boys with
Duchenne MD lose the ability to walk in their mid-teens and die in their early
20s. Gradual heart failure is one of the most common causes of death.

   However, patients with MD typically get referred to cardiologists in their
late teens - after their heart failure has reached advanced stages and treatment
has limited benefit, Cripe said.

   During the past two years in Cincinnati, a team of various kinds of
specialists has urged some boys to get heart failure treatment earlier in life.
A few have been as young as 6 or 8 years old, Cripe said.

   The Parent Project was founded in 1994 by Pat Furlong, a Middletown woman
whose two sons died of the illness in 1996.

   The annual conference is intended for parents to hear about the latest
treatment advances and trends in MD directly from the experts. This year, topics
range from updates on genetic therapy to the value of physical therapy to coping
with insurance issues.

   The focus on cardiology is a relatively new development in muscular
dystrophy. The experts gathering this weekend hope to develop a draft set of
treatment recommendations that eventually would be submitted to the American
Academy of Pediatrics for use as a nationwide care guideline.

   E-mail tbonfield@enquirer.com

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2003


                             676 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 9, 2003, Wednesday  THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1101 words

HEADLINE: CANDY COATED POWER-CLEANING CLEARS WAY FOR LABS AT OLD NECCO FACTORY

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   CAMBRIDGE - To convert the 1926 Necco candy factory into Novartis Pharma AG
research labs, construction workers first had to deal with the building's sticky
past.

   During the decades when Necco cranked out its signature pink, purple, green,
and yellow candy wafers, sugar spores burrowed into the pores of the building's
concrete walls.  A gooey residue coated the basement floor, where six tanks once
stored 30,000 gallons of corn syrup, molasses, and sugar. Small sugary patches
remained in areas where mixing vats once held batches of chocolate.

      Sugar and laboratory experiments don't mix, though. So floor by floor,
workers are power-washing away the remnants of sweeter days, with hot water and
bleach. The cleaning, among the first steps in an intricately choreographed $175
million project, is akin to a rite of passage for a city that evolved from a
confectionery capital into a biotechnology hub.

   "I like finding new uses for old buildings," said David Clem, managing
director of Lyme Properties, which has converted several old Cambridge buildings
into lab space.

   "I love that at One Kendall Square, in the same building where the first
bicycle tires were created, that we had a biotech company accelerating the
growth of human skin," he said.

   The Necco building sits on Massachusetts Avenue, a stone's throw from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and within a mile's walk of more than 70
biotechnology firms. Novartis, based in Basel, Switzerland, signed a 45-year
lease for the candy factory's 500,000 square feet as part of setting up its
research headquarters in Cambridge, where it will house about 1,000 scientists.

   Many other biotech firms are breathing new life into old Cambridge's
buildings.

   The Boston Woven Hose Co. factory at One Kendall Square was converted in the
mid-1980s into lab space. Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. occupies a former Ford
Motor Co. plant on Memorial Drive, where the automaker once built Model Ts.
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. moved into 180,000 square feet of renovated lab and
office space in the former Kaplan Furniture building, on Main Street.

   In many cases, renovating costs less than building - and offers attributes
that would be too costly to recreate in new construction. In other cases,
adapting an old plant can be just as costly as building from the ground up. But
recycling old plants allows biotech companies to be in sections of the city
where they would otherwise be hard pressed for space: near MIT, Harvard
University, and other academic centers, on which they rely heavily.

   "What I love about recycling these old industrial buildings is that it
preserves the character of the city and reveals some of its history," said Roger
Boothe, Cambridge's director of urban design.

   Until Necco, or the New England Confectionery Co., began moving out last fall
(it's now in Revere), the factory was one of the last and mightiest vestiges of
the days when the region was a candy-making hub. A block away, a factory now
owned by Tootsie Roll Industries Inc. continues to turn out Junior Mints, Sugar
Daddies, and Sugar Babies. Candy makers like Fanny Farmer, Great American
Brands, and Squirrel Brand Co. were once also nearby in Cambridge. Schrafft's
was in Charlestown, and Fox-Cross Candy Co. made Charlestown Chew bars in
Everett.

   Necco traces its roots to the founding of Chase Candy Co. in Boston in 1847.
By the end of the 1920s, just a few years after the opening of the Necco factory
on Mass. Ave., the city was home to 375 manufacturing firms.

   Many of the features that made the Necco building state of the art when it
was built in 1926 also make it ideal for conversion into lab space. Made of
concrete instead of the steel-frame construction that is more common today, the
building better resists vibrations, which can spoil sensitive experiments. The
concrete also gives the building a three-hour fire rating (the highest possible
rating), which allows Novartis to store flammable chemicals for mixing drugs.

   Its floors, between 9 and 14 inches thick, can hold as much as 250 pounds per
square foot, strong enough to support storage tanks, mixing vats, and conveyor
belts needed to make candy as well as the robotics, screening machinery, and
other heavy machinery used in drug research. The 14-foot ceilings allow for drop
ceilings that can hide an elaborate network of pipes and ducts needed to
constantly circulate fresh air throughout the labs.

   The building will house about 700 of the 1,000 scientists Novartis plans to
employ in Cambridge by the end of 2004. Before it signed the lease last year,
Novartis was looking for a large amount of lab space that could be ready
quickly.

   The company had already leased more than 200,000 square feet of space at 100
Technology Square. "We wanted something close to our other building," said
Novartis spokesman Fintan Steele. "Necco was the size we needed; it had good
structural features. It's a happy coincidence that the building is also a nice
part of the history of Cambridge."

   Arthur Solomon, senior partner of DSF Real Estate Investors in Boston, the
building's owner, estimated the cost of buying and renovating the candy factory
for Novartis will total $175 million by the time it is completed next spring.

   DSF and its architect, Ed Tsoi of the Cambridge firm Tsoi/Kobus & Associates,
are preserving the building's exterior, including the water tower painted to
look like a giant roll of Necco wafers. Because of those efforts, the building
will be placed on the National Register of Historic Places, earning a tax credit
equal to 20 percent of the renovation cost.

   Inside is a different story. Workers carved out amoeba-shaped openings on
each floor to make way for a sunlit atrium and a winding stairwell. They
replaced glass-bricked windows, installed years after the factory opened to
protect the candy from sunlight, with replicas of the building's original large
windowns. A winter garden and main lobby will replace a loading dock on the
ground floor, where railroad cars once delivered sugar and corn syrup.

   Workers are converting an old power plant into a cafeteria and auditorium.
The plans also call for a parking garage, with three of its five levels
underground, to replace a parking lot. Tsoi's design also includes a courtyard
that resembles a small Post Office Square, with benches, gardens, and a
fountain. It will open onto Mass. Ave.

   "In its day, the Necco building was a demonstration of manufacturing," Tsoi
said. "In our day, it will be a demonstration of research."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. During the decades when Necco cranked out its pink, purple,
green, and yellow candy wafers, sugar spores burrowed into the pores of the
building's concrete walls. 2.  Then and now: An old photograph shows what the
sixth floor of the Necco candy factory on Massachusetts Avenue in Cambridge
looked like in 1928. The factory is being remodeled as laboratories for Novartis
Pharma AG. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / JOHN BOHN

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2003


                             677 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 8, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 102 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Meddling, for Good or Ill

BODY:

   To the Editor:

        Regarding gene therapy, Nicholas D. Kristof (column, July 4) writes,
"I'm afraid we may be slipping, without any conscious decision or even awareness
of the implications."

    I am a sufferer of a rare genetic disease, mastocytosis. This disease, like
many other genetic diseases, may cause a sudden premature death or progress to a
chronic debilitating illness. We are in no way distinguishable from the general
population.

   We get no special treatment, nor do we want it. Our only wish is for a cure
someday and a way to prevent others from the same fate.

MYRA HOPPER
Oro Valley, Ariz., July 5, 2003

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2003


                             678 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 07, 2003, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   14 bicyclists injured as motorist crosses lane

   ST. PETERSBURG, Fla. - A motorist swerved over the center lane in a
no-passing zone Sunday and plowed into a group of oncoming bicyclists, injuring
14 of them, officials said.

   Joseph Pastore, 60, said he was trying to pass a slow-moving car when he
struck the group on a two-lane residential road, said police spokesman George
Kajtsa.

   The 25 to 30 bicyclists were members of two clubs who were on a weekly
outing.

   Kajtsa said investigators questioned Pastore and initiated tests to see if
Pastore was impaired by alcohol or medication.

   Ten bicyclists were in fair or serious condition at Bayfront Medical Center,
said hospital spokeswoman Vicky Burkhart. Four were treated and released.

   6th drowning victim found in Lake Michigan

   ST. JOSEPH, Mich. - The number of people confirmed dead in drownings along a
3-mile stretch of Lake Michigan at Warren Dunes State Park rose to six Sunday.

   A seventh swimmer who disappeared in the lake's choppy waters at the same
time was still missing and presumed dead.

   Ismael Gonzalez, 22, and Roland Rodriquez, 15, both of Chicago, and one other
would-be rescuer disappeared. Authorities recovered Gonzalez's body Saturday and
Rodriquez's on Sunday. Still missing was Marcos Reynoso, 25, also of Chicago.

   Three teens arrested with cache of weapons

   OAKLYN, N.J. - Three teenagers arrested Sunday with a cache of guns, knives
and swords planned to carry out random attacks after targeting people they
considered enemies, police said.

   The trio - two juveniles and an adult - were taken into custody about 4 a.m.
Sunday after a driver reported a carjacking attempt.

   Police said two rifles, a shotgun, two handguns, two swords, several knives
and ammunition were seized. More weapons were found at the adult's residence.

   Arrested were 18-year-old Matthew Lovett and two boys, ages 15 and 14, whose
names were not released. They were charged with weapons offenses and attempted
carjacking. An additional charge of attempted murder was filed against the three
Sunday night.

   Another gene is linked to heart defect in babies

   Scientists have identified a third gene that can cause congenital heart
defects, a leading cause of death in newborns.

   A malfunctioning version of the gene, called GATA4, can lead to defects in
the formation of the walls that separate the four chambers of the heart.

   Individuals from families with a history of the common heart defect already
are being screened for the mutated gene.

   The discovery also could lead to drug or genetic therapies that could fix the
problem in fetuses, said study co-author Dr. Deepak Srivastava, of the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

   Details of the discovery appeared Sunday on the Web site of the journal
Nature.

   EPA begins investigating auto emissions program

   BOSTON - The Environmental Protection Agency has launched an investigation
into the Massachusetts auto emissions program after allegations surfaced that
state officials have known for two years that their test fails to detect many
polluting vehicles.

   The $ 29 test that Massachusetts instituted in 1999 has never accurately
measured two key tailpipe gases.

   But instead of admitting the defects to the federal government, the state has
been quietly adjusting the test and massaging two years of data to account for
changes to the system.

   EPA spokesman Peyton Fleming confirmed that the EPA is investigating whether
the DEP knowingly misrepresented its progress in controlling emissions that
cause pollution.


LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2003


                             679 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        July 7, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: Research decoding how heart fixes itself

BYLINE: CATHERINE NANGINI cnangini@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Imagine your heart performing its own bypass without entering the operating
room.

   A Medical College of Wisconsin doctor is leading a study to identify genes
that cue coronary arteries to grow collateral branches, or self-made bypasses.

   "These collaterals are detours . . . protective mechanisms of the heart,"
said Ulrich Broeckel, director of the Human Genetics Resource Program at the
Medical College.

   Collaterals are bridges that form between a healthy coronary artery and a
stenotic artery -- an artery narrowed or blocked by an obstruction -- and can
develop over the years as the blockage grows.

   Heart muscle is in trouble when its blood supply, delivered by the coronary
arteries, is reduced or cut off. Collateral bridges reroute the blood so that it
gets to the area affected by the damaged artery.

   Nobody knows for sure who can grow these collaterals and why. Broeckel has
found them in about one-third of the participants in his study, which is in the
third of five years.

   This is one of the many unanswered questions about cardiovascular disease,
which kills about 16.6 million people around the globe each year, according to
the World Health Organization.

   Our genes may determine who is predisposed to getting the disease, how it
responds to treatment and the final outcome, Broeckel said. However, other
factors also play a role, such as smoking, high blood pressure and cholesterol
levels.

   In the study, Broeckel is focusing on the genetic factors. He relies on
angiograms -- X-ray images of coronary arteries -- to determine who has
collateral arteries and who doesn't. Blood samples from those with both blocked
arteries and collaterals are compared with those who have a blockage but no
collaterals.

   Using DNA analysis, portions of the blood's sequence, or genetic alphabet, is
read and labeled. By looking for mutations in the DNA, or "spelling mistakes" in
the alphabet, across these two groups, Broeckel hopes to identify the genes that
play a role in collateral artery development.

   Michael Kutryk, a cardiologist at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto, thinks
there are genes that control collateral growth.

   "I think there's some validity to (Broeckel's) approach; I think it's real,"
he said.

   Kutryk is investigating different growth factors that might influence the
development of small blood vessels in the heart to improve blood supply and is
the co-principal investigator of a randomized gene therapy clinical trial in
Canada.

   He cautioned, however, that collaterals are difficult to see in angiograms,
especially in large patients, which means Broeckel might not be able to
accurately classify the patient groups by relying solely on these images.

   "We always look at the quality of the film," Broeckel said, which varies
according to patient size as well as equipment quality. Poor images won't be
included in the study. He also said that angiography is the gold standard
technique, which means it's widely used and readily available.

   Frank Sellke, a professor of surgery at Harvard Medical School and chief of
cardiothoracic surgery at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, also
studies growth factors that stimulate development of collateral arteries.

   "Some patients have a large number of collaterals and some do not," he said.

   Finding the genetic causes behind this is "very exciting and important
clinically," but Sellke said he feels that angiography is an imperfect tool for
finding collaterals.

   Patients may have working collateral arteries that are too small to see on
angiograms, which also can't detect collaterals that are present but not
functioning, he said. But that is part of the puzzle that Broeckel is trying to
solve.

   "These collaterals only help you if they work," Broeckel said. He added that
the larger the vessels, the more likely strong genetic differences will be
found.

   Broeckel hopes that finding the genetic basis of collateral development will
lead to a diagnostic test for patients with coronary heart disease to determine
who should be treated more aggressively. It can also lead to prime targets for
drug development.

   "You'd like to find a drug that turns the gene on," he said.

   It also might be possible that patients without collaterals aren't missing
the right gene, they just don't have enough of it at work because of the way
it's regulated.

   "You could develop a drug that sticks to this regulatory region longer,"
Broeckel said, causing more of the gene to be expressed.

   According to Kutryk, however, the real genetic basis for collateral
development may be difficult to determine with Broeckel's method. He said that
reading out the DNA alphabet gives the order of the letters but not the timing
that regulates when genes are switched on and off. This timing could be crucial
to understanding the whole process.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                             680 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              July 7, 2003 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 812 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE;
Notebook

BODY:

   The eating disorder anorexia nervosa, which has been studied mostly in white
women, appears to be extremely rare among black women in the United States, new
research has found. Results from a study involving 2,046 women, more than half
of them black, were striking.

   "In our sample of more than 1,000 black women (ages 19-24), no case of
anorexia nervosa was detected, and the odds of detecting bulimia nervosa were
six-fold greater for white women than for black women," the researchers
concluded in a paper published this month in the American Journal of Psychiatry.

   Bulimia and anorexia are disorders tied to distorted perceptions of body
image, and affected women often induce vomiting or diet excessively to lose
weight.

   Binge eating was the only eating disorder for which white and black women had
somewhat comparable rates: 27 out of a sample of 985 white women and 15 out of a
sample of 1,061 black women.

   There was a slightly higher risk of obesity among binge eaters, although the
relative youth of the volunteers prevented the researches from drawing long-term
conclusions about health effects. The risk of binge eating may rise with age,
said the team of researchers from Wesleyan University and elsewhere.

   The study did not examine the risk of eating disorders in other ethnic
groups, such as Asian, Latina or Native American women.

    -- Shankar Vedantam

   A new approach to correcting the genetic defect that causes muscular
dystrophy shows promise in mice, though it remains a long way from use in
people.

    Scientists had been hoping to treat muscular dystrophy with gene therapy, an
experimental approach in which healthy copies of a gene are given to patients
who inherited faulty copies. But the gene that is broken in muscular dystrophy
is very large, making it difficult to deliver to muscle cells, where the gene
does its work of producing a muscle protein called dystrophin.

    The new approach, known as antisense technology, takes a different tack.

   Researchers knew that children with muscular dystrophy have a mostly intact
version of the dystrophin gene. Just a small portion of the gene is damaged, but
it is enough to cause problems when muscle cells try to read its code. So
instead of delivering entire replacement genes, researchers in England and
Australia decided to patch up the damaged ones by injecting antisense strands of
genetic material that bridge the damaged region.

    When the antisense strands were injected into the leg muscles of mice with
muscular dystrophy, the genes began producing near-normal dystrophin protein,
and the muscles regained strength.

    Now the team is looking for ways to get the antisense strands into muscle
cells more efficiently, so they might make a clinical difference in large human
muscles. The research appears in yesterday's advance online issue of the journal
Nature Medicine.

    -- Rick Weiss

   Evolution depends on the presence of variety in genes, so that an organism's
structure, skills or behavior has the opportunity to adapt to changing
conditions through natural selection. But could there be situations where
evolution bumps up against a shortage of useful genes?

   The answer is yes. A team of Australian researchers found such a case in the
rainforest fruit fly Drosophila birchii.

   Led by Ary A. Hoffmann of La Trobe University in Victoria, the researchers
looked at the ability of flies to resist dessication, or fatal drying out, when
conditions were less humid. They collected specimens from several populations
along Australia's east coast, and found that populations from the drier south
were slightly more tolerant of dryness than those closer to the equator. This
was evidence that "dessication-resistance" had been favored by natural selection
sometime in the past.

   The researchers wondered if D. birchii could get even more tolerant of
dryness, so they put the question to the most dessication-resistant flies they
had found.

   They subjected the insects to very dry conditions until 90 percent had died,
and then they bred the survivors. They did this for 50 generations. They
expected to end up with even more dryness-tolerant flies. But what they got were
flies basically no different from the ones straight out of the rainforest.

   It appears that inherited traits were no longer important in determining
which individuals lived and which did not. Other things, such as luck or
behavior not under genetic control, had become the important variables.

   It is highly unusual to find that a species has maxed out its genetic
adaptability for a trait as important as dessication resistance is to insects.
It may be that D. birchii will have to wait for a new mutation or gene
rearrangement to provide more raw material for natural selection.

   Whatever the reason, the finding bodes poorly for these flies -- and other
species in similar straits -- in an era of global climate change.

    -- David Brown

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                             681 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              July 7, 2003 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: Researchers Link Gene to Congenital Heart Defects

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

    Scientists have identified a third gene that can cause congenital heart
defects, a leading cause of death in newborns.

    A malfunctioning version of the gene, called GATA4, can lead to defects in
forming the walls that separate the heart's four chambers.

    Individuals from families with a history of the common heart defect are
being screened for the mutated gene. Such screenings can prepare them for the
possibility that their offspring are at risk.

    The discovery also could lead to drug or genetic therapies that could fix
the problem in fetuses, though such treatments are years away, said study
co-author Deepak Srivastava of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas.

    Details of the discovery appeared yesterday on the Web site of the journal
Nature.

    About 25,000 babies born in the United States each year -- or as many as 1
in 125 births -- have a heart defect, according to the March of Dimes. Many
defects require open heart surgery to repair.

    American and Japanese researchers discovered the mutated gene while plumbing
the genetic makeup of two multigenerational families plagued by heart defects.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                             682 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        July 4, 2003 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 005

LENGTH: 372 words

HEADLINE: Medical advances offer some hope for injured girl

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   If little Kai Leigh Harriet's spinal cord has been completely severed, her
chances of walking again are slim, but not impossible, given her young age and
advances in the fight to cure paralysis, experts said.

   "The hope is that some of the research will affect her in her lifetime," said
Naomi Kleitman, program director at the National Institute of Neurologic
Diseases and Strokes, which is leading research efforts into spinal-cord
injuries.

   "The prospects for her to have a good healthy life are better than they have
ever been."

   But the 3-year-old shooting victim is still going to depend on the same
scientific advances that other paralysis victims are counting on, Kleitman said.

   "The science that will help her is the same science for regeneration that
Christopher (Reeve) is counting on," she said.

   Officials at Boston Medical Center, where Kai Leigh is being treated, will
not comment on her case other than to say she is listed in serious condition.
But reports are that her spinal cord was severed by a stray bullet in the
Dorchester shooting incident.

   Research areas that could provide help for her and others like her include
nerve regeneration, gene therapy, advances in rehabilitation science and new
drugs, including high-dose steroids, that are given soon after the initial
injury to prevent further damage.

   Improvements in rehabilitation science are likely to help Kai Leigh keep her
body in shape as she awaits a cure for paralysis, Kleitman said.

   Patients with paralysis often have problems with brittle bones, wasting
muscles, cardiovascular disease and bladder and bowel control.

   Electrical stimulation of muscles can help on those scores, she said.

   But computer-fired electrical signals are also being tested to bypass the
spinal cord itself, allowing the legs, for example, to work without getting a
signal from the brain.

   Such techniques are best used in patients whose spinal cords have been
completely severed, she said. They are often too powerful for those whose spinal
cords have merely been damaged.

   Exercising Kai Leigh's muscles and keeping her bones strong will also be
important so that she can grow as naturally as possible, Kleitman said.

   "That's a big problem," she said.

LOAD-DATE: July 04, 2003


                             683 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 4, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: The New Eugenics

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF;  E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   One of the most profound and layered questions raised by recent genetic
advances is this: Do we as a species still want babies born with genetic
disabilities?

        Science is scoring great successes in combating the 7,000 genetic
ailments that can strike our children -- and that sounds great. Yet it's
difficult to draw a line where we stop "improving" our species. Many disability
activists argue that we're moving toward a new eugenics, and I'm afraid that
they could be right.

    The first step toward upgrading our descendants will come in the treatment
of disabilities because the benefits are so obvious. And so I sat down here in
London with an expert on disability and genetics, someone whose struggle with
the issue is not just scholarly but also personal -- to me as well as him.

   It all began when my British great-uncle, Sir Geoffrey Shakespeare, had a
son, William. That's right: he became Sir William Shakespeare. (We in the family
have always claimed to be related to the Bard as descendants of his cousin
Humphrey Shakespeare; it's a coincidence that this column is written in iambic
pentameter.)

   William was born with a genetic mutation that results in achondroplasia, a
kind of dwarfism. William became a fine doctor (his short stature gave him a
rapport with child patients), and his eldest son, my cousin Tom, was also born
with achondroplasia. And Tom in turn has a daughter with achondroplasia as well.

   Tom Shakespeare inherited the title and is formally Sir Thomas (which
mortifies him), as well as a leading scholar on genetics and disability. As we
sat down at a London coffee shop to talk about these issues, Tom attracted
attention because he's not only the shortest person around but also the most
self-confident, charming and funky, with earrings and tremendous presence.

   "Society sees disability as the worst thing that can happen," Tom says. "It's
one thing that can happen, but not the worst." All in all, he says, he's had
more opportunities than if he had been born without a disability but into a poor
family.

   Tom says many disabled people feel threatened by genetic advances and are
hurt by cheerful talk about engineering a world without people like them.
"That's verydifficult for disabled people," Tom says. "To hear people discuss a
world in which you don't exist can be very hurtful."

   "People ask me all the time, 'Wouldn't you rather have been not short?' But
that's almost like saying, 'Wouldn't you rather have not been born?' "

   Yet Tom notes that his own views have also evolved, and he struggled with the
question of whether he would have another child with his same condition. Every
father wants a child like himself, yet also a child with every advantage. In the
end, he says, he will not have more children, partly because of the risk of
disability.

   If that's a knotty question, so is the broader one we face as a species. I
disagree with those disability leaders who oppose strong efforts to combat
genetic diseases. But I think they're right to ring alarm bells. The problem is
that it may eventually become possible not just to cull embryos associated with
dwarfism, but also to screen out baldness, pug noses or homosexuality, or even
to choose the embryo most likely to get into Yale.

   My guess is that germ-line gene therapy will arrive a bit further down the
road, initially to fix "bad genes" that cause disease, and then moving on to
enhance intelligence and performance. I'm afraid we may be slipping, without any
conscious decision or even awareness of the implications, toward a future in
which we will hugely accelerate our own evolution, in which our descendants
quickly diverge from all that has been human for 200,000 years.

   Bill McKibben, in his cautionary new book about genetic science, "Enough,"
articulates the dangers as he recalls a childhood friend, Kathy, who died of
cystic fibrosis:

   "Why not at least let the germ-line engineers go to work on the Kathys of the
world? The harm is not to the patient but to the world in which she lives. As
even proponents acknowledge, the line between repair and enhancement is too
murky to be meaningful. Soon you're headed toward a world where Kathy's lungs
work fine, but where her goodness, her kindness, don't mean what they did. Where
someone's souping up her brains or regulating her temper, not just clearing up
her mucus."

Paul Krugman is on vacation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2003


                             684 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 4, 2003, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: To biotech industry, labeling is taboo

BYLINE: Paul Elias; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- What's in a name?  Deep political, economic and cultural
concerns, at least when it comes to labeling food made with genetically modified
ingredients.

   It's such a tempestuous topic that organizers of the world's largest
biotechnology conference scrubbed a Canadian proposal to have a panel discuss
labeling during last week's gathering here.

   But that was only a prelude to Wednesday's vote by the European Parliament to
require strict labeling as a condition of the European Union dropping its
five-year ban of genetically modified food.  Rather than ease trade tensions
with the United States, that stipulation is expected to exacerbate them.

   For the U.S. biotech industry, the labeling requirements represent a de facto
continued European ban on genetically modified products.

   Biotechnology's critics readily agree.  They think European consumers will
reject labeled products, and hope to also bring mandatory labeling to the United
States, which has so far resisted such legislation at all levels of government.

   "I think the European action marks the beginning of the end for agricultural
biotechnology," said longtime critic and activist Jeremy Rifkin.

   The industry argues that Europe's stand is based more on internal politics
than science.  It maintains that biotechnology products are safe, better for the
environment than traditional crops and will someday improve human health.

   Under the European rules, which still must be ratified by member countries,
all products including animal feed, vegetable oils, seeds and byproducts
containing more than 0.9 percent genetically altered material must carry this
label: "This product is produced from GMOs."

   Companies using engineered ingredients must trace each altered product from
its point of origin to the supermarket shelf.

   "It's impractical," said Val Giddings of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, or BIO.  "It will be impossible to monitor, hugely burdensome and
expensive.  Rather than facilitating consumer choice, it's more likely to drive
food producers to avoid using genetically improved ingredients."

   U.S. soy and corn farmers have been particularly hard hit by the EU's
aversion to biotechnology crops.

   Eighty percent of U.S. soy crops are engineered to withstand the spraying of
a popular weed killer and 40 percent of corn crops are engineered with a
bacterium's genes to kill pests.

   Soy exports to the European Union have fallen from $2.3 billion annually in
1997, the year before the biotech moratorium, to half that last year.  U.S. corn
exports fell from $191 million in 1997 to less than $2 million last year.

   There is a consensus among food and biotechnology companies that any
genetically modified food label anywhere will deter consumers.  Already, most
large food makers don't use genetically modified ingredients in their European
goods.  Biotechnology companies fear the same thing could happen in the world's
largest market if labeling is ever mandated in the United States.

   "It's a black label," said Stephanie Childs of the Grocery Manufacturers of
America.  "We have to respond to the market demand." So her organization has
lobbied hard against mandatory labeling.

   Last year, the biotech and grocery industries spent a combined $5 million to
defeat an Oregon ballot measure that would require mandatory labeling in that
state.

   At least two proposed laws mandating labels failed on Capitol Hill since
2000. Another bill was introduced last month by Rep. Dennis Kucinich, the Ohioan
seeking the Democratic presidential nomination.

   BIO and the GMA, which represents the world's largest food makers, say they
support voluntary labeling, which is the Food and Drug Administration's current
position.

   But not a single company is known to label its products, although an
estimated 70 percent of processed food in the United States contains genetically
modified ingredients.

   Organic companies have found a growing niche labeling their food as free from
genetically modified ingredients, but even they face some trouble in European
markets skeptical of all U.S. imports.

   At BIO's annual convention, 16,000 international biotechnology professionals
heard some 200 panel discussions on topics ranging from gene therapy to
plant-made pharmaceuticals.  But not an official word on labeling.

   Giddings said the labeling panel simply failed to make the final cut for the
busy four-day conference.

   "Four out of five proposed panels got the ax for one reason or another,"
Giddings said.  "It didn't clear our threshold."

   But the Canadian regulators organizing the labeling panel said BIO yanked it
well after they had begun the planning.  They said indications were that BIO was
pressed to skip the subject by a conference organizing committee of food and
biotech executives.


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2003


                             685 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             July 3, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: FINANCIAL; TALKING TECH; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 1205 words

HEADLINE: CIO foresees big progress in diagnosing

BYLINE: Dave Lundy

BODY:


   Bruce Smith

   Title: Chief information officer

   Company: Advocate Health Care is Chicago's largest health care network,
including eight hospitals in the metropolitan area

   Passion: Making things happen

   Six months after starting his first job in 1969 in the IT department at
Sears, Roebuck and Co., Bruce Smith was drafted into the Army and sent to
Vietnam. Although he later earned his MBA from Loyola, Smith's real management
education came from his tour of duty as a "shake and bake" sergeant, leading
young soldiers who weren't fully convinced they should even be there.

   When he returned from the war, Smith re-entered the IT department at Sears,
where he stayed until leaving for Lutheran General in 1977. Quickly rising to
become vice president and chief information officer at Lutheran General, Smith
was selected to stay on as CIO of the combined company when Lutheran merged with
Evangelical Health Systems in 1995.

   While much in the field remains unpredictable, Smith sees medical technology
increasingly moving toward pre-emptive diagnoses, instead of the "retro"
conventional approach, "where you have an illness or an accident and doctors fix
you up."

   Q. How did your time in the military affect you?

   A. It certainly taught me leadership. I was what they called a "shake and
bake" sergeant because I went through an accelerated program to fill the
shortage of sergeants, so I was in a leadership role almost from the beginning.
It was an interesting experience because so many of the soldiers didn't believe
in what they were doing, so trying to get them to work together was kind of a
challenging experience.

   Q. Was it difficult to adjust from Vietnam rifleman back to Sears programmer?

   A. It was a bit of a struggle getting back into the corporate setting. But I
give Sears a lot of credit, because they were flexible and gave me the option to
go through their training program again.

   So I did the program again and took those three months to become
reassimilated.

   Q. How did you end up at Lutheran General?

   A. I stayed at Sears until 1977, and then I got a call from a recruiter for
Lutheran General, which was looking for a systems analyst. I had no health care
experience, but it looked like an interesting opportunity, so I interviewed
there, really liked the people, and took the job.

   They only had about 15 people in their computer systems department at the
time, and you could see right when you walked in that it was not being run very
well. Over time I think I was able to bring them a lot of the structure I had
learned at Sears.

   Eventually, I worked my way up to vice president and CIO. Then in 1995, when
Lutheran General merged with Evangelical Health Systems, I went through a whole
interview process and was selected to be CIO of the combined company, which was
to be named Advocate Health Care.

   Q. How has the role of information technology in health care evolved since
you started in 1977?

   A. When I started with Lutheran General in the late 1970s, most IT
infrastructure was focused on billing and registration. All the hospital
department heads were very strong, and they picked their own software, so we had
lots of different systems running in the same building.

   But we've made a lot of progress toward a centralized IT infrastructure. When
Advocate was created in 1995, we took a very aggressive stand about
standardizing all the systems--so much so, in fact, that we are now one of the
more integrated health care delivery systems in the nation.

   Q. What is your most interesting project now?

   A. The technology project that I think is making the biggest impact is called
the EICU, or Electronic Intensive Care system. It's a system that allows an
intensivist [a person trained in treating Intensive Care Unit patients] in a
central location to monitor all the beds of intensive care patients. Cameras can
zoom in on a person, software checks different things that are going on with the
patients and can deliver alerts, so you can see a change in condition before
someone may notice it.

   It's more of an intervention prior to something serious happening.

   Q. How have advances in information technology improved care for the average
patient?

   A. One of the main benefits is the portability of information. We used to
have a huge problem where one department would know a lot about you, but then
you go to another department and it becomes lost in the translation. Our new
information architecture is allowing us to pull everything together, so
everybody has access to the same information.

   Q. Has the Internet affected patient care?

   A. The main effect for patients has been their level of education. So now
when patients come to see a doctor they come armed with information which helps
them advocate for better care.

   The Web has also provided new tools for physicians. Our doctors have Web
access so they can look up something they may not understand or want to get more
information on. We also have a product called Medline, which has information for
laypersons on different medical conditions, so doctors can print out the
information for their patients.

   Q. There has been a lot of concern about patient privacy; privacy provisions
in the HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) law recently
took effect. How have you responded to those concerns?

   A. We created a new task force to examine ways to protect privacy and
confidentiality of information. We've taken multiple tracks. Our first step is
culture change so doctors are more careful when they talk about patients on the
elevators or around the facilities.

   The second is being more careful with the IT we use. For example, we have
much stricter guidelines now on distributing information. We used to get
research companies calling, saying, "We'd really like to have patient data." And
it wasn't so much they wanted individual data. They wanted it in aggregate. So
now we're much stricter about who can get it, what we can give them, how we
strip off names, how things are being used.

   Q. How will technology change the way we get health care 20 years from now?

   A. We're going to see huge progress in the pre-emptive and diagnostic
capabilities of medicine. We're also going to see a lot of advances with ethical
implications such as gene therapy and the regeneration of organs and body parts
for replacement.

   Imaging will allow us to see all parts of your body clearly so we can tell
long in advance that there's a plaque buildup or that there is something going
on here. Gene therapy gives you the opportunity to predict if you're going to be
susceptible to certain diseases, possibly altering genes that would prevent some
of those things from happening.

   Up until now, a lot of health care has been sort of retro, where you have an
illness or an accident and doctors fix you up. Obviously there are so many
things that you can't predict and project, including what humans do to each
other. But I believe there's going to be a lot more emphasis on pre-emptive
diagnoses.

   Dave Lundy is president of Aileron Communications, a Chicago-based strategic
communications firm.

GRAPHIC: Rich Hein, CHART; SEE BELOW.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2003


                             686 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: OBSERVATORY

BYLINE:  By HENRY FOUNTAIN

BODY:

   Mac 'n' Cheese 'n' Bixin

   Macaroni and cheese -- the kind made from a box -- is a favorite of young
people everywhere. It's hard to say why they love it so, though flavor probably
has little to do with it, since by most accounts it has none. No, it must be the
otherworldly orange glow that emanates from a heap of mac'n'cheese as it sits
there on the plate.

        That color, dedicated readers of food labels know, comes from annatto,
an ingredient in the cheese. And annatto, really dedicated readers of food
labels know, comes only from the seeds of a small tropical evergreen tree, Bixa
orellana.

    That may change, with the development reported in the current issue of the
journal Science. Researchers from France and the Ivory Coast have isolated the
tree's genes that are responsible for creating annatto (which to scientists is
more commonly known as bixin). What's more, they've inserted those genes into
bacteria to make a bixin-producing bug.

   The researchers discovered that three genes are involved in bixin production.
But more important, they discovered that the process required a precursor
compound, lycopene. So in order tomodify a strain of bacteria to produce bixin,
they also had to re-engineer it to produce lycopene.

   Now it happens that tomatoes produce a lot of lycopene naturally (it's what
makes them red). So the researchers suggest that it may be possible to
genetically modify a tomato species so that it produces bixin. That would mean a
new source of annatto. And with all the uses for it -- in addition to coloring
cheese, it is added to margarine and other foods, cosmetics, shampoos and soaps
-- you can't really have too much.

Nanomedicine

   True believers in nanotechnology have made many claims about its future, not
the least of which is that some day it will help cure what ails you. One idea is
that tiny particles will be able to deliver minute amounts of a drug directly to
a target -- a diseased cell, say -- within the body.

   Now, scientists from several Japanese universities have taken steps toward
doing just that. They have created hollow "nanocages" of proteins that can hold
a few molecules of a drug (or a gene, for use in gene therapy) and bring them
straight to the liver.

   The scientists, who report on their work in the journal Nature Biotechnology,
used a protein from the hepatitis B virus. When this protein is created in large
amounts, it forms cagelike structures of about 110 molecules each, with a
diameter of about 80 nanometers (a nanometer is a billionth of a meter).

   The researchers took these nanocages and, using small electric pulses, were
able to put genetic material or proteins inside -- like the filling in a jelly
doughnut.

   One feature of these protein cages is that their surface holds a peptide, a
sort of semiprotein that consists of a few amino acids. This peptide has a
specific function -- it binds with a receptor on human liver cells.

   In the complete hepatitis B virus, the peptide plays a crucial role in how
the virus infects the liver. Here, however, it simply ensures that the nanocages
reach their target. In one experiment, a fluorescent dye inserted into the cages
reached cancerous human liver cells (both cultured in a lab dish and
transplanted into mice) without affecting other cells.

   The researchers suggest that with alterations in the surface peptide, the
cages could be used as vehicles to deliver drugs or genes to other tissues as
well.

Off Limits: Florida Reefs

   Something is killing the staghorn coral of the Florida Keys, and now the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is doing something about it. It
is closing two small reef patches near Key Largo, part of the Florida Keys
National Marine Sanctuary. Divers and snorkelers won't be allowed in the areas
for at least 60 days. Scientists think a new fast-spreading disease may be
causing the die-off, and will be conducting research on the coral to determine
an exact cause.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Nurit Karlin)

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2003


                             687 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 1, 2003 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.D-1

LENGTH: 878 words

HEADLINE: BEYOND FLUMIST;
 TAKING DRUGS VIA NASAL SPRAYS IS LIKELY TO BECOME COMMON

BYLINE: KAREN HOFFMANN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The recent approval of an inhaled flu vaccine called FluMist by the Food and
Drug Administration might signal not only the eventual demise of the flu shot,
but also an accelerating shift to nasal sprays as a favored means of drug
delivery.

    Nasal sprays boast a number of advantages over other methods of
administering drugs.

    First of all, they get around people's fear of needles.

    "If you compare nasal delivery to an injection, the patient is going to be
more likely to accept [the nasal] route of delivery," said Dr. Denise Sokos,
assistant professor of pharmacy and therapeutics at the University of Pittsburgh
School of Pharmacy.

    Nasal sprays let drugs reach the bloodstream rapidly and thus take effect
more quickly. Viagra pills, for instance, can take up to an hour to work,
causing some men to become impatient, take more of the anti-impotency drug and
perhaps overdose. Researchers at the University of Kentucky in 1999 developed a
form of Viagra that could be taken through the nose instead by pill and that
works almost immediately.

    Nasal sprays might also be used to deliver medications that can't be taken
orally, such as insulin and other proteins that are destroyed in the stomach and
intestine.

    "The nasal route is very much in research right now because of proteins, and
gene therapy, and large molecules," said Dr. Ashim Mitra, chairman of the Nasal
Drug Delivery Focus Group of the American Association of Pharmaceutical
Scientists. "Those are very difficult to deliver other than by giving
injections."

    Here's a look at advances and issues in the development of nasal delivery
drugs:


    Advantages

    Nasal delivery offers particular advantages for vaccines. Injected vaccines
cause an immune response throughout the body that provides protection from
infection. Nasal delivery of vaccines not only produces this systemic immune
response, but also a local immune response in the nasal lining, providing an
additional barrier of protection.

    "Many infectious diseases are transmitted via that mucosal route," Sokos
explained.

    Also, the nasal passages are rich in blood vessels, which makes it easier
for the drug to be absorbed into the bloodstream and cause the systemic immune
response.

    The convenience of using a nasal spray for vaccination is another benefit.
"In Third World countries, [nasal delivery] makes it very easy to vaccinate
large populations without needing a needle," said Dr. Julie Suman, a graduate of
Duquesne University and president of Next Breath LLC, a Baltimore company that
does research on nasal delivery systems.


    Challenges

    The main problem with delivering drugs through a nasal spray is getting them
to stick.

    The nose is lined with mucus and tiny hairs called cilia. "The mucus is a
defense mechanism that the body uses to keep out particles," said Suman. The
cilia sweep the mucus to the back of the nasal cavity, where it is swallowed,
about every 20 minutes. A lot of a nasally delivered drug thus gets swallowed
and destroyed.

    Ingredients are often added to sprays to help the drug stick to the nasal
cavity and promote its absorption.

    Insulin

    Most diabetics would prefer an alternative to their daily injections of
insulin. Companies like West Pharmaceuticals, Nastech, and France's INSERM are
developing nasal delivery for insulin.

    One of the main difficulties in nasal delivery of insulin is making sure the
right dose is administered. "We're looking at a tremendous development in nasal
delivery systems so that it accurately provides the dose," Mitra said.


    Other hormones

    While Americans can take nasal calcitonin for osteoporosis, Europeans have a
wider array of hormones that can be taken as nasal sprays. "There are lots of
products that are available in Europe that aren't on the U.S. market," Suman
said. Among those are estrogen, testosterone, and leuprolide, a hormone
suppressant.

    "I've talked to a number of companies that are interested in bringing the
products to the U.S.," she added.


    Relieving pain

    Another good candidate for nasal delivery is pain medication. Instead of
swallowing a pill and waiting half an hour for pain relief, a nasal spray would
relieve pain almost instantly.

    "I think you're going to see a lot more medications for pain," said Suman.
Several already are available for migraines, like GlaxoSmithKline's Imitrex and
Magnum's Migranal.

    Severe pain, like that experienced by cancer patients or following surgery,
might be treated by nasal delivery of endorphins, the body's natural painkilling
molecules.

    The nose-to-brain controversy

    At the Nasal Drug Delivery Conference in London in March, Suman said,
researchers heatedly debated whether it was possible to nasally administer drugs
to the brain, such as nerve growth factor to treat Alzheimer's disease.

    "We do not know exactly what governs the passage of the drug directly from
the nose to the brain," Mitra said.

    Some researchers claim that such a drug could be transported by the same
nerve cells that allows us to smell.

    "The hot topic is the delivery of a drug via the olfactory nerves into the
brain," said Suman. "I've seen some studies that indicate that absorption can
occur. Whether or not it's effective remains to be seen."


NOTES:
Karen Hoffmann can be reached at khoffmann@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1994.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2003


                             688 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 30, 2003, Monday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Engineered viruses show new potential to heal damaged cells

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 Scientists have worked for years to harness the power that viruses have to
invade cells, replacing unwanted elements of herpes and other viruses with
disease-fighting genes in hopes the new genetic payload would correct a targeted
illness.

   Such genetic therapies have found limited success.

   But a team of 12 Japanese and Belgian scientists says it has found promise
with the hepatitis B virus, using it as a tool to temporarily treat hemophiliac
mice.

   The researchers reported yesterday in the online edition of the journal
Nature Biotechnology that their technique -- using a small, hollow fragment of
the hepatitis B virus -- enables the inserted genes to be more narrowly focused
than other viral delivery systems.

   Engineered viruses sometimes deliver good genes to bad places, setting
unintended cellular changes in motion.  That's what happened recently to two
boys who got leukemia after being treated for the immune disorder commonly
called "bubble boy" disease.

   Those other viruses have the potential of entering a variety of cells, but
the researchers said in their report that their hepatitis B method targets only
liver cells.

   The researchers aren't using the whole hepatitis B virus, but instead are
inserting disease-fighting genes inside "nanoparticles," tiny fragments of the
virus.

   Those nanoparticles dumped their genetic payload of blood-clotting genes
almost exclusively in the liver.

   Using that technique, the researchers said, their test produced measurable
amounts of blood clotting proteins for about 40 days.

   The nanoparticle is "a safe vehicle for delivering both genes and drugs," the
researchers concluded.  The lead author of the study was Tadanori Yamada of
Osaka University.

   French researchers reported using an earlier technique to cure four boys of
severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, and better known as "bubble boy"
disease.  But that excitement was tempered months later because some of the
inserted genes ended up in the wrong place and caused two boys to develop
leukemia.

   The new technique may better protect against such unintended consequences,
the researchers said yesterday.

   "Delivery is the big issue in gene therapy," said Dr. Mark Kay, director of
Stanford University's Human Gene Therapy Program.


LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2003


                             689 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              June 30, 2003 Monday

SECTION: METRO - EDITORIAL; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell standard

BODY:

   Researchers all over the world are trying to unlock the potential of stem
cells in treating Alzheimer's disease, spinal cord injuries and other ailments,
and Tulane University will play a key role in helping them.

   The National Institutes of Health awarded a $4.3 million grant to the Tulane
Center for Gene Therapy that will enable it to set the standard for adult stem
cells, which are produced in bone marrow.

   Scientists who work with stem cells have been hindered by differences in
batches of cells because they yield inconsistent results. "Unless everybody
starts with the same material, it's difficult to say whether the results are
comparable," one researcher said.

   Using a single source for adult stem cells will avoid that problem by
guaranteeing a standardized method of preparation. This grant will make the
Tulane Center for Gene Therapy the preferred source.

   That's quite an achievement for Tulane, which is poised to become a leader in
this high-tech field.

   It's also good news for people who hope that stem-cell research will provide
the treatment needed to make them well.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2003


                             690 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                      June 29, 2003 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: ARTS AND LIVING; Pg. E06

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: TWO CHEERS FOR DNA - JAMES WATSON EXPLAINS HIS DISCOVERIES AND
GIVESHIS OPINIONS

SOURCE: JAMES M. GARDNER - Special Writer, The Oregonian

BODY:

   Two books celebrate Watson and Crick and the double helix

   DNA

   James D. Watson

   Knopf, $29.95, 446 pages

   The first serious speculation about the nature of the potent chemical
substance that governs both the inheritance of genetically prescribed traits and
the development of individual organisms from fertilized egg to mature adulthood
came from the mind of a brilliant pioneer in quantum physics, Erwin Schrodinger.
In a pithy little book, published in 1944 and called "What Is Life?: With Mind
and Matter and Autobiographical Sketches," he suggested that a "hereditary
code-script" written into the molecular fabric of chromosomes was responsible
for the twin miracles of genetic transmission and ontogeny (the maturation of an
organism during its life cycle).

   As Nobel Prize-winner James D. Watson reveals in a stunning new book "DNA:
The Secret of Life," Schrodinger's conjecture profoundly influenced the entire
founding generation of the emerging science of molecular biology:

   "Schrodinger argued that life could be thought of in terms of storing and
passing on biological information," Watson writes. "Chromosomes were thus simply
information bearers. . . . Many of those who would become major players in Act 1
of molecular biology's great drama, including Francis Crick (a former physicist
himself), had, like me, read 'What Is Life?' and been impressed."

   Inspired by Schrodinger, Watson and Crick went on to win a Nobel Prize for
discovering the double helix structure of the molecule responsible for
orchestrating life's grand symphony -- deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA. In this
book, Watson conveys the sheer drama of that discovery as well as the spirit of
intense competition that characterizes scientific inquiry at the cutting edge.

   Two important and controversial philosophical conclusions emerge from "DNA:
The Secret of Life." The first is that the phenomenon of life harbors no
inherently inscrutable secrets. As Watson puts it:

   "Our discovery put an end to a debate as old as the human species: Does life
have some magical, mystical essence, or is it, like any chemical reaction
carried out in a science class, the product of normal physical and chemical
processes? Is there something divine at the heart of a cell that brings it to
life? The double helix answered that question with a definitive No."

   The second conclusion is perhaps more disconcerting. President Clinton
proclaimed on the occasion of the completion of the rough draft sequence of the
human genome: "Today, we are learning the language in which God created life.
With this profound new knowledge, humankind is on the verge of gaining immense
new power to heal."

   As Watson argues in the concluding chapter of "DNA: The Secret of Life,"
science is on the verge of acquiring the capability to revise and edit what
Clinton called God's language. Specifically, molecular biologists will soon be
able to engage in heritable genetic modification of human genes. Should they be
permitted to do so?

   The overwhelming consensus of the scientific establishment is that they
should not. Watson is a contrarian on this issue, as he reveals in a passage
certain to raise a storm of controversy among ethicists and religious leaders:

   "My view is that, despite the risks, we should give serious consideration to
germ-line gene therapy. I only hope that the many biologists who share my
opinion will stand tall in the debates to come and not be intimidated by the
inevitable criticism. Some of us already know the pain of being tarred with the
brush once reserved for eugenicists. But that is ultimately a small price to pay
to redress genetic injustice. If such work be called eugenics, then I am a
eugenicist."

   Like Prometheus, humankind has appropriated to itself an awesome power once
regarded as the exclusive prerogative of God. It is nothing less than the power
to replace the blind force of biological evolution with consciously directed
genetic enhancement. The profundity of the ethical, moral, legal and religious
issues raised by this momentous development can scarcely be overstated. And it
all began on a day that will live forever in the annals of science -- Feb. 28,
1953 -- when Watson and Crick deciphered the structure of life's master
molecule, DNA. James N. Gardner is a Portland attorney who writes frequently
about scientific topics. His forthcoming book "Biocosm" will be published in
September.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2003


                             691 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              June 29, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: MONEY; Reporter's Notebook; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 561 words

HEADLINE: Capital abuzz about Boeing-plant bid

BYLINE: Stewart Yerton

BODY:

   Louisiana's bid for Boeing Co.'s proposed $900 million airplane manufacturing
plant dominated business and economic development news from the capital last
week, even as the Legislature wrapped up a regular session that included several
items that bode well for the New Orleans metro region.

   In its capital outlay bill, the Legislature approved $16.4 million for the
Louisiana Gene Therapy Consortium, a Tulane University-Louisiana State
University partnership that has facilities in Shreveport, St. Tammany Parish and
New Orleans; $500,000 for the proposed Grammy Exposition Hall of Fame in New
Orleans; $1.1 million for the National Center for Advanced Manufacturing at
Lockheed Martin's Michoud facility in eastern New Orleans; and $18 million for
biomedical business incubators in Shreveport, Baton Rouge and New Orleans.

   In its appropriations bill, the Legislature offered $450,000 for MetroVision,
the New Orleans Regional Chamber of Commerce's economic development arm, and
granted $1.6 million for Delgado Community College to establish a night program
to train nurses and other health care workers, who are in high demand.

   The Legislature also passed legislation revising the state's year-old film
incentive program. The new provision will let film producers transfer tax
credits granted to investors in movies made in Louisiana, which film and finance
executives say is a key to making the program more user-friendly. New
legislation also would move the state film office from Baton Rouge to the New
Orleans area, and finance new staff positions.

   Finally, House Bill 2022, a bill that drew avid support from the New Orleans
Regional Chamber's Oil and Gas Cluster Committee, was passed. The legislation
aims to resolve problems stemming from a recent court ruling on groundwater
remediation.

Focus on big projects

   Although critics have complained that the Legislature did nothing related to
the state's Boeing bid, lawmakers did pass a bill that could help the state land
the big projects that have long eluded Louisiana. Senate Bill 888 establishes
the Louisiana Major Projects Development Authority, designed to secure major
projects for the state -- ones that would offer investment of more than $300
million and provide more than 1,000 jobs -- such as the plant Boeing is
considering building.

   A companion capital item in the capital outlay bill would arm the authority
with $5 million for "Mega-Plant Site Preparation."

The real deal?

   Anyone looking to handicap Louisiana's odds of landing the Boeing project
might consider this: Officials in Washington state, which is the center of
Boeing's manufacturing operations, have been in contact with the company for
more than a year discussing the company's plans, says Sharon Wallace, a
spokeswoman for the Washington State Department of Community, Trade and economic
Development.

   Boeing, she said, "is really important for the state's economy."

   Indeed, some speculate that Boeing's search is a ruse designed to force
Washington state to sweeten its incentive package.

   "Would Boeing do that?" said Mike Keller, manager for economic development
with Burlington Northern Railway Co. "Sure they would. I'd be shocked if they
didn't."

   . . . . . . .

Stewart Yerton can be reached at syerton@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3495.

*

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2003


                             692 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 27, 2003, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 156 words

HEADLINE: TRIBUNAL REJECTS DEATH SUIT VS. GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT

BYLINE: BY ALICE DEMBNER

BODY:

   A medical tribunal yesterday rejected the wrongful death lawsuit filed last
year by the widow of a man who died of a heart attack in 2001 while
participating in a gene therapy experiment at Caritas-St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center in Brighton.

   Susan Darke of Peabody had alleged that her husband, Roger, would never have
participated in the experiment if he had known that the hospital and the study
leader, Dr. Jeffrey Isner, had a financial stake in the outcome of the study.

       The tribunal's rejection means that Darke's case will not go forward
unless she posts a $6,000 bond or appeals the decision. Darke's attorney, Robert
Sinsheimer, said they were disappointed and would review their options.

   The ruling does not affect a separate part of her lawsuit against Vascular
Genetics, a company that funded the study. A second company, Cato Holdings,
settled out of court last year without admitting any wrongdoing.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2003


                             693 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            June 25, 2003 Wednesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: Tulane becomes stem-cell supplier;
Grant lets school set worldwide standard

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   In the specialized realm of high-tech research, Tulane University took a step
toward world leadership Tuesday when it landed a $4.3 million federal grant to
replicate, test and distribute adult stem cells that will set the standard for
scientists around the globe.

   By using stem cells from the New Orleans center alone, scientists worldwide
won't have to worry about the differences in batches that have hampered
research, the National Institutes of Health said in announcing the five-year
grant.

   Stem cells are made in bone marrow and deployed throughout the body to
develop into bone, cartilage, fat, muscle, nerve and other types of cells. They
are being investigated for their potential to fight ailments such as Parkinson's
disease, Alzheimer's disease, arthritis and spinal-cord injuries.

   Starting with teaspoon-size amounts of bone marrow from 199 donors, Tulane
scientists have made millions of copies of stem cells. Within a few months, they
should be distributing them to researchers around the world, said Steven Moye,
president of the Louisiana Gene Therapy Consortium.

   Even though the stem cells come from many people, scientists will work to
make them as uniform as possible while they are being cultured, said Brian
Butcher, associate director of the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy, which
received the grant.

   "Down the way, they may develop special properties, reflecting the traits of
the donors, but that wouldn't hamper comparisons," he said.

   "In terms of where we're going with stem-cell therapy, this (grant) is an
integral part in helping us accomplish a lot," said Moye, whose organization
consists of Tulane University Health Sciences Center and Louisiana State
University's Health Sciences centers in New Orleans and Shreveport.

   Though scientists have been growing and studying stem cells for years, there
have been no production standards to ensure consistency.

   "Unless everybody starts with the same material, it's difficult to say
whether the results are comparable," said Dr. Malcolm Brenner, director of the
Center for Cell and Gene Therapy at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. He
was one of 162 scientists in 12 countries who wrote letters backing Tulane's
grant application.

   "Unless you have a standardized method of preparation, you're going to have a
vast variety," he said.

   Given this situation, "the need for this center has been very, very clear,"
said Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy.

   Prockop spoke at a Tuesday morning meeting at Tulane where his colleagues
saluted him with prolonged applause.

   The manufacturing and distribution center has four employees and might expand
to as many as 11, Prockop said. Its initial home will be in the Tidewater
Building, but it will move across the 1400 block of Canal Street to the Wirth
Building when the blond-brick structure is renovated.

   Researchers will continue to seek stem-cell donors, who receive $220 apiece
for letting researchers extract bone marrow from their hips. Donors must be in
good health, at least 18 years old and not pregnant.

   Each procedure, performed on an outpatient basis with local anesthesia, takes
about a half-hour and yields about a teaspoon of fluid, which is enough to yield
as many as a billion stem cells, Butcher said.

   Once that happens, in about two weeks, the stem cells will be shipped in
frozen vials.

   The stem cells generated through this grant can be used only in preclinical
work, which is the stage before tests on people, Prockop said.

Information about becoming a stem-cell donor is available at cgt@tulane.edu or
(504) 988-7711.

   . . . . . . .

John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             694 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        June 23, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 05G

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: Protein fights prostate cancer;
Discovery on slower tumor growth gives hope for gene therapy or drug

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT Knight Ridder Newspapers

BODY:

   Detroit -- Why do some men die of prostate cancer and others live years with
slow-growing tumors?

   In research published last week in a leading cancer journal, a University of
Michigan team reports it has identified an important protein that stops prostate
tumors from spreading.

   Deadly tumors don't have enough of a protein called RKIP, or raf kinase
inhibitor protein.

   Soon, the team hopes to complete research that could lead to a test to help
men know what type of tumor they have -- so-called prognostic information that
could be used along with tumor size and cell characteristics to determine if a
prostate tumor is deadly.

   Down the road, at least several years away, might be gene therapy or a
specific new drug that helps regulate the protein to stop prostate and other
tumors from spreading.

   "We're looking at breast, colon and lung tumors to see if there's greater
relevance" to the protein, said Evan Keller, an associate professor of
comparative medicine and pathology at the University of Michigan Medical School.

   The research, published in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, is
one of the few to identify a specific gene, or genetic product, that plays a
role in metastasis, the spread of cancer. Some people have more of the protein
than others. Scientists don't know why.

   "Though lots of genes associated with prostate cancer have been identified,
there are only about a dozen genes identified with metastasis," Keller said.

   These findings represent "new targets for cancer control," said the editorial
by Danny Welch and Kent Hunter, pathologists at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham.

   Using separate batches of cancer cells -- one of slow-growing,
stay-in-their-place prostate tumors and another of fast-growing, deadly ones --
the University of Michigan team found that the slow ones contained three times
more of the protein than faster ones. The researchers also looked for the
protein in tissue donated by the Michigan patients who died of prostate cancer.
The samples were analyzed within hours of the patients' deaths.

   The team concluded that RKIP plays an early role in the metastatic process,
stopping invasion of cells into the bloodstream, Keller said.

   The protein was discovered about 15 years ago, in research that focused on
its role controlling cell signals in the brain, Keller said. About three years
ago, scientists found that the protein played a critical role in how cells
direct each other to perform tasks such as multiplying, dividing and moving.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2003


                             695 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       June 22, 2003 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 032

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; Federal Home Loan Bank promotes Abisla

BYLINE: By Shaun Bean

BODY:

   Robert M. Abisla, of Gardner, was promoted to vice president, director of
internal audit, at The Federal Home Loan Bank of Boston.

   Robert C. Howard was named a vice president-commercial loan officer at
Bridgewater Savings, of Bridgewater.

   Robert Gittens, of Dorchester, is the new vice president for public affairs
at Northeastern University, of Boston.

   Syska Hennessy Group, of Cambridge, tapped Michael Rozenblum to be senior
vice president.

   Laurie Ann Lucchina has joined Shuster Laboratories, of Canton, as director
of the food and pharmaceuticals division.

   Nicholas Bonn and Arthur Hogan III were elected as the newest governors to
the board at the Boston Stock Exchange.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, appointed Michael J. Astrue to be
its president and chief executive.

   Candela Corp., of Wayland, appointed George A. Abe to its board of directors.

   Russell T. Glen has been promoted by Design Management, a Natick-based
architectural firm, to director of design.

   Unitarian Universalist Service Committee, a human-rights agency in Cambridge,
named Nancy Moore as chief operating officer and interim executive director.

   Eastern Bank, of Boston, appointed Terri Z. Campbell, of Boston, to be its
vice president and investment manager.

   Aaron Green, president of Boston-based Professional Staffing Group, has been
elected president of the Massachusetts Staffing Association.

   OHO, a Cambridge-based design firm, hired Jon C. Wretlind as lead designer.

   James Moro, of Grafton, was promoted to vice president of sales by
Leominster's PFERD Inc., a manufacturer of industrial hand-finishing products.

   Carol J. Dube, of Falmouth, joined Plymouth Savings Bank, of Middleboro, as
senior vice president and chief information officer.

   The Massachusetts Broadcasters Association, of Milford, elected Thomas M.
McAuliffe II, of Marlboro, to chairman of the board of directors.

   Umech Technologies, of Watertown, appointed Rick Mannello to be its vice
president of sales and marketing.

   Stephen L. Bond was appointed general manager of Sudbury-based Methods EDM.

   The Aspen Group, of North Reading, hired Mark S. Baranski as senior vice
president and partner.

   Gary Bell, of Arlington, joined Quincy-based communications agency Devine &
Pearson as a project manager.

   Richard N. Kimball and George A. Xixis have joined the Boston law firm of
Nutter McClennen & Fish as partners.

   Jacqueline H. Haley, of Weymouth, was elected chairwoman of the board of
South Shore Hospital and its parent, South Shore Health and Educational Corp.,
of South Weymouth.

   TowerGroup, of Needham, named to its securities and investment practice
Ernest J. Brito as managing director, Stephanie Evanick as manager of consulting
services and Miranda S. Mizen as senior analyst.

   Health Care For All, of Boston, appointed John E. McDonough as executive
director.

   Hill Holiday, of Boston, named Carrie Cook as vice president and director of
event marketing.

   Cambridge-based iPhrase Technologies Inc. promoted Tony Frazier to senior
vice president of product development.

   KPC Christopher Thomas, of Boston, added Tim Weldon as copywriter and Brooke
Garber as traffic manager.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, Sunday Business People, attn.: Andrew
Manuse, One Herald Square, Boston MA 02106 or fax them to 617-619-6388. No phone
calls, please.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2003


                             696 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 22, 2003 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA METRO; Part 2; Metro Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: Pair Giving $100 Million to Boost Health, Education

BYLINE: Anne-Marie O'Connor, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Media mogul Haim Saban and his philanthropist wife, Cheryl, will announce
Monday that they have made charitable commitments or gifts of $100 million to
health care and education in the United States and Israel, including a
$40-million pledge to Childrens Hospital Los Angeles that the facility called
unprecedented.

   Haim Saban, who made headlines last year with a $7-million gift to the
Democratic National Committee, said he hoped his gifts would inspire others in
Hollywood to give away more of their wealth.

   "This is a call to action," Saban said, naming a string of prominent
Hollywood players he said should give more to charity. "You have some people
here who are multibillionaires who can make a difference in this community, and
they don't. All these producers and superstars are amassing huge fortunes. They
have too much money. They should give more away."

   Walter W. Noce Jr., president of Childrens Hospital, called the $40-million
commitment to the medical center a "gift of transformation."

   He said the money would support ongoing research into cancer and gene therapy
and open the door to further research into neuroscience. He said it would also
finance the construction of an 88,500-square-foot state-of-the art research
facility.

   "We believe it is the single largest donation to a children's hospital to
support pediatric research in North America," he said. "We are extraordinarily
grateful."

   Noce said the gift would help explore the relationship between genes and
proteins and reveal how this affects metabolism and can create disease. Such
research, he said, could be critical to developing individualized treatments for
genetic diseases that children suffer from, such as cystic fibrosis and severe
combined immune disease.

   "In the next 20 years," he said, "we're going to see some advances, and
hopefully some cures, for diseases that we just treat symptoms of -- a lot of
genetic diseases that affect kids that we really end up managing because we
can't cure the underlying cause."

   Noce took note of a seed grant by the David and Lucile Packard Foundation of
$100 million to the Lucile Packard Children's Hospital in Palo Alto. But he said
the Sabans' focus on groundbreaking research makes their gift unique. This type
of research, he added, "makes people excited."

   Noce said the hospital started speaking with the Sabans late last year.

   "We began talking about where their gift might make the single largest impact
and benefit children in a significant way," he said. "Like many major donors,
they're really looking to make an impact in more than just routine medical care.
As we talked about the opportunities of research, they were excited about the
possibility of influencing, not just children in Los Angeles, but children
worldwide."

   Research Institute

   The new facility is to be renamed the Saban Research Institute of Childrens
Hospital Los Angeles. Its laboratory facilities are to be named the Saban
Research Institute.

   Cheryl Saban, who has been on the Childrens Hospital board for seven years,
said she is impressed by its pediatric trauma capabilities, its neo-natal
pediatric transport program and its tiny heart and lung machines. She said her
family personally benefited from strides in scientific research, when new
fertility advances made it possible for the Sabans to have their youngest
children by having their embryos implanted for surrogate pregnancies.

   "I think that all of us have been touched in monumental ways by scientific
research that has taken place," she said. "We think it's one of the ways we can
help people for years to come."

   The remaining $60 million in gifts the Sabans announced will go to a variety
of causes.

   The couple earmarked $13 million to establish the Saban Center for Middle
East Policy at the Brookings Institution in Washington to support research on
U.S. policy in the region, according to Shai Waxman-Abramson, program director
of the Saban Family Foundation.

   An additional $5 million is pledged to help build a children's hospital at
the Soroka Medical Center in Be'er Sheva, Israel -- a gift that could help as
many as 350,000 children, Waxman-Abramson said.

   Such gifts reflect a personal interest in Israel on the part of Saban, the
chairman and chief executive officer of Saban Capitol Group Inc., who was
previously co-owner of Fox Family Worldwide Inc. He also founded Saban
Entertainment, which produced such children's television programs as the "Mighty
Morphin Power Rangers."

   Saban was born in Alexandria, Egypt, and moved to Israel when he was 12. He
said he now holds both Israeli and U.S. citizenship, quipping: "In case of a
hijacking, I'd be the first on a plane to go."

   Other gifts to concerns in Israel include an additional $5.2-million pledge
earmarked for the creation of a Beit Halochem Center for disabled veterans and
civilian victims of terror, to provide survivors with long-term physical and
psychological rehabilitation, Waxman-Abramson said. An additional $1.6 million
will be given as higher education scholarships to qualifying Israeli combat
veterans who lack the means to attend university, Waxman-Abramson said.

   The Sabans will also give $10 million to the Motion Picture and Television
Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills to help support the construction of
the Cheryl and Haim Saban Therapy and Wellness Center, Waxman-Abramson said.

   Jeffrey Katzenberg, who is on the board of the Motion Picture and Television
Fund Foundation, said he was "deeply touched by Haim and Cheryl's support" and
welcomes "their future leadership."

   "Cheryl and Haim have always been among the most generous givers in our
community," he said.

   Clinton Library

   Other donations include $5 million to the William J. Clinton Library
Foundation, $3 million to the Jewish Community Foundation and a number of
smaller gifts: $151,000 to the Rape Foundation, $100,000 to the Geffen Playhouse
and $25,000 to Human Rights Watch.

   Saban said he and his wife agreed to go public with their gifts in the hopes
of inspiring others to part with some of their fortunes, adding, "Once you turn
into dust, it's bye-bye."

   "There's come a point in life when something clicks and you sit down and see
what life's about and how blessed you have been and you ... say, 'How can we do
good?' " he said.

GRAPHIC:  PHILANTHROPY: Media mogul Haim Saban and his wife, Cheryl, are
donating $40 million to Childrens Hospital Los Angeles and $60 million to other
concerns in the U.S. and Israel. PHOTOGRAPHER: Luis Sinco Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2003


                             697 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 21, 2003 Saturday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 2A NATIONAL DIGEST

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: NATIONAL DIGEST

BODY:

   In Washington

   Patients' rights to see Medicare information upheld

   When Medicare patients ask for an investigation into their care, the
government must tell them the results, a federal appeals court ruled yesterday.
The U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia upheld a 2001
District Court ruling, saying Medicare patients had to be kept up to speed on
revelations about their complaints.

   The government policy had been to merely tell people who complained that it
had investigated and, if any problems were found, the proper action would be
taken. That's not enough, the court said. The agency must tell the patient
whether or not any problems were found.

   The Public Citizen Litigation Group filed the suit in 2000 against the Health
and Human Services Department.
Sarbanes honored for law to fight corporate fraud

   Sen. Paul S. Sarbanes has received the Paul H. Douglas Ethics in Government
Award for his efforts last year in winning congressional passage of a law that
gave the government new tools to combat corporate fraud.

   As chairman of the Banking Committee at the time, the Maryland Democrat
largely crafted the legislation to tighten corporate accounting rules and
restore investor confidence after scandals involving such companies as Enron and
WorldCom.
In The Nation
Harvard and MIT plan human genome facility

   CAMBRIDGE, Mass. - In an unprecedented collaboration, Harvard University and
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are joining forces to launch a $300
million institute that hopes to take the mass of raw information generated by
the Human Genome Project and turn it into real-world cures for disease.

   With the help of a $100 million donation from West Coast philanthropists Eli
and Edythe L. Broad, the institute aims to build on the work of the Human Genome
Project, which in April finished assembling the long sequence of DNA that
controls every human cell.

   Harvard and MIT will run the new institute with the Whitehead Institute, a
Cambridge-based genetics laboratory, and have pledged to raise another $200
million for the effort over the next 10 years. The agreement adds to Boston's
momentum in becoming a center for the new century of biological research.
Novartis Pharma AG, the international drug company, recently decided to move its
headquarters to Cambridge.
Presidential candidate's son suspected in burglary

   MONTPELIER, Vt. - Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean said
yesterday that his 17-year-old son was cited in the burglary of a Vermont
country club with four teen-agers searching for liquor.

   Dean, who canceled several campaign appearances, said that his son Paul and
four high school hockey teammates apparently were discovered yesterday at the
Burlington Country Club by a police officer. Dean said it was his understanding
that his son would be charged as an accessory.

   "Children do stupid things, and this is one of them," Dean told the
Associated Press by telephone from a Minnesota airport as he waited for a flight
back to Vermont. Art Cyr, a detective in Burlington, Vt., said that when a
police officer noticed Paul Dean at the wheel of a car near the country club and
questioned him, Dean said a burglary was in progress. The boys were ordered to
answer charges in court Aug. 5.
University of Pennsylvania president plans to retire

   PHILADELPHIA - The president of the University of Pennsylvania, the nation's
highest-paid university president, said she will retire next year. Judith Rodin
has been president of the Ivy League school for nine years. The research
psychologist plans to stay on at Penn after retiring in June next year.

   Rodin was a provost at Yale before returning to her alma mater. Under her
tenure, Penn's research budget soared from $280 million to nearly $700 million
and its endowment more than tripled to a projected $3.5 billion this year.
Applications increased 37 percent, with a lower ratio of students being
accepted.

   Rodin, 58, weathered controversies including the gene-therapy death of a
teen-age research patient. Rodin earns more than $800,000 in pay and benefits
annually, according to The Chronicle of Education, which listed her as the
highest-paid university president.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2003


                             698 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     JUNE 21, 2003 Saturday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1885 words

HEADLINE: End of an Era at Penn: Rodin Stepping Down;
'Dynamic' leader to leave next year

BYLINE: James M. O'Neill INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Judith Rodin, the first woman to head an Ivy League institution and the
University of Pennsylvania's president for nearly a decade, told Penn trustees
yesterday that she will step down next June.

   The trustees responded by creating a part-time position for her as chancellor
and asking her to focus on fund-raising after she resigns.

   Rodin, 58, who grew up in the shadow of the Penn campus and graduated from
the university in 1966, returned in 1994 to orchestrate an impressive
transformation of Penn and its surrounding neighborhood. She has become the
nation's highest-paid university president.

   "I believe she's the most dynamic university president in the country right
now, and what she has accomplished at Penn is almost unique in terms of breadth
and scope," said Steve Schutt, president of Lake Forest College near Chicago and
a former Rodin chief of staff.

   John Fry, president of Franklin & Marshall College and a former executive
vice president under Rodin, agreed. "She's going out on top, and Penn is very
well placed for the future," Fry said. "She leaves a tremendous legacy."

   When told about Rodin's decision, Mitch Marcus, a computer and information
sciences professor who had just stepped down as chairman of Penn's Faculty
Senate, said, "That's very bad news. She has fundamentally transformed this
place. The faculty have been very proud to have her as president."

   Provost Robert Barchi, a member of the faculty at Penn for 30 years, said the
changes under Rodin "surpass anything that has happened to Penn" in his
lifetime.

   Rodin said that because she comes up for renewal every five years, it was
natural to consider whether to stay for a third term. She realized she had
accomplished most of her goals.

   She said she was most proud of rebuilding Penn's tattered relationship with
the city, overhauling the undergraduate academic experience, and shepherding
Penn's health system out of financial difficulty.

   She plans to remain connected to Penn as a fund-raiser. But do not expect her
to recede into the background.

   "I certainly can see her having an exciting next career, in a corporate,
nonprofit or government role," Fry said. "Her skills are totally transferrable.
Search firms will be all over her."

   Rodin said she would use the next year to decide whether to begin a new
career. "I don't know the answer to that today," she said. "But 'lame duck' is
not in my vocabulary."

   Harnessing Penn's billions, Rodin set about revitalizing West Philadelphia
into a trendy neighborhood to rival Harvard Square in Cambridge, Mass. First,
she had to win over skeptical community leaders, bitter from years of shoddy
treatment by Penn.

   "I am a Philadelphian. I grew up here," Rodin said. "I knew that Penn and
Philadelphia needed to figure out how to work together. Now, Penn and the
neighborhood really trust one another."

   Spurred by the high-profile murders of a faculty member and a graduate
student early in her tenure, Rodin wanted to lower crime and increase foot
traffic around campus, lure professors and graduate students as residents, and
create new destinations for entertainment.

   Fry remembers a time after the murders when advisers told Rodin to stay away
from the mess, but she decided to reach out to the neighborhood. Penn launched a
flurry of expensive projects - adding lights on residential streets, buying and
restoring dilapidated houses, and building a supermarket, a movie complex, and
Sansom Common at 34th and Walnut Streets, which includes a bookstore, the Inn at
Penn, and upscale shops. In conjunction with developer Carl Dranoff, Penn turned
an empty factory at 32d and Chestnut into apartments.

   Gov. Rendell, Philadelphia's mayor in the 1990s, said Penn's investment in
West Philadelphia greatly aided the city's economic resurgence. "She's done a
tremendous job with the university," he said. "Penn had always been the
stepchild of the Ivy League, and now it is routinely ranked among the top four
or five universities in the country."

   Penn also helped the Philadelphia school district launch a public elementary
school in the neighborhood, providing money and professional expertise.

   "She has been incredibly successful at mending some broken relationships with
the community," said Judy Wicks, owner of the White Dog Cafe adjacent to the
Penn campus. "The new construction has been thoughtful, and the new buildings
have really served the neighborhood, not just the students. They've woven the
university community into the fabric of the neighborhood. Past administrations
were antagonistic and never dreamed of involving the community in plans, but
Rodin's people would actually call and ask us what we thought. It's a totally
different atmosphere."

   On the academic side, Rodin prodded the faculty to overhaul the undergraduate
core curriculum and started a college house system to promote academics.

   "There has been a great shift here towards valuing undergraduate education,"
said Marcus, the former faculty senate chairman. "Faculty members here clearly
feel a real obligation to be good teachers if they want to be successful, and
that's a big change. Among big research universities, Penn has been ahead of the
curve on that."

   Rodin also invested in facilities and salaries to attract faculty stars who
could bring in coveted research dollars.

   Penn's federal research money has doubled in her tenure to $570 million, and
total research money is nearly $700 million, up from $280 million a decade ago.
The university endowment, now almost $3.5 billion, tripled in that time. When
Rodin began as president, Penn ranked 16th in the U.S. News rankings of top
national research universities. Now it ranks fourth.

   "One of her key successes was convincing the university that we were a lot
better than we thought we were," said trustee chairman James Riepe.

   But it was not all smooth sailing. In the early days, Rodin had to navigate
the spate of violent crime, and in 1998 the federal government cited Penn for
violating federal law by reporting campus crime statistics inaccurately. Penn's
health system suffered through staff cuts and four years of operating losses
totaling more than $400 million before returning to profitability in 2001.

   Rodin also acted after a gene-therapy experiment led to the death of an
Arizona teenager in 1999. Rodin decided to break up the $25 million Gene Therapy
Institute and spread its money and experiments throughout other Penn
departments.

   Now, the trustees will begin the search for a successor. "There will be a
very long line of interested candidates, because the university is so strong,"
Fry said. "The Penn job is at the top of the food chain. It's complex and
prestigious. A lot of sitting presidents will be interested."

   Penn, the city's largest private employer, has more than 12,300 staff members
and 4,300 faculty for 22,000 students. Penn's payroll of $1.3 billion is part of
an operating budget of $3.2 billion.

   To oversee all that, Rodin earned $808,021 in pay and benefits in the 2001
fiscal year, making her the highest paid university president in the country,
according to an analysis by the Chronicle of Higher Education.

   As she settled into her role at Penn, Rodin also began to take leadership
roles in the city.

   Rendell teamed with her to launch plans for a National Constitution Center,
which will open on Independence Mall July 4. As chairwoman of the board of
Innovation Philadelphia and the Knowledge Industry Partnership, she has taken a
lead in efforts to stem a "brain drain" of talent away from the city, and as
head of the New Economy Development Alliance, she has looked at how to entice
high-tech industry to the city.

   Rodin has held seats on various corporate boards, including those of Aetna
and Comcast.

   "J Ro," as friends call her, grew up in West Philadelphia and attended Girls
High. After graduating from Penn, she earned a doctorate in psychology from
Columbia University. She spent 22 years on the faculty at Yale University,
specializing in research on obesity and aging. She was Yale's provost for two
years before Penn tapped her for the presidency.

   In 1994, she married Paul Verkuil, a former president of William & Mary
College and an administrative law expert.

   After she steps down, she might have a little more time for a few of her
passions - tennis and skiing.

   Contact staff writer James M. O'Neill at 610-313-8012 or
joneill@phillynews.com.

   What Rodin is doing

   Penn president Judith Rodin will remain at the helm for one more year, then
step aside; she will fill a new part-time position, chancellor, to focus on Penn
fund-raising. She might advise other universities and cities on economic
development. She could also enter a new career in the nonprofit, corporate or
political worlds.

   What Penn is doing

   The university will begin looking for a new president, forming a search
committee of trustees, faculty, and students, to be led by trustee chairman
James Riepe. Riepe, vice chairman of T. Rowe Price Associates Inc., is an
alumnus of Penn's Wharton School.

   Judith Rodin's Eventful Tenure

   Dec. 16, 1993 Yale University provost Judith Rodin is confirmed as the
University of Pennsylvanias president.

   Oct. 21, 1994 Rodin begins her tenure at Penn.

   Sept. 27, 1996 Rodin vows to hire more campus police and increase patrols by
city and SEPTA officers.

   June 1997 Penn joins the National Constitution Center to provide scholarship
and other resources for the museum, which is to open next month.

   Feb. 10, 1998 A U.S. Department of Education report cites Penn for violating
federal law requiring universities to publish complete statistics on campus
crime.

   May 1998 Penn plans to bring in more neighborhood-friendly retailing, provide
mortgage incentives to encourage faculty and staff to live in the area, and
improve neighborhood public schools.

   Oct. 2, 1998 Rodin announces plans for a six- to eight-screen art-house movie
theater on campus.

   Feb. 7, 1999 Penn and developer Carl Dranoff announce plans to turn an empty
factory at 32d and Chestnut Streets into upscale rental housing.

   Sept. 1, 1999 The Inn at Penn opens in Sansom Common, a development at 34th
and Market Streets that includes a bookstore and shops.

   Dec. 7, 1999 Penn faculty approve a plan to overhaul the undergraduate core
curriculum.

   February 2000 About 30 Penn students stage a weeklong sit-in outside Rodin's
office in an effort to persuade the university to ensure that Penn-logo clothing
is not produced with sweatshop labor.

   Jan. 14, 2000 Penn appoints a faculty committee to examine the school's
system for overseeing campus research involving human subjects after the death
of an Arizona teenager in a gene-therapy experiment at Penns medical center.

   Feb. 8, 2001 Mayor Street puts Rodin in charge of the New Economy Development
Alliance.

   June 30, 2001 The University of Pennsylvania Health System ends the fiscal
year in the black after four straight years of losses totaling $400 million.

   September 2001 Penn and the city open the Sadie Alexander University of
Pennsylvania Partnership School, a university-assisted public elementary school,
as part of an effort to revitalize West Philadelphia.

   June 20, 2003 Rodin announces she will step down.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
PETER TOBIA, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Judith Rodin addresses a 1994 news conference after the fatal beating of Al-Moez
Alimohamed, a Penn graduate student in mathematics. She is flanked by City
Councilwoman Jannie Blackwell and Deputy Police Commissioner Thomas Seamon.
MICHAEL PEREZ, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Judith Rodin's nine-year tenure as president of the University of Pennsylvania
has been marked by transformation of the university's surroundings and improved
relations with the neighboring West Philadelphia community. Penn also overhauled
undergraduate education and brought the University of Pennsylvania Health System
back to financial well-being under Rodin.
University of Pennsylvania president Judith Rodin in 1999.
CHART
Judith Rodin's Eventful Tenure

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2005


                             699 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 20, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.C-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 853 words

BYLINE: GENE COLLIER

BODY:

   Roger Clemens' acute case of milestones appeared to resolve itself this week
when the famously truculent Texan nearly pitched a no-hitter against the Tampa
Bay Devil Rays.

    Like that would count, a no-hitter against the Devil Rays.

    Seems The Rocket has never pitched a no-hitter, so that would have been a
third pseudo-major milestone to go with his 300th win and his 4,000th strikeout,
both coming last week and both very serious accomplishments, but neither being
unprecedented.

    A healthy historical list of pitchers have won 300 times, and Nolan Ryan and
Steve Carlton struck out more than 4,000 batters, which is not worth the
examination implied by the famous call to the Post-Gazette sports department
that went, "Hi, um, I know that Nolan Ryan struck out 5,714 guys, but who were
they?"

    Anyway, with Clemens fever returned to double digits and with mounting
evidence that we are not to experience another 70-homer season by someone of
questionable metabolics, the chances that we'll see something this summer that
we've never seen before aren't favorable.

    Unless ...

    No. Won't happen.

    I was thinking about Carlos Delgado. I was thinking about Hack Wilson. I was
thinking about Dave Kingman. And about Lou Gehrig. And about George
Hackenschmidt. And about Manny Ramirez. And even about Sean Penn. They are all
loosely related in a story that would rivet the baseball-addled, or at least
addle the baseball-riveted, right through September. But it won't happen.

    And of course, that's not going to stop me.

    The story starts April 26, 1900, just up the road in Ellwood City with the
birth of Lewis Robert Wilson, who would soon enough grow into a bull of a young
man, though not, you know, one of your taller bulls. He was 5 feet 6, but his
muscles had muscles that had muscles of their own. He had an 18-inch neck and
size 6 hoofs, uh, shoes.

    When he joined the Chicago Cubs in 1923, his teammates saw in him the image
of the legendary Russian wrestler and strongman George Hackenschmidt, and
immediately nicknamed Lewis Wilson "Hack."

    Four years later, legendary Yankees slugger and strongman Lou Gehrig drove
in 175 runs for the Bronx Bombers, a record for RBIs in a season, one some
thought would never been broken, even by legendary Yankees slugger and strongman
Babe Ruth.

    (Gehrig, some media outlets have mentioned, would have been 100 years old
yesterday, which seems a particularly crass bit of trivia in that poor Gehrig
didn't live to be 38. That's the media's annoying oh-by-the-way reflex.
Fortunately, 100 is usually the last point at which we make such an
acknowledgment. We rarely say that George Washington would be 271 if he were
here, or that Shakespeare would be 439. If Shakespeare were alive today, his
birthday would not be the top story. And don't call to ask what the record is
for parenthetical sentences. I didn't come close, OK?)

    While Ruth and Gehrig were setting fire to the record books, Hack Wilson's
major preoccupation was challenging himself to stay in the major leagues despite
what was pretty much a permanent hangover. Some seemed offended that Hack was
wasting a phenomenal arsenal of power and tried to intervene. Such is
the backdrop of the Joe McCarthy anecdote.      McCarthy, the noted manager,
is said to have put a worm in a glass of whiskey and forced Hack to watch it
die.

    "What does that suggest to you Wilson?" McCarthy asked.

    "It suggests that if you drink whiskey," Hack said studiously, "you won't
get worms."

    In fact, Wilson's power was such that he could afford to be flip. In 1929,
he drove in 159 runs, and the next year, he hit 56 homers and drove in 190. One
hundred and ninety. That number represents a single-season monument you almost
never hear of, mostly because only Gehrig and Hank Greenberg got within 10 of it
in the 72 years since. It has been approached so rarely, in fact, it's
practically forgotten.

    When Cubs' slugger and strongman Dave "King Kong" Kingman had his agent
demand a $50,000 bonus in the event Dave set the club record for RBIs, the Cubs
agreed instantly.

    "Good, what is the record?" the agent said.

    "One hundred and ninety," they said.

    "Oh."

    Only one player since 1938 has driven in even 160 runs, and that was Indians
slugger and strongman Manny Ramirez in 1999. He drove in 165.

    Which brings us to Toronto slugger and strongman Carlos Delgado, the reason
I started thinking about this at all. Delgado, you'll remember, played the
leading man as the Blue Jays walloped the Pirates across three nights of
televised spankervision last week. Delgado started yesterday's game with 76
RBIs. Only two Pirates had half as many.

    Maintaining the pace, Delgado would drive in 173, but a little acceleration
could liven up a dreary statistical summer. If it did nothing but stir the
memories of Hack, it would be worth it.

    Hack was so productive, it must be noted, that he's the only dead man ever
to get an RBI. A clerical error discovered four years ago raised his 1930 total
to 191. You loved Sean Penn in Dead Man Walking. Wonder if he'd do Dead Man
Driving In Runs?

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2003


                             700 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 19, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: Busy minds may be healthiest

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   BOSTON - An absorbing book or a challenging crossword puzzle may keep your
mind more than busy. It may keep it healthy, too, according to a 21-year study
of mental breakdown in old age.

   The study adds to the evidence that stimulating the mind can ward off
Alzheimer's disease and other dementia, much as physical exercise can keep the
body fit.

   The study was led by Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City and
published in today's New England Journal of Medicine. It was funded by the
National Institute on Aging.

   Researchers are eager to establish whether keeping mentally active can help
guard against dementia. That would provide a simple, drug-free way of reducing
the risk of the widespread, debilitating ailment. About 10 percent of people
develop dementia between ages 60 and 70.

   In the Einstein College study of 469 elderly people, those in the top third
in mental activity had a 63 percent lower risk of dementia than the bottom
third. Taking part in a single activity one day a week reduced the risk by 7
percent.

   The use-it-or-lose-it notion is not a new idea. Other researchers have
discovered evidence that mental activity may guard against dementia. But it is
hard to prove, since early dementia without obvious symptoms may cause people to
slack off their hobbies. If this is so, dementia affects hobbies - and maybe not
the reverse.

   It is not clear what physiological mechanism might confer the protection. But
researchers say evidence is accumulating that the brain is much more easily
molded than scientists once thought. Mentally engaging hobbies might lay down
new neural pathways, one theory holds.

   Study finds kids lacking in vitamin D

   PHILADELPHIA - New research suggests children aren't getting enough vitamin
D, putting them at potential risk for skeletal problems later in life.

   Vitamin D plays a crucial role in building and maintaining strong bones by
helping the body absorb calcium. Most people get it through vitamin D-fortified
food such as milk and from sunlight.

   A study of 307 Boston area adolescents found that 24 percent were deficient
in vitamin D, according to data to be presented Friday at the Endocrine
Society's annual meeting in Philadelphia.

   "It was really astounding, said Catherine M. Gordon, the study's lead author
and a pediatric endocrinologist at Children's Hospital in Boston. "We think long
term there may be a deleterious effect. She said the findings should prompt a
close examination of adolescent lifestyles.

   "We don't know why we found such a high prevalence," said Gordon, who is also
a specialist in adolescent medicine. "By analyzing the data, our suspicion is
that adolescents are drinking soda and sweetened water instead of milk.
Teenagers sit in front of the computer instead of going outside.

   Some studies suggest chronic vitamin D deficiency is associated with some
cancers, immune disorders, high-blood pressure and Type 1 diabetes.

   Technique may aid in detecting tumors

   BOSTON - An enhanced type of MRI can detect much smaller tumors than ever
before - some tinier than a pea - in an advance that could open a new age in
diagnosing cancer without surgery, researchers say.

   The experimental technique examines the lymph nodes for signs of spreading
cancer.

   Doctors already routinely use magnetic resonance imagings, or MRIs, to check
the lymph nodes to see whether cancer that originated somewhere else in the body
- say, in the breast or the prostate gland - is spreading. The enhanced
technique proved superior to conventional MRIs when tested with cancer that had
spread from the prostate.

   The leader of the research, Dr. Mukesh Harisinghani, said his team has also
had preliminary success using the approach to detect the spread of breast,
testicular, bladder and kidney cancer.

   In the prostate study, the technique found 63 cancerous lymph nodes in 33
patients. Conventional MRIs would have missed 71 percent of the nodes, and the
spreading cancer would have gone undetected in nine patients.

   Prostate cancer inhibitor is identified

   DETROIT - Why do some men die of prostate cancer and others live years with
slow-growing tumors?

   In research published Wednesday in a leading cancer journal, a University of
Michigan team reports it has identified an important protein that stops prostate
tumors from spreading.

   Deadly tumors don't have enough of a protein called RKIP (raf kinase
inhibitor protein).

   Soon, the team hopes to complete research that could lead to a test to help
men know what type of tumor they have - so-called prognostic information that
could be used along with tumor size and cell characteristics to determine if a
prostate tumor is deadly.

   Down the road, at least several years away, doctors may try gene therapy or a
specific new drug that helps regulate the protein to stop prostate and other
tumors from spreading.


LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2003


                             701 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2003 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     June 19, 2003, Thursday, Metro Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 686 words

HEADLINE: 'Gene therapy' satisfies;
Feeding each other at lunch were the Wordos, who care about the language, and an
ex-senator who's a poet.

BYLINE: Paul Levy; Staff Writer

BODY:

   He's been a U.S. senator, presidential candidate, visionary and poet. And now
meet Eugene McCarthy, Wordo.

        The Wordos are local self-appointed guardians of the printed and
broadcast word, lovers of language. For two hours Wednesday they discussed
grammar and spelling mistakes, the New York Times scandal, reading about a
"bargain basement upstairs" and a sign that said, "We can repair anything. Knock
hard. Bell doesn't work."

        "We need Gene therapy," Bob Shaw, retired manager of the Minnesota
Newspaper Association, told the 16 flustered Wordos gathered at the Edina
Country Club for their monthly critique of the media.

        The 87-year-old McCarthy relied on a cane as he entered the room, but
otherwise was in fine form, delivering a string of wordly observations and
grammatical gems in rapid succession:

        - "Jerry Ford once said, 'If Abraham Lincoln were alive today, he'd be
spinning in his grave.' "

        - "Reporters write about high sources in the federal department. But the
high sources are never on the top floor. They're lower. The FBI is below
ground."

        - "Every president mispronounces the word 'nuclear.' Bush is the hardest
to figure out because he speaks in phrases. We have dirty bombs and clean bombs
that don't destroy anything but people."

        The recent New York Times scandal?

        "It's like the 'Jimmy' story," McCarthy said, referring to the
fabricated story of an 8-year-old heroin addict. That story, by Janet Cooke,
brought a 1981 Pulitzer Prize to the Washington Post, followed by great shame
and embarrassment.

        "I told [Post editor Ben] Bradlee, 'She gave you a true story with the
wrong names,' " McCarthy said. "With the New York Times, the names were right
but the story wasn't true."

   There's still time

        The meeting was McCarthy's third with the Wordos, who feasted on his
every word while nipping at their $12 hamburger luncheons.

        Introduced as "the only famous Democrat who is not running for
president," he quickly replied, "There's still time."

        The Wordos knew they were in for something much sweeter than dessert.

          McCarthy said he wondered what the media thought of his 1968
presidential bid when he learned that one of the reporters covering his campaign
was deaf.

        He dismissed new Federal Communications Commission regulations
concerning media conglomerates, saying, "It doesn't take any genius to run a
television station."

        And he compared scandals, past and present:

        "With Nixon, it was, 'We were responsible, but not to blame. With the
Post, the Post was to blame, but not responsible.

        Other Wordos added to the spirit of the meeting with whimsies of their
own.

        "Shortest celebrity marriage," one read from a newspaper clipping. "What
about the tallest celebrity marriages?"

        "This could be the start of something big," read another Wordo. The
headline ran next to a Viagra ad.

   .

   Running battle

        McCarthy had no newspaper clippings, just his recent book of poetry,
"which I carry to stay armed."

        He questioned the media's use of the word "terrorists," saying, "We've
[Americans have] been the biggest terrorists in the world. We've been
terrorizing blacks since the 1700s."

        He admitted that he's had a "running battle" with newspapers since his
1968 presidential campaign. He questioned the media's acceptance of government
"handouts" when the My Lai massacre in Vietnam was revealed in the 1970s.

        A byline "would say 'Special to the New York Times,' but what was so
special?" he asked. "The Washington Post had the same story. Same text."

        And he wondered if the number of religions increases every fourth year,
when presidential candidates declare they've been "reborn."

        President Dwight Eisenhower's wife, Mamie, once said her husband prayed
every night for "God to look after the country 'til I wake up," McCarthy said.

        "Was that for daylight saving time?" McCarthy asked. "What about the
time when half the country's not asleep?"

        .

   Paul Levy is at plevy@startribune.com.


CORRECTION-DATE: June 20, 2003, Friday

CORRECTION:

   A picture caption on Page B3 Thursday misidentified the last name of Helen
Beggs, who was attending a meeting of a group critiquing use of the language in
the media.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2003


                             702 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2003 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  JUNE 18, 2003 Wednesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: PROTEIN IS SHOWN TO STOP SPREAD OF PROSTATE TUMORS;
DISCOVERY COULD LEAD TO GENE THERAPY, DRUG

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT FREE PRESS MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Why do some men die of prostate cancer and others live years with
slow-growing tumors?

   In research published today in a leading cancer journal, a University of
Michigan team reports it has identified an important protein that stops prostate
tumors from spreading.

   Deadly tumors don't have enough of a protein called RKIP (raf kinase
inhibitor protein).

   Soon, the team hopes to complete research that could lead to a test to help
men know what type of tumor they have -- so-called prognostic information that
could be used along with tumor size and cell characteristics to determine if a
prostate tumor is deadly.

   Down the road, at least several years away, might be gene therapy or a
specific new drug that helps regulate the protein to stop prostate and other
tumors from spreading.

   "We're looking at breast, colon and lung tumors to see if there's greater
relevance" to the protein, said Evan Keller, PhD, an associate professor of
comparative medicine and pathology at U-M Medical School.

   The research, published in today's issue of the Journal of the National
Cancer Institute, is one of the few to identify a specific gene, or genetic
product, that plays a role in metastasis, the spread of cancer. Some people have
more of the protein than others. Scientists don't know why.

   "Though lots of genes associated with prostate cancer have been identified,
there are only about a dozen genes identified with metastasis," Keller said.

   These findings represent "new targets for cancer control," said the NCI
editorial by Drs. Danny Welch and Kent Hunter, pathologists at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham.

   Using separate batches of cancer cells -- one of slow-growing, stay-in-their
place prostate tumors and another of fast-growing, deadly ones -- the U-M team
found that the slow ones contained three times more of the protein than faster
ones. The U-M team also looked for the protein in tissue donated by U-M patients
who died of prostate cancer. The samples were analyzed within hours of the
patients' deaths.

   The team concluded that RKIP plays an early role in the metastatic process,
stopping invasion of cells into the bloodstream, Keller said.

   The protein was discovered about 15 years ago, in research that focused on
its role controlling cell signals in the brain, Keller said. More recently,
about three years ago, scientists found that the protein played a critical role
in how cells direct each other to perform tasks such as multiplying, dividing
and moving.For further information, visit the U-M Web site at www.umich.edu.

   Contact PATRICIA ANSTETT at 313-222-5021 or anstett@freepress.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2005


                             703 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                   June 17, 2003 Tuesday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS - SCIENCE; PEDIATRIC RESEARCH; Pg. 07A

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: PREVENTIVE CARE BEST MEDICINE FOR KEEPING CHILDREN HEALTHY

BYLINE: Dr. Grant Morrow, For The Columbus Dispatch

BODY:

   Why does our nation expend resources on pediatric research? Why not just take
care of our young patients with the best-known medical care possible?

   The most compelling reason for me is that by asking how to do things better
and finding answers, we ensure that our children will have the best chance to
grow up to be healthy, productive adults.

   One has to remember that no matter how effective a therapy might seem, it
probably can be improved.

   Physicians do not usually see patients until they are sick. Fortunately, most
children get well. However, some get worse, and all we can do at that point is
provide rehabilitation. Many never return to normal health.

   Pediatrics always has advocated moving the point of first contact with
patients to a time when the child is healthy.

   Well-baby care is a term quite familiar to parents.

   At the end of the 19th century, 20 percent of children in the United States
died before their first birthday. Because of the work of scientists and
physicians, that number is now less than 1 percent.

   Most of the early research advances were followed by the production of
vaccines and improved feeding practices.

   Before 1989, Children's Hospital annually admitted about 120 patients with
serious bacterial infections of Haemophilus influenzae type b.

   About half of these children had meningitis, an inflammation of the membranes
surrounding the brain. About one-third of those patients developed neurological
damage.

   Since introduction of a vaccine in 1990, we now rarely see any serious
Haemophilus influenzae infections in children.

   Research gives us the best chance to prevent problems, rather than waiting
until they have surfaced and can't be fixed. Amazing approaches in gene therapy
will prevent inevitably fatal diseases by replacing a defective gene at birth
with a normal one.

   When successful, this will be the ultimate preventative approach.

   In upcoming columns, I will go into more detail about some of the research
advances that allow children to live healthy, productive lives.

   Dr. Grant Morrow is medical director of the Columbus Children's Research
Institute.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2003


                             704 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       June 16, 2003 Monday FINAL Edition

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 971 words

HEADLINE: POCKET SCIENCE;
 Role: Increases in industry-financed research at academic institutions raise
concerns about objectivity of the work.;
 MEDICINE & SCIENCE

SOURCE: BY A SUN STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS are watching Harvard Medical School closely as the prestigious
institution considers revising conflict-of-interest policies for researchers
that are considered among the strictest in the nation.

   The potential revisions, which some observers expect to allow greater
financial ties between Harvard researchers and private industry, come as
companies bankroll a larger share of experiments at academic institutions
nationally. As the funding has grown, so have concerns that the lines between
industry-sponsored drug research and academic pursuits are blurring, violating a
once sacrosanct division designed to protect research from taint.

   "All these traditional boundaries of public/private, govern-
ment/nongovernment are being eviscerated," said Sheldon Krimsky, a Tufts
University science policy analyst. "So perhaps it is not unusual that
universities are beginning to fall into the same pattern - forgetting who they
are."

   At least 11 studies have shown that industry-sponsored research tends to
result in pro-industry conclusions, according to a review by Yale University
researchers published this year in the Journal of the American Medical
Association. The article said industry's share of investment in biomedical
research grew from about 32 percent in 1980 to 62 percent in 2000.

   Industry funding at Harvard hasn't kept pace with other research
institutions, a fact Krimsky attributes to its policies. While many institutions
use guidelines that help them assess conflicts on a case-by-case basis,
Harvard's policies include outright prohibitions. The policies ban faculty
members or their families, for example, from owning more than $20,000 of stock
in any company that owns the technology they are researching.

   Full-time faculty also must seek the university's approval before taking an
executive position with a for-profit biomedical company and can't spend more
than 20 percent of their professional time on non-university work.

   Perhaps as a result, Harvard's research dollars from industry stood at just
$12.2 million - or what Krimsky estimated was 3.6 percent of the school's
research budget - in fiscal 2000. By comparison, funding at Duke University
stood at $109.8 million, accounting for 31 percent of its research dollars,
National Science Foundation figures show.

   Conflict of interest guidelines are designed to ensure researchers produce
science with the best interests of patients - rather than profits - in mind.
Harvard Medical School Dean Joseph B. Martin scrapped an earlier review of
Harvard's policies after the 1999 death of a teen-ager enrolled in a clinical
trial at the University of Pennsylvania's gene-therapy institute. The
institute's director was a researcher who stood to profit from its discoveries,
prompting a nationwide focus on conflicts in biomedical research.

   But researchers at Harvard and other universities also want to move their
ideas from the laboratory bench to pharmacy shelves, something companies usually
do. With the cost of research climbing, many universities have looked for ways
to increase ties with companies while managing the financial conflicts that
arise.

   At Harvard, two faculty committees - one focused on clinical research and the
other on basic research - are reviewing the medical faculty's "Integrity in
Science" policies, said Don Gibbons, Harvard Medical School's associate dean for
public affairs. The committees are scheduled to present their recommendations
June 26. Faculty members heading the committees didn't return calls.

   The fact that the policy is under review has created a buzz among researchers
nationally.

   "My sense is research institutions are trying to encourage ... relationships
with industry and Harvard's looking at its policy is likely to go along with
this trend," said Mildred Cho, acting co-director of the Stanford University
Center for Biomedical Ethics. "I think it's likely to be a loosening of the
policy."

   Proponents of industry-funded research believe researchers' financial
conflicts can be managed in many cases by requiring them, for example, to put
their stock in escrow. The case-by-case approach is backed by the Association of
American Medical Colleges and practiced by institutions including the Johns
Hopkins University and the University of Maryland, Baltimore.

   At Hopkins, a medical researcher entitled to royalties on sales of a drug
being researched must get approval of the university's Committee on Conflict of
Interest before proceeding. How the panel rules might depend partly on the stage
of the invention.

   If it's on the market for one purpose and its inventor wants to do an
early-stage test in patients to see if it might work for another, the Hopkins
committee might approve it.

   "A strict interpretation of Harvard's rules would say, 'No, never,'" said Dr.
Curt Civin, a professor of oncology and pediatrics and the committee's chairman.
"You might have the world's expert in this cancer research and he could no
longer do this kind of research. That seems to throw out the baby with the bath
water."

   But if the invention has yet to be approved for any purpose, the inventor has
lots of stock and is doing a pivotal clinical trial that could make or break the
company, the committee is likely to turn the research down or require the
inventor to divest.

   "It's not the case that a conflict of interest means first-class science
can't be done," said Dr. Laurence B. McCullough, a Baylor College of Medicine
professor of medicine and medical ethics. But he said a diligent vetting of
potential conflicts is essential.

   "It creates ethical instability," McCullough said of a conflict. "It's like a
nuclear reactor. It's inherently unstable. If you stop paying attention, you
could have a Chernobyl on your hands. So you never stop paying attention."

NOTES:
SEE HARD COPY FOR CHART

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / CHART(S), 1. Dr. Curt Civin of Johns Hopkins; 2. COMPANY
MONEY; 2. SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2003


                             705 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 15, 2003, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. H10

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: KEEPING RESEARCH CLEAN

BODY:

   HARVARD MEDICAL School's review of its conflict-of-interest rules for
researchers comes at a time when, for all the hoopla about the human genome and
pioneering approaches to cancer, the pharmaceutical industry does not have much
in the pipeline. Proponents of loosening Harvard's rules, among the tightest in
academic medicine, contend that dangling more drug company money before
researchers will bring new miracle drugs to the fore. Critics say such changes
could produce biased research and the drought in important new drugs might be
caused in part by scientists being too involved already with pharmaceutical
partners.

   In this view, the industry has been too content to produce profitable "me
too" drugs that make just incremental advances against long-term illnesses or
conditions like arthritis, high cholesterol, or diabetes. Not only are these
common conditions, but patients usually live with them for many years, ensuring
decades of sales.  With companies focusing their resources on drugs like these,
according to Marcia Angell, former editor of The New England Journal of
Medicine, it is not surprising that there have been few entirely new compounds
in recent years.

       Three years ago Harvard Medical School began a similar review of its
conflict-of-interest rules, which limit researchers to $20,000 in equity
ownership of a sponsoring company and to $10,000 in annual royalties, consultant
fees, or other income from the company. The review was nearing conclusion when
the school's dean, Joseph B. Martin, cut it short.

   Part of Martin's concern was the death of a young volunteer in a University
of Pennsylvania experiment. The head of Penn's gene therapy center was the
founder and a stockholder of the company sponsoring the fatal experiment. In
stopping the Harvard review, Martin told his faculty that maintaining the
school's standards was "the right thing to do . . . at this juncture," allowing
for the later review of ethics rules that is now occurring.

   In the meantime, a task force of the Association of American Medical Colleges
has come up with a set of guidelines for research using human subjects, calling
for more intensive review before trials begin and monitoring of any studies in
which a researcher has more than a minimal financial interest.

   But the task force clearly states its role is to "provide a floor" for ethics
rules, inviting individual medical schools to maintain more stringent standards.
Harvard has been and should continue to be a leader on that score. In his memo
to the medical school faculty three years ago, Martin said: "I believe that the
most important role academic medicine can have in clinical research today is to
try to bolster the public's faith in the veracity and ethical underpinnings of
this noble endeavor." That should remain its beacon today.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2003


                             706 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  June 15, 2003 Sunday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: A[E] Gail Pennington Column; Pg. F6

LENGTH: 1048 words

HEADLINE: NO BUZZ? NO MATTER; LIFETIME PROSPERS WITH RELATIONSHIP STORIES

BYLINE: Gail Pennington Post-Dispatch Television Critic
gpennington@post-dispatch.com

BODY:

   A TV quiz: Name the cable network that's No. 1 in prime time, produces
top-rated original dramas and movies - and gets no respect.

   The answer: Female-friendly Lifetime, butt of countless jokes, punch line of
a "Saturday Night Live" parody and - for two years running - the highest-rated
cable network in prime time. Available in 86 million homes, Lifetime has spun
off two sister channels (Lifetime Movies and Lifetime Real Women), launched a
magazine (called simply Lifetime), developed popular and long-running series
(including "Strong Medicine," beginning its fourth season on Sunday) and, along
the way, inspired virtually no buzz.

   Will, Grace or other sitcom characters might get occasional laughs by
confessing that they enjoy bonbons, Lifetime and a good cry. But pop-culture
sophisticates who openly boast about an addiction to HBO's "Six Feet Under" or
FX's "The Shield" wouldn't admit picking up Lifetime on their radar, let alone
their TiVo.

   "Would we like more respect? Sure," admits Barbara Fisher, who just marked
her first anniversary as Lifetime's executive vice president for entertainment.
"But if it's a choice between buzz and solid, all-around programming, we'd
choose that."

   Proudly billing itself as "television for women," Lifetime has devoted "a lot
of hours to figuring out what women want to watch," Fisher said last week by
phone from her office in Los Angeles.

   The result is a lineup heavy on reruns of female-skewing sitcoms ("Golden
Girls," "Designing Women," "The Nanny") and movies with titles like "A Child
Lost Forever," "A Face to Kill For" or "A Kiss to Die For" (all culled from just
the "A" category of the Lifetime movie archives).

   But Lifetime is moving toward 60 percent original programming, spending $800
million in the next two years to accomplish that goal. Originals include
scripted dramas, movies and reality shows, from the "Intimate Portrait"
franchise to "I Do Diaries," offering different spins on the wedding experience.

   The broadest answer to the "what do women want to watch?" question is "a mix
of programming from all different genres that fits into our brand," Fisher says.

   Increasingly, the Lifetime brand emphasizes relationships: "Stories about
people connecting, or not connecting. Multigenerational stories about families
and the challenges they face." Some stories are serious and some are fun, Fisher
says, but "we always try to make sure we're dealing with how people relate to
one another."

   Fisher found the "Saturday Night Live" parody - a Lifetime movie in which a
man played by Sen. John McCain, the episode's guest host, "gets into a woman's
space" - hilarious.

   "It's healthy to have a sense of humor," she says. "But on the other side,
some of the serious things we do don't get full attention." She mentions the
network's commitment to public affairs, which has included working with women's
organizations on issues from domestic violence to drive-by mastectomies.

   Lifetime has moved away from the women-in-jeopardy potboilers on which it
made its reputation in favor of movies about women overcoming adversity.
"Especially with the really difficult times the country has gone through, we
realized that viewers want a ray of hope and optimism about life," Fisher says.
"We've made a conscious shift."

   She mentions "Homeless to Harvard," last year's inspiring true story of a
young woman's journey from the streets to the Ivy League, a movie she says she
still can't get through without crying. "We don't do only true stories, but it
adds a dimension to watch someone overcome challenges and realizing it really
happened."

   The newest Lifetime movie, "More Than Meets the Eye: The Joan Brock Story,"
airing at 7 p.m. Monday, stars Carey Lowell ("Law & Order") as a woman faced
with almost unbelievable challenges, "and yet it's true," says Fisher, who has
met and been inspired by the real Joan Brock.

   Brock was teaching at a school for blind children, happily married with a
daughter, when she suddenly began losing her sight for unexplained reasons.
Things got much, much worse before they got better. But inevitably, in a
Lifetime movie, things get better.

   "It's easy to use the victim word, but we're very careful not to portray
women as victims," Fisher says. "They endure tough blows, but there's always
hope, and it's rare that they don't overcome the odds."

   Enduring a tough blow in the fourth-season premiere of Lifetime's "Strong
Medicine" (9 p.m. Sunday) is Dr. Lu Delgado (Rosa Blasi), who had just told her
boyfriend she loved him when they were confronted by a gun-toting, mentally ill
patient in the cliffhanger season finale. The result was a tragedy that leaves
Lu in emotional turmoil.

   Facing her own crisis is Dr. Andy Campbell, played by Patricia Richardson
("Home Improvement"), who joined the cast last season. Andy has dumped her
abusive husband and will now be raising two daughters (including one recovering
from surgery) alone.

   "Strong Medicine" routinely deals with medical hot-button issues, this week
including transplant protocol and gene therapy, but this season will offer
viewers "a deeper look into the personal lives of the doctors," producers
promise.

   Lifetime will beef up its slate of original dramas with two shows debuting in
August, when the cop show "The Division" will also return.

   In "1-800-Missing," Gloria Reuben ("ER") plays an FBI agent who partners with
a young psychic to find missing persons. "Wild Card" has Joely Fisher as a woman
who moves back to her hometown to raise her late sister's three kids and winds
up involved in investigating insurance fraud.

   Both shows prove that "you can have mystery, suspense, twisting plots,
forensics, and still tell stories that are emotionally driven," Barbara Fisher
says.

   But she won't be disappointed if the new shows - like "Strong Medicine" and
"The Division," which rank second and third among cable dramas, after "The
Shield" - are much watched but little talked about.

   "Buzz is harder to get if there's not a lot of shock value," Fisher says
(noting that she's not knocking the envelope-pushing "Shield," which she calls
"a really good show"). "But we're not going to do something just for the sake of
getting buzz. Buzz doesn't sustain. Good writing and good characters do."

NOTES:
ELEVISION; Critic Gail Pennington:; E-mail: gpennington@post-dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Color Photo - Rosa Blasi (right) stars as Dr. Delgado in "Strong
Medicine," which begins its fourth season Sunday on Lifetime.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2003


                             707 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                      June 15, 2003, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: COMMENTARY, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: HEALTHY INSIGHTS

BYLINE: DIANE EGNER, degner@tampatrib.com; Diane Egner is a Tampa Tribune
editorial writer.

BODY:

   Studies in bioethics and medical humanities form the basis of a pioneering
degree program at the University of South Florida's College of Medicine.

   Medical education traditionally focuses on the sciences: biology, chemistry,
physics, human anatomy and such. Students study hard, learn much more than the
basics, challenge their minds beyond their imaginations and generally perform
well on written and oral exams.

   Then, after just a few short years, they are thrust into the realities of
practicing medicine. Patients. Disease. Injury. Pain. Hope. Healing. Fear. New
and renewed life, temporary loss and death. All scrambled into the system our
society uses to address human medical needs in a nation of too little true
health maintenance, preventive care and time, mixed in with impersonal
treatment, overly managed care and increasing costs.

   The result: Doctors and patients become equally frustrated. Few get to know
one another well. Care suffers. Mistakes happen. Lawsuits ensue. Insurance
premiums go up. Businesses struggle to provide employees with coverage.
Confidence subsides. Trust wanes. The spin spirals downward. People all along
the way get hurt.

   That's a very simplistic summary of the downside of what is clearly the best
medical care system in the world. And, make no mistake, America's is the
greatest system anywhere.

Looking For Solutions

   Into that scenario, medical school professors and physicians across the
nation are always seeking opportunities to enhance patient-doctor relationships
that will result in measurable improvements in care.

   One such idea gaining momentum here and attention elsewhere is a new master's
degree program about to be launched at the University of South Florida's College
of Medicine.

   The program combines bioethics with medical humanities for the first time at
any medical school in the nation.

   If all goes as planned, says Dean Robert M. Daugherty, vice president for
health sciences at USF, the course will help bridge the communications gap that
too often exists between the university and the community, as well as between
caregivers and patients.

   It's imperative, he stresses, that the degree program be understood and
considered important by faculty and staff who aren't used to thinking of
medicine from any perspective other than their own and that it be embraced by
the community, which sometimes sees the university as an elite entity operating
far from the realities of the real world.

   The brainchild of Lois LaCivita Nixon, a professor in the College of
Medicine, the 18-month curriculum will offer an interdisciplinary program aimed
at addressing the real-life consequences of today's common ethical dilemmas
surrounding stem cell research, gene therapy, patient confidentiality, access to
care, emerging infectious diseases, chronic illnesses, aging issues and cultural
differences.

   The goal is to help health care and civic leaders cope with the challenges of
an overburdened health care system that too often fails to acknowledge, much
less address, the human toll it takes on patients and caregivers.

   "If you want well-informed decisions and public policy, you need insights
drawn from a broader mix of disciplines, including philosophy, religion,
science, law, history, anthropology, the arts, film and theater," Nixon
explains.

   Her plan engages a multitude of experts using artistic media from paintings
to television to theater to literature to film to the performing arts as each
portrays the human medical condition.

   By merging expressions of the arts with concerns raised by advances in
technology, the allocation of scarce resources and emerging global tensions, the
degree program is designed to paint a human face on what can be a terribly
impersonal experience.

   This year's film "The Hours," for instance, focuses on mental health issues.
The best-selling book "The Tennis Partner" explores drug addiction, troubled
relationships and the lonely lives of physicians. The play "Wit" takes a look at
aging and its impact on the elderly and their families. Numerous artists have
drawn and painted the societal ramifications of infectious diseases such as AIDS
and tuberculosis.

   Such insightful examinations of medical conditions will help increase
understanding between those working in the medical field and those who venture
into it only through personal or workplace experiences.

   Getting to know patients as individuals, dealing with entire families,
understanding the societal context into which illness emerges, and planning for
the future are all part of helping people overcome disease and injury as well as
keeping doctors happily inspired within their profession.

   The entire curriculum is a reminder that the medicine we know isn't what our
mothers and fathers once knew. Today's doctor - likely born long after the era
of routine house calls - has a difficult time even seeing all the patients
waiting in her office.

   Routine physicals must be arranged weeks in advance. Getting an appointment
for an annual test such as a mammogram can take months. Delivering a baby often
means driving across town or into the next county to find a willing
obstetrician. Missing an appointment may mean not getting in the next time.

   And some 41 million Americans have no health insurance.

   Still, the system works, even as it sometimes teeters on the brink of
disaster.

Benefits For All

   Doctors get into trouble most often over ethical dilemmas - usually involving
situations that would be tempered and possibly alleviated if physicians and
their patients knew one another and their concerns better.

   "The most common cause of doctors losing their licenses isn't a lack of
skills or making a mistake," says Dean Daugherty. "It's an ethical violation."

   Through increasing communication and creating empathy among all participants
in the system, USF aims to better prepare its medical school graduates - all are
U.S. citizens and nearly 60 percent are women - for career-long rewarding
service in the community.

   As medicine continues to evolve through advances in genetic research, more
effective prescription drugs, precision surgeries and highly effective
therapeutic treatments, the profession's very survival may ultimately depend not
on its success in the laboratory, but on its ability to thrive in the eyes and
minds of its patients.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (C)
Tribune illustration by TIM LEE

   (C) (Healthy Insights)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2003


                             708 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                      June 15, 2003, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: COMMENTARY, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: HEALTHY INSIGHTS

BYLINE: DIANE EGNER, degner@tampatrib.com; Diane Egner is a Tampa Tribune
editorial writer.

BODY:

   Studies in bioethics and medical humanities form the basis of a pioneering
degree program at the University of South Florida's College of Medicine.

   Medical education traditionally focuses on the sciences: biology, chemistry,
physics, human anatomy and such. Students study hard, learn much more than the
basics, challenge their minds beyond their imaginations and generally perform
well on written and oral exams.

   Then, after just a few short years, they are thrust into the realities of
practicing medicine. Patients. Disease. Injury. Pain. Hope. Healing. Fear. New
and renewed life, temporary loss and death. All scrambled into the system our
society uses to address human medical needs in a nation of too little true
health maintenance, preventive care and time, mixed in with impersonal
treatment, overly managed care and increasing costs.

   The result: Doctors and patients become equally frustrated. Few get to know
one another well. Care suffers. Mistakes happen. Lawsuits ensue. Insurance
premiums go up. Businesses struggle to provide employees with coverage.
Confidence subsides. Trust wanes. The spin spirals downward. People all along
the way get hurt.

   That's a very simplistic summary of the downside of what is clearly the best
medical care system in the world. And, make no mistake, America's is the
greatest system anywhere.

Looking For Solutions

   Into that scenario, medical school professors and physicians across the
nation are always seeking opportunities to enhance patient-doctor relationships
that will result in measurable improvements in care.

   One such idea gaining momentum here and attention elsewhere is a new master's
degree program about to be launched at the University of South Florida's College
of Medicine.

   The program combines bioethics with medical humanities for the first time at
any medical school in the nation.

   If all goes as planned, says Dean Robert M. Daugherty, vice president for
health sciences at USF, the course will help bridge the communications gap that
too often exists between the university and the community, as well as between
caregivers and patients.

   It's imperative, he stresses, that the degree program be understood and
considered important by faculty and staff who aren't used to thinking of
medicine from any perspective other than their own and that it be embraced by
the community, which sometimes sees the university as an elite entity operating
far from the realities of the real world.

   The brainchild of Lois LaCivita Nixon, a professor in the College of
Medicine, the 18-month curriculum will offer an interdisciplinary program aimed
at addressing the real-life consequences of today's common ethical dilemmas
surrounding stem cell research, gene therapy, patient confidentiality, access to
care, emerging infectious diseases, chronic illnesses, aging issues and cultural
differences.

   The goal is to help health care and civic leaders cope with the challenges of
an overburdened health care system that too often fails to acknowledge, much
less address, the human toll it takes on patients and caregivers.

   "If you want well-informed decisions and public policy, you need insights
drawn from a broader mix of disciplines, including philosophy, religion,
science, law, history, anthropology, the arts, film and theater," Nixon
explains.

   Her plan engages a multitude of experts using artistic media from paintings
to television to theater to literature to film to the performing arts as each
portrays the human medical condition.

   By merging expressions of the arts with concerns raised by advances in
technology, the allocation of scarce resources and emerging global tensions, the
degree program is designed to paint a human face on what can be a terribly
impersonal experience.

   This year's film "The Hours," for instance, focuses on mental health issues.
The best-selling book "The Tennis Partner" explores drug addiction, troubled
relationships and the lonely lives of physicians. The play "Wit" takes a look at
aging and its impact on the elderly and their families. Numerous artists have
drawn and painted the societal ramifications of infectious diseases such as AIDS
and tuberculosis.

   Such insightful examinations of medical conditions will help increase
understanding between those working in the medical field and those who venture
into it only through personal or workplace experiences.

   Getting to know patients as individuals, dealing with entire families,
understanding the societal context into which illness emerges, and planning for
the future are all part of helping people overcome disease and injury as well as
keeping doctors happily inspired within their profession.

   The entire curriculum is a reminder that the medicine we know isn't what our
mothers and fathers once knew. Today's doctor - likely born long after the era
of routine house calls - has a difficult time even seeing all the patients
waiting in her office.

   Routine physicals must be arranged weeks in advance. Getting an appointment
for an annual test such as a mammogram can take months. Delivering a baby often
means driving across town or into the next county to find a willing
obstetrician. Missing an appointment may mean not getting in the next time.

   And some 41 million Americans have no health insurance.

   Still, the system works, even as it sometimes teeters on the brink of
disaster.

Benefits For All

   Doctors get into trouble most often over ethical dilemmas - usually involving
situations that would be tempered and possibly alleviated if physicians and
their patients knew one another and their concerns better.

   "The most common cause of doctors losing their licenses isn't a lack of
skills or making a mistake," says Dean Daugherty. "It's an ethical violation."

   Through increasing communication and creating empathy among all participants
in the system, USF aims to better prepare its medical school graduates - all are
U.S. citizens and nearly 60 percent are women - for career-long rewarding
service in the community.

   As medicine continues to evolve through advances in genetic research, more
effective prescription drugs, precision surgeries and highly effective
therapeutic treatments, the profession's very survival may ultimately depend not
on its success in the laboratory, but on its ability to thrive in the eyes and
minds of its patients.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (C)
Tribune illustration by TIM LEE

   (DRAWING) (C) (Healthy Insights)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2003


                             709 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              June 15, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2662 words

HEADLINE: AWAY GAME;
Over the past several decades, Tulane University has transformed itself into one
of the nation's premier universities. But in the process, critics say, the
school has lost sight of its mission to "serve the youth of Louisiana."

BYLINE: By Josh Peter; Staff writer

BODY:

   His voice erupting in volcanic bursts, John Serio lets the frustration flow
like hot lava. Oddly, the object of his discontent is also the object of his
affection: Tulane University.

   The diploma he earned from Tulane hangs on his office wall. So do Tulane
sports memorabilia, such as a picture of the school's old mascot known as The
Angry Wave. When talking about his beloved school these days, Serio often
resembles that old mascot: scowling.

   "I think Tulane University should make a greater commitment to the people of
Louisiana, especially people in the greater New Orleans area," said Serio, who
earned his master's of education from Tulane in 1974 and is in his 16th year as
principal of Archbishop Hannan High School in Meraux.

   Tulane's financially troubled athletic department underwent an intense and
tumultuous review that finally ended last week when the board of trustees voted
27-0 in favor of keeping all sports at Division I. But the process offered a
glimpse into another debate that divides the Tulane family.

   Serio points to the athletic review and the fact that Louisiana students
account for less than 20 percent of Tulane's full-time undergraduate enrollment
of 5,548 students as evidence that Tulane has turned its back on the community
-- and he is hardly alone. Among those urging Tulane to boost in-state
enrollment and reconnect with the community is Sen. John Hainkel, R-New Orleans.

   But Tulane President Scott Cowen says the best thing Tulane can do for New
Orleans and Louisiana is to build on its national academic reputation, luring
research dollars and some of the brightest students in the nation to New
Orleans. He sees the effort to trim athletic losses as part of that mission.

   Cowen estimates Tulane produces an annual economic impact in the hundreds of
millions of dollars and points out that the university also is the city's
largest private employer with 5,700 jobs.

   It also can boast something no other Louisiana school can: Tulane is a
fixture in the Top 50 national universities in U.S. World & News Report's annual
rankings and is the only top research university in the Deep South.

   "The fact that you have a national university here should be a great source
of pride to the community," Cowen said. "You could almost say we're one of the
largest net importers of brainpower to this state, and that's because we're a
national university."

   If the debate sounds familiar to you, you're not alone. Though the recent
athletic review reignited it, Tulane history professor Lawrence Powell said
people long have debated the school's local obligations versus its national
ambitions.

   "We're still struggling with an identity crisis," he said.

Changing times

   It's the identity crisis of what once was and what now is.

   What Tulane once was, people like Serio say, is the hometown school that drew
large crowds for football games because locals felt connected to the university.

   "If Tulane had a spitting contest, my mother and father took us," Serio said.

   But times have changed, and as Tulane's national reputation grew, its
enrollment base changed, too. It has had an impact on attendance at Tulane
football games at the Superdome, as fewer local students generally means fewer
local alumni. And because Tulane is not a large state school and hasn't been a
consistent winner, it has failed to attract the casual sports fan.

   Critics such as Serio say that if Tulane had maintained high numbers of
Louisiana students, they would have formed a strong fan base for the struggling
athletic program.

   Yet others, such as Cowen, suggest that doing that would've cost the city
something else: a preeminent university that provides a shining example for a
city and state that have struggled with image problems. And they suggest that
the school should not accept local students simply to boost attendance at
athletic events.

   The battle lines were drawn long ago. In fact, the debate's origins date back
to 1884, when Paul Tulane, a merchant from New Jersey who made his fortune in
New Orleans, helped rescue the financially troubled school then known as the
University of Louisiana. It was Act 43 of the Louisiana legislature that in 1884
transformed the school from a public to private university.

   Those who say Tulane has shirked its local obligations cite language in Act
43, which states the university is to serve "the youth of Louisiana."

   But Clarence Mohr, a former Tulane history professor who co-authored a book
about the school's development between 1945 and 1980, is among others who point
out that the act also specified the university should serve only white students.
His point: The discriminatory language is proof the mission is outdated.

   "What Paul Tulane might have envisioned in the 1880s couldn't possibly be
taken in any way as a rigid set of guidelines about what an institution might
become a century and a quarter later," Mohr said.

   It's doubtful Paul Tulane or anyone else in 1884 could've foreseen World War
II and the impact it would have on higher education. Hundreds of thousands of
U.S. soldiers returning home took advantage of the G.I. Bill.

   Although the number of college students grew dramatically, Tulane did not.
Instead, the school raised its admission standards and set out to become one of
the South's premier research institutions, Mohr said. By all accounts, the
school succeeded.

   Today, school officials boast, Tulane is the only school in the Deep South
that is a member of the Association of American Universities, a group of 62 top
research universities in the North America.    The school also was ranked 36th
among national universities in the 1998 U.S. News & World Report rankings and
since has ranked no lower than 46th.

   But as the university's national reputation took off, its number of Louisiana
students plummeted. Between 1950 and 1960, the percentage of in-state students
at Tulane dropped from 65 percent to 34 percent, according to Mohr's book, which
shows Louisiana's presence in the student body continued to dip -- to 26 percent
by 1970, 19 percent by 1980 and just 12 percent when Cowen took over as
president in 1998.

   As in-state enrollment dipped, so did attendance at Tulane games, although
others cite the school's withdrawal from the SEC in 1966 and the demolition of
Tulane Stadium as crippling blows to the sports program.

   Cowen, encouraged by board members when he took over in 1998, pledged to
increase Louisiana enrollment. Yet for all of Tulane's efforts -- three
scholarship programs, automatic acceptance for all high school valedictorians
and bus tours through the state to drum up interest -- the percentage of
in-state students has inched up to only 15 percent, said Cowen, who said his
goal is 20 percent.

   Hainkel, president of the state Senate, suggests it should be no less than 33
percent. Serio and others want 40 percent to 50 percent.

Seeking top students

   Such talk irks John Koerner, chairman of Tulane's board of trustees.

   "Sometimes the insular thinking of people of Louisiana is amazing," said
Koerner of New Orleans. "To think that everything has to be local is just not
right. And to think that we can build a great university with 50 percent local
kids is simply incorrect."

   Hainkel is among many who cite the relatively low in-state enrollment as
Tulane's chief obstacle in developing a broad fan base for its athletic program.
In fact, poor attendance in football and men's basketball contributed to the
athletic review, during which the board of trustees considered dropping all
sports to Division III, which offers no scholarships, or dropping football
altogether and keeping the other sports in Division I.

   "I think we're paying for that now," Hainkel said. "When I go to Fogelman
(Arena) to a basketball game and all I see in my section are people 50 and 60
years old, and they went to Tulane when I did, I keep telling Cowen, 'What the
hell are you going to do when they die and you don't have anybody to replace
them?' "

   Of the seven schools Tulane lists as peer institutions, its percentage of
in-state enrollment, according to the 2003 U.S. News & World Report college
edition, is lower than all but two: Washington University in St. Louis, which
has 11 percent in-state enrollment, and Duke University in Durham, N.C., which
has 15 percent in-state enrollment. Of the other peer schools, according to the
magazine's report, in-state enrollment is 20 percent at Vanderbilt University in
Nashville, Tenn., 29 percent at Emory University in Atlanta, 48 percent at New
York University in New York City, 50 percent at the University of Rochester in
Rochester, N.Y., and 54 percent at Rice University in Houston.

   But Tulane officials point out that some of the schools have a much larger
population base to draw from. Louisiana's population is 4.5 million, for
example, and Rice draws from a Texas population of almost 22 million. New York's
population is 19 million, and Missouri's is 5.7 million.

   Serio said Archbishop Hannan has produced a number of top students that
Tulane has failed to attract -- but one in particular galls him most. Josh San
Salvador, Hannan's 1998 valedictorian and that year's MVP of the Class 4A
baseball state championship, caught the eye of Tulane coach Rick Jones. But
Harvard pried him away with a strong financial offer, Serio said.

   "The point of Josh San Salvador is, you need a kid like that," Serio said.
"Go get that kid."

   San Salvador declined to comment about the issue, other than to say, "I
couldn't pass up the opportunity to go to Harvard."

   It's a point Koerner has noticed. Though critics say Tulane does too little
to keep students like San Salvador, Koerner said sometimes there's little Tulane
can do.

   "Times have changed, and people don't understand that highly qualified kids
want to go away to college," Koerner said. "They want to leave home. That's the
ritual. Establish their individuality and leave mama's nest."

   Others say that Tulane's effort to land top students conflicts with two
undeniable factors: Louisiana ranks near the bottom of the nation's 50 states in
standardized test scores and average income.

   Tulane's high tuition compounds what some school officials see as an
insurmountable problem in attracting locals. Though more than 50 percent of
Tulane's students receive some financial aid, the school's tuition of $26,310
dwarfs that of LSU, which costs $3,536 a year, or the University of New Orleans,
which costs $2,972, or any other state school in Louisiana. Indeed, Tulane is
priced in the same tier as Harvard and Yale, and many top Louisiana students who
have a choice prefer the Ivy League.

   Louisiana's TOPS program that covers tuition to state schools has only
widened the cost difference for eligible students. Though eligible students can
apply their TOPS scholarship to private school tuition in Louisiana, that was
worth only $2,452 at Tulane during the 2003-03 academic year.

   "A lot of smart kids go to LSU, and a lot of smart kids go to UNO," said
Sidney Lassen, a former member of Tulane's board of trustees. "It's very, very
hard to compete on a dollars-and-cents basis."

   Hamstrung by a relatively small endowment, Tulane already is struggling to
solve campuswide financial shortages. So when asked why Tulane doesn't offer
more financial aid to Louisiana students, Koerner said, "You can't just dole out
money with both hands. The lights go off."

   But the student body isn't the only place Tulane has lost a local presence.
Cowen has pushed to nationalize the board of trustees, not an unusual move for a
national university. Of the 12 board members who have joined the board during
Cowen's five-year tenure, 10 live outside Louisiana.

   Then there was just the general feeling John Franklin of Metairie got when he
and his son attended orientation at Tulane.

   "We were very impressed, but we did notice on this video they show you that
most of the students are from out of state," said Franklin, adding that
financial considerations led his son to enroll at Loyola. "The professors and
the members of the board that spoke, none of them were from Louisiana. It's
obvious they've gotten away from being concerned about the locals."

Review feeds perception

   For all of Tulane's academic success and research achievements, some school
supporters say that it is still athletics that forms the strongest connection
between the school and many local residents. And they talk longingly of Tulane's
underdog role in its longtime football rivalry with LSU.

   But the rivalry is no longer an annual affair, and, fittingly, Tulane blames
LSU, and LSU blames Tulane. After the 1996 game, five years passed before the
teams met again.

   The schools won't play again until 2008 in New Orleans and 2009 in Baton
Rouge. Lassen, the former Tulane board member and longtime Green Wave supporter,
said he thinks that's part of Tulane's image problem in the community. He said
the idea of Tulane being removed and insular has coincided with the end of the
annual football game that stirred passions throughout the state.

   "There were always pictures in the paper of who was riding who down the
street in a wheelbarrow," Lassen said. "The winner of the game got to do that.
Unfortunately, Tulane didn't get the opportunity to ride the wheelbarrow very
often."

   But there were greater consequences to ending the annual game that would
rotate between New Orleans and Baton Rouge and traditionally drew huge crowds.

   "Financially, it cost us," Lassen said.

   For Tulane fans, whose most cherished sports memories are football victories
over LSU, the prospect that the board of trustees might end Division I football
-- meaning the Green Wave would never again play the Tigers -- led to outrage.

   They found out about the school's intense review of athletics when news
leaked on the Internet. Though Cowen said the school planned to involve alumni
and the public, fans such as Serio said the behind-the-scenes study underscored
Tulane's perceived disinterest for its local alumni and fans.

   When board member Billy Slatten and Athletic Director Rick Dickson confirmed
that dropping football had emerged as a serious option, angry fans urged the
school to keep football and dump Cowen.

   Not until the day of the much-anticipated vote did Cowen declare his
position. He recommended a plan that keeps the athletics program in Division I
and calls for lowering the athletics department's annual deficit to $2 million,

  and the board of trustees approved the plan with a 27-0 vote that included one
abstention.

   And after weeks of silence, Cowen wants to be heard. He wants to talk about
more than sports, too.

   Last week, in what sounded like a stump speech, Cowen rattled off a litany of
ways he says the school makes New Orleans and Louisiana a better place.

   Gene therapy. Cancer research. Neurobiotechnology. Environmental studies. A
regional humanities center,

   Cowen said the school works hard to meet its local obligation, and suggests
critics should be more appreciative of having such a highly regarded university
in a state with a well-known image problem. And he points out that since he took
over as Tulane's president in 1998, the school has created 400 new jobs --
raising the total to 5,700, according to the school -- and has brought in
millions of dollars more for research.

   "Athletics may be a part of Tulane University to the community -- the
emotional part," Cowen said. "But if you look at the full spectrum of Tulane
University, the shadow it puts on New Orleans and all it does is immense. And
all I ever ask is take a look at the full picture, not jut one slice of the
picture.

   "I believe in our institution, and I believe in New Orleans, and we need one
another. This challenge between being national and local is a good challenge,
one worthy to fight, for all of us."

   . . . . . . .

Josh Peter can be reached at jpeter@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3407.

GRAPHIC: STAFF FILE PHOTO As Tulane University's attempts to achieve preeminence
seem to be paying off, landing it on the U.S. News and World Report's top 50
list year after year, many locals say the school has abandoned its mission to
serve 'the youth of Louisiana.' [129753] STAFF PHOTO BY TED JACKSON A
representative of the Tulane University admissions office gives a campus tour
Friday for prospective students and their parents. [129725] STAFF PHOTO BY
JENNIFER ZDON Tulane student Catherine Hughs works with other technicians to
create stem cells for research inside the tissue culture room at the Tulane
Center for Gene Therapy, which has gained international attention for its
advancements in stem-cell research and gene therapy. [129707] STAFF PHOTO BY TED
JACKSON John Serio's office at Archbishop Hannan High School in Meraux has a
wall of plaques and paintings of Tulane University. The high school principal
says Tulane is turning its back on Louisiana, disappointing and frustrating him.
[129727] STAFF FILE PHOTO Tulane President Scott Cowen says that though his goal
is to increase in-state enrollment to 20 percent, critics should focus on good
things the school has brought to the state, such as jobs and research
facilities. [129754] STAFF FILE PHOTO BY MICHAEL DeMOCKER The audience was
sparse for a Tulane football game in the Superdome in October. With fewer local
students attending Tulane, there are fewer local alumni around to attend games.
[108931]

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2003


                             710 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        June 14, 2003, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: Brooks researchers work to blow away anthrax ; They try to harness
electricity to destroy harmful cells.

BYLINE: Cindy Tumiel


BODY: Zap anthrax spores with the right kind of electrical pulses, and the
potentially deadly pathogens explode into popcorn-like kernels of benign
material.

    Use a less-intense kind of pulse, and the spores will open gently and bleed
to death.

    Researchers at the Air Force's radio frequency laboratory in San Antonio
envision a day when a backpack-sized electrical device will be able to
decontaminate clothes, rooms, people or entire buildings exposed to bioterrorist
pathogens such as anthrax.

    There's also the potential to put radio and laser frequency devices to work
in a host of biomedical applications, from food safety to cancer treatment to
gene therapy to rapid wound healing.

    "The same thing that can be used on a weapon can be used in a hospital,"
said Michael Murphy, a scientist at the Radiofrequency Radiation Branch at
Brooks City-Base.

    Air Force researchers already have developed a non-lethal weapon that fires
an invisible burning wave capable of stinging people but causing no serious
injury. It is seen as a way of controlling crowds without the use of deadly
force.

    Murphy is the chairman of a small convention of electromagnetic experts who
have convened in San Antonio this week for the third international
Electromagnetic Research Symposium. About 200 scientists are at the Westin
Riverwalk hotel discussing potential medical and biological applications for
electromagnetic fields and ionized gases.

    Their emerging field of science explores the use of short, high-powered
pulses - electrical bursts of one billionth of a second that deliver 10,000
volts or more of power. It allows scientists to use electricity on cells without
heating them.

    Brooks researcher Johnathan L. Kiel has turned electric pulse power on
anthrax, a naturally occurring spore that has been harnessed as a biological
weapon. Anthrax bacteria sent through the mail in 2001 killed five people,
sickened 17 others and paralyzed postal operations along areas of the East
Coast.

    Work with a device called a Pulse Corona Reactor, which fires fast pulses of
current through a network of metal tubes, shows the toxin is very vulnerable.

    "At high frequencies, it just like you're popping popcorn," Kiel said. "They
explode."

    Lower frequencies - akin to the energy of a light bulb - brought gentler but
no less lethal consequences. The spore cell walls opened, stretching into the
shape of a ballet slipper, and the contents drained out.

    "Inside, these spores still have water," Kiel said. "This gets them
dehydrated and they die."

    He has gotten similar results on experiments with shiga, a toxin produced by
E. coli bacteria. Plans are being made to test vaccinia, a bacteria closely
related to smallpox.

    "This has the potential for many applications in combating bioterrorism,"
Kiel said.

    ctumiel@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: KAREN L. SHAW/STAFF : Johnathan Kiel, a researcher at Brooks
City-Base, explains the Pulse Corona Reactor, which uses fast pulses of electric
current in biomedical work. Scientists at Brooks City-Base were talking about
their work Tuesday. Kiel has been experimenting on anthrax.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2003


                             711 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: Cancer Risk Exceeds Outlook In Gene Therapy, Studies Find

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   New studies suggest that gene therapy might have a greater chance of causing
cancer than previously thought, adding to safety concerns that have troubled the
fledgling field.

        Gene therapy often uses partly disabled viruses to carry genes into
human cells to correct gene defects. The new studies, one of which is being
published today, show that these viruses tend to land on or near genes in the
human cells. When that happens, the gene hit by the virus can be inadvertently
switched on or off, contributing to unexpected effects like cancer.

    "It's sort of potentially rather bad news for gene therapy because you're
hitting just what you'd rather not be hitting," said Dr. Frederic Bushman of the
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, who has done some of the recent work.

   The gene therapy field was jolted several months ago when two children in
France who had been essentially cured of a rare immune disorder by gene therapy
developed leukemia, a blood cancer. Scientists believe the virus used in the
gene therapy inserted its genetic material into or near a cancer-promoting gene
and turned it on.

   Scientists had long known that this could theoretically occur but had thought
the chances were small. That is because much of human DNA is not part of a gene
and has no known function. Some scientists presumed that the viruses would land
at random locations, and therefore would probably not hit a gene, let alone a
cancer-promoting one.

   But the new studies show that the viruses land on genes more often than if
the process were random.

   In the study being published today, in the journal Science, Dr. Shawn M.
Burgess and colleagues at the National Human Genome Research Institute looked at
903 cases in which murine leukemia viruses, very similar to the type used in the
French gene therapy, infected human cells in culture.

   They found the virus hit a gene 34 percent of the time, more than the 22
percent that would have been expected if the process had been random. Moreover,
the virus had a striking preference for the beginning of the genes, a site that
is key to turning genes on or off.

   That mean the leukemia cases in the French children were not so surprising
after all, they said.

   "This is definitely showing that it can integrate into the most important
regions of gene," said Dr. Xiaolin Wu, a postdoctoral researcher and first
author of the paper. "The risk is definitely much higher than what we thought
before."

   The scientists also studied 379 cases of infection with H.I.V., the virus
that causes AIDS, and one that, in a disabled form, is also being considered for
use in gene therapy. That virus landed inside genes 58 percent of the time,
though not it did not favor the beginning of the genes. That was similar to
findings reported last year by Dr. Bushman.

   Both the murine leukemia virus and the H.I.V. are retroviruses, which
integrate their genetic content into the genome of the cells they infect. That
makes them desirable for gene therapy because the corrective gene can become a
permanent part of the human cells and the therapy might not have to be repeated
periodically.

   Some other viruses do not integrate their genetic material into the human
genome and might thus be safer. But another new study shows that one of the more
commonly used ones, known as adeno-associated virus, is not free of risk either.

   That virus occasionally does integrate into the genome of the cells it
infects. And when it does so, the integration occurs inside genes 72 percent of
the time, according to the study, published on-line by Nature Genetics this
month.

   Still, some scientists say the risk of cancer should not be exaggerated. "We
can't rule out that it would never cause cancer, but there's lots of data
suggesting that it hasn't caused cancer in animals," Dr. Mark A. Kay of
Stanford, lead author of the Nature Genetics study, said of adeno-associated
viruses.

   He and others said that the findings about the retroviruses were also not
that big a cause for concern because it usually takes turning on more than one
gene to cause cancer and no cancer cases had been found in the scores of
American gene therapy trials. They said the cancers in the French children might
be unique to that circumstance because the corrective genes were put into cells
that multiplied rapidly, giving an advantage to fast-growing cells like those of
cancer.

   "In most gene therapy this doesn't happen," Dr. Kay said. "You are putting
the gene into quiescent tissue that is not rapidly dividing."

   Scientists say they are not sure why the viruses seem to land on genes.

   Some scientists said that rather than doom gene therapy, the studies could
provide clues to finding or designing safer viruses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2003


                             712 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 9, 2003, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1374 words

HEADLINE: HARVARD MAY EASE RULES ON FACULTY TIES TO DRUG FIRMS

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Harvard Medical School is considering loosening its regulations governing the
financial ties between faculty researchers and private drug companies, according
to school officials, a process whose outcome could help set the tenor and pace
of medical research here and around the country for years to come.

   The policy review comes at a time when big drug makers Merck, Pfizer, and
Novartis are moving significant portions of their research operations to the
Boston area, hoping proximity to Harvard's world-leading medical school will
result in new, profit-making drugs.

      Under the current regulations, considered among the toughest in the
nation, Harvard researchers cannot own more than $20,000 of stock in companies
that finance research in their lab. They cannot receive more than $10,000 in
consulting fees from those companies. And they cannot spend more than 20 percent
of their time on non-Harvard research.

   "There are people who are very unhappy" about the current limits, said
Margaret Dale, Harvard Medical School's associate dean for faculty affairs, who
monitors the faculty for conflicts of interest.

   Some Harvard faculty members, as well as some drug company officials, said
the medical school should set higher limits on financial ties between
researchers and companies, medical school officials said. This, said proponents
of loosening the policy, would speed the conversion of scientific discoveries at
Harvard into life-saving medicines by rewarding the faculty members who helped
the research.

   But others at the medical school, as well as some medical ethicists
interviewed, said Harvard should keep its current policy in place. This would,
they said, send medical researchers across the country an important message
about minimizing corporate influence over academic research.

   "Others look to [Harvard] as the standard of integrity in science. If they
start to lower the bar, they would be tarnishing their standards of integrity,"
said Tufts University science policy analyst Sheldon Krimsky.

   Two faculty committees charged with reviewing the policy are scheduled to
issue their recommendations on June 26, with a faculty vote to follow. The
process is closely guarded, and Harvard officials declined to name the members
of the panels or detail their discussions. Within the faculty "there are people
on all sides of the spectrum," Dale said.

   Because of Harvard's prestige and history of limiting corporate influence in
research, its decision will influence other medical schools.

   Many of them also are reexamining their conflict-of-interest policies at a
time when industry-academia collaboration is accelerating and the public has
become increasingly wary of the influence of money on medical science.

   "Harvard is clearly an institution of enormous standing, and people watch
what it does," said Dr. David Korn, a vice president at the American Association
of Medical Colleges and a former dean of Stanford University's medical school.
"They're among the very strictest in the nation and have been for years."

   Harvard was on the cusp of changing the policy four years ago, but the sudden
death of Jesse Gelsinger, a subject in a University of Pennsylvania medical
trial, persuaded Joseph B. Martin, Harvard's medical dean, to scrap the process
and leave the policy untouched. Gelsinger, 18, was killed after a gene therapy
experiment , and it was later revealed that one of the researchers involved had
financial ties to a company set to profit from the research.

   Martin, in a Globe interview at the time, said the decision not to loosen
Harvard's conflict-of-interest policy was "the right thing to do, the
responsible thing to do at this juncture."

   Martin refused to be interviewed about the current reexamination of the
policy, saying through a spokesman that he did not want to undermine the
deliberative process underway.

   One of the two 10-member faculty committees, led by Dr. Barbara J. McNeil,
chair of Harvard's department of health-care policy, is examining the policy for
doctors conducting clinical trials with patients. The other, led by biological
chemistry and molecular pharmacology professor Dr. Christopher T. Walsh, will
deal with basic science researchers, whose work typically does not involve
humans.

   The intellectual climate surrounding the process has been influenced by
Harvard president Lawrence H. Summers, who in repeated public and private
comments has suggested to faculty members that the medical school's conservative
policies may prevent medicines that could help thousands from reaching the
marketplace, said several Harvard officials.

   In an address just after taking office in 2001, Summers told hundreds of
doctors and researchers at Harvard-affiliated Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center: "We have to think creatively and flexibly about how to work with the
private sector, how to support entrepreneurship, and how to make sure research
moves from the bench to the bedside."

   With Novartis, Merck, and Pfizer just miles away from the medical school's
Longwood campus - in the case of Merck, just blocks - and dozens of
biotechnology companies nearby, Harvard officials expect informal contacts and
formal ties between medical school researchers and companies to deepen in the
years to come.

   "Ideally, there's going to be a cross-fertilization of ideas," said Harvard
Medical School's associate dean for research, Susanne Churchill, who envisions
frequent joint seminars, workshops, and symposia with Harvard faculty and
Novartis staff that leads to extensive collaboration.

   In particular, Harvard officials expect more research collaboration aimed at
converting basic biological findings into medicines. Harvard researchers turn
out more basic discoveries about the human body than perhaps any institution in
the world. And pharmaceutical companies can spend millions to find compounds
that work as drugs and test them on patients. But the middle step, determining
whether basic biological discoveries have wider medical applications, is often
too costly and time-consuming for academics and too risky for companies.

   But drug companies said they should be able to give more financial support to
academics, who often are the most skilled at making these intermediary advances,
to speed the drug-making process along.

   "Industry will tell you that they are handicapped in their ability to do that
intermediate stage thing by our conflict-of-interest policies," said Churchill.

   Big drug companies, Churchill said, are increasingly desperate to capitalize
on Harvard research to help fill their fast-emptying product pipelines.

   "Novartis, Merck, Pfizer understand they have to look to us," she said. She
added that the medical school must set a conflict-of-interest policy that
balances industry needs while protecting academic freedom. "This is an
incredible opportunity, if we can figure out how to reach out."

   But former New England Journal of Medicine editor Dr. Marcia Angell said,
"Harvard Medical School would be unwise to loosen its restrictions. It should
tighten them."

   "Academic medical centers need to keep their missions distinct from the
mission of investor-owned businesses," said Angell.

   Critics such as Angell worry that researchers with deep financial ties to
companies will face pressure to place test results in a positive light, devise
research agendas that fulfill corporate needs, and withhold data from
publication to benefit companies.

   George Annas, a Boston University medical ethicist, said all financial ties
between researchers and companies should be banned.

   "Should you have any equity in a product you're testing? It seems to me the
answer should be no," he said.

   At Harvard, increasing willingness to reach out to private industry may be
part of a generational shift. Churchill, who helps manage faculty dealings with
businesses, said there is an "increasing entrepreneurial awareness" among
medical school students, citing in particular the student-run Harvard
Biotechnology Club, which has invited industry heavyweights to club meetings.

   "It's not a bad thing to benefit from the fruits of your labor," said
Churchill of the new attitude. "It's OK. "

   Raja Mishra can be reached at rmishra@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2003


                             713 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        June 8, 2003 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 064

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; U.S. mayors honoring Cloutier for advocacy work

BYLINE: By Shaun Bean

BODY:

   George Cloutier, founder and chief executive of Boston-based American
Management Services Inc., was the first-ever recipient of the National Small
Business Advocate Award from the U.S. Conference of Mayors.

   Melissa Morgante, of Andover, was promoted to executive vice president,
director of human resources at Arnold Worldwide, a Boston-based advertising
agency.

   Conley & Co., an executive recruitment firm in Boston, hired Michael A.
Ahearn as managing director.

   Shareholder.com, of Maynard, named Michael Detwiler senior vice president of
worldwide sales and marketing.

   Richard L. Levine was added as a new partner in the bankruptcy and insolvency
group at Boston law firm Adler Pollock & Sheehan.

   Gray & Rice Public Relations, of Boston, appointed Bob McNeil an agency
principal.

   Amato De Civita, of Boston, was appointed vice president, New England
operations by the Xerox Corp.

   Veridiem, a software company in Maynard, appointed Paul Basson as vice
president of international operations and Ken Nicolson as vice president of
North American sales.

   Stuart H. Bentkover joined Beauty Therapies, of Brookline, as medical
director.

   Boston law firm Foley Hoag added Denise W. DeFranco, Gerard P. O'Connor and
Gare A. Smith as new partners.

   Patrick Cavanagh and John Butterworth were promoted to managing directors at
the Boston office of Insignia-ESG Inc., a commercial real estate service
provider.

   Greenberg Traurig LLP, of Boston, added Michel Morency and John M. Garvey to
its intellectual property practice.

   Private Healthcare Systems, of Waltham, promoted Mike Boudreau, of Wakefield,
to vice president of planning and analysis; LeeAnn Solomon Christ, of Lunenburg,
to vice president and associate general counsel; Kevin O'Reilly, of Weymouth, to
vice president and controller; and Nicholas Zaffiris, of Hopkinton, to vice
president of client services.

   TowerGroup, of Needham, appointed Maureen Hesney as senior vice president of
research and consulting services.

   NetTeks Technology Consultants Inc., of Boston, announced four appointments:
Kevin Webb, of Melrose, chief financial officer; Jon Hutchins, of Upton, senior
engineer; Gregg Henebry, of Boston; and Jack Mallaghan, of Lexington, account
executives.

   Robert D. Buckley, chief executive of Boston-based Programming Research, was
elected to the inaugural board of governors at the Sustainable Programming
Research Group, of Dublin.

   Biogen, of Cambridge, elected Lawrence C. Best, Boston Scientific's senior
vice president and chief financial officer, to its board of directors.

   David Waters will take over as the new vice president of cargo operations at
Woburn-based L-3 Communications.

   EnvoyWorldWide, of Bedford, added Paul A. O'Brien, Rob Adler, David
McFarlane, and Thornton May to the company's board of advisors.

   Jeffrey Bean, of Fitchburg, will serve as managing director of Partner
America and vice president of government relations for Waltham-based American
Management Services Inc.

   Compete Inc., of Boston, hired Daniel F. X. O'Reilly as vice president and
chief analytics officer of its management team.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, appointed Michael J. Astrue
president and chief executive. David D. Pendergast was promoted to executive
vice president, operations.

   Nicholas Bonn, executive vice president of State Street Corp., and Arthur R.
Hogan III, chief market analyst at Jefferies & Company Inc. were elected as
governors to the board of the Boston Stock Exchange.

LOAD-DATE: June 08, 2003


                             714 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 7, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 48 words

HEADLINE: FOR THE RECORD / CORRECTION;
FOR THE RECORD

BODY:
BECAUSE OF A REPORTING ERROR, A STORY IN YESTERDAY'S BUSINESS SECTION ABOUT JOB
CUTS AT MILLENNIUM PHARMACEUTICALS INC. INCORRECTLY DESCRIBED THE LAYOFFS AT
ANOTHER CAMBRIDGE BIOTECHNOLOGY FIRM, TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES INC. THE LAYOFFS
AT TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES WERE COMPLETED IN MARCH.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2003


                             715 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                        June 6, 2003 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: Vineyard woman hails gene therapy experiment

BODY:

   Caption: MICHAEL LASALANDRAJoan Svetz of Martha's Vineyard received the third
in a series of injections yesterday as part of a study that seeks to find out if
gene therapy can fix the diabetes-related nerve damage in her legs and help her
walk without pain again.

   "Nothing ventured, nothing gained," said the 74-year-old Oak Bluffs woman who
suffers from peripheral neuropathy, a common complication of diabetes in which
the nerves in the legs and feet become damaged, resulting in pain, tingling and
numbness.

   "Last fall, I didn't know if I could walk to the end of the driveway," she
said. "Walking is very painful. The feet and ankles burn. I had two
alternatives: spend the rest of my life in a wheelchair or lose my limbs. I
didn't want that at all."

   Svetz is one of six patients getting injections of vascular endothelial
growth factor, or VEGF, into the muscles near the damaged peripheral nerves in
her legs in a study under way at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton.

   Six more patients are in the pipeline to enter the study and Dr. Alan Ropper,
chief of neurology, said more are being sought. The $ 10.2 million federally
funded study seeks to enroll 196 patients.

   The idea is that the DNA in the growth factor will be picked up by cells in
the nerves and produce tiny new blood vessels to nourish and restore the damaged
nerves.

   In an earlier study, when VEGF was given to try to improve severe blockages
in leg arteries, those with diabetes said their nerve pain had improved - an
unexpected occurrence.

   The research follows that of the late gene therapy pioneer Dr. Jeffrey Isner,
who used a similar growth factor to grow new blood vessels for heart blockages.

   It is way too early to say if the therapy is working for the neuropathy
patients, but Svetz said she has noticed some positive effects.

   Svetz has received three of eight sets of injections that will span six
weeks.

   Subjects are being treated in just one leg so as to compare the treated leg
with the untreated one. In addition, some subjects are getting only placebo
injections.

   "One fellow who couldn't drive can now drive," Ropper said. "We're willing to
say that is genuine improvement."

   But all subjects will have to be examined clinically and scored on a number
of indicators before it can be said that the treatment has been effective, he
noted.

   "This is the only active treatment for diabetic neuropathy," Ropper said.

   Diabetics with neuropathy who are interested in enrolling in the study may
call 617-789-3040.

   Caption: SVETZ: Participates in experimental treatment.

LOAD-DATE: June 06, 2003


                             716 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 6, 2003, Friday ,THIRD EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 718 words

HEADLINE: MILLENNIUM TO TRIM 600 JOBS PLANS RESEARCH CUTS AS IT TURNS FOCUS TO
PROFIT, PRODUCTS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., one of the state's largest biotechnology
concerns, yesterday said it will eliminate 600 jobs by the end of next year and
cut certain research programs, as it shifts from a research-based outfit to a
products-driven company.

   The Cambridge company plans to close operations in South San Francisco and in
the United Kingdom, sites it gained through its acquisitions of Cor Therapeutics
Inc. last year and Cambridge Discovery Chemistry Ltd. three years ago. About 360
people are employed at those two locations.

      Millennium came under pressure from Wall Street to reduce the amount of
cash it was burning through every year. The 10-year-old company has two marketed
products: Integrilin, a heart drug it acquired when it merged with San
Francisco's Cor, and Velcade, a cancer drug that regulators approved last month
to treat multiple myeloma. With a staff of 2,300 people and a dozen drugs in
clinical trials, however, Millennium is already too large to become profitable
based solely on the projected revenues from Integrilin and Velcade.

   Last year, the company lost $590 million, and analysts said it was on track
to lose $420 million this year. To meet its goal of profitability by 2006,
analysts said, the company had to lower costs. Millennium said the aim of the
restructuring, which will trim the company's work force to 1,700 people, is to
lessen its traditional focus on early-stage research, streamline operations, and
increase its ability to market products.

   "No one ever wants to see people being laid off, but I think it was a
necessity for Millennium," said Yaron Werber, an analyst with SG Cowen in New
York.

   The news comes at a time when many biotech companies have trimmed their work
forces or have frozen hiring. Millennium laid off 103 people late last year.
Another Cambridge biotech firm, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., is laying off 100
people, or roughly 20 percent of its work force. A slew of smaller biotech
companies have cut their staffs by 10 or 20 people, and others aren't hiring.
    "These people are running out of places to go," said Pearl Freier, a
managing director with Cambridge recruitment firm Talent Capital. "Especially on
the research side, there's just not enough hiring going on."

   Others are more optimistic. Biotech shares have rallied in the past month,
raising hopes that a turnaround might be underway.

   Novartis Pharma AG, the world's sixth-largest pharmaceutical company, plans
to hire several hundred scientists as it establishes its research headquarters
in Cambridge over the next year. Companies such as Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.
in Lexington are hiring as they refocus research programs, and venture
capitalists said the state's start-up ventures are hungry for talented
scientists.

   "Millennium is laying off scientists who focus on discovering new drugs,"
said Michael Lytton, a venture capitalist with Oxford Bio science Partners in
Boston. "That's exactly the skill set that is most needed in younger companies."

   The layoffs alone are not enough to carry Millennium to profitability. For
that to happen, analysts said, Velcade will have to prove a powerful
cancer-fighting weapon against more common cancers. The drug was approved in an
unusually rapid development and review process, reaching the market at least a
year ahead of schedule, and is proving a valuable tool in the fight against
multiple myeloma, a deadly blood-borne cancer. Millennium is currently studying
its use in treating solid tumors.

   The company said it will revise its outlook in July when it releases
second-quarter earnings. Earlier this year, Millennium predicted a loss of $290
million to $320 million in 2003, excluding costs related to the Cor acquisition.
The layoffs, which affect about 25 percent of its work force, will begin this
quarter and continue through 2004. In the short term, analysts said, the cuts
should make it easier for Millennium to meet its financial forecast this year.

   "These are good steps in the right direction," said Matthew Geller, an
analyst with CIBC World Markets in New York. "They are a prerequisite for
profitability."

   Shares in the company rose 93 cents yesterday to $17.08. They are up 115
percent this year.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

CORRECTION-DATE: June 7, 2003, Saturday

CORRECTION:

   BECAUSE OF A REPORTING ERROR, A STORY IN YESTERDAY'S BUSINESS SECTION ABOUT
JOB CUTS AT MILLENNIUM PHARMACEUTICALS INC. INCORRECTLY DESCRIBED THE LAYOFFS AT
ANOTHER CAMBRIDGE BIOTECHNOLOGY FIRM, TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES INC. THE LAYOFFS
AT TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES WERE COMPLETED IN MARCH.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2003


                             717 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 05, 2003, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 40 Health

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Program offers six-week grief and support series


   The Terrace at Memorial City will host Life After Loss, a grief education and
support program from 3 to 4:30 p.m. June 12, 19 and 26 and July 3, 10 and 17.
The program, designed by the American Cancer Society and presented by Houston
Hospice, is geared to help bereaved people better understand the grief process,
their emotions and how to cope with them.

   The Terrace at Memorial City is at 11900 Barryknoll Lane, just off Interstate
10 and Gessner.

   Admission for the six-week series is free.

   To register, please call Kay Bergen or Kay French in the Bereavement
Department of Houston Hospice at 713-468-2441.





   St. Luke's Miles named Cullen Chair at Baylor


   Dr. Brian J. Miles, medical director of St. Luke's Texas Cancer Institute,
has been named the Distinguished Cullen Chair in Urology at Baylor College of
Medicine.

   Miles joined the faculty of the Scott Department of Urology as associate
professor and chief of Urology Services at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center
in 1992. In 1994, he was named chief of urology at St. Luke's Episcopal
Hospital, where he was appointed medical director of the cancer institute in
1999. In 1998, he became clinical director of Baylor's Prostate Gene Therapy
Program. In 2001, 2002 and 2003, Miles was listed in America's Top Doctors on
the basis of a national selection process of peers from around the nation.





   Toll-free call gets results among area's smokers


   Researchers from the University of Texas School of Public Health at Houston
have announced findings that the multi-part Texas Tobacco Prevention Pilot
Initiative is "effectively reducing both youth and adult tobacco use in Houston
and southeast Texas."

   The comprehensive anti-tobacco initiative, launched in June 2000, combines
prevention activities for children with media campaigns and telephone counseling
to help Texas smokers kick the habit.

   "Long-term follow-up from an experimental study of callers in the first two
years showed smokers who were given counseling were twice as likely to quit for
good as smokers who only got self-help booklets in the mail," said Angela
Meshack, project director for the initiative.

   The "Quit Line," sponsored by the American Cancer Society, receives more than
7,000 calls annually from smokers in the Houston, Fort Bend and Beaumont/Port
Arthur areas.

   Researchers have learned that callers in the pilot area who participate in
the counseling have a successful quit rate estimated at nearly 21 percent, much
higher than those who use only self-help methods and twice the rate elsewhere in
Texas. Surveys show 90,000 fewer smokers overall than expected without the pilot
program.

   The Quit Line is one part of the comprehensive Texas Tobacco Prevention Pilot
Initiative. The program also includes preventive activities for youths and
efforts such as the "Tobacco is Foul" campaign and the Web site
www.ducktexas.com.

   The Quit Line is a joint project of the UT School of Public Health, the
American Cancer Society and the Texas Department of Health.

   The Quit Line telephone number is 877-YES-QUIT (937-7848).





   Sleep disorders focus of Parkinson's meeting


   The subject of this month's meeting of the Parkinson Foundation of Harris
County is sleep disorders in Parkinson's disease.

   Dr. Robert W. Fayle, a clinical assistant professor in the Department of
Neurology at the University of Texas Medical School at Houston, will be the
speaker.

   The meeting will be held from 10 a.m. to noon Saturday at the Tracy Gee
Community Center, 3599 Westcenter Drive, just east of Sam Houston Parkway
between Richmond Avenue and Westpark.

   For more information, call 713-552-0858.


GRAPHIC: Mug: Dr. Brian J. Miles

NOTES: CONTACT US
 Mail information with a contact name and phone number to: Health Page, Houston
Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210. Call 713-220-2550 or fax to
713-220-6806. Send electronic mail to health@chron.com and please include your
e-mail address in the message.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2003


                             718 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 5, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-4

LENGTH: 193 words

HEADLINE: Genetronics shares rise 83 percent; volume up

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:
 Trading of Genetronics has been pretty quiet -- until yesterday.

   Shares of the San Diego company, which have traded below 50 cents for the
past year, surged 83 percent as more than 5.1 million shares changed hands. The
stock closed at 77 cents, up 35 cents.

   The average daily volume recently has been 86,590 shares.

   Brook Riggins, Genetronics vice president of finance and corporate relations,
said he thought the trading was a trickling down of money that has been flowing
into larger companies that have promising cancer drugs.

   Genetronics specializes in electroporation therapy, or using electric pulses
to create temporary openings in cell membranes, theoretically allowing
cancer-fighting drugs or gene therapies to enter and work more effectively.

   The company issued a news release yesterday that said it had two
presentations accepted for a meeting this week of the American Society of Gene
Therapy.

   Money began flowing into biotechs recently, after a spate of drug approvals
and positive clinical results for some high-profile experimental cancer drugs.
The American Stock Exchange's biotech index is up nearly 35 percent this year.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2003


                             719 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 5, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-4

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: Genetronics shares rise 83 percent; volume up

BYLINE: UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:

   Trading of Genetronics has been pretty quiet -- until yesterday. Shares of
the San Diego company, which have traded below 50 cents for the past year,
surged 83 percent as more than 5.1 million shares changed hands. The stock
closed at 77 cents, up 35 cents. The average daily volume recently has been
86,590 shares. Brook Riggins, Genetronics vice president of finance and
corporate relations, said he thought the trading was a trickling down of money
that has been flowing into larger companies that have promising cancer drugs.
Genetronics specializes in electroporation therapy, or using electric pulses to
create temporary openings in cell membranes, theoretically allowing
cancer-fighting drugs or gene therapies to enter and work more effectively. The
company issued a news release yesterday that said it had two presentations
accepted for a meeting this week of the American Society of Gene Therapy. Money
began flowing into biotechs recently, after a spate of drug approvals and
positive clinical results for some high-profile experimental cancer drugs.

   The American Stock Exchange's biotech index is up nearly 35 percent this
year.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             720 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 4, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-2

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: QUEST; SCIENCE BRIEF

BODY:
 Can chimps speak?

   A new study shows that baby chimpanzees share a feature with baby humans that
implies speech must have evolved in two steps rather than one.

   The larynx, or voice box, is positioned lower in people than in other
animals, enabling the complicated acoustics of human speech.  Scientists from
Japan have now shown that the larynx in baby chimps drops down early in infancy
-- a trait once thought unique to humans.

   In people, the hyoid -- a U-shaped bone in the neck -- must drop after the
larynx in a second step that permits speech, the researchers noted.

   Eclipse record eclipsed

   Astronomers have reported the longest eclipse ever observed, but they don't
know what did it.  HMW15, a star in the constellation Perseus, grew dimmer and
then returned to its original brightness over a period of 3 1/2 years.

   Something apparently passed in front of the star during that period, about a
year longer than any previously recorded eclipse.

   Hair linked to hearing

   Michigan scientists have grown new hair cells in the inner ear of adult
guinea pigs, a finding that may eventually lead to new treatments for hearing
loss.  Almost 30 million Americans have hearing loss because the tiny hairs of
the cochlea are lost or damaged from infection, excessive noise or aging.
Vibrations of these hairs transmit sounds to the brain.

   The researchers used gene therapy to the prompt hair growth, using a gene
called Math 1. During development, cells that make use of Math 1 are triggered
to become hair cells.  But researchers do not know yet whether adult cells can
be reprogrammed.


LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2003


                             721 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 3, 2003 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 3; Health & Fitness; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1177 words

HEADLINE: Virtual World of Support for Real World Woes

BYLINE:  By DAVID TULLER

BODY:

   Shannon Pierce was distraught three years ago when she learned that herbaby,
Caroline, had Pierre Robin syndrome, a rare congenital disorder. In her
desperate search for information, Ms. Pierce latched onto an increasingly common
option for people grappling with little-known diseases, an online support group.

        Children with Pierre Robin syndrome are born with facial deformities
like abnormally small lower jaws and cleft palates that can hinder eating and
breathing. When Caroline had a tracheotomy and surgery to repair her palate, Ms.
Pierce's new friends from the Pierre Robin Network Web site,
www.pierrerobin.org, eagerly advised her on the procedures, the length of
recovery and ways to change the tracheotomy tube at home.

    "I'm online daily, corresponding with a few of the other moms," said Ms.
Pierce, who lives near Atlanta. "It's been so important. I'm a nurse, and I'd
never heard of this. The hospital only gave us so much information. Everything
we've gotten has been from the Internet."

   According to the National Institutes of Health's Office of Rare Diseases,
there are about 6,000 ailments that afflict 200,000 or fewer Americans. Some
like Crohn's disease, cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease and Tourette's
syndrome are relatively well known. Others, especially those with just handfuls
of cases, remain obscure even to medical specialists.

   Now, instead of needing to expend huge amounts of time, energy and money to
find information about rare diseases, the sufferers and their relatives can turn
to the Internet, which has drastically changed their landscape in just a few
years.

   "If you've got cancer or arthritis, you can probably find a support group
that meets locally in a church basement," said Abbey Meyers, who is the
president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders (www.rarediseases.org)
in Danbury, Conn. "But if you have a rare disorder, you can feel very isolated.
If you get into a chat room, you're suddenly communicating with people all over
the world who have the same disease."

   That desire for contact was what drove David Hughes of Plano, Tex., to teach
himself the coding to produce Web pages. Mr. Hughes is the father of two young
boys with X-linked alpha-thalassemia mental retardation syndrome.

   With his new skills, Mr. Hughes established a Web site for the disorder in
1999 and started an online support group that has 36 families.

   When he realized that many individuals and families coping with other unusual
ailments lacked similar support, he created the International Rare Disease
Support Network (www.raredisorders.com), which links people to more than 1,000
online groups for specific disorders.

   Mr. Hughes's sons, Barak, 9, and Zechariah, 7, have severe physical and
mental disabilities. Although children like his can bond with others and laugh
easily, Mr. Hughes said, they do not generally learn how to speak.

   "Most of them can't communicate," Mr. Hughes said. "They can't tell you when
they hurt. There are all kinds of sleeping and eating problems, problems with
the school districts and with doctors. What's good about a support group on the
Internet is you get to share your frustration with people who know exactly what
you're talking about, and you can do it at any time, 24 hours a day."

   The Internet has been vital in other ways, too. Because only a small part of
government and other research funds are spent on disorders that affect few
people, patients' advocates use the Web sites to raise money, lobby officials
and drive the research agenda for the particular illnesses, all at a small
fraction of the cost of printing and mailing letters and brochures.

   "The Internet," said Dr. Vicki Ratner, an orthopedic surgeon and the founder
of the Interstitial Cystitis Association, "has been crucial in terms of
disseminating information not only to the public, but to the medical community,
as well."

   Dr. Ratner established her group after learning 20 years ago that she had the
disease, an inflammation of the bladder wall that affects mostly women. It can
cause excruciating pain and a constant sensation of having to urinate, but
treatment options are limited. Modifying the diet by eliminating possible
irritants like coffee, alcohol and spicy foods is often the most effective
approach.

   In addition to a list of support groups, the association's Web site,
www.ichelp.com, includes reports from scientific conferences; information on
clinical trials; articles on coping with the disease; summaries of studies in
peer-review journals; profiles of patients and interviews with them; online
surveys, including a current one on how it affects sexual activity; recipes for
restricted diets; and unusual but useful tips like ways to grow low-acid
tomatoes and where to buy the seeds.

   Some Internet sites were created solely to harness technology in the search
for medical help.

   In 1999, Phil and Tricia Milto learned that their son Nathan, who was then 4,
had late infantile Batten disease, an extremely rare genetic syndrome that leads
to blindness, mental deterioration, the loss of motor skills and, ultimately,
death. In his effort to learn more, Mr. Milto scanned all of his son's medical
records online and sent them using mass e-mail messages to hundreds of doctors
and scientists.

   "Early on, I recognized that this was a vehicle that enabled us to get to
people that I couldn't have gotten on the phone," said Mr. Milto, who owns a dry
cleaning business in Greenwood, Ind. "It's difficult for someone to talk to the
parent of a sick kid. So they're more likely to respond if they can e-mail you
at 2 in the morning."

   The Miltos, whose youngest son, P. J., also has the disease, formed the
Nathan's Battle Foundation and worked on the organization's Web site,
www.nathansbattle.com, to plan scientific gatherings, promote promising
treatment possibilities and raise money for gene therapy and stem cell research.

   "I'm just a parent trying to do the best for my kids," said Mr. Milto.

   Even though the Internet improves communication among people who might face
their problems alone, it can have drawbacks. Yet many of the people who rely on
it also seem to recognize its limits. Acknowledging the problem of irresponsible
postings, for example, Dr. Ratner said she would not post medical information
that had not been screened and approved.

   The wealth of online information can also lead to faulty diagnoses, said
Hollie L. Swain, founder and president of the Association for Glycogen Storage
Disease in Durant, Iowa. The symptoms of glycogen storage disease, a hereditary
illness that involves the inability to metabolize sugars properly, can vary
widely and may mimic other disorders, Ms. Swain said. Some visitors to the
group's Web site, www.agsdus.org, read about it and come to the wrong
conclusions, she said.

   "I'll get people who will say, 'I think I have this,' " added Ms. Swain, a
court clerk in Durant whose adult son has the disorder. "These are people who
haven't felt well, and they're perusing whatever kind of diseases may be out
there. They're looking for something to have."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Hughes with his wife, Linda, and their sons, Zechariah,
left, and Barak, whose rare disorder is the focus of an Internet support group.
(Matt Rourke for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2003


                             722 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 3, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 862 words

HEADLINE: UCSD will lead effort to fathom schizophrenia; Genes at root of traits
to be studied

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 UCSD will lead a consortium in a $20 million national study to solve the
mystery of schizophrenia by identifying the genes that cause behavioral traits
associated with the mental illness.

   "Instead of identifying the genes responsible for schizophrenia, we're aiming
to find the genes responsible for six or more specific brain functions that make
one more vulnerable to develop the disease," said Dr. David Braff, a professor
of psychiatry at the University of California San Diego.

   Braff also is the director of the new Consortium on the Genetics of
Schizophrenia.

   For example, Braff said yesterday, people with schizophrenia can't filter out
everyday sounds as effectively as mentally healthy people.  They also have poor
attention spans and have trouble recalling lists or organizing a random
assortment of letters and numbers in ascending or descending order.

   Sometimes their close relatives, although not afflicted with schizophrenia,
may have exhibited some of these traits.

   It is theorized that schizophrenia may be caused by a cluster of alterations
on several genes, each changing a specific protein and resulting in a functional
defect.  Relatives may share some of these genetic defects, but not enough to
cause schizophrenia.

   While some genes are believed to play a role, no one knows exactly to what
extent or how, Braff said, and there is no brain imaging test that can diagnose
a person with schizophrenia.

   The study eventually may lead to new ways to treat or prevent schizophrenia,
which affects about 2 million people in the United States and costs an estimated
$40 billion a year.  It often does not manifest itself until the teenage years,
for reasons that are unclear.

   Symptoms include imaginary voices or visions and paranoia that can last a
lifetime.  Less than 10 percent of its victims are able to hold a regular job,
and even fewer can live independently.

   Braff said he believes that while genes may play a strong role in
schizophrenia, the disease also requires an assault on the developing brain,
such as an infection or accident while a child is in the uterus or just after
birth.

   One trait seen in people with schizophrenia as well as in some of their
siblings is distorted processing of background noise.

   When a normal person hears a bell chime 10 times, his brain responds a little
less to each succeeding sound.  The brains of schizophrenics and some relatives
process each chime as if it were the first.

   One clue to the puzzle may be that 60 percent to 80 percent of people with
schizophrenia smoke cigarettes, a much higher percentage than for people who do
not have the disease.  Braff suggested that in smoking, schizophrenics may be
"self-medicating," replacing nicotine to help regulate a brain signaling process
called P50 suppression.

   It is P50 suppression that helps normal people distinguish between a first
chime and a second, third or 10th chime.

   The researchers will lean heavily on the fact that schizophrenia and many of
these traits are highly inherited, Braff said.  If either a mother or father has
the disease, each child has a 10 percent chance of getting it.  If both parents
have the disease, the child has a 45 percent chance.  If a nonidentical twin or
a sibling is born with it, the other sibling has a 4 to 12 percent chance of
having it.

   Identical twins have a 65 percent chance of sharing schizophrenia.  The fact
that it's not a 100 percent chance is seen to indicate the necessity for a
second stimulus, such as an illness or traumatic event to a developing brain.

   Braff hopes that by using siblings to zero in on genetic links to shared
defect traits, scientists may be able to learn which genes are closely
associated with schizophrenia.  Eventually, he said, they may tailor genetic
therapy or perhaps even certain drugs to "normalize" certain functional defects.

   Irving Gottesman, psychiatric geneticist at the University of Minnesota,
applauded the effort as "a long overdue strategy" to get at the root of the
mental disease.

   The project, which is funded by the National Institute of Mental Health in
Bethesda, Md., the arm of the federal government that funds mental health
research, will involve the use of brain-wave measuring tools, electrodes placed
on facial muscles, probes of eye movement and several tests of working and
verbal memory.

   The study will take five years and involve more than 420 patients with
schizophrenia and 1,300 of their siblings or parents, Braff said.  An additional
525 healthy people will be studied as controls.

   The patients, their siblings and the healthy controls will range in age from
18 to 65.

   Besides UCSD, the centers involved in the project are Harvard Medical School
in Cambridge, Mass.; Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City; UCLA
School of Medicine; the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver;
the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia; and the
University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle.

   People with schizophrenia or their families who wish to participate in the
project can call (619) 543-7201.

   Cheryl Clark: (619) 542-4573; cheryl.clark@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2003


                             723 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 3, 2003 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: UCSD will lead effort to fathom schizophrenia;
Genes at root of traits to be studied

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD will lead a consortium in a $20 million national study to solve the
mystery of schizophrenia by identifying the genes that cause behavioral traits
associated with the mental illness. "Instead of identifying the genes
responsible for schizophrenia, we're aiming to find the genes responsible for
six or more specific brain functions that make one more vulnerable to develop
the disease," said Dr. David Braff, a professor of psychiatry at the University
of California San Diego. Braff also is the director of the new Consortium on the
Genetics of Schizophrenia. For example, Braff said yesterday, people with
schizophrenia can't filter out everyday sounds as effectively as mentally
healthy people.

   They also have poor attention spans and have trouble recalling lists or
organizing a random assortment of letters and numbers in ascending or descending
order. Sometimes their close relatives, although not afflicted with
schizophrenia, may have exhibited some of these traits. It is theorized that
schizophrenia may be caused by a cluster of alterations on several genes, each
changing a specific protein and resulting in a functional defect.

   Relatives may share some of these genetic defects, but not enough to cause
schizophrenia. While some genes are believed to play a role, no one knows
exactly to what extent or how, Braff said, and there is no brain imaging test
that can diagnose a person with schizophrenia. The study eventually may lead to
new ways to treat or prevent schizophrenia, which affects about 2 million people
in the United States and costs an estimated $40 billion a year.

   It often does not manifest itself until the teenage years, for reasons that
are unclear. Symptoms include imaginary voices or visions and paranoia that can
last a lifetime.

   Less than 10 percent of its victims are able to hold a regular job, and even
fewer can live independently. Braff said he believes that while genes may play a
strong role in schizophrenia, the disease also requires an assault on the
developing brain, such as an infection or accident while a child is in the
uterus or just after birth. One trait seen in people with schizophrenia as well
as in some of their siblings is distorted processing of background noise. When a
normal person hears a bell chime 10 times, his brain responds a little less to
each succeeding sound.

   The brains of schizophrenics and some relatives process each chime as if it
were the first. One clue to the puzzle may be that 60 percent to 80 percent of
people with schizophrenia smoke cigarettes, a much higher percentage than for
people who do not have the disease.

   Braff suggested that in smoking, schizophrenics may be "self-medicating,"
replacing nicotine to help regulate a brain signaling process called P50
suppression. It is P50 suppression that helps normal people distinguish between
a first chime and a second, third or 10th chime. The researchers will lean
heavily on the fact that schizophrenia and many of these traits are highly
inherited, Braff said.

   If either a mother or father has the disease, each child has a 10 percent
chance of getting it. If both parents have the disease, the child has a 45
percent chance.

   If a nonidentical twin or a sibling is born with it, the other sibling has a
4 to 12 percent chance of having it. Identical twins have a 65 percent chance of
sharing schizophrenia.

   The fact that it's not a 100 percent chance is seen to indicate the necessity
for a second stimulus, such as an illness or traumatic event to a developing
brain. Braff hopes that by using siblings to zero in on genetic links to shared
defect traits, scientists may be able to learn which genes are closely
associated with schizophrenia.

   Eventually, he said, they may tailor genetic therapy or perhaps even certain
drugs to "normalize" certain functional defects. Irving Gottesman, psychiatric
geneticist at the University of Minnesota, applauded the effort as "a long
overdue strategy" to get at the root of the mental disease. The project, which
is funded by the National Institute of Mental Health in Bethesda, Md., the arm
of the federal government that funds mental health research, will involve the
use of brain-wave measuring tools, electrodes placed on facial muscles, probes
of eye movement and several tests of working and verbal memory. The study will
take five years and involve more than 420 patients with schizophrenia and 1,300
of their siblings or parents, Braff said.

   An additional 525 healthy people will be studied as controls. The patients,
their siblings and the healthy controls will range in age from 18 to 65. Besides
UCSD, the centers involved in the project are Harvard Medical School in
Cambridge, Mass.; Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York City; UCLA School
of Medicine; the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver; the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine in Philadelphia; and the
University of Washington School of Medicine in Seattle. People with
schizophrenia or their families who wish to participate in the project can call
(619) 543-7201. Cheryl Clark: (619) 542-4573; cheryl.clark@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             724 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 1, 2003 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Business Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS;
City of Hope Is Among Top Research Centers

BODY:

   Editor's note: After discussions with Times editors about a May 2 article,
the City of Hope was invited to write a letter to provide some important context
for readers.

   In the article "City of Hope Names New CEO," the Los Angeles Times painted a
narrow -- and therefore potentially misleading -- picture of City of Hope. We
appreciate The Times' invitation to respond with a more comprehensive view of
our organization's scientific programs and financial status.

   City of Hope is one of the world's leading biomedical research and treatment
centers for those with cancer, diabetes and other life-threatening diseases. Our
reputation -- recognized by our patients and philanthropic donors -- has been
established by national scientific and professional peers who regularly review
City of Hope's research programs and its contributions to scientific literature.
This external review, the benchmark for evaluating research institutions,
provides an objective view of City of Hope's virtues.

   The most prominent of peer-review groups direct the federal government's
National Institutes of Health research networks and funding. After nationwide
competitions in which these peer reviewers assessed many institutions, City of
Hope has been invited to join a number of important NIH-sponsored research
networks and centers. For example, in 1998, City of Hope was named one of 39
Comprehensive Cancer Centers of the National Cancer Institute. This designation
recognizes our excellent laboratory and clinical research in cancer, as well as
our important community outreach activities directed toward cancer prevention
and control. The designation [recently] was formally renewed for the next five
years.

   In 2001, the NIH selected us as one of the ten institutions that constitute
the National Islet Cell Transplantation Network. Through the cooperative
research of this group, we will make important progress in the search for a
diabetes cure. Also in 2001, we became one of the five National Gene Vector
Laboratories of the NIH, which provides important technical support for the
national gene therapy effort. In 2002, we were one of 14 institutions asked to
join the National Bone Marrow Transplantation Research Network.

   In the past six years, City of Hope has more than doubled its peer-reviewed
research grants. Indeed, we rank in the top 5% of the thousands of institutions
nationally that receive funds from the NIH.

   All these designations recognize the outstanding research conducted at City
of Hope. We have published in the highest tier of international scientific
journals significant discoveries in human genetics and gene therapy, bone marrow
transplantation, immunology and immunotherapy, experimental therapeutics of
cancer, and molecular biology and molecular medicine.

   One further measure of our work's importance has been our success in
licensing City of Hope technology to the biotechnology industry for the
manufacture of significant drugs that translate our science into human benefit.
This began with the discovery of synthetic insulin and human growth hormone and
now continues with a host of anti-cancer drugs, such as Herceptin, Rituxan and
AvastinTM, that all employ a platform technology in monoclonal antibody design
co-invented by City of Hope scientists. In 2000, we ranked ninth among all U.S.
academic institutions for annual royalty income. This income is reinvested in
our research programs.

   The financial health of City of Hope has allowed us to support an
extraordinary level of patient care and research initiatives in our National
Medical Center subsidiary. The NMC regularly and deliberately incurs a deficit
because we choose to conduct a high level of clinical research, putting more
than double the number of patients on clinical trials than the average cancer
center. We deliberately choose to maintain an exceptionally high level of
patient care, reflected in a 2002 accreditation survey of the hospital in which
we received the top score in the nation. Finally, we deliberately choose to
support a significant level of care for underinsured patients. We support such
mission-driven activities through the generous donations of our supporters and
the growth of grants and royalties described above.

   Thus, in the aggregate, City of Hope's consolidated operating results
continue to show substantial surpluses ($12 million last year), and we have
increased our assets by 6% yearly for the past five years, triple the rate of
growth of our liabilities.

   The real story about City of Hope is that, in the face of a very difficult
local managed-care economy, a troubled economy and a highly competitive research
funding environment, we continue to advance our mission of providing outstanding
patient care and contributing important advances to the national biomedical
research effort.

   Michael A. Friedman, MD

   President, City of Hope

CORRECTION-DATE: June 1, 2003

CORRECTION:

   City of Hope -- In a May 2 article in the Business section, City of Hope
National Medical Center in Duarte was incorrectly referred to as the nation's
third-largest cancer center, which it is not; by various measures, many others
are larger. Also, a letter by the president of City of Hope in today's Business
section provides important context about the institution's scientific programs
and financial status.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2003


                             725 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2003 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 1, 2003 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 984 words

HEADLINE: Science races to outrun SARS

BYLINE: DANIEL Q. HANEY, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Fifteen or 20 years to create a vaccine from scratch is considered quite
speedy. So the federal government's blueprint for a shot to stop the SARS
epidemic in a mere three years seems positively head-snapping.

   Can it be done?

   Certainly, says Gary Nabel, chief of the Vaccine Research Center at the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. "If everything went
perfectly," he qualifies. "If all the stars were aligned."

   The stars almost never align precisely in medical research. But if they do,
Nabel says scientists will finish all the basic lab work, creating the vaccine
and testing it in animals, in just one year.

   Then they will spend two more years trying it out on people to make sure it
works, turn the results over to the Food and Drug Administration and be done.

    No vaccine in modern times has gone from start to finish nearly that fast.
But even if Nabel's time line proves unrealistic, his willingness to state it
out loud shows how seriously the government takes SARS.

   The strategy for changing the pace from glacial to galactic: Forget solving
problems one at a time.

    At Nabel's institute, two teams are working separately to create possible
vaccines. One sticks to the time-tested approach of making them with dead or
weakened viruses. The other builds them with up-to-the-second gene-splicing
tools.

   Instead of dealing with big technical issues in the usual one-by-one order,
scientists will jump into all of them at once. For instance, they are gearing up
production of newly minted vaccines at the same time they figure out how to test
them in animals and tease apart exactly how the human immune system does the job
of fighting off SARS on its own.

   "Parallel tracking," Nabel calls this. It's also called science in a hurry.

   Why the rush? Why work so hard to defend against a disease that is just a few
months old, that has yet to kill a single person in the United States?

   No one knows how bad SARS will become, whether it will burn out or continue
to spread, even exactly how it makes people so sick. But the consensus among the
country's top health officials is that it would be foolish to wait and see.

   Even if SARS is somehow contained in China and Taiwan, many experts doubt it
will ever be wiped from the planet, even though this is the World Health
Organization's goal. More likely, they say, the virus will come and go, perhaps
in some seasonal pattern, maybe by chance.

   No matter what happens in the next few months, federal officials promise to
keep working on a vaccine so the world will be ready whenever, wherever SARS
returns.

   "We need a vaccine. There's no question about it," says Anthony Fauci, head
of the infectious disease institute. "This is potentially disastrous enough that
we can't just hope it will go away and stay away."

   The government is not alone in this. It is encouraging private vaccine makers
to take a crack at SARS. In April, Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy
Thompson hosted a meeting of vaccine scientists, where government researchers
shared what they knew about the virus and promised them samples to work with.

   "They more or less said, 'We want your entrepreneurial brains working on
this,'" says Una Ryan, president of Avant Immunotherapeutics.

   Labs from Hong Kong to Canada are also tackling SARS vaccines, and Fauci said
his institute will sign contracts with up to a dozen companies to help with
development.

   At this point, however, the single biggest question is still unanswered: Is a
SARS vaccine even possible?

   Emilio Emini, head of vaccine development at Merck, is among those trying to
answer this. For now he refuses even to chance a guess.

   "This is a new virus. So much is not understood," he says. "It's a big black
box."

   Still, Nabel says he knows of at least three major pharmaceutical companies
besides Merck, the world's largest vaccine maker, that have gone to work on
SARS, even though no one can be sure whether there will ever be a market for a
vaccine.

   Their success will depend on figuring out a way to train the body's immune
system to see the SARS virus quickly, to recognize it as dangerous and to kill
it before it makes people sick.

   Although this approach has subdued some of the world's most persistent
infections, there are many notable exceptions. Malaria and tuberculosis, for
instance, have resisted decades of vaccine research. And of course scientists
cannot forget their humbling failure at a vaccine for HIV, the most studied
virus in history.

   Nevertheless, one strong clue at least gives them some hope: Most people who
catch the SARS virus eventually fight it off and get better.

   "That means their immune response is working, and that means a vaccine is
possible," says Louis Picker, associate director of Oregon Health & Science
University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute. "It's just a matter of finding
the approach that will mimic that response without being too dangerous."

   Worry that a vaccine will be too dangerous is one reason development takes so
long. No one wants to make healthy people sick by giving them shots intended to
prevent illness. So typically vaccines are tested painstakingly on thousands of
volunteers over many years to prove they do far more good than harm.

   Even with this, dangers may come to light only when they get into routine
use. Four years ago, the first rotavirus vaccine was pulled from the market
after just one year. The shots prevent childhood diarrhea, but they also turned
out to cause life-threatening bowel obstructions in one in 10,000 recipients.

   Scientists are especially cautious because of their experience with vaccines
aimed at animal relatives of the SARS virus. SARS is a coronavirus, the same
virus family that causes serious diseases in pigs and other animals. While shots
work well against some of these, they occasionally go disastrously bad. A
vaccine for the feline coronavirus actually results in worse disease, not less,
when cats catch the virus.

GRAPHIC: 1. Gary Nabel, left, chief of the Vaccine Research Center at the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, discusses the SARS
vaccine drive with Anthony Fauci, head of the institute.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             726 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                   May 31, 2003 Saturday, Home Final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: FACULTY CAN'T LET RESEARCH DEMEAN TEACHING

BYLINE: Jack P. Calareso,

BODY:

   Does corporate-funded university research benefit all involved -- the
university and students, the funding agency and the public? Yes, but only when
teaching and ethics are not sacrificed for notoriety and profits.

   Those who oppose corporate-funded academic research warn of what can happen
when researchers wear two hats: objective evaluator and company spokesperson.
Corporations won't continue to fund work that is critical of them or
unprofitable. This can influence the outcome of the research when insufficient
tests are performed or the benefits of a finding are overstated.

   The scientific community has responded by saying that no amount of corporate
influence can corrupt an honest researcher who is trained to seek the truth.
This noble sentiment is not always demonstrated in the research community, so
safeguards must be in place.

   In an interview in The Scientist , an international news magazine,
Christopher Scott, a former administrator at the University of California at San
Francisco, said that while companies benefit by getting a "gold standard
research imprint," in pharmaceutical research, paving the way for faster federal
approval, the university gains access to technology and materials that it
couldn't otherwise afford. "The entire Silicon Valley was built on the backs of
these types of relationships. Where the danger comes in is when universities try
to become too corporate in their approach, aggressively taking equity positions
in companies," Scott said.

   Researchers who receive grants through the National Science Foundation for
the Public Health Service, which includes the National Institutes of Health, are
required to disclose significant financial interests that could affect their
research. The American Society of Gene Therapy and the American Society for
Human Genetics have called on their members not to own stock in companies that
fund their research.

   Just as researchers have the duty to identify potential conflicts of
interest, higher-education institutions have an obligation to safeguard their
integrity. Most universities have policies that direct the extent of corporate
influence on research. Researchers at Johns Hopkins University must have
approval before accepting a fiduciary role with a company, if such a position is
related to their academic duties.

   Corporate research contracts often require researchers to maintain secrecy
about their work, to ensure that the corporation will gain profitable inventions
from the research. This prevents peer review of research, which is fundamental
to the search for truth. In its Statement on Funding Research, the American
Association of University Professors called for faculty to play a key role in
drafting and carrying out policies designed to guard against conflicts of
interest. "The primary responsibility for such efforts resides with the academic
community and especially with the faculty," the association said.

   An equally important concern is the university's ethical responsibility to
educate students. A legitimate question is whether universities emphasize
research at the expense of teaching and student learning. Researchers at many
universities are rewarded for their nonteaching activities with promotions,
compensation and tenure. This is based on their productivity -- articles
published in peer-review periodicals or the scope of their research activities.

   While research is important, universities need to place a greater emphasis on
quality teaching, which in turn must weigh more heavily in decisions on merit
raises and faculty status. The price of research cannot be paid at the expense
of students' classroom experience, which is the heart of the educational
process.

   In response to this issue, a number of teaching centers have sprouted at
universities across the country, including Stanford University and the
University of Michigan. Unfortunately, the need for more teaching resources and
a clearer focus on the centrality of teaching comes at a time when universities
face serious financial cutbacks.

   While teaching possibly will figure more heavily into faculty tenure
decisions, in most cases research will hold the most weight. As a result,
faculty have the primary responsibility for safeguarding research. Sometimes,
the answer to a question of conducting research might need to be no.

   Jack P. Calareso is president of Ohio Dominican University .

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2003


                             727 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      May 29, 2003 Thursday Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1090 words

HEADLINE: Docs here pioneers in new bypass surgery aid

BYLINE: Tim Bonfield, STAFF

BODY:

   By Tim Bonfield

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   Researchers say the latest way to prevent a serious complication from
coronary bypass surgery could be a good soaking.

   Two Tristate hospitals have begun recruiting patients who need bypass
operations to participate in a nationwide study of a genetic therapy that could
sharply reduce complications and make bypass vein grafts last years longer.

   Soaking the leg vein often used in bypass surgeries in a special solution
could make it less vulnerable to closure later, which can lead to health
problems and even second bypass operations.

   The soaking therapy - called "E2F Decoy" - could be one of the biggest
advances in years for an operation performed on more than 300,000 Americans a
year. It's big enough that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration recently put
the product on its fast-track approval process.

   Now, more than 100 medical centers nationwide are involved in final testing
of the product in up to 3,000 patients. As many as 40 Tristate patients could be
enrolled in the study this year through Good Samaritan or Bethesda North
hospitals, the only local hospitals participating.

   "The data we've seen so far is compelling," said Dr. J. Michael Smith, a
cardiothoracic surgeon at Good Samaritan who recently has started using a robot
to perform heart surgery. "Not only can this therapy prevent early closure, it
could make vein grafts last almost indefinitely."

   Blocking inflammation

   The technology at the heart of the E2F Decoy reflects the boom in advances
flowing from research into genetic therapies for many kinds of disease.

   In this case, researchers at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston and
Stanford University in California discovered a way to block an inflammation
reaction that has been noted for years as a complication of bypass surgery.

   In about 70 percent of traditional bypass operations, surgeons harvest a
segment of vein from the patient's leg to use as a new artery that allows blood
to flow around a blocked coronary artery. Bypass operations also can be done
using a mammary artery.

   The leg vein, which doesn't carry blood under the same pressure or volume as
vessels near the heart, naturally has thinner walls than coronary arteries. In
reaction to the sudden change in function, to the trauma of being cut from the
leg, and possibly to other factors, the interior lining of the vein graft begins
to grow and swell.

   For most patients, the swelling settles down within weeks after surgery,
resulting in a thicker vein wall that mimics an artery. But for some, the
swelling doesn't stop soon enough, and can close off the bypass.

   As many as 15 percent of bypass patients suffer vein graft closure with three
months to a year of their operation. Another 10 percent to 12 percent suffer
graft closure five to 10 years later, Smith said.

   Graft failures can result in chest pain, loss of energy and other symptoms.
In rare situations the complication can lead to heart attack and death, but more
commonly the problem is caught soon enough to perform an angioplasty or a second
bypass operation.

   Repeat bypass operations are not desirable because patients must endure a
risky surgery in a weakened state of health and because they add to the overall
costs of health care.

   "Getting a bypass is a road you only want to go down once," said Dr. Michael
Mack, president and chairman of the Cardiopulmonary Research Science and
Technology Institute in Dallas, where 90 patients already are enrolled in the
E2F Decoy trial.

   "Potentially this is a big deal because it could make bypasses last longer,
and that would have a major impact on people with heart disease," Mack said.

   Various medications have been studied to control the inflammation process,
but they have not been effective because they block only a few of at least 12
known biological "pathways" that can trigger the inflammation, Smith said.

   The E2F Decoy appears to block all the pathways at once.

   How it works

   After harvesting the vein segment, surgeons place the graft in a thin glass
tube filled with a special solution containing the E2F Decoy.

   The decoy is a genetically engineered segment of DNA that binds to cells in
the vein graft. The decoy does nothing to the cell. However, it occupies
receptors that normally would catch a human "messenger" protein that is known to
trigger rapid cell growth and inflammation.

   "It's not gene therapy in the truest sense of the word because you are not
injecting genetic material that changes a person's DNA," Mack said. "But it is
genetically related because you are blocking the function of a gene within the
cells of the vein wall that make a product that turns on the unwanted cell
growth."

   To properly infuse the cells with the E2F decoy, the solution must be soaked
into the vein under pressure. After a 10-minute soak, surgeons complete the
bypass operation by connecting the vein from the aorta to a point beyond the
blocked coronary artery.

   In small-scale clinical trials, the therapy reduced the rate of early bypass
complications by about 40 percent. Side effects have been minimal. .

   It will require several more years of study to measure the product's
long-term effect. But any improvement would be welcome, Smith said, because more
than 30 percent of patients who get bypass operations wind up coming back within
10 years for another heart procedure, including angioplasty and replacement
bypass operations.

   The E2F Decoy is made by Corgentech Inc., a California biotech company
founded in 1999. Since publishing early findings in 1999 in the British medical
journal Lancet, the company has attracted more than $50 million in development
financing from investors.

   In addition to studying the product for coronary bypass operations,
Corgentech is researching whether the product will work in leg bypass operations
and in vein grafts used by kidney dialysis patients.

   The coronary bypass trial is being coordinated by the Duke Clinical Research
Institute at Duke University Medical Center, and by the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons.

   In Cincinnati, about 20 patients will be enrolled at Good Samaritan and
another 20 at Bethesda North. The clinical trial is a "double-blind" study,
which means that neither patients nor their doctors will know if the patient
gets the actual E2F Decoy solution or a placebo solution made from saline.
Results will be measured by angiograms performed 12 months after surgery.

   E-mail tbonfield@enquirer.com

   The Cincinnati Enquirer/GAIL KOCH

   A new step in bypass surgery

   GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2003


                             728 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      May 28, 2003 Wednesday SOUTH EDITION

SECTION: METRO, Pg.S-2

LENGTH: 452 words

BODY:

   Four Bethel Park High School students captured first- and second-place awards
at the Pittsburgh Regional Science and Engineering Fair held recently at Heinz
Field.

    Junior Shan Gaur received a perfect score for his research on "Genetic
Susceptibility to Prostate Cancer: The Tobago Study." He will advance to the
state competition at Penn State University this month.

    Additionally, he was chosen to represent Pittsburgh at the Intel
International Science and Engineering Fair in Cleveland, considered to be the
Olympics of science competitions, where he will compete with students from 40
countries.

    Also capturing a first-place award was senior Joanna Armstrong for her
project, "The Effect of Different Insect Repellents on Carbonic Acid." She was
recognized as an Honorary Scientist for her five years of participation in this
event and will also compete at the state level at Penn State.

    Receiving second-place awards were two freshmen: Christopher Nagel for "Does
Age Influence the Stroop Effect?" and Andrew Armstrong for "The Effect of the
Magnifying Lens on Solar Cells."

    *

    Louis A. Klos, a senior at Upper St. Clair High School, has been elected to
the James Monroe Foundation's National Advisory Board.

    The foundation, founded in 1927 by President James Monroe's
great-great-grandson, supports the James Monroe Law Office Museum and Memorial
Library in Virginia.

    Klos is acquisitions manager for his family's collection of manuscripts and
historic documents that are housed at Skibo Centre in Carnegie.

    Earlier this year, on a visit to Richmond, Va., he donated to the Monroe
Foundation an original December 1823 printing of the Monroe Doctrine.

    *

    Two Independence Middle School students captured the top spots in their
respective grade levels at the recent Fayette Invitational Scrabble Tournament
at California University of Pennsylvania.

    Abbie Kovell won the eighth-grade division and Roma Amin won the
seventh-grade division.

    *

    Folmont Property Owners Association in Somerset County asked Bethel Park
High School students to design a pamphlet for their association.

    Senior Rachel Havelka's design was chosen. She won $100 for her brochure.

    Students in the Desktop Publishing class were asked to create a tri-fold
pamphlet that would include the association's regulations, building permit
information, the history of the area and other useful information.

    *

    Two Bethel Park High School sophomores received first place at the fourth
High School Bioethics Web Fair and Competition, sponsored by the University of
Pennsylvania.

    Hannah McGhee wrote a paper on "Benefits of Gene Therapy" and Mike Pahler
wrote about "Gene Therapy/Breakthrough or Failure?"

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2003


                             729 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              May 26, 2003 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part 6; Features Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy with angioplasty may prevent bypass;
A new study finds that the procedure increases oxygen-carrying blood to the
heart.

BYLINE: Jane E. Allen, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   When it comes to restoring blood flow through blocked coronary arteries,
angioplasty works well. But there may be a way to make it more effective.

   New research has found that performing gene therapy at the same time can
further improve the amount of oxygen-carrying blood nourishing the heart muscle.

   Although gene therapy previously has been tried during open-heart surgery,
the new study was the first to deliver gene therapy into the heart during
minimally invasive angioplasties. The promising results suggest that patients
with very serious coronary artery disease might be able to avoid risky bypass
surgery.

   At the same time that the researchers snaked a tiny balloon-tipped catheter
into the arteries through a small incision in the groin to open up blockages,
they also delivered copies of a gene for vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). VEGF enters heart cells and promotes the creation of new blood vessels.

   The study involved 103 angioplasty patients, ages 38 to 75. In 37 patients,
doctors delivered the growth factor using a disabled adenovirus that can get
into cells and multiply without making the patient sick. They gave 28 the growth
factor through fat cells called liposomes; 38 patients got a saltwater placebo.

   Although blood flow improved for all three groups, those who got the growth
factor through the adenovirus had significantly improved blood flow in the heart
wall, said lead researcher Dr. Seppo Yla-Herttuala, a professor of molecular
medicine at the University of Kuopio in Finland. He and his colleagues believe
the growth factor caused the sprouting of tiny blood vessels called capillaries
in the heart wall, increasing the blood supply.

   The findings were reported in the May 14 online edition of Circulation:
Journal of the American Heart Assn. In an accompanying editorial, a pioneering
cardiovascular gene therapy research team at Tufts University School of
Medicine, led by Dr. Douglas Losordo, called the results provocative. A major
complication of angioplasty has been the formation of scar tissue in response to
damage to the artery walls. Drug-coated stents have been one means of reducing
the re-clogging.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2003


                             730 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 23, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 765 words

BODY:

   LeBron James already was livin' pretty large from all reports, or at least he
had ascended to that level of celebrity at which his Hummer was equipped with
three TVs.

    Not at all bad for what is still essentially a schoolboy hoopster from
Akron, Ohio.

    So I was just trying to think, you know, of how much more comfortable James
will be now that Nike is preparing something like $90 million for him to join
its celebrated stable of shoe pimps.

    Perhaps when General Motors gets tired of marketing the Hummer, James could
be taking delivery on the first Bradley Fighting Vehicle designed for street
use, with maybe four or five TVs and wireless access to the nuclear launch
codes.

    No one can accurately project how wealthy and powerful James can become even
before he finds his way to an NBA training camp, but if there is anyone who can
fuel-inject the formula, it's a shoe company executive with a market share to
protect.

    It's no surprise that Nike won the James Derby over Reebok and adidas. Nike
is the established trigger for this kind of societal cancer, a name trusted by
athletes the world over who can't ever have enough.

    Nike, overcompensating the overcompensated since 1983.

    We see figures like $90 million so frequently on these sports pages we've
become almost impenetrable to their significance. Here are some ways I could
think of to spend $90 million, that is, if someone else hadn't thought of them
first.

    When the United States finally flicked the lights on in Afghanistan and the
Taliban cockroaches fled in panic, the cost of re-establishing order in a
bomb-cratered country fell in part to The World Bank. There were three agencies
established to address the most urgent humanitarian needs, one called Emergency
Educational and Rehabilitation Development, one called Emergency Community
Empowerment, and one called Emergency Infrastructure Reconstruction.

    For all of that, the World Bank paid roughly $90 million.

    When Cuba gathers its emergency resources and comes to the international
marketplace for food products, it is one of the United States' most reliable
annual customers. It spends roughly $90 million.

    Last year, Congress released a first appropriation to track the health
impact on the thousands of Ground Zero workers who risked their lives in the
terrible hours and days and weeks after 9-11. It was designed to monitor the
effects of dozens of environmental toxins like cement and glass dust, asbestos,
lead and PCBs on rescue and recovery personnel. At that point, there was only
enough money to monitor some 8,000 of as many as 30,000 workers.

    Congress finally agreed that to even come close to adequately funding the
World Trade Center Worker and Volunteer Medical Screening Program, it should
spend another $90 million.

    In fiscal year 2004, Red Storm is likely to come into operation, which
doesn't mean an immediate upgrade of the basketball program at St. John's. Red
Storm is a supercomputer developed by the Department of Energy's Sandia National
Laboratories and Cray Inc. Red Storm makes it possible to understand in minutes
the complex implications of nuclear weapons stockpile stewardship. On its Web
site, Sandia Vice President for Nuclear Weapons Programs Tom Hunter, who I don't
believe even has a shoe contract, said, "This computer will allow modeling and
simulation of problems that were only recently thought impractical, if not
impossible. Calculations that would have taken months only a dozen years ago
will now be done in a matter of minutes."

    Red Storm, with what's called a "theoretical peak performance" of 40
trillion calculations per second, cost roughly $90 million.

    There are approximately 126 Department of Defense facilities according to a
recent report, one of them in Pennsylvania, that need massive expenditures to
address the problem of hazardous waste contamination. You could clean up one of
them for roughly $90 million.

    Last June, the U.S. Agency for International Development released about five
years' worth of funding to expand social marketing programs designed to curb the
spread of AIDS. Administered in cooperation with AIDSMark, the programs deliver
voluntary counseling and testing services and sexually transmitted infection
services in 29 countries.

    You could fund most of that for $90 million.

    Or, as you see in the world's most opulent consumer culture, you can take
$90 million and put it in the pocket of an 18-year-old for wearing a swoosh on
his shoe.

    In too many American boardrooms, that makes perfect sense.

NOTES:
Gene Collier can be reached at gcollier@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1283.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2003


                             731 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 23, 2003, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 961 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   DirecTV, Dish try to block tax

   Satellite television companies are rallying to stop a move to add an 8
percent California tax on their services -- even before the proposal makes its
way to the Legislature.  A commission looking into tax policy is considering a
handful of recommendations, including the tax on satellite television, as a
means to raise revenue for the cash-strapped state.  A proposal to add a 5
percent tax on satellite customers failed in the Legislature last year.

   If an 8 percent tax were passed, the average satellite customer's bill could
increase about $5 a month.

   The two major satellite TV companies, DirecTV, based in El Segundo, and
Colorado-based Dish Network, have quickly organized to rally customers to oppose
it.  The companies have launched a joint Web site urging customers to oppose
such tax proposals.

   The Web site is www.stopsatellitetax.com/stoptax/ Associated Press

   Amylin expands management team

   Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it expanded its management team with the
addition of Dwayne M. Elwood as senior vice president of marketing and Craig
Eberhard as vice president of sales.

   Elwood and Eberhard will focus on preparing for the commercialization of
Amylin's two late-stage diabetes product candidates, Symlin and Exenatide.

   Elwood has more than 25 years pharmaceutical industry experience.  Eberhard
spent 21 years at Pharmacia Corp., most recently as regional vice president of
sales.

   Genetronics, Genteric team

   Genetronics Biomedical Corp., a San Diego biotech, announced it would partner
with Genteric Inc., a private gene therapy company, to work on delivering gene
therapy through saliva.

   Genetronics specializes in electroporation therapy, or intracellular delivery
of therapeutic materials for diseases that include head and neck cancer.

   Genteric's aim is to commercialize technology that converts genes into
therapeutic proteins within a patient's salivary glands and other
gastrointestinal organs.  This system then distributes the protein to blood.

   Titan receives federal contract

   The Defense Threat Reduction Agency recently awarded a contract that could be
worth as much as $300 million to the Titan Corp. and two other companies.  The
agency said the contract expands and modifies an 11-year contract of the same
value previously announced to provide balanced electromagnetics engineering
services to the agency.  Under this latest contract, Titan will develop
methodologies and software tools to model, design, test and assess the
survivability and operability of new technologies in radiation-contaminated
environments.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Treasury delays terms of auction

   The Treasury delayed an announcement of terms for next week's auction of
short-term securities, citing the national debt limit.  Typically, it announces
terms for three- and six-month bill sales on Thursdays, in advance of auctions
held every Monday.

   Treasury said the delay on the announcement of terms was due to the debt
limit.  The department did not comment on whether an auction would be conducted
on Tuesday.  Auctions that would fall on a federal holiday -- as is the case
Monday when Memorial Day is observed -- are usually conducted the next business
day.

   Also, it delayed announcing terms for its monthly auction of two-year notes
and did not say whether that auction would be conducted Wednesday as currently
scheduled. Associated Press

   Mutual fund disclosure eyed

   Federal regulators are examining how large brokerage firms are paid for
selling mutual funds and whether that compensation is adequately disclosed to
investors.  The Securities and Exchange Commission said it started the inquiry
to determine whether special incentives could be prompting brokers at Wall
Street firms to push certain mutual funds to customers that may be unsuitable
for them.

   Commission chairman William Donaldson said there may be compensation to
brokers or investment firm managers that isn't being disclosed to investors.
"At the very least, it's a piece of information that the prospective buyer has a
right to know," he said.

   News of the government scrutiny of big brokerage firms comes a few weeks
after the SEC approved a record $1.4 billion settlement with 10 Wall Street
brokerages over alleged deception of investors by issuing biased stock
recommendations to lure investment-banking business.

   The SEC has proposed new rules that would tighten internal controls within
mutual fund companies and opened to public review the idea of creating a
self-policing organization for the fund industry. Associated Press

   Mortgage rates continue to dip

   Rates on 30-year mortgages dropped to a new low this week, the seventh time
that has happened this year.  The average interest rate on a fixed-rate 30-year
mortgage fell to 5.34 percent from 5.45 percent last week.

   For 15-year fixed-rate mortgages, rates decreased to 4.73 percent from 4.84
percent.  Rates for one-year adjustable mortgages fell to 3.61 percent from 3.67
percent.

   This week's mortgage rates do not include add-on fees known as points.  Each
loan type carried an average fee of 0.7 point this week. Associated Press

   Accounting firm OKs settlement

   PricewaterhouseCoopers, the nation's largest accounting firm, agreed to pay
$1 million to settle federal regulators' allegations that it engaged in improper
professional conduct in its audit work.  It neither admitted nor denied
wrongdoing in the settlement that the Securities and Exchange Commission
announced.  However, it did agree to be censured and to make changes in how it
operates.

   At issue was the 1997 audit of SmarTalk TeleServices Inc., a provider of
prepaid phone cards and wireless services, which is now bankrupt. Associated
Press


LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2003


                             732 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 23, 2003 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 946 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA DirecTV, Dish try to block tax Satellite television
companies are rallying to stop a move to add an 8 percent California tax on
their services -- even before the proposal makes its way to the Legislature.

   A commission looking into tax policy is considering a handful of
recommendations, including the tax on satellite television, as a means to raise
revenue for the cash-strapped state.

   A proposal to add a 5 percent tax on satellite customers failed in the
Legislature last year. If an 8 percent tax were passed, the average satellite
customer's bill could increase about $5 a month. The two major satellite TV
companies, DirecTV, based in El Segundo, and Colorado-based Dish Network, have
quickly organized to rally customers to oppose it.

   The companies have launched a joint Web site urging customers to oppose such
tax proposals. The Web site is www.stopsatellitetax.com/stoptax/ Associated
Press Amylin expands management team Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it
expanded its management team with the addition of Dwayne M. Elwood as senior
vice president of marketing and Craig Eberhard as vice president of sales.
Elwood and Eberhard will focus on preparing for the commercialization of
Amylin's two late-stage diabetes product candidates, Symlin and Exenatide.
Elwood has more than 25 years pharmaceutical industry experience.

   Eberhard spent 21 years at Pharmacia Corp., most recently as regional vice
president of sales. Genetronics, Genteric team Genetronics Biomedical Corp., a
San Diego biotech, announced it would partner with Genteric Inc., a private gene
therapy company, to work on delivering gene therapy through saliva. Genetronics
specializes in electroporation therapy, or intracellular delivery of therapeutic
materials for diseases that include head and neck cancer. Genteric's aim is to
commercialize technology that converts genes into therapeutic proteins within a
patient's salivary glands and other gastrointestinal organs.

   This system then distributes the protein to blood. Titan receives federal
contract The Defense Threat Reduction Agency recently awarded a contract that
could be worth as much as $300 million to the Titan Corp. and two other
companies.

   The agency said the contract expands and modifies an 11-year contract of the
same value previously announced to provide balanced electromagnetics engineering
services to the agency.

   Under this latest contract, Titan will develop methodologies and software
tools to model, design, test and assess the survivability and operability of new
technologies in radiation-contaminated environments. WORLD AND NATION Treasury
delays terms of auction The Treasury delayed an announcement of terms for next
week's auction of short-term securities, citing the national debt limit.

   Typically, it announces terms for three- and six-month bill sales on
Thursdays, in advance of auctions held every Monday. Treasury said the delay on
the announcement of terms was due to the debt limit.

   The department did not comment on whether an auction would be conducted on
Tuesday.

   Auctions that would fall on a federal holiday -- as is the case Monday when
Memorial Day is observed -- are usually conducted the next business day. Also,
it delayed announcing terms for its monthly auction of two-year notes and did
not say whether that auction would be conducted Wednesday as currently
scheduled. Associated Press Mutual fund disclosure eyed Federal regulators are
examining how large brokerage firms are paid for selling mutual funds and
whether that compensation is adequately disclosed to investors.

   The Securities and Exchange Commission said it started the inquiry to
determine whether special incentives could be prompting brokers at Wall Street
firms to push certain mutual funds to customers that may be unsuitable for them.
Commission chairman William Donaldson said there may be compensation to brokers
or investment firm managers that isn't being disclosed to investors.

   "At the very least, it's a piece of information that the prospective buyer
has a right to know," he said. News of the government scrutiny of big brokerage
firms comes a few weeks after the SEC approved a record $1.4 billion settlement
with 10 Wall Street brokerages over alleged deception of investors by issuing
biased stock recommendations to lure investment-banking business. The SEC has
proposed new rules that would tighten internal controls within mutual fund
companies and opened to public review the idea of creating a self-policing
organization for the fund industry. Associated Press Mortgage rates continue to
dip Rates on 30-year mortgages dropped to a new low this week, the seventh time
that has happened this year.

   The average interest rate on a fixed-rate 30-year mortgage fell to 5.34
percent from 5.45 percent last week. For 15-year fixed-rate mortgages, rates
decreased to 4.73 percent from 4.84 percent.

   Rates for one-year adjustable mortgages fell to 3.61 percent from 3.67
percent. This week's mortgage rates do not include add-on fees known as points.

   Each loan type carried an average fee of 0.7 point this week. Associated
Press Accounting firm OKs settlement PricewaterhouseCoopers, the nation's
largest accounting firm, agreed to pay $1 million to settle federal regulators'
allegations that it engaged in improper professional conduct in its audit work.

   It neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing in the settlement that the
Securities and Exchange Commission announced.

   However, it did agree to be censured and to make changes in how it operates.
At issue was the 1997 audit of SmarTalk TeleServices Inc., a provider of prepaid
phone cards and wireless services, which is now bankrupt. Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             733 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              May 23, 2003 Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: State health care sidesteps scalpel;
Panel restores money to assist elderly, disabled

BYLINE: By Jan Moller; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- Months of emotional pleas from people affected by health-care
cuts hit their mark Thursday as a House panel restored millions of dollars to
programs for the elderly and disabled before shipping Gov. Foster's $16 billion
budget to the floor for consideration.

   The House Appropriations Committee voted to strip money from education,
research, business development and other administration priorities so it could
plug more than $150 million back into hospitals, senior homes and state-run
centers for the mentally handicapped and keep open the Southeast Louisiana
Hospital in Mandeville.

   "We're glad to see that our job won't be as difficult," said Department of
Health and Hospitals Secretary David Hood, whose agency had been asked to absorb
the vast majority of cuts sought in Foster's proposed budget.

   Although the spending plan still must clear the full House and Senate before
the Legislature adjourns June 23, Hood predicted the health-care money will
remain largely intact. "The first action by a legislative committee probably
sets the tone for the rest of the process," he said. "This is a very important
milestone."

   Proposed cuts to two controversial funds that provide money for lawmakers'
pet projects, however, are likely to prompt a major floor fight.

   An amendment approved unanimously chops $8 million from programs for urban
and rural districts, often derided as "slush funds," that governors use to
bargain for votes. Committee members soundly rejected an attempt to eliminate
all of the programs' $16 million budget, and some members said they would seek
to have the money restored.

   "I hope somewhere in the process we can look for other areas to make sure we
don't leave out the folks in the urban and rural funds," said Rep. Edwin Murray,
D-New Orleans, whose district gets money from the urban fund.

   Also likely to spark lively debate in the weeks ahead are amendments by Rep.
Warren Triche, D-Thibodaux, that add money for health and welfare programs by
stripping $4 million from the Louisiana Community and Technical College System
and $4.75 million in planned increases to prekindergarten programs.

   Triche said Louisiana shouldn't be increasing its education spending at the
same time that it is cutting from people who can't care for themselves.

   "Whatever happened to something called tuition?" Triche said.

   Andy Kopplin, Foster's chief of staff, said the administration will try to
restore the money for community colleges that was to cover the cost of rising
enrollment. Expanding the two-year-college program will pay dividends by
producing trained workers who can quickly contribute to the state's economy,
Kopplin said.

   "If you look at this from an economic development perspective, the most
important investment we can make in Louisiana is in our community colleges,"
Kopplin said.

   Kopplin said the administration will also try to restore $1.1 million for
gene-therapy research in New Orleans and $6 million cut from four-year colleges
that would have paid for employee pay increases.

   Foster's original budget angered many lawmakers by seeking a boost for higher
education while asking for nearly $1.5 billion in cuts to health-care programs.

   A revised health-care plan presented earlier this month restored many of
those reductions but still would have reduced Medicaid payments to private
hospital and senior homes by 15 percent and made 10 percent cuts to group homes
for disabled people.

   Though not as harsh as the original plan, the revised version still produced
hours of anguished testimony and doomsday predictions from patients and
health-care providers.

   "We think it's a good starting point," said Sean Prados of the Louisiana
Hospital Association, who is among the dozens of lobbyists who have waged a
determined campaign against the cuts. "They did a tremendous job of putting the
pieces back together for a budget that was almost unworkable."

   The amendments approved Thursday mean most health-care providers will face
cuts in the range of 3 percent to 5 percent. Some health programs, such as rural
hospitals and waiver programs for the elderly and mentally disabled, will remain
intact or receive increases.

   "You cannot ignore the fact that you have to have a stable health-care
system," said Rep. Jerry Luke LeBlanc, D-Lafayette, the committee's chairman.

   Though administration officials said they helped negotiate most of the
changes approved by the committee, others viewed the amendments as a backlash
against Foster and a willingness by lawmakers to tackle an administration whose
days are numbered.

   "You are seeing the tail end of a lame-duck administration and they
(legislators) know that," said Barry Erwin of the Council for a Better
Louisiana, a nonpartisan advocacy group.

   Some cuts remained intact, such as the $36 million being saved by eliminating
a program for noninsured people who suffer catastrophic illness and $125 million
being saved by limiting Medicaid patients to six prescriptions per month.

   "This has been, no doubt, the toughest budget to confect that I've had in my
eight years as chairman," LeBlanc said.

   The full House is expected to start debating the measure Thursday.

   . . . . . . .

Jan Moller can be reached at jmoller@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-5207.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2003


                             734 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2003 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                         May 22, 2003, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: San Antonio Area Foundation Grants


BODY: These are some of the grants awarded by the foundation for 2003:

    ANIMAL SERVICES

    Organization/project / Amount

    Animal Resource Center / $20,000

    Brighter Days Horse Refuge Inc. / 50,015

    Converse Animal Shelter / 15,000

    Bexar Humane Society/SPCA / 70,000

    Last Chance Forever / 60,000

    Primarily Primates / 85,000

    SNAP / 60,000

    Wildlife Rescue / 70,000

    ARTS AND CULTURE

    Arts San Antonio / 19,000

    Cactus Pear Music Festival / 10,000

    Carver cultural center / 11,250

    Gemini Ink / 10,900

    San Anto Cultural Arts / 9,750

    San Antonio Museum of Art / 14,250

    Symphony Society / 10,000

    Youth Orchestras / 5,000

    BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH

    Southwest Foundation / 18,915

    Analysis of endocrine function of adipose tissue/Southwest Foundation /
24,000

    Role of DC-SIGN in HIV infection

    Southwest Foundation / 30,000

    Cell-mediated immune response to RSV in baboons/UTSA17,000

    Targeting respiratory vaccines to M cells by coupling to IgA/UTSA / 16,203

    Exercise training effect on cardiac function and repair after heart attack

    UT Health Science Center / 29,800

    Role of Rad23 in ubiquitin/proteasome-mediated proteolysis/UTHSC / 11,815

    Mutant frequencies in mouse tumor for neurofibromatosis type 1/UTHSC /
28,240

    Perinatal hypoxia-induced epileptogenesis/UTHSC / 26,500

    Survival of mycobacterium tuberculosis in the host/UTHSC / 22,960

    Phenotypic stratification of people with fibromyalgia syndrome/UTHSC /
13,000

    BDNF deficient mice: A model for substance abuse/UTHSC / 11,549

    Targeting NF-kB for the treatment of breast cancer/UTHSC / 30,796

    Pharmacogenomic Banking of DNA Samples from Cancer Patients/UTHSC / 31,372

    Development of vaccine against coccidioides immitis/UTHSC / 19,500

    Regulation of Interleukin-6 in the Malnourished Host/UTHSC / 35,000

    Super macrophage promoters for gene therapy of Parkinson/UTHSC / 33,550

    CHILDREN/YOUTH

    Alamo Children's Advocacy Center / 10,000

    American Cancer Society/SA / 10,000

    Any Baby Can Inc. / 12,000

    Assistance League / 10,000

    Boysville Inc. / 15,000

    Child Advocates San Antonio / 12,000

    Child Guidance Center / 15,000

    Communities In Schools / 16,000

    Dare To Love / 10,200

    Family Service Association / 10,000

    Father Flanagan's Boys Town / 10,000

    Girl Scouts of S.A. / 10,000

    Healy Murphy Center / 11,000

    Inman Christian Center / 5,000

    Jewish Federation / 4,000

    Mission Road Ministries / 10,000

    Positive Beginnings / 7,500

    SAMMinistries / 15,000

    Seton Home / 10,000

    St. Peter-St. Joseph Children's Home / 8,000

    YMCA of S.A. & Hill Country / 8,000

    YWCA of San Antonio / 5,000

    HUMAN SERVICES

    Alzheimer's Association / 8,000

    Catholic Charities / 13,000

    Family Violence Prevention / 13,000

    Goodwill Industries / 8,000

    Greater Randolph Area services / 5,000

    Habitat For Humanity / 17,000

    Madonna Neighborhood Center / 16,000

    Pregnancy Care Center / 10,000

    Project MEND / 16,000

    USO San Antonio / 1,000

    HUMAN SERVICESSENIORS

    Christian Senior Services / 18,500

    Good Samaritan Center / 10,000

    Merced Housing Texas / 15,000

    Sisters Care of San Antonio / 8,000

    EDUCATION-MEDICALLY RELATED

    Alamo Regional Academy / 4,775

    Cancer Therapy and Research / 7,750

    Ear Foundation of Texas / 5,322

    Recording for Blind and Dyslexic / 13,400

    Sunshine Cottage / 11,538

    UT Health Science Center / 19,304

    UT Health Science Center / 25,000

    EDUCATION-NONMEDICAL

    Blessed Sacrament Academy / 30,700

    Central Catholic High School / 15,000

    Gillespie County Historical Society / 10,000

    Holy Cross High School / 6,670

    Jump Start Performance Company / 6,194

    Lakehills Library/Community Assn. / 10,000

    Miller Child Development Center / 8,000

    Neighborhood Resource Center / 4,000

    Our Lady of Peace school / 10,000

    San Antonio Children's Museum / 4,500

    Seguin Youth Services / 13,980

    St. Benedict Catholic School / 3,256

    St. Gerard Catholic High School / 10,000

    St. Joseph's Catholic School / 10,000

    St. Philip's College / 5,000

    Trinity University / 6,300

    United Negro College Fund / 20,000

    University of Texas at San Antonio / 15,000

    Prefreshman Engineering Program / 4,400

    San Antonio Regional History Fair / 2004

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2003


                             735 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 20, 2003, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F26

LENGTH: 74 words

HEADLINE: THE GLOBE 100;
TOP DEBT-FREE COMPANIES LARGEST COMPANIES WITH NO LONG-TERM DEBT, LISTED BY
EQUITY.

BODY:

   COMPANY            EQUITY - MILLIONS 1 SYCAMORE NETWORKS      $ 1, 011.5 2
COMMERCE GROUP                    790.1 3 BJ'S WHOLESALE CLUB              740.8
4. ASCENTIAL SOTWARE CORP.   694.2 5. WATERS CORP.
665.3 6. INTERACTIVE DATA CORP.        662.7 7. COGNEX CORP.
                          354.5 8. CYTYC CORP.
324.7 9. TRANSKARYOTIC THERAPIES 323.9 10 PARAMETRIC TECHNOLOGY    279.5

    CORP. SOURCE: STANDARD & POOR'S COMPUSTAT

          GLOBE STAFF CHART

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2003


                             736 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 20, 2003, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F13

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: THE GLOBE 100 / BULLS & BEARS;
TOP 5 BEARS

BODY:

   1. Aspen Technology Inc.

   At the beginning of 2002, Aspen Technology was bulking up for what it thought
would be a big year. Emboldened by major deals with Exxon and Dow, this
Cambridge based enterprise software company made a series of significant
investments and acquisitions. Unfortunately, Aspen's customer base, primarily in
the oil and chemicals industries, was not in a buying mood, forcing the company
to miss its revenue projections, disappointing investors. Aspen was also forced
to cut about 550 jobs, close to 25 percent of its work force, in order to
realign its business around the new harsh market conditions

    2. Transkaryotic Therapies

   Investors last fall sold off nearly 23 million shares, sending the stock down
more than 60 percent, after regulators decided that the Cambridge company's data
would not support approval of Replagal its drug to treat the rare, inherited
Fabry disease. The chief executive resigned early this year and new CEO Michael
J. Astrue said the company, which has about 450 employees, has grown too
quickly, given its revenues. He plans to cut more than 20 percent of the jobs
this spring.  3.  LTX Corp.

   The Westwood company laid off nearly 300 employees last year amid a prolonged
downturn in the semiconductor industry, as businesses cut back on capital
investments investments and purchases of computer systems. During the first
quarter last year, orders fell 55 percent, to $20.3 million, from the prior
quarter's $45 million. But this year, chief executive Roger W. Blethen said the
company won two new customers and is leaner and more efficient, and better able
to weather the downturn.  4. ArQule

   After nearly a decade of using its expertise in chemistry to help other
companies discover drugs, ArQule is restructuring so it can make the transition
from a service company to a drug-discovery outfit. The changes will allow it to
spend more than $100 million over the next five years on the transition, which
involves cutting back on expenses and forgoing opportunities for revenue growth
that do not advance its new goals. The Woburn company dismissed 128 people, or
31 percent of its work force, last year and closed facilities in California and
the UK to help save as much as $12 million a year.  5.  Immunogen

    The Cambridge company suffered several blows at a time when it is under
pressure to validate the technology on which drugs in its pipeline are based.
Shares were slashed nearly in half last July after Immunogen's partner
GlaxoSmithKline halted development of their cancer drug, cantuzumab mertansine.
Another of its partners, Genentech Inc. of California, said it would conduct
additional tests before advancing a different drug, Trastuzumab-DM1, into human
clinical trials.

GRAPHIC: Technician Bobby Oquendo (left) and supervisor Gerry Gallant monitor
the North American network of Woburn-based Boston Communications Group. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO / PAT GREENHOUSE

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2003


                             737 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                May 19, 2003 Monday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; St. Louis At Work Column The Personality of Business; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 874 words

HEADLINE: ACADEMIC RESEARCHER YEARNS TO TAKE HIS QUEST "ALL THE WAY"

BYLINE: Judith VandeWater Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   * St. Louis U. professor works to create genetic therapy that goes from the
lab bench to an actual product, helping cure illness.

   Parents take heart.

   As a teenager, Dr. Maulik R. Shah was more interested in the human experience
than the academic one.

   He was a cosmopolitan kid. Born in India, he lived as a boy in the United
States and Saudi Arabia. His family vacationed in Europe and Asia.

   Shah and school chums at the Salzburg International Preparatory School amused
themselves by boarding a train out of Austria bound for youthful adventures in
excess. "It is easy to live the Hemingway lifestyle when you are in boarding
school," Shah said.

   Shah, 33, an internist with a doctorate in genetics and an assistant
professorship at St. Louis University Medical School, was still inclined to let
experience trump classroom learning when he entered Tulane University in New
Orleans. He hung out with a creative crowd in coffee shops and bars. "That to me
was a much more fulfilling experience than sitting in Biology 101," he said.

   His scholarship at Tulane lapsed after his freshman year, and his parents,
who had returned from Saudi Arabia, encouraged him to complete his undergraduate
study closer to their home in Virginia. He transferred to Virginia Commonwealth
University in Richmond, Va., and took advanced classes in religion, ethics and
philosophy to balance biology and chemistry.

   "I'm not really sure why science appealed to me more than anything else,"
Shah said. "I knew that I could really succeed in science."

   He read "Advice to a Young Scientist" by Nobel Prize winner Peter Brian
Medawar. The book resonated with him and influenced his decision to pursue a
research career in academia.

   "It described the life of an academic - the independence of thought and the
drive to identify questions no one knows the answers to and design experiments
to answer those questions.

   "It was the first time I thought I could find a little niche and become the
world's expert at it. That appealed to me," Shah said. "Up until then, I had
been happy being good at a lot of things. I never thought I could be great at
any one thing."

   The intellectual sparring required of a researcher also suited him. "You are
always arguing about how you know the answer and someone else may not," he said.
"I like the whole concept of being able to say I am an expert and this is the
data I have to back me up."

   Shah graduated magna cum laude and had his choice of several medical schools.
He liked Richmond and stayed there to attend Medical College of Virginia. He was
accepted into the college's fledgling M.D./Ph.D. program.

   As a financially challenged and recreation-starved student, he turned an
expenses-paid trip to a scientific meeting in Aspen, Colo., in 1991 into a
vacation. He blew off almost all the sessions to go biking and hiking in the
mountains.

   One morning, he struck up a casual conversation with a hiker he met on a
trail. The two men spent several hours together but never formally introduced
themselves. To Shah's surprise, his hiking buddy appeared on the dais as the
keynote speaker at the conference later that day.

   The speaker, Dr. Ken Culver, was one of three researchers at the National
Institutes of Health who had performed the first successful human gene therapy
trial in September 1990.

   Shah said his second encounter with Culver led to a research fellowship in
the National Center for Human Genome Research at NIH. Shah earned his doctorate
for his work at NIH engineering on adenovirus - the common cold bug - to carry a
suicide gene to brain tumors in rats. The gene was turned on with a common
anti-shingles drug, acyclovir. "It worked quite well in rats," he said.

   The promise of gene therapy lies in its potential to cure, not merely treat,
a variety of human ailments. But 12 years after the first experiment by Culver,
Dr. French Anderson and Dr. Michael Blaese on a child with severe immune
disorder, such cures have proven elusive. Much of the work being done today,
including work that Shah is pursuing at SLU, is in designing therapies to cure
cancer.

   Shah completed a residency in internal medicine and a fellowship in clinical
genetics at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston. The majority of geneticists
complete residencies in pediatrics, but Shah found adult medicine more
challenging. "Kids tend to get better by themselves; with adults you have to
think a lot more," he said.

   At Baylor, Shah met and married a medical student, Dr. Priya Gopalan. Gopalan
now has a medical degree and a research Ph.D. She accepted a residency that
brought the couple to St. Louis last year.

   Shah said he likes the area and loves his work, but the couple's priority
will be finding a city where they both can find academic jobs.

   Shah's job at St. Louis University is 10 percent teaching, 30 percent
clinical work and 60 percent research. "One of the reasons I did an M.D./Ph.D.
was to be a clinician and do it all," he said. As a genetic counselor and
physician, Shah advises patients about their risk for disease and options for
treatment.

   His goal is to engineer a gene and take it from the bench to clinical trials
to salable product. "I would very much like to go all the way," he said.

NOTES:
Reporter Judith VandeWater:; E-mail: jvandewater@post-dispatch.com; Phone:
314-340-8201

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Color PHOTO by ANDREA SCOTT /POST-DISPATCH - Dr. Maulik R. Shah,
an internist and geneticist at St. Louis University Hospital, inserts a liquid
media into a tube of colon-cancer cells in testing virus effects on cancer
cells.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2003


                             738 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              May 19, 2003 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE;
Notebook

BODY:

   Neptune, the eighth planet from the sun, is known for its strange and violent
weather, with winds gusting to 900 mph. But until now, no one knew that this
giant ball of gas so far from the warmth of the sun might have a springtime.

   Hubble Space Telescope observations of the planet made over a six-year period
show the planet is brightening considerably in the southern hemisphere -- a
harbinger of seasonal change, scientists say.

   "Neptune's cloud bands have been getting wider and brighter," apparently in
response to seasonal variations in sunlight, said Lawrence A. Sromovsky, of the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, who has made extensive studies of Neptune's
atmosphere.

   It is now late spring in the Neptunian southern hemisphere, he said, where a
visitor would feel "relatively modest temperatures" close to the boiling point
of liquid nitrogen, or 321 degrees below zero Fahrenheit.

   "No need for a sun block," he added. Neptune is the coldest of the major
planets, and the sun's intensity there is 900 times weaker than at Earth.

    The amount of solar energy absorbed by a planet's hemisphere at a given time
is what determines the season. Neptune, like Earth, is tilted at an angle
relative to the sun. As the planet spins, the slant exposes each hemisphere to
varying amounts of solar radiation as it orbits the sun. Neptune takes 165 years
to circle the sun, compared with Earth's 365 days. The 40-year winters there
"could seem a bit tedious," said Sromovsky, who worked on the project with
researchers from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.

   The most remarkable aspect of the finding, described in the current issue of
the journal Icarus, is that a planet so far from the sun shows any sign of
seasonal change at all, he said.

    -- Kathy Sawyer

   A decade of news, education and entertainment on the hot topic of genetics
has left the U.S. population no more savvy about the subject than it was in
1990, according to a nationwide survey.

   The brief telephone survey, conducted by the University of Michigan's
Institute for Social Research, questioned 1,006 respondents in 1990 and 1,824
respondents when the survey was repeated in virtually identical form in 2000.
Part of the survey asked about attitudes toward genetic testing and related
topics, with no right or wrong answers. But the survey also included five
true-false questions.

   Overall, a smaller proportion of those five questions were answered correctly
in 2000 than in 1990. For example, 58 percent of respondents answered at least
three questions correctly in 1990, while only 24 percent did so in 2000.

   Here's a crib sheet, with the five questions, paraphrased, and the correct
answers:

   1. Genetic tests can find out if an adult has an above-average chance of
developing certain cancers. (True, although the tests offer probabilities and
cannot predict an individual's medical fate.)

   2. Genetic tests can find out if an adult has an above-average chance of
developing depression. (False; no gene has been identified as a major risk
factor for depression)

   3. Genetic tests can predict whether a person will have a heart attack.
(False; heart disease, like depression, is the result of minor susceptibilities
conferred by many genes, plus environmental factors such as diet or exercise.)

   4. Genetic tests can be used during pregnancy to find out whether the baby
will develop sickle cell disease or cystic fibrosis. (True; each of these
diseases is caused by a defect in a single gene.)

   5. Gene therapy is currently being used to correct many genetic defects
(False; only one disease -- a childhood immune deficiency -- has been cured by
gene therapy, and those treatments are on hold in this country because of recent
evidence that they can cause cancer.)

    -- Rick Weiss

    Languages may be disappearing faster than birds and mammals, according to a
new analysis.

   William J. Sutherland of the University of East Anglia in Britain evaluated
the danger of extinction that all 6,809 "living" languages face using the same
criteria used to determine the risk that species face of being wiped off the
planet.

   Sutherland determined whether the languages were "critically endangered,"
"endangered" or "vulnerable" based on the estimated number of speakers that
still exist and the estimated rate of decline.

   "Languages are more threatened than birds or mammals," he concluded in the
May 15 issue of Nature.

   There are 357 languages that have 50 or fewer speakers, he said.

   Sutherland also found that places with a large diversity of languages also
tended to have a wide diversity of birds and mammals. "And all three show
similar relationships to area, latitude, area of forest and, for languages and
birds, maximum altitude," he wrote.

   He was surprised, however, to find that there was no relationship between the
time a country was settled and the diversity of language.

    -- Rob Stein

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2003


                             739 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       May 15, 2003 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 041

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic acknowledges probe by SEC

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said yesterday that the Securities and Exchange
Commission has ordered an investigation of its disclosures and public filings
regarding Replagal, its experimental treatment for Fabry disease.

   The investigation includes information submitted to the SEC regarding the
status of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's approval process for the drug.

   The agencyisalso investigating transactions of company securities.

   Officials of the Cambridge biotech said they are cooperating with the
investigation, which comes on the heels of a class-action lawsuit filed
following a steep stock drop last year. On Oct. 2, company shares slipped to $
15.52 from about $ 33.25 when it announced FDA concerns about Replagal.

   Regulators said clinical data from major studies wouldn't support the
product's approval.

   A competing product by Genzyme Corp., also of Cambridge, has since been
approved. Genzymewon seven years of market exclusivity for the product under an
FDA program to promote the development of drugs for rare diseases. Fabry
disease, a metabolic disorder, affects 5,000 to 10,000 people.

   Replagal is available in Europe.

   Transkaryotic shares have dropped 28 percent this year. They ended yesterday
at $ 1.09.

   A lawsuit filed by Berger & Montague P.C.,  based in Philadelphia, alleges
that Transkaryotic misled investors by filing "false and misleading statements"
between Jan. 3, 2001, and Jan. 14, 2003.

   The suit charges that the company misrepresented the adequacy of the evidence
showing Replagal would work against Fabry disease.

   In April, the company said a shareholder derivative lawsuit was filed in
Superior Court against its board. The claims were similar to the class-action
lawsuit.

   Company officials have said they would defend the company vigorously against
the claims.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                             740 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     May 15, 2003, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 551 words

HEADLINE: TRANSKARYOTIC PROBED OVER FDA DEALINGS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. disclosed yesterday that the Securities and
Exchange Commission has opened an investigation into the company's dealings with
the Food and Drug Administration as it raced with cross-town rival Genzyme Corp.
to bring a treatment for a rare genetic disorder known as Fabry disease to the
US market.

   The SEC notified company officials yesterday that a formal investigation is
underway, and they said they plan to cooperate fully with investigators. The
regulatory agency also is looking into transactions in the company's stock.

      In October, former TKT chief executive Richard Selden told investors that
the FDA had deemed a key portion of its data from clinical studies supporting
TKT's drug, Replagal, to be "uninterpretable." Selden, however, described the
company's application for approval as "compelling" and assured investors he was
confident the drug would be approved. Despite Selden's comments, the stock fell
$20.50, or 62 percent, on the news.

   At an unusual public meeting the FDA called in January to examine both
Genzyme's and TKT's Fabry drug applications, an agency reviewer said the FDA had
informed the company by letter on Dec. 22, 2000 - almost two years prior to the
October announcement - that its data did not support approval of Replagal and
recommended additional study. At the time, all that TKT disclosed to investors
was that the FDA "has asked for further explanation and requested additional
data."

   Since January, TKT has been hit with a slew of shareholder lawsuits from
investors who believe the company withheld information from the public.

   "The case is going to be won or lost on what the FDA minutes and
correspondence with the company reflect, and on key witness testimony about what
the company knew and when they knew it," said Jennifer Chao, an analyst with RBC
Capital Markets in New York.

   Both TKT and Genzyme invested hundreds of millions of dollars in the
winner-take-all battle to bring a Fabry drug to market. FDA rules require that
only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such as Fabry, which affects
only a few thousand people worldwide. The "orphan drug" act gives a company
seven years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in exchange for being the
first to develop a drug to treat a rare disease.

   Last month, the FDA approved Genzyme's drug, Fabrazyme, effectively blocking
Replagal from the US market.

   "We're not altogether surprised that the SEC would take this action," Chao
said. "It's impossible to speculate what the outcome could be because so many
important facts have not been publicly disclosed."

   Selden resigned from the company in February, ending a 15-year tenure at the
firm he founded. Michael Astrue, who had been the company's senior vice
president and general counsel, was appointed president and chief executive.

   "There are questions about the old management for sure," said Bill Tanner, an
analyst with Leerink Swann & Co. in Boston. "Even with new management, there's
going to be a residual bad taste in investors' mouths about TKT, and this will
do nothing to attenuate that."

   Shares in TKT closed up 1 cent to $7.09 yesterday in trading on the Nasdaq
Stock Market before news of the investigation was released.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2003


                             741 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: S.E.C. Investigates Transkaryotic Over Drug Approval

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 14

BODY:

   The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Transkaryotic
Therapies misled investors about the regulatory status of a drug it was
developing, the company said today.

        The investigation of Transkaryotic, a biotechnology company based here,
recalls the case involving ImClone Systems and its cancer drug, which soured
investors on the biotechnology industry.

    Transkaryotic said it had received a formal order of investigation from the
S.E.C. concerning public statements about the status of the Food and Drug
Administration approval process for its drug for Fabry disease, a rare inherited
disorder. It said the investigation also concerned stock transactions.

   Transkaryotic, which is known as TKT, said it would cooperate with the
investigation. The S.E.C. does not comment on investigations it is undertaking.

   The company, meanwhile, faces several shareholder lawsuits asserting that it
misled investors.

   TKT's stock dropped 62 percent on a single day in October when it announced
that the F.D.A. staff did not agree with the main data supporting its Fabry
drug, Replagal. Some angry analysts and investors said that TKT had been
assuring them until then that the drug was on track for approval.

   On that day in October, TKT management said that the company still expected
approval based on other data. But according to some of the shareholder lawsuits,
it was revealed at an F.D.A. advisory panel meeting in January that the agency
also had reservations about that data and had informed TKT of its reservations
as early as December 2000.

   The panel did not recommend approval of Replagal and it has not been
approved. Instead, the F.D.A. in April approved a rival drug from the Genzyme
Corporation. That will probably keep TKT's drug from the market for seven years,
under the terms of a federal law concerning drugs for rare diseases.

   TKT has denied accusations in the shareholder lawsuits. It also said it did
not know about the F.D.A.'s concerns until just before it made it its
announcement in October.

   The TKT case bears some resemblance to that of ImClone, which had assured
investors that its cancer drug Erbitux would easily win approval. But the F.D.A.
rejected ImClone's application. It later became clear that the agency had had
concerns about the design of ImClone's clinical trial for more than a year.

   Both cases highlight a dilemma for biotechnology investors. The F.D.A.
usually does not publicly discuss drugs that are under consideration for
approval. That leaves investors almost totally dependent on the company's
version of what is happening.

   Samuel D. Waksal, ImClone's founder and chief executive at the time of the
F.D.A. rejection, was later indicted for tipping off relatives to sell shares of
ImClone in the days before the F.D.A. decision was announced. He has pleaded
guilty to several charges.

   It is not clear what stock transactions the S.E.C. is looking at in the case
of TKT. One of the shareholder lawsuits, filed by Scott & Scott, says that TKT
raised $267 million in stock offerings since January 2001, and that Richard F.
Selden, the company's founder and former chief executive, sold $2.8 million in
stock during that period.

   Dr. Selden resigned in February and since then other top managers, including
the chief financial officer, have also left. The new chief executive, Michael J.
Astrue, had been the company's general counsel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                             742 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:

   Fraud and Forgery Charges Are Brought in Spam Case
A man was arrested outside his home in Buffalo and charged in state court with
forgery and fraud in connection with millions of unsolicited e-mail messages,
said the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer. The state does not have a law
specifically against sending spam.

        The man, Howard Carmack, pleaded not guilty and was released on $20,000
bail. Last week, Mr. Carmack was ordered to pay $16.4 million to EarthLink, the
Internet provider he used to send the spam.  Page C6.


   Losses at Edison Schools Shrink
Edison Schools said its losses shrank in the first quarter and that it expected
to report a profit by midyear. "We believe Edison has executed a dramatic
financial turnaround, which will culminate with the achievement of our first
ever net income in the current quarter," said H. Christopher Whittle, the
company's founder and chief executive.  C4.

S.E.C. Investigates Drug Maker
The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether Transkaryotic
Therapies misled investors about the regulatory status of a drug it was
developing.  C4.

Tenet Healthcare, the hospital operator, reported a first-quarter loss of $20
million, or 4 cents a share.  C10.

CBS Adds 5 Dramas and 2 Comedies
CBS announced a fall schedule that contrasted sharply with rivals in its
emphasis on middle-age rather than young adult or teenage stars. The network
will add five dramas and two comedies. Advertising.  C7.

The Interpublic Group of Companies said it had agreed to sell its NFO WorldGroup
research division to Taylor Nelson Sofres in London for $435 million in cash,
stock and future considerations.  C7.

Price-Fixing Inquiry Into Copper
Antitrust authorities in the United States, Europe and Canada are investigating
whether large copper companies colluded to fix prices, regulators said.  World
Business, Section W.

McWane Inc., a manufacturer of cast-iron pipes and a persistent violator of
workplace safety and environmental laws, is the target of an extensive federal
criminal investigation, according to law enforcement officials.  A1.

Clear Channel Dominance Is at Issue
The Federal Communications Commission is trying to devise rules aimed at
breaking the hold Clear Channel Communications has on radio markets in some
rural areas, a commissioner, Kathleen Abernathy, said. "Because of the way our
markets are defined, in certain markets they've clearly acquired more power than
we would have wanted," said Ms. Abernathy, above.  C10.

Owner of Miller Brewing Is in Deal
SABMiller, the large brewer, said that it was buying a majority stake in Peroni
of Italy for as much as $280 million. The deal is the first big transaction by
SABMiller since it bought Miller Brewing.  World Business, Section W

A South Korean court ordered Jinro, a distiller, into bankruptcy and removed its
management.  World Business, Section W

What the Economy Needs Most Now
Tax cuts won't stimulate the economy. What's needed is working with other
nations to coordinate fiscal policies that will push the dollar down more and
stimulate demand everywhere. And that will take leadership.
Jeff Madrick: Economic Scene.  C2.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos Chart: "YESTERDAY"Dow industrials -- 8,647.82 down 31.43Nasdaq
composite -- 1,534.90 down 4.7810-yr. Treasury yield -- 3.52% down 0.09The euro
-- $1.1511 down 0.0008The dollar -- 116.08 yen down 0.50 Graph: "TODAY" shows
producer prices since October 2002.April figures due at 8:30 a.m. Eastern
time.Expected: -0.7% Graph: "TODAY" shows industrial production since October
2002.April figures due at 9:15 a.m. Eastern time.Expected: -0.4%

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2003


                             743 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 15, 2003, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: $13.9 million awarded to Ichor Medical

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 A federal jury has awarded a San Diego company $13.9 million after determining
that a rival Maryland firm stole trade secrets surrounding technology for
treating cancer and other diseases.

   Ichor Medical Systems, a tiny Sorrento Valley company that employs 20, won a
$13.5 million judgment against Cyto Pulse Sciences, its founder Richard Walters,
and affiliated companies owned by Walters.  The defendants were also ordered to
pay Ichor $400,000 in punitive damages.

   The verdict, which came late last week after a three-week jury trial before
U.S. District Court Judge Napoleon Jones, lifts the life sciences company out of
a four-year judicial limbo.

   During the dispute over technology rights, Ichor found it difficult to raise
venture capital or forge collaborations with biotechnology and pharmaceutical
companies to develop its technology.

   "In this business so much depends on patents and exclusive rights to
technology, so when someone misappropriates trade secrets you have no choice but
to defend yourself and get it back," said Robert Bernard, chief executive of
Ichor.  "This put us in a holding pattern, but now the cloud has lifted and we
can push forward."

   In coming days, the judge will rule on whether to assign patents granted to
Walters and his companies on the disputed technology to Ichor.  Richard Walters,
chief executive of Cyto Pulse, declined to comment on the verdict or allegations
raised in the case.

   At issue is a device that uses electric pulses to create temporary openings
in cell membranes, theoretically allowing cancer-fighting drugs or gene
therapies to enter and work more effectively.

   The technology, known as electroporation, has been around for a few decades
and developed by various companies, including San Diego's publicly traded
Genetronics Biomedical Corporation.

   Ichor, founded in 1994, devised its own patented electroporation system,
which it claims provides a marked improvement on rival technologies.  Later, the
company decided to develop a more automated version, and considered hiring
Walters and another of his firms, Instrument Research Company, to custom-build
it if Ichor could land a research grant to fund it.

   Before opening discussions, however, Ichor required Walters to sign an
agreement not to disclose to others trade secrets or information related to
Ichor's proprietary technology.

   Ultimately, Walters produced a prototype but the grant never came through and
the project was taken no further.  Meanwhile, according to court documents,
Walters secretly took what he had gleaned from Ichor and developed his own
device, which became the cornerstone of another of his companies, Cyto Pulse.

   It wasn't until December 1998, when a patent filed by Walters on the
technology was published, that Ichor discovered Walters claimed what was
substantially the company's invention as his own.

   Meanwhile, Walters and Cyto Pulse hawked their technology to academic
research centers, landing some collaborations to test the equipment and improve
on it.  And Cyto Pulse also tried to interest drug companies, but without
clinical data to support its technology claims was not successful.

   Tony Stiegler, a partner with the law firm Cooley Godward who represents
Ichor, said Cyto Pulse's actions damaged Ichor's chances of success because
Ichor couldn't claim exclusivity for its technology.  And adding insult to
injury, Cyto Pulse hurt the technology's credibility with its lackluster
promotion of the product.

   "They polluted Ichor's waters, tainted the playing field by running out and
promoting the technology as their own without having the science and data to
back it up," said Stiegler.  "That makes it difficult for Ichor to go back as a
second presenter to drug companies after the companies have already seen the
same invention presented so poorly."

   Ichor filed a lawsuit in April 1999 alleging that Walters stole trade
secrets, breached his nondisclosure agreement with Ichor and breached his
fiduciary duty to the company.  The jury found in favor of Ichor on all three
counts.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2003


                             744 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 15, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: $13.9 million awarded to Ichor Medical

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A federal jury has awarded a San Diego company $13.9 million after
determining that a rival Maryland firm stole trade secrets surrounding
technology for treating cancer and other diseases. Ichor Medical Systems, a tiny
Sorrento Valley company that employs 20, won a $13.5 million judgment against
Cyto Pulse Sciences, its founder Richard Walters, and affiliated companies owned
by Walters.

   The defendants were also ordered to pay Ichor $400,000 in punitive damages.
The verdict, which came late last week after a three-week jury trial before U.S.
District Court Judge Napoleon Jones, lifts the life sciences company out of a
four-year judicial limbo. During the dispute over technology rights, Ichor found
it difficult to raise venture capital or forge collaborations with biotechnology
and pharmaceutical companies to develop its technology. "In this business so
much depends on patents and exclusive rights to technology, so when someone
misappropriates trade secrets you have no choice but to defend yourself and get
it back," said Robert Bernard, chief executive of Ichor.

   "This put us in a holding pattern, but now the cloud has lifted and we can
push forward." In coming days, the judge will rule on whether to assign patents
granted to Walters and his companies on the disputed technology to Ichor.

   Richard Walters, chief executive of Cyto Pulse, declined to comment on the
verdict or allegations raised in the case. At issue is a device that uses
electric pulses to create temporary openings in cell membranes, theoretically
allowing cancer-fighting drugs or gene therapies to enter and work more
effectively. The technology, known as electroporation, has been around for a few
decades and developed by various companies, including San Diego's publicly
traded Genetronics Biomedical Corporation. Ichor, founded in 1994, devised its
own patented electroporation system, which it claims provides a marked
improvement on rival technologies.

   Later, the company decided to develop a more automated version, and
considered hiring Walters and another of his firms, Instrument Research Company,
to custom-build it if Ichor could land a research grant to fund it. Before
opening discussions, however, Ichor required Walters to sign an agreement not to
disclose to others trade secrets or information related to Ichor's proprietary
technology. Ultimately, Walters produced a prototype but the grant never came
through and the project was taken no further.

   Meanwhile, according to court documents, Walters secretly took what he had
gleaned from Ichor and developed his own device, which became the cornerstone of
another of his companies, Cyto Pulse. It wasn't until December 1998, when a
patent filed by Walters on the technology was published, that Ichor discovered
Walters claimed what was substantially the company's invention as his own.
Meanwhile, Walters and Cyto Pulse hawked their technology to academic research
centers, landing some collaborations to test the equipment and improve on it.

   And Cyto Pulse also tried to interest drug companies, but without clinical
data to support its technology claims was not successful. Tony Stiegler, a
partner with the law firm Cooley Godward who represents Ichor, said Cyto Pulse's
actions damaged Ichor's chances of success because Ichor couldn't claim
exclusivity for its technology.

   And adding insult to injury, Cyto Pulse hurt the technology's credibility
with its lackluster promotion of the product. "They polluted Ichor's waters,
tainted the playing field by running out and promoting the technology as their
own without having the science and data to back it up," said Stiegler.

   "That makes it difficult for Ichor to go back as a second presenter to drug
companies after the companies have already seen the same invention presented so
poorly." Ichor filed a lawsuit in April 1999 alleging that Walters stole trade
secrets, breached his nondisclosure agreement with Ichor and breached his
fiduciary duty to the company.

   The jury found in favor of Ichor on all three counts. Penni Crabtree: (619)
293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             745 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 9, 2003 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 03D

LENGTH: 144 words

HEADLINE: Madison biotech firm enters into joint venture

BODY:

   Mirus Corp., a Madison biotechnology company, is starting a new business in a
joint venture with a Japanese firm.

   The new firm, called Takara Mirus Bio Inc., will start during the first week
of June with about 10 employees, said Terry Sivesind, president of Mirus. The
new company initially will operate out of Mirus' facility in the University of
Wisconsin Research Park in Madison.

   Takara Bio is the leading manufacturer and supplier of reagents for life
sciences research in Japan, Sivesind said.

   The new company will distribute Takara's products in North America and South
America, as well as collaborate on developing technology for clinical gene
therapy, said Sivesind, who initially will serve as the top executive for the
joint venture.

   Mirus and Takara are sharing the start-up expenses, and both will have
representatives on the board.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2003


                             746 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 9, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 831 words

BODY:

   Even with the confusing totality of political convulsions that have occurred
in motorsports the past couple of decades, there still isn't anything wrong with
the Indianapolis 500 that can't be fixed with a little tweaking.

    My suggestions might be generally unwelcome, as I am not an auto racing fan,
and, indeed, couldn't even tell you the year the Mercury Cougar XR-7's final
drive ratio went from 2.73:1 to 3.08:1, although I think I heard recently in
church that it was 1988.

    Still, because all long-established professional sports, and by that I
include the basketball program at the University of Michigan, are essentially in
the entertainment business, it is evident enough even to the uninitiated what's
wrong with the Indy 500 -- the relative speed of the riotously, dangerously,
unimaginably fast cars to that of the incredibly, alarmingly, stupifyingly fast
cars is way too narrow.

    It's fine that Kenny Brack drove 231.039 mph in practice the other day, but
it's not fine that Scott Sharp's second-fastest time was 230.100 mph. Thus
tomorrow's pole qualifying in Indiana is a proposition with no margin of error.

    (For perspective's sake, at 230 mph you could get from Downtown to the
Post-Gazette Pavilion in about seven minutes. On days when there's no show.)

    "In qualifying, it's an exercise in trying to achieve perfection," 1998 Indy
champion Eddie Cheever told writers the other day. "But it's rare that you go
out and get the absolute maximum speed out of the car. You make one mistake, go
two feet wide, you lost a 10th of a mile an hour. This year here, that can knock
you back two rows [in the starting position]."

    What you need, it seems obvious, is a couple of cars out there whose maximum
speeds are, maybe, 56 and 28 mph. In fact, the tweaking I would do if I were
running this race is that drivers would choose pole positions by random draw,
and further, that each would then be assigned a car once driven by me.

    Not the actual vehicles of course, but a meticulous recreation of the exact
condition of the various models on the days I traded them in for a different
pile of junk.

    Scott Goodyear, for example, instead of finishing .043 seconds behind Al
Unser Jr. in 1992, the smallest margin of victory in Indy history, would have
finished around midnight had he only been assigned my 1968 Impala with the
squawking speedometer. When it hit the 25 mph position, the big red needle would
leap to the right and the dash would emit an excruciating WOOKAWOOKAWOOKA type
noise. If that wasn't entertaining enough, you could always pull over and lift
the hood to see the Impala's amazing
spray-fuel-completely-out-of-the-engine-compartment trick, which defied
explanation.

    Say what you will about Indy, but it has never produced the kind of
entertainment that putting the ' 68 Impala on the pole could well have
engendered.

    Gordon Johncock beat Rick Mears by 16 hundredths of a second in 1982, but I
would like to have seen him do it in my 1974 Riviera, which achieved,
interestingly enough, just about the identical gas mileage of the contemporary
Indy machines. It had a 455-cubic inch V-8 to drag around more than 4,500 pounds
of ostentatious pimp-in-training style, or fail to do so, mostly the latter.

    There simply was no known form of mechanical failure the Riviera couldn't
present, and its black leather interior barely camouflaged its black leather
heart. It had no interest in performing any of its intended functions beyond
looking spectacular. Its extended pit stops produced little but head-shaking and
hand-wringing, until one befuddled mechanic suggested it might have a future as
a ship's anchor.

    Described in the Buick literature of the period as the perfect blend of
"performance, elegance and romance," it was instead the annoying juxtaposition
of exasperation, elegance and unchecked profanity.

    Jacques Villeneuve beat Christian Fittipaldi by a comfortable 2.481 seconds
in 1995, but I would like to have seen him try it in my 1987 Volvo with suicide
wipers.

    With each wipe of the driver's side assembly, the length of the wiper's
sweep would decrease by a fraction of an inch. Finally, after a long dramatic
buildup of shorter and shorter wiper strokes, the wiper would stop at the end of
its right to left arc and literally leap off the left side of the windshield,
thus committing suicide. The harder the rain, the faster the process, and the
more likely the driver would share in the suicide pact.

    I never met Jacques Villeneuve, but I don't think he was ever stranded in
Breezewood by a suicide wiper.

    Furthermore, in my Indy 500, the pits would be staffed exclusively by
teenagers currently employed at Pennsylvania Turnpike service areas (glorified
pop stands), one of whom said of my wiper problem, "Hmm, I'm not sure; ya know
there's a little motor in there that drives the wipers."

    Really? I thought that was done with small animals and a treadmill. Or was
that just in my ' 85 Grand Prix?

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2003


                             747 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     May 07, 2003, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 27 Metfront

LENGTH: 828 words

HEADLINE: Cold virus outsmarts, destroys brain tumors;
M.D. Anderson plans clinical trials for next year

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Local scientists have turned a cold virus into a kind of "smart bomb" that
may be able to destroy the deadliest form of brain cancer.

   In experiments with mice, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
researchers are reporting that a genetically engineered version of the common
cold infected and killed malignant glioma cells that resist other therapy. The
virus doesn't harm normal tissue.

   "Viral therapy like this may be just what we need to treat a complex disease
like cancer," said Dr. Frederick Lang, a professor of neurosurgery and primary
investigator of the study. "Cancer can be devious the way it does everything
possible to avoid destruction, but viruses are equally tricky and may be able to
outsmart brain tumors."

   In today's issue of the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, M.D.
Anderson researchers said the therapy produced a response on glioma not
previously seen with any other treatment. Clinical trials with people are
expected to begin late next year.

   Roughly 17,000 new cases of brain tumors are diagnosed in the United States
every year and half are gliomas, a primary type which arises from the brain
itself rather than metastasizing from another location. Surgery, radiation
therapy, steroids and chemotherapy can prolong survival, but most everyone dies
within a year.

   The virus is designed in such a way that to reproduce itself, it can only
replicate in cancer cells, not healthy tissue. While reproducing, it kills
cancer cells, and when no more are left to infect, the virus simply dies.

   The idea of using viruses to kill cancer cells has been around since the
1950s, but it is only in recent years that it is moving toward application.
Therapeutic viruses for lung cancer and head and neck cancer are in clinical
trials, said Howard Fine, director of the brain tumor program at the National
Cancer Institute.

   The NCI is providing $ 1 million to produce the drug-grade version of the
therapy in its laboratories. It is scheduled to be finished in time to start
enrolling patients in a study in the winter of 2004.

   But Fine warned against expecting too much from the therapy. He called it "a
promising approach that is one of many good ideas out there," but said success
in animal models is a long way from success in human patients. He said it is
unclear whether the virus will replicate as well in humans, where glioma cells
are surrounded by normal cells; in mice, glioma cells cluster together.

   But the results in the mice were extraordinary. The virus cured 60 percent of
the glioma tumors implanted in mice brains whereas mice given a placebo died
after less than three weeks. (A precursor of the virus cured 15 percent of the
tumors.)

   The mice that survived treatment with the experimental virus were killed for
examination. Researchers found only empty cavities and scar tissue where the
tumors once were.

   "This therapy needs more study, but it has a lot of potential," said Dr. Juan
Fueyo, a professor in M.D. Anderson's department of neuro-oncology, the study's
lead author and the developer of the genetically engineered adenovirus. "We've
never had this kind of result with any kind of treatment on glioma - in humans
or animals."

   The virus is injected directly into the brain tumor surgically, through a
small hole. Lang expressed hope the therapy might work even better in humans
because delivery would be more precise.

   Researchers are studying human adenoviruses for a wide range of medical uses,
from cancer therapy to gene therapy, because they are so good at infecting human
cells. One question is how the immune system will respond - will it overreact
and cause illness or kill the virus, or will it be boosted to kill the cancer or
other pathogen.

   But Lang said he's optimistic the treatment will accomplish its goal before
the immune system goes after it.

   The research team also included scientists from the University of Alabama at
Birmingham and the Institut Catala d'Oncologia in Barcelona, Spain.





   VIRUS KILLS BRAIN TUMORS


   Glioblastomas are the most deadly kind of brain tumor, rapidly returning
after surgery and other treatment.  Scientists created an altered cold virus
that, when directly injected into brain tumors in mice, killed the cancer
without harming healthy tissue.

    Why the cold virus is used


   Adenovirus kills cells by hijacking their reproductive machinery. To get
inside the cells, it must disable a protective protein called Rb. Cancer cells
lack this protein and are vulnerable to attack.


    Tumors under attack


   The altered adenovirus invades the cancer cells, destroying them.

    Healthy cells, containing Rb, are protected against the virus and remain
unharmed.


   Altering the virus to attack tumors


   Scientists remove the virus's ability to disable Rb so it can't get inside
healthy cells.

   The virus is weak, so it is altered to adhere more easily to tumor cells.

   The altered virus is injected into the brain tumor.



GRAPHIC: Graph: 1. VIRUS KILLS BRAIN TUMORS (color, TEXT); Drawings: 2. Virus,
Tumer cells, and Healthy cells (color); 3-4 Cells (color); 5. Tumor and Mouse
(color); All by Associated Press, Source: M.D. Anderson Cancer Center

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2003


                             748 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                     May 7, 2003 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1541 words

HEADLINE: OREGON TAKES ON SARS

SOURCE: PATRICK O'NEILL - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Portland-based AVI BioPharma and OHSU hope to win the race for a
medicine to defeat the virus

   Whatever vanquishes the SARS virus will come out of a laboratory filled with
beakers and flasks, computers with Internet access and scientists who are driven
to charge into the worldwide research race.

   The odds are long but the stakes are high. But maybe, just maybe, that weapon
will come from Oregon.

   That's the fervent hope of two groups of biotech experts in the state. One is
AVI BioPharma, headquartered in Portland with laboratories in Corvallis, in the
fertile Willamette Valley. The other is Oregon Health & Science University's
Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute located on a wooded campus in Beaverton where
deer often graze on the lawn.

   Researchers around the world are gearing up to defeat the new virus that has
sickened almost 7,000 and killed nearly 500, most in China where it began in
November as a "mystery disease" with no known cause. But with unprecedented
speed, researchers have spelled out the genetic text of a new kind of
coronavirus -- never before seen in humans -- that can swiftly sicken and kill.

   The two Oregon groups form a kind of microcosm of global research on the SARS
virus. There are two possible approaches to defeating the virus: Find a medicine
to treat it after it invades the body, or marshal the body's natural defenses to
defeat the virus before it takes hold.

   AVI, a company that manufactures artificial genetic sequences, thinks it has
developed a treatment for people who are sick with SARS. Last week, the company
sent vials of white powder -- the medicine developed from computer modeling --
to the U.S. Army Research Institute of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Md.,
for testing. Those are in competition with experimental medicines from around
the country.

   OHSU, with access to monkeys and biocontainment facilities, has launched a
program to develop a vaccine to stop people from getting the virus in the first
place.

   As with many such ventures, success likely will depend on finding the money
to proceed. On Monday AVI announced it had raised $15 million from institutional
investors. The Gene Therapy Institute is looking also looking for financial
support.

   Dr. Louis J. Picker, the OHSU institute's associate director and a passionate
AIDS vaccine researcher, is confident about the institute's plan.

   "I have no doubt that we can generate a vaccine to SARS, if we were given the
resources," he said.

   But this is not going to be a slam-dunk for either approach. Viruses are
among the most ancient and efficient forms of life. A virus is a package of
genetic material that can replicate itself only after it infects a cell and
hijacks the cell's machinery.

   Scientists studying SARS have identified its cause: a new kind of coronavirus
that is one of a large family of viruses blamed for a third of the cases of
common cold. Its name comes from the crown or halo of spikes on its surface when
viewed with an electron microscope.

   Unlike the common cold, SARS kills 6 percent of those infected.

   OHSU's Picker said the fact that most people who develop SARS eventually get
better on their own -- unlike those infected with AIDS -- is a hopeful sign for
the development of a vaccine.

   "This is a key question," Picker says. "If the body's immune system doesn't
launch some attack against the virus you can't make a vaccine against it."

   That has been the difficulty with the AIDS virus, which Picker has been
wrestling with since 1994. The AIDS virus targets immune system cells and
mutates so quickly that finding a vaccine for it has been impossible.

   But AIDS has been a boon to vaccine research. Technology developed in
searching for an AIDS vaccine likely will hasten the development of protection
against SARS, Picker says.

   "Without AIDS the institute wouldn't even exist," Picker says.

   Vaccine possibilities

   Picker says there are two major approaches to vaccine design:

   * Find a substance that will stimulate the immune system's B cells to make
antibodies to the SARS virus. Antibodies bind to the virus, marking it for
destruction by cells of the immune system.

   * Stimulate the immune system's T cells to make cytokines, protein molecules,
that can directly kill the virus.

   At this point, Picker says, nobody knows just how the immune system knocks
out the SARS virus.

   "We don't know what parts of the virus are the best targets," Picker says.
"We're starting from scratch."

   The first step is to study how the virus works in primates, using monkeys at
the Oregon National Primate Research Center.

   "You know that if you give a certain dose of virus to the animal certain
events ensue," he says.

   After developing an animal model of the illness researchers will try to
figure out what aspect of the virus the immune system targets under normal
circumstances. Then they'll try to develop a way to introduce that part of the
virus to the immune system without making the recipient sick.

   "We need to give the immune system a taste of the pathogen without the
disease," he says.

   Such a taste might be proteins on the surface of the virus, say, in the
spikes on the outer coat.

   "Probably a killed virus will be the first thing to try," he says. That would
be the safest approach.

   A weakened virus

   A weakened virus -- one that has been robbed of the ability to cause disease
-- can bring about a stronger immune response. There are dangers in that
approach, however.

   Picker says the problem is that researchersdon't know how weak a virus has to
be before it is harmless. "This is a disease that kills you," Picker says, so
using a weak version of it won't be the first choice.

   First, though, researchers have to win approval from the university's
Institutional Biosafety Committee, which determines whether they can handle
dangerous organisms safely. The institute has Biolevel 3 laboratories designed
to keep the virus from escaping, which researchers say is enough. However, it
normally takes about two months to obtain such approval.

   In the meantime, AVI hopes to use technology it has developed during the past
23 years to find a way of keeping the virus from destroying cells after it has
infected them. This could be a make-or-break move for the company, which has yet
to send a medicine to market.

   Patrick Iversen, the senior vice president of research and development at the
company's 50,000-square-foot laboratory on the south edge of Corvallis, had been
following the movement of the SARS epidemic through the Internet. He noted with
interest that the coronavirus, a single-strand RNA virus, was similar to one his
company had been researching -- a coronavirus that causes hepatitis in mice.

   Mouse hepatitis virus is an enormous problem for medical researchers. The
disease can roar through colonies of mice used in experiments, destroying a year
of research in a matter of days.

   Key information

   On April 14, Iversen found that researchers in the United States and Canada
had deciphered key genetic information from the coronavirus that had been
implicated in the SARS outbreak and had posted those genetic sequences on the
Internet.

   The information came in sequences of the letters A, C, T and G, which stand
for adenine, thymine, cytosine and guanine, the four amino acids that are the
building blocks of life. To those outside the field of genetics, the string of
letters is gobbledygook. But to Iversen they spelled out the possibility of
designing a drug to fight SARS.

   One string of letters spelled out an "antisense" genetic sequence, one that
could form the mirror image of a portion of the virus' genetic code. That
antisense sequence would jam up the virus' copying mechanism.

   A powerful tool

   Experts see the use of raw genetic information and computing power as a new
and powerful tool in the fight against disease. "We're able to design a molecule
within hours and gain toxicity information literally with a matter of minutes by
using the Internet," Iversen said.

   Like many biotech labs, AVI has a stable of inventions that it hopes will pay
off with successful medications.

   Iversen says his company can make synthetic genetic sequences that have a
neutral electrical charge. These "Neu-Genes," as the company calls them, are
supposed to float freely until they encounter a targeted section of the viral
gene. Other companies in the antisense field make similar sequences, but they
tend to stick to structures that aren't targeted, he said.

   One challenge will be to target a viral gene that won't change in the rapidly
mutating virus, rendering the medicine useless, he says.

   As with any medicine, AVI must be sure that its virus killer won't interfere
with human cells. Iversen had to answer a key question: Does the gene appear in
the human genome? If so, there's a danger that an antisense drug could disrupt
the machinery of human cells. That, in effect, would make the drug poisonous to
humans.

   Iversen is optimistic that the drug will be harmless to humans.

   According to his computer models, there are no locations on the human genome
where the antisense sequence would adhere.

   "The only perfect fit is to the coronavirus sequence," he said. Patrick
O'Neill; 503-221-8233; poneill@news.oregonian.com

GRAPHIC: Photo by SOL NEELMAN/Special to The Oregonian; Graphic -- Diagrams and
text by DERRIK QUENZER and MICHAEL GUILLEN - The Oregonian -- SARS: STOPPING A
DEADLY VIRUS...

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2003


                             749 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                      May 6, 2003 Tuesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: STANDING AT THE EDGE OF MY FUTURE

SOURCE: ALEX W. RODRIGUEZ - Special Writer, The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Upon his acceptance to college, a high school senior looks back at
his experiences and friends met in his days in the Portland system

   Editor's note: This essay is one in an occasional series by 18-year-old Alex
W. Rodriguez on the milestones he's facing as he goes through his senior year at
Portland's Wilson High School. My dad stepped through the front door with an
armful of the day's mail.

   Sifting through its contents, one parcel caught his attention. "Alex!" he
called down to me. "They say that fat envelopes are a good sign."

   He casually tossed the package onto the couch next to me. I studied the
outside of the envelope for a moment before tearing it open. A course catalog
fell out, and a folder full of multi-colored paper remained. Nervously opening
it, I saw on one of the papers these encouraging words: "Warmest
congratulations!" I figured that was a good thing.

   When I returned to school to share news of acceptances, rejections and
waiting lists, conversations were abuzz with college triumphs and defeats. We
joked about how we could tell whether or not we were accepted to the school
based on the salutations of our mail -- "Dear Alex" meant I was in, while "Dear
Mr. Rodriguez" was a sure sign of rejection.

   While everyone was disappointed by a few "Mr./Ms." letters (I was turned down
by Harvard and Yale), people were, for the most part, upbeat knowing that the
final stage of the arduous application process was almost over. Now that the
college decision is in our hands -- with our final confirmation deadline upon us
-- we can all breathe a sigh of relief.

   My friends and I are lucky to be hearing good news during troubling times. In
the hallways, typical adolescent spring gossip is flying, magnified by the
anticipated prom. Gossip about inevitable breakups, last-minute flings and
limousine arrangements are unavoidable. And of course, college-acceptance
excitement is at the forefront of all of the spring euphoria.

   Having been accepted to college, I am starting a transition into "my future."
But I'm not there yet -- five months remain here in Portland, and many important
things still remain. From the State Speech Tournament to advanced-placement
tests, I have plenty to keep me busy. In the meantime, I can reflect upon my
path to the current crossroads.

   On one hand, I can't help but feel that I'm getting out of Portland Public
Schools at the right time. When I started kindergarten, my elementary school had
the money to support an innovative Spanish immersion program. Now, my high
school can't even fund a band.

   Even my parents are losing faith, opting to enroll my 10-year-old brother in
a private middle school for next year (he received his acceptance before I did).

   On the other hand, I can't ignore the gifts that our unique school system has
provided. And I can take solace in the fact that, despite the budget crisis we
face, the schools are nurturing an incredibly talented generation of future
leaders.

   Having spent my school days with such motivated, intelligent friends, I know
that our future is still bright.

   I can visualize all of my talented classmates shaping world policies in 2030:
AJ on the Joint Chiefs of Staff after graduating from the Air Force Academy and
rising through the military ranks. Kate as the U.S. ambassador to the United
Nations after attending Smith College. Megan's biomedical engineering firm --
where she began as an intern while an undergraduate at Stanford University --
preparing to patent a revolutionary gene therapy that could cure cancer. Kyle as
a powerful U.S. senator building on political connections made during his four
years at George Washington University.

   And me, well, I honestly don't know. I've sealed the envelope that marks the
end of my long college search and commences my academic career at Amherst
College. As I walk outside to mail the letter, I take a breath of fresh Oregon
air, anxious to begin a promising adventure. Alex W. Rodriguez:
kickbrass26@attbi

GRAPHIC: Color Photo by STEVE NEHL - of The Oregonian staff

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2003


                             750 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 05, 2003, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Study: Disinfectants kill SARS on surfaces

   BEIJING - New laboratory findings support the theory that the SARS virus can
survive up to four days on contaminated household surfaces like toilets but that
disinfectants like bleach are effective weapons to kill it, the World Health
Organization said on Sunday. Beijing reported its lowest increase in SARS cases
in two weeks Sunday but ordered schools to remain closed for an additional 14
days. In Hong Kong, a dozen former SARS patients initially thought to have
suffered relapses actually had other medical problems, health officials said
Sunday.


    Chinese sub accident hidden for two weeks


    BEIJING - The Chinese submarine accident that the government said killed 70
crew members occurred April 16, more than two weeks before it was officially
disclosed, a Chinese naval officer told the Boston Globe. The catastrophe may
have resulted from a malfunction in the craft's diesel engines that sucked the
oxygen from the interior during a descent, quickly killing those aboard, the
officer said.


    Cuba detainees await agencies' questioning


    WASHINGTON - Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld said Sunday that prisoners
from the war on terrorism at Guantanamo Bay in Cuba must be questioned by
several agencies before they can be released. He blamed this "very slow" process
for their continued detention. Rumsfeld was responding to a letter from
Secretary of State Colin Powell, who urged the Pentagon to move more quickly to
determine which of the some 660 prisoners can be released. The FBI, the Justice
Department, the State Department, the Pentagon, the CIA and the Immigration and
Naturalization Service are reviewing cases.


   Gene therapy causes cancer in 2 toddlers


    BIRMINGHAM, England - A revolutionary gene therapy treatment that cured 10
French boys of a deadly inherited disorder known as "bubble boy disease" gave
two of them leukemia, scientists said Sunday. Genetic tests have confirmed that
the treatment, the first time that gene therapy has cured a disease, triggered
the cancer. The toddlers are responding well to anticancer therapies, officials
said. Scientists had feared that cancer might occur if the virus used in the
therapy lodged near certain genes that control cell growth and affected those
too.


   Pope canonizes priests, nuns in Spain


    MADRID, Spain - Pope John Paul II proclaimed five new saints Sunday before a
crowd of 1 million people. In the major event of his weekend visit to Spain, the
82-year-old pope canonized two priests (Pedro Poveda, assassinated in 1936 at
the start of the Spanish Civil War; and Jose Maria Rubio, a Jesuit priest) and
three nuns (Angela de la Cruz, founder of the Sisters of the Company of the
Cross; Genoveva Torres, founder of the Sisters of the Sacred Heart and of the
Holy Angels; and Maravillas de Jesus, founder of convents for the Order of
Barefoot Carmelites).


   Final quake victims recovered from school


    CELTIKSUYU, Turkey - Rescuers have recovered the last of 83 children killed
in Thursday's earthquake, which reduced a school dormitory to rubble. Working
around the clock since then, rescuers saved 115 children, most just after the
tragedy. The earthquake killed 167 people and injured 1,000 in the region.


   Chavez blames foes for May Day death


    CARACAS, Venezuela - President Hugo Chavez blamed his political foes for
provoking a shooting spree that resulted in a man's death during an opposition
march last week. Chavez said the May Day violence was the latest attempt by his
opponents to destabilize Venezuela and undermine his presidency.



LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2003


                             751 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                         May 5, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may fight impotence tied to diabetes ;
Gene therapy may fight impotence tied to diabetes, cancer

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE mmarchione@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   For the first time, experiments in rats suggest that gene therapy may prevent
impotence for men having prostate cancer surgery and may even be able to restore
sexual function for men who have lost it.

   As important as that is for cancer surgery, the technique also shows promise
for a much bigger problem: reversing impotence caused by diabetes, radiation
treatments and a variety of other conditions, researchers say.

   Even if the gene therapy alone doesn't restore sexual function, it may
improve nerves enough for Viagra to be able to help such men regain the ability
to have sex.

   "Viagra doesn't work unless you have intact nerve tissue," and there's often
not enough left after prostate surgery for the drug to do any good, said David
Jarrard, chief of urologic surgery at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

   Jarrard was not involved in the gene therapy work but is among several dozen
surgeons around the country trying new techniques, such as nerve grafts, to keep
men from becoming impotent from prostate surgery.

   "Erectile dysfunction is such a huge disease, and Viagra has sort of brought
it out of the closet," said Michael Chancellor, a prostate cancer surgeon at the
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center who led the gene therapy experiments and
reported on them last week at an American Urological Association meeting in
Chicago.

   "We're going in and directly repairing the nerve through gene therapy," he
said. "It offers tremendous hope."

   Other labs are doing similar work, which already "has clearly documented
'proof of concept' for the utility of gene therapy for the treatment of erectile
dysfunction," concludes a review recently published in the journal Urology.

   Chance for impotence

   Prostate cancer is the most common cancer among men and the second leading
cause of cancer deaths in men in the United States. If a man is young enough to
stand it, an operation called a prostatectomy, or removal of the prostate, is
recommended because studies show it offers the best chance of curing the cancer
and keeping it from coming back. Between 60,000 and 80,000 American men have
this surgery each year.

   "Prostatectomy is the gold standard, but a lot of men are afraid of it. They
hear that if they have it they're going to become impotent or incontinent,"
Chancellor said.

   Impotence often results when one or both of the cavernous nerves, a tangle of
nerves that control erections, must be removed to contain the cancer. In such
situations, Jarrard and other surgeons have been trying to move a nerve from the
foot into the groin to allow men to have an erection.

   But in many other cases, the cavernous nerves aren't removed but are
traumatized during cancer surgery, leaving a man unable to have sex.

   "There's always some damage or stretching on the nerve," so gene therapy or
other treatments to help repair it are badly needed, Jarrard said.

   Chancellor's gene therapy approach aims to fix that by giving patients a gene
that causes production of nerve growth factors, so new neural connections can be
forged to compensate for damaged ones.

   Men will be relieved to know there are many differences between them and
rats. One is that removing a rat's prostate doesn't cause the erectile problems
it does in men, so researchers must simulate the damage by partially freezing
the rats' cavernous nerves.

   Next, they use an ingenious way to give the patient the desired gene --
enclosing it in a herpes virus that's been modified so it is harmless and
doesn't cause illness.

   "These viruses travel up and down nerves" and are in the family of germs that
cause painful shingles, so they're good at getting inside nerve cells, Jarrard
said.

   Several dozen rats got injections of one of two growth factor genes, and a
control group of animals got shots of a dummy substance. Pressure in the penis
-- a measure of ability to achieve an erection -- was measured four weeks later,
and the rats that got the therapy had statistically significant improvement over
the control group, Chancellor said.

   Ideally, the gene therapy would be given at the time of prostate cancer
surgery, or even before it.

   "A week or two before surgery you could give a nerve protection factor,"
Chancellor said.

   A second set of tests he led on other rats offers promise for treating other
causes of impotence. Diabetic rats were given shots of the growth factor and
showed improvement in erections and ability to copulate compared with rats that
got placebo shots.

   "It gives hope it can help other impotent men," especially the more than 60%
of diabetics who develop erectile difficulties at some point in their lives, he
said.

   "This whole area is in evolution," Jarrard said. "It's still very early on."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2003


                             752 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 5, 2003 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 02A

LENGTH: 180 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy tied to leukemia ;
Gene therapy tied to leukemia, doctor says

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Birmingham, England -- A revolutionary gene therapy treatment that cured 10
French boys of a deadly inherited disorder known as "bubble boy disease" gave
two of them leukemia, scientists said Sunday.

   Salima Hacien-Bey-Abina said genetic tests have confirmed that the treatment,
the first time that gene therapy has cured a disease, triggered the cancer in
the toddlers. The boys are responding well to anti-cancer therapies, she added.

   Experts said it is now clear that the virus used to carry the needed gene
into the children's bodies landed in a bad place. Scientists had always feared
that cancer might occur if the virus used in the therapy lodged near certain
genes that control cell growth and affected those too.

   Addressing a conference of the European Society of Human Genetics,
Hacien-Bey-Abina of the Necker Hospital for Sick Children in Paris said tests
have shown that in the first toddler stricken with leukemia, the correcting gene
landed inside a cancer-promoting gene called LMO-2. In the second toddler, the
gene also landed near the LMO-2 gene.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2003


                             753 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       May 5, 2003 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg.A-5 WORLD BRIEFS

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: HOSTAGE TAKERS, ALGERIA IN TALKS

BODY:

   ALGIERS, Algeria -- Some 31 European tourists who disappeared in the Sahara
Desert are alive, and Algerian authorities are in talks with their captors, said
Mohammed Guerrout, president of a parliamentary commission on tourism and
culture. He did not identify the abductors in his radio statement yesterday.

    The desert travelers, who had set off in seven separate groups on four-wheel
drive vehicles or motorcycles, disappeared starting in mid-February.

    The tourists -- 15 Germans, 10 Austrians, four Swiss, one Dutch and a Swede
-- are being held in the region of Illizi, near the Libyan border.

    Philippine rebels raid town

    MANILA, Philippines -- Muslim guerrillas attacked a town and took hostages
yesterday.

    Twenty-two people were killed in the raid by about 100 members of the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, which also injured dozens of people in the town of
Siocon in the southern province of Zamboanga del Norte.

    The guerrillas fired on houses, town hall, a hospital and public market --
then fought army troops, killing 16 soldiers and wounding eight more. Six
guerillas also were killed and 15 civilians were wounded.

    The guerrillas took 15 hostages, but soldiers recovered all but four.
Rescued hostages included the wife and child of the town's mayor.

    Pope speaks in Spain

    MADRID, Spain -- Showing unusual energy, Pope John Paul II proclaimed five
new saints yesterday before a crowd of 1 million people as he urged Spaniards to
remain faithful to the Roman Catholic Church.

    Facing the vast crowd spread out in the form of a cross, John Paul spoke in
a strong and clear voice in the major event of his weekend visit to Spain.

    "Don't break with your Christian roots," the frail 82-year-old pope said
during a three-hour Mass, taking up a theme he has sounded across an
increasingly secular Europe.

    Who killed U.K. journalist?

    JERUSALEM -- A British journalist shot dead while filming Israeli army
operations in a strife-ridden area of the Gaza Strip was hit from behind,
raising the possibility that he was killed by Palestinian fire and not by
Israeli troops, the Israeli army said yesterday.

    James Millers' body was being taken to the Israeli national forensic center
in Jerusalem for an autopsy. Miller, 34, a prize-winning documentary maker, was
killed Friday night in the southern Gaza city of Rafah.

    Gene therapy causes cancer

    BIRMINGHAM, England -- A revolutionary gene therapy treatment that cured 10
French boys of a deadly inherited disorder known as "bubble boy disease" gave
two of them leukemia, scientists said yesterday.

    Dr. Salima Hacien-Bey-Abina said genetic tests have confirmed that the
treatment, the first time that gene therapy has cured a disease, triggered the
cancer in the toddlers. The boys are responding well to anticancer therapies,
she added.

    Also in the world

    Four bombs exploded in the southern Turkish city of Adana late yesterday,
shattering the windows of several shops and homes. Police said no one was
injured. One of the bombs went off on a street behind the U.S. Consulate . . .
Two men attacked the director of a Paris theater yesterday, punching him and
slashing his face, apparently because of a play he is staging that criticizes
President Bush, titled "George W. Bush, or God's Sad Cowboy" . . . A Saudi man
convicted of murder was beheaded in a public execution yesterday in Saudi
Arabia's capital Riyadh. Abdul Rahman bin Hanash al-Shihri had been found guilty
of fatally shooting another man following a dispute. It was the sixth public
execution this year in the Gulf kingdom.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2003


                             754 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2003 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 May 4, 2003 Sunday Five Star Late Lift Edition

SECTION: A[E] Pg. F13

LENGTH: 836 words

HEADLINE: ON THE CUTTING EDGE, WHEN IS "ENOUGH" TRULY ENOUGH?

BYLINE: Dale Singer Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Bill McKibben writes about complex issues in a way that makes them easy to
understand. In "Enough," for example, he compares the effects of technology to
the effects of too much beer.

   In either case, he says, it doesn't necessarily make sense to abstain. The
problem comes in figuring out where to stop.

   "Judging when you've reached this 'enough point' is, admittedly, no easy
trick," McKibben reasons. "You might stop short and miss some real improvement;
you might overshoot and hit some wall. Is the fifth beer the one that's going to
make you feel really good, or the one that's going to make you puke?"

   As he did in books like "The End of Nature" and "The Age of Missing
Information," Mc-Kibben writes incisively and persuasively about the effects
that advancing scientific discoveries have on our everyday lives. He is neither
a novice nor an innocent, and he knows how naive his argument could appear. But
using one more basic analogy, he refutes the expected objection that he blindly
opposes all efforts to take advantage of what science can offer.

   "One danger of any critical writing about technology is that it will be
dismissed as Luddite," he says. "That's a glib charge, as silly as accusing
someone of being a prohibitionist because he'd rather leave a barroom with a
warm glow than a spinning head."

   With a lesser writer, many readers might feel their heads spinning anyway.
But Mc-Kibben easily, logically and forcefully sets out his main argument:
Technology has changed our lives in many ways, often for the better, but we have
reached a point where it could easily go too far, and people who are dazzled by
its bright promise might be blinded to its potential dark side. Rather than risk
taking disastrous further steps, we should be wise and willing to stop while we
are mostly ahead and to say we've had enough.

   He makes this case in several different ways. The most compelling might be in
the example of gene therapy, where he underscores the crucial but often
overlooked distinction between somatic therapy, in which science tries to modify
someone's genetic makeup to help ease the suffering from a specific condition,
such as cystic fibrosis; and germline genetic engineering, in which genes
carrying specifically designed characteristics are inserted into a fertilized
embryo to create a child who is different from any who ever existed.

   Presumably, the parents of such a child -- or, more accurately, its
laboratory creators -- would want someone with sharper skills than they could
have had with a more natural process. McKibben's response is twofold. Once we
start creating such superboys and supergirls, whether they can run faster or
play music more beautifully or have outsized IQs, where do we stop?

   More ominously, he asks, what if something goes wrong? While the scientific
work is moving ahead rapidly, society's safeguards are not keeping pace.

   "The only thing holding us back," McKibben says, "is a thin tissue of ethical
guidelines, which some scientists and politicians are working hard to overturn."

   One of his most interesting arguments is about how three societies have done
precisely what he wants to do -- say no to advancing technology.

   He points out how the Amish don't shun all modern inventions. They will use
telephones, when necessary, and ride in cars. But they won't own cars, and their
definition of necessity is far stricter than that of most people. They simply
choose to enjoy the benefits of a simpler life, forgoing what people around them
consider to be improvements.

   Similarly, McKibben notes how the Chinese in the 15th century had ships that
were far more sophisticated than those of Columbus and the Europeans who came
later, and the Japanese used firearms in the late 16th century. In both cases,
those societies made a conscious decision to go back to an earlier time, one
they thought was more beneficial, and leave behind modern temptations --
worldwide exploration in the case of the Chinese and deadly weapons in the case
of the Japanese.

   Neither decision was irrevocable, of course. But Mc-Kibben's point remains
valid: Just because a technology exists, it does not follow, as many scientists
would insist, that it has to be widely adopted and advanced.

   McKibben's argument is one large slippery slope -- or, as he terms it, an
Olympic bobsled track -- and such a technique has its limits. It would be
difficult, if not impossible, to say no to a specific scientific advance that
has clear, immediate benefits, even if it may lead to others whose outcome is
not so certain. Besides, he is hardly the first writer to warn about the dangers
of science; look at Mary Shelley and "Frankenstein."

   Even though McKibben's proposal is unlikely to take hold, he has raised
necessary, disturbing questions to which anyone who is involved in engineering
cutting-edge technology must give serious thought.

   * * * * *

   "Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age"

   By Bill McKibben

   Published by Times Books, 271 pages, $25

NOTES:
BOOKS

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2003


                             755 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              May 1, 2003 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HOWARD EXTRA; Pg. T04

LENGTH: 546 words

HEADLINE: Howard County Briefs

BODY:

    The Columbia Foundation's 21st annual Spring Garden Party will be held from
5:45 to 8 p.m. today at the Rouse Building's Spear Center, 10275 Little Patuxent
Pkwy, Columbia. The event, which costs $ 50 a person, benefits nonprofit
organizations throughout Howard County. Food and beverages will be provided by
Clyde's, Bun Penny and Tomato Palace. For more information, call 410-730-7840.

   Rabies vaccinations for dogs, cats and ferrets will be provided from 6 to 8
p.m. Wednesday at the Clarksville Fire Department on Route 108 near Route 32 and
also at Ellicott Mills Middle School, 4445 Montgomery Rd., Ellicott City.

   The vaccination costs $ 5 but is free to county residents who purchase
licenses for their pets at the time. A pet license for spayed or neutered pets
costs $ 6. For non-spayed or non-neutered animals, the charge is $ 24.
Documentation is required.

    All pets in Howard are required to have rabies vaccinations. Pets must be at
least 3 months old to be vaccinated. For more information about the clinic, call
the Howard County Health Department's Bureau of Environmental Health at
410-313-1773. For information about neutering or spaying, call Animal Control at
410-313-2780.

   The Savage Volunteer Fire Company will host a chili cook-off from 2 to 6 p.m.
Saturday at the Savage Volunteer Fire Hall, 8925 Lincoln St., Savage. Admission
is $ 5 for adults and $ 2 for children 10 and younger. The event will also
feature games and a raffle. For more information, call 410-707-9641.

   Vernon C. Gray, a Democrat who served five terms on the Howard County
Council, was honored Sunday with the Rev. John W. Holland Humanitarian Award by
the Community Action Council of Howard County. The award was presented at the
10th annual award dinner.

   Gray, who also served more than 10 years as a Community Action Council board
member, was recognized for work on issues involving health, youth and children.
He also was cited for efforts to obtain a better quality of life for all Howard
residents.

   The Maryland Alumnae Chapter of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority Inc. will
celebrate May Week with two public events.

   A book signing with Frankie Muse Freeman, the 14th national president of the
sorority, will be held at 2 p.m. Sunday at the Columbia Sheraton, 10207 Wincopin
Cir., Columbia. She will discuss her book, "A Song of Faith and Hope -- The Life
of Frankie Muse Freeman." In 1964, Freeman became the first woman appointed to
the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights. She served on the commission for 16 years.
The cost of the event is $ 50 and includes lunch and an autographed book.

   Nelson Rivers III, chief operating officer of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People, will speak during a reception at 6:30 p.m.
Tuesday at Historic Oakland, 5430 Vantage Point Rd., Columbia. The free event
will focus on empowering voters.

   For more information or to attend the events, call 410-730-9553.

   Talks about genetic testing and gene therapy will be given from 7:30 to 9
p.m. May 13. Sponsored by the Howard County chapter of Hadassah, the lectures
will feature Risa Davis of Jewish Family Service of Baltimore and Karen Wolff, a
genetic counselor at Greater Baltimore Medical Center. To attend, call Jodie
Berson at 301-596-3690 or e-mail mjmberson@erols.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                             756 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2003 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      April 30, 2003 Wednesday 1ST EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-08

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Cancer doctors seek research overhaul Regional boards would be
monitors

BYLINE: Karen Auge , Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   The country's largest organization of cancer doctors and  researchers - led
by a University of Colorado oncologist - wants to  overhaul the way research is
monitored and is instituting a strict  policy requiring members to disclose
business relationships that  could be conflicts.

   The American Society of Clinical Oncologists announced Tuesday that  it wants
to set up regional review boards that would make sure  cancer researchers follow
rules and procedures in clinical trials.  The regional boards would, in many
cases, replace the smaller  groups, known as internal review boards, that are
now within nearly  all institutions that conduct clinical trials.

   'Reducing duplicated effort almost certainly will reduce the cost  to the
entire research budget' as well as create uniform standards  and procedures that
all researchers would have to adhere to, said  Dr. Lowell Schnipper, director of
the organization's task force on  clinical research oversight.

   Schnipper and Dr. Paul Bunn, president of the society and a lung-

   cancer specialist at the University of Colorado, said they hope  that the new
research-oversight structure also would help speed  research.

   A more centralized system would also enable researchers to learn  more
quickly about any serious side effects or problems emerging  from new drugs or
procedures being tested, Schnipper said.

   The recommendations result from more than two years of work by a  pair of
task forces investigating issues of integrity and practice  in research.

   Those task forces were a response to what Schnipper called 'a  growing crisis
of public confidence in the clinical trials process,  not necessarily specific
to cancer. But there were well-publicized  research problems at a number of
major medical centers.'

   In perhaps the most widely publicized case, an Arizona teenager and  research
volunteer died in 1999 during gene-therapy experiments at  the University of
Pennsylvania. As a result, the university halted  all human gene research.

   This month, the Bush administration ordered a nationwide review of  all
research at the nation's veterans hospitals after investigators  found serious
violations of federal rules.

   And in 1999, CU voluntarily suspended about 2,700 human studies  when the
federal Office for Protection from Research Risk raised  concerns about CU's
review procedures. Trials have resumed at CU.

   At the same time, regulation of research trials has increased,  leading some
researchers to fear that fewer and fewer physicians  will participate because of
the bureaucracy involved.

   Bunn credited research and clinical trials with driving the  progress in
cancer treatment over the past 30 years.

   In the mid-1970s, about half of cancer patients lived five years or  more
after being diagnosed, he said. Today, that number is 62  percent.

   Nevertheless, researchers estimate that only about 2 percent to 3  percent of
cancer patients participate in clinical trials. Whether  that is because they
don't have access to trials or because their  doctors aren't aware of trials or
don't participate in research  because of the expense and hassle isn't clear,
Bunn said.

   For the centralized review boards to become more than a wish and a
recommendation will require widespread cooperation not only from  universities
and hospitals involved in research, but from such  agencies as the Food and Drug
Administration and the National  Cancer Institute.

   The oncology society's new rules requiring researchers to disclose  business
interests are a reality now and will begin applying to  research in one year,
Bunn said.

   "We believe abuses are uncommon, but the system must have  integrity."

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003


                             757 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 30, 2003, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: Doctors aim to end conflicts of interest ;
Cancer specialists issue new guidelines

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Less than a year after the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center's
president was criticized for not disclosing his financial interest in a drug the
center was testing, the world's leading organization of cancer doctors Tuesday
issued new guidelines to eliminate conflicts of interest.

   Under a revised ethics policy, the American Society of Clinical Oncology will
now require clinical cancer researchers to disclose virtually all financial ties
involving trial sponsors and restrict the financial interests of principal
investigators and other clinical trial leaders.

   "The rationale behind the new policy is the national abuses that came to
light in recent years," said Dr. Lowell Schnipper, chairman of the task force
that reworked the policy. "While we remain confident in the integrity of
clinical investigators, the goal of this policy is to increase the transparency
of clinical cancer research overall."

   The society also called for independent regional boards, rather than those at
each institution, to provide oversight and review of clinical trials. Schnipper
said such centralization would streamline the review process and improve patient
safety.

   The task force was formed in 2000, about the same time that numerous
conflict-of-interest cases began generating national attention. In one, a
University of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment led to the death of an
18-year-old. And in another, patients in a trial at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center in Seattle weren't told of the risks or the center's financial
interest.

   Schnipper said an increasing amount of private funding and a lack of uniform
policies among institutions necessitated the policy review.

   M.D. Anderson's policy came under scrutiny last July, when it was reported
that its president, Dr. John Mendelsohn, had not told participants in a trial of
the drug Erbitux that he owned large amounts of stock in a company sponsoring
its development. Mendelsohn made $ 6 million on the sale of 90,000, or 20
percent, of his shares last November.

   But the new guidelines do not require that an institution disclose financial
ties by institution leaders, such as the president, if the people aren't
involved in the trial. That was the case with Mendelsohn.

   Claiming it came "completely out of the blue," Dr. Leonard Zwelling, M.D.
Anderson's vice president for research administration, called the new policy "a
complicated issue that requires thought." He would not comment on specifics of
the policy.

   But M.D. Anderson faculty said the new policy was nothing revolutionary. They
said M.D. Anderson's conflict-of-interest policies already call for what's in
the society's policy.

   The society's policy says that researchers must disclose financial ties
including money earned through an advisory role, employment, leadership position
or expert testimony; stock ownership (except when invested in a diversified fund
not controlled by the individual); honoraria; research funding; and any other
remuneration such as trips, travel and gifts with a value more than $ 100.

   It prohibits trial leaders from receiving or holding stock or equity interest
in the trial sponsor; royalties or licensing fees from the product or treatment;
patents for the product; positions with the trial sponsor; and travel or trips
paid by the trial sponsor.

   Society President Dr. Paul A. Bunn Jr. said the fact that only 2 percent to 3
percent of adult cancer patients participate in clinical trials - and a crisis
of public confidence in the trial oversight system - could slow the
already-tardy approval of new drugs. He estimated there are about 400 compounds
in various stages of development.


LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2003


                             758 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                     APRIL 30, 2003 Wednesday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: CITY;
REGION

BYLINE: Staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Lawyer, CPA charged

   in 200G business scam

   An "inactive" lawyer and a certified public accountant were charged yesterday
in federal court in Philadelphia with an alleged $200,000 business scam.

   The former lawyer, Andrew C. Abrams, 40, of Bryn Mawr, and the accountant,
Louis D. Cavaliere, 56, of Medford, N.J., have agreed to plead guilty at a later
date to mail and wire fraud.

   They were former officers of Woodland Cryogenics Inc., a Philadelphia
manufacturing firm that was sold in 1997 to Thermadyne Holdings Corp., of St.
Louis. Prosecutors say they misrepresented Woodland's assets to induce the sale,
and then misappropriated Thermadyne funds after the purchase to pay Woodland
debts.

   "The amount of the loss is in dispute," said Cavaliere's attorney, Carmen
Nasuti.

   Man who stole 326G

   from bank jailed 1 year

   David J. McGrath, owner of Hook Financial Services, put cash in automated
teller machines for area banks. Problem was, he had his own hooks on the cash,
too.

   McGrath, 43, of Cloverly Road near Willits, was sentenced this week to a year
in prison for admittedly stealing $326,230 from one client, Wilmington Savings
Fund Society, over a four-month period.

   Sentencing guidelines called for at least 18 months in jail but U.S. District
Judge Eduardo C. Robreno showed leniency because McGrath had returned all but
$84,328.97.

   McGrath said he stole the money so he could "continue business operations and
deploy new" ATM machines.

   Free legal help offered

   by Philadelphia Bar

   Free legal help is available today as part of the Philadelphia Bar
Association's annual Law Week. From noon to 2 p.m., dozens of Philadelphia
attorneys will gather at the Gallery mall to offer free help on topics ranging
from landlord/tenant disputes, divorce and child custody to wills and employment
law, and other topics.

   Also, from 5 to 8 p.m., free legal advice will be available on the bar's
LegalLine hotline, 215-238-6333.

   Law Week is a week-long effort to reach out to citizens and make them more
aware of legal issues. Lawyers will also appear in city classrooms and bring
students into courtrooms to be a "lawyer for a day." For more information, see

   www.philadelphiabar.org.

   Mafia not dominant,

   N.J. crime panel finds

   The New Jersey Commission of Investigation has discovered that the Mafia is
no longer the predominant criminal organization in the state.

   The traditional La Cosa Nostra has been joined - and in some cases supplanted
- by organized criminals of Asian, Latino and Eastern Europe origin, said
chairman Francis E. Schiller.

   The commission yesterday opened a two-day inquiry on organized crime, with
special emphasis on the emergence of other criminal groups that are big in the
drug trade. Schiller called them "a chaotic, violent array of ethnic and
transnational criminal entities that function under new and different rules."

   S.C. girl, 2, recovering

   from operation at Cooper

   A 2-year-old South Carolina girl who is unable to walk because of a rare
brain disease was recovering yesterday from an experimental operation at Cooper
Hospital University Medical Center in Camden.

   Lana Swancey, of Columbia, S.C., who is 2 today, underwent a gene therapy
treatment yesterday morning. She has Canavan Disease, whose victims usually die
before their 10th birthday.

   Man charged with murder

   in death of 8-month-old

   Eight-month-old Sage Tyler Morgan-Abrahams made a fatal mistake last year
when he knocked over a bowl of his father's marijuana, police said.

   The father, Kevin Abrahams, 26, beat the baby so severely he died the next
night, police said. The alleged killer then incinerated the remains in a
fireplace in the Burlington City, N.J., home.

   The child's remains were found June 1 hidden in a box in the home. Yesterday,
Abrahams was charged with murder.

   The child's mother, Jessica Morgan, pleaded guilty on April 7 to aggravated
manslaughter and conspiracy to hinder apprehension in exchange for testifying
against Abrahams, her former boyfriend.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2005


                             759 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     April 30, 2003 Wednesday, Final / All

SECTION: SENIOR STANDOUTS; Pg. S2

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: Westlake's Baunach draws pride from giving to others

BYLINE: Sarah Treffinger, Plain Dealer Reporter

DATELINE: Westlake, Ohio

BODY:

   Emily Baunach / Westlake High School

   HEAD OF THE CLASS

   Westlake - Emily Baunach will never forget the day she got through to Ilco
Fabinak.

   After two years of refusing to let the autistic boy shut her out of his
world, Emily said, she was rewarded with the words, "I love you too, Emmy."

   It was one of the best moments of her life.

   "Ilco had a paralyzing fear of people, but he learned to trust that I wasn't
going to harm him in any way," Emily said. "He knows that I'm safe."

   Emily has worked with Ilco and his twin sister, Villie, who also is autistic,
for four years. Her role in their lives, which began in a Bulgarian orphanage,
is ever-changing.

   Initially, Emily volunteered as Villie's "buddy" during Sunday School
classes. For tips on how to connect with the little girl, she sat in on therapy
training sessions. She soon became so interested in learning more about the
twins' "institutional autism" that she decided to work with both of them on a
regular basis.

   Since the twins had little human interaction before they were adopted at age
3, Emily said she started many sessions with Villie by looking into her eyes for
20 minutes. When she worked with Ilco, she literally had to get in his face and
force him to acknowledge her presence.

   Emily now focuses on academics with the twins, who are 9 and in the first
grade.

   "They have come so far, and their progress hasn't stopped," Emily said
proudly.

   Though Emily is bound for Vanderbilt University to study neuroscience, she
knows Ilco and Villie always will be part of her life.

   "I love them to pieces," she said.

   At Westlake High School, Emily is co-president of Student Council, co-captain
of the Science Olympiad team, secretary of the Key Club and an Ohio Reads tutor.

   Last year, she worked on the school district's campaign for a new auditorium.
And every Thursday, she drives across town to take out the trash for a senior
citizen with a heart condition.

   A National Merit Finalist, Emily also manages to maintain her No. 1 ranking
and 4.95 grade-point average. She was one of six national finalists for the
Toshiba Exploravision Award, with a project on gene therapy.

   She is the daughter of Dorothy and Bruce Baunach.

   "She's a very mature kid, and has been since, maybe, [age] 3," her father
said. "What she's done has blown us away."

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003


                             760 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                  April 30, 2003 Wednesday, Sports Final / All

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis trial shows promise;
Gene therapy technique pioneered in Cleveland

BYLINE: Harlan Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   The first human experiments using a gene therapy technique pioneered in
Cleveland appear to have succeeded in correcting the faulty cellular process
responsible for cystic fibrosis.

   Researchers at University Hospitals and Case Western Reserve University began
the clinical trial one year ago with 12 patients who received a corrected gene
in a saline solution dripped into their nasal passages. Cystic fibrosis patients
have a genetic defect that causes the buildup of thick mucus in the lungs and
digestive system.

   Scientists using a gene-transfer system developed by Cleveland-based
Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. found that the patients suffered no ill effects and
that the therapy appeared to normalize the nasal cells.

   The experiment did not attempt to cure the 12 volunteers because the nasal
passages were merely a test site.

   Doctors don't know yet whether the gene transfer will take hold in the lungs
or how frequently therapy would be necessary as mature cells die off and new,
defective cells take their place.

   But in eight of the 12 patients, the cells produced enough protein to improve
the transport of salt and water, a critical balance that is upset in cystic
fibrosis patients. The gene controls production of the protein responsible for
maintaining the balance.

   Doctors are far from fixing the genetic cause of cystic fibrosis, which
affects 30,000 Americans.

   "Data is encouraging. We're continuing clinical development, but it's not a
cure yet," said Dr. Robert Moen, president and CEO of Copernicus.

   The eight-employee biotechnology firm has a $1 million state grant to develop
an aerosol technology that will enable the gene to be pumped into the lungs.
Human trials are to begin next year.

   The company licensed technology that compacts DNA - the structure that
carries the genetic code - so the corrected gene would be small enough to enter
the cell nucleus. The compacting technology is critical because viruses that are
commonly used to introduce corrected genes into cells are fraught with problems
for cystic fibrosis patients. Early gene therapy trials caused a devastating
inflammatory response.

   The 12 patients will have first crack at enrolling in the clinical trial
using aerosol technology for the lungs, said Dr. Michael Konstan, director of
the Cystic Fibrosis Center at UH's Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital.

   "We've got to get it into the lungs," said Robert Beall, president and CEO of
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "Then I'll call it a breakthrough, if we see
improvement in lung function."

   Stacy Stoutenberg, a Cleveland native who lives in Boulder, Colo., has been
closely following the clinical trial. Her 20-month-old son, Jack, has cystic
fibrosis, and she contacted Moen at Copernicus.

   "It seems so promising," she said. "If therapy works . . . Jack can have a
healthy adulthood."

   ILLUSTRATION RAN WITH STORY BY STEPHEN J. BEARD | THE PLAIN DEALER

   "GENE THERAPY TREATMENT SUCCESSFUL"

   SOURCE: COPERNICUS THERAPEUTICS INC.,

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2003


                             761 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           April 30, 2003, Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 182 words

HEADLINE: Science academy elects San Diegans

BODY:
 Two researchers in San Diego were among 72 American and 18 foreign scientists
elected yesterday to the National Academy of Sciences.

   They are Fred H. Gage, a neuroscientist at the Salk Institute for Biological
Sciences in La Jolla, and Dr. Dennis A. Carson, professor of medicine and
director of The Sam and Rose Stein Institute for Research on Aging at UCSD.

   Gage studies the adult nervous system and has shown that humans are capable
of growing new brain cells throughout their lives, a notion long thought
impossible.

   Scientists hope to expand upon his work to find ways to replace brain tissue
lost to stroke, Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative diseases and to develop
treatments for spinal cord injuries.

   Carson specializes in autoimmune diseases and cancers of the lymphoid system.
He has researched drugs and genetic therapies to treat and prevent cancer and
arthritis.

   The academy is a private organization of scientists and engineers established
in 1863 by an act of Congress to advise the government on science and
technology.

   The academy now has 1,922 members


LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2003


                             762 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 29, 2003 Tuesday REGION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY SPARE PROSTATE PATIENTS FROM IMPOTENCE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It might be possible to reduce the risk of erectile dysfunction following
prostate cancer surgery by use of gene therapy, local scientists say based on
successful experiments with laboratory rats.

    In the experiments, the researchers injured the nerves in the rats that are
necessary for erections and immediately injected the animals with a modified
herpes virus carrying growth factor genes to repair the damage. Eight weeks
after the operations, the animals had regained 80 percent of their erectile
function.

    Dr. Michael Chancellor, director of neuro-urology at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, presented the findings in Chicago yesterday at the
annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

    "It works much better than we expected," he said. "The concept is very
slick."

    Prostate cancer can be treated by removing the prostate gland and
surrounding tissue, but the cavernous nerve, which causes and maintains
erection, can be injured in the process. More than half of the patients suffer
erectile dysfunction, Chancellor said.

    "There are some studies that show [men] steering away from the surgery
because they don't want to lose what [sexual function] they have," Chancellor
said. "More importantly, some men are afraid of getting their prostates
checked."

    The drug Viagra helps many patients, but it means depending on pills.

    In the gene therapy technique, genes that make nerve protective proteins are
engineered into the herpes virus, which has been altered so it can't replicate
or cause disease. The engineered virus is injected near the cavernous nerve or
in the penis. The gene proteins are pumped out for several weeks, helping the
cavernous nerve heal.

    Tests showed that the proteins were being made, that treated rats had more
nerve fibers than rats in a placebo group and that the virus stayed by the
injection site, Chancellor said.

    If further testing proves successful, a man having prostate cancer surgery
could get the gene therapy in a few minutes during his operation.

    The researchers are also testing the nerve-repairing gene therapy to improve
numbness and other sensation problems in animal models of diabetes.

NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2003


                             763 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 29, 2003 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY SPARE PROSTATE PATIENTS FROM IMPOTENCE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It might be possible to reduce the risk of erectile dysfunction following
prostate cancer surgery by use of gene therapy, local scientists say based on
successful experiments with laboratory rats.

    In the experiments, the researchers injured the nerves in the rats that are
necessary for erections and immediately injected the animals with a modified
herpes virus carrying growth factor genes to repair the damage. Eight weeks
after the operations, the animals had regained 80 percent of their erectile
function.

    Dr. Michael Chancellor, director of neuro-urology at the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, presented the findings in Chicago yesterday at the
annual meeting of the American Urological Association.

    "It works much better than we expected," he said. "The concept is very
slick."

    Prostate cancer can be treated by removing the prostate gland and
surrounding tissue, but the cavernous nerve, which causes and maintains
erection, can be injured in the process. More than half of the patients suffer
erectile dysfunction, Chancellor said.

    "There are some studies that show [men] steering away from the surgery
because they don't want to lose what [sexual function] they have," Chancellor
said. "More importantly, some men are afraid of getting their prostates
checked."

    The drug Viagra helps many patients, but it means depending on pills.

    In the gene therapy technique, genes that make nerve protective proteins are
engineered into the herpes virus, which has been altered so it can't replicate
or cause disease. The engineered virus is injected near the cavernous nerve or
in the penis. The gene proteins are pumped out for several weeks, helping the
cavernous nerve heal.

    Tests showed that the proteins were being made, that treated rats had more
nerve fibers than rats in a placebo group and that the virus stayed by the
injection site, Chancellor said.

    If further testing proves successful, a man having prostate cancer surgery
could get the gene therapy in a few minutes during his operation.

    The researchers are also testing the nerve-repairing gene therapy to improve
numbness and other sensation problems in animal models of diabetes.

NOTES:
Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or 412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2003


                             764 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       April 28, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 1947 words

HEADLINE: Finding the right gene therapy;
Hope for sound treatment for those in dire straits emerging

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE mmarchione@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Ruth Bettin was only 9 years old when scientists cracked the genetic code.
Fifty years later, she's probably alive because of it.

   Bettin endured two heart bypass surgeries, three balloon angioplasties and
five stent procedures to open blocked arteries, only to have them reclog within
weeks. Doctors listed her for a heart transplant but said she might not survive
the wait or the operation. Conventional medicine could offer her no more.

   "They were just out of options," the Beloit woman said. "I was so unstable
they just did not hold out a lot of hope."

   Her cardiologist, the University of Wisconsin-Madison's Matthew Wolff, called
around the country, searching for something new to try.

   He found Jeffrey Isner, a Boston doctor pioneering a radical treatment:
injecting patients' hearts with a gene that promotes the growth of blood
vessels. It was so risky that some people died from the procedure itself.

   "It's really designed for desperate patients, and Ruth was a desperate
patient," Wolff said.

   Bettin had the treatment in January 1999. Four years later, she's not cured,
but is alive against all odds, taking fewer medications and trying to build up
time on the treadmill at the gym.

   "Walking and breathing was difficult before," she said. "A couple years ago,
we had the river festival in Beloit, and my kids pushed me around in a
wheelchair because there was no way I could walk the distance of the park. The
last couple years I've taken grandchildren, and I go on rides with them. We go
on the Tilt-A-Whirl and all those things."

   She is among a small but growing number of people for whom gene therapy is
finally starting to pay off after a decade of stunning failures -- a teenager
dying in one experiment and two toddlers developing a cancer-like disease in
another.

   "Gene therapy has taken a lot of knocks," said George Daley, a scientist at
one of the nation's leading genetics centers, the Whitehead Institute in
Cambridge, Mass. "The early stuff was a nightmare. It was worthless."

   But many scientists think that gene therapy now has been redirected in ways
that may finally make it more safe and successful, though that may wind up being
for a much smaller set of diseases and problems than originally hoped.

   Thousands of people in the United States are currently enrolled in about 200
gene therapy experiments, more than half of them for cancer. All are clinical
trials regulated by the Food and Drug Administration.

   Several times, federal officials have halted many of these trials, worried
about unforeseen consequences from a technology so new that predicting every
possible outcome is virtually impossible.

   After each interruption and review by overseers, most of the trials have
resumed because the reality is that gene therapy remains many people's only hope
of defeating fatal diseases.

   'Simple' concept, tough method

   "The concept is very simple," said Nelson Wivel, a University of Pennsylvania
scientist who for many years headed the National Institutes of Health office
responsible for overseeing gene therapy experiments in the U.S.

   The idea is to give people the correct or healthy version of a gene they
lack. People with Parkinson's disease, for instance, would get a gene that
directs production of the brain chemical dopamine. Diabetics would get genes for
insulin. Cancer patients would get tumor suppressor genes to put the brakes on
rampant cell growth.

   It all seemed doable in 1990, in the first U.S. gene therapy experiment on a
4-year-old girl with a severe immune system disorder caused by a defect in one
of her genes.

   About 2,800 diseases or disorders are believed to be caused by single gene
defects. It was these "easy targets" that researchers first set their sights on
trying to cure. A young genetics researcher at the University of Michigan, James
Wilson, took aim at one of the most common ones -- cystic fibrosis.

   The gene defect that causes this disease results in an overproduction of
sticky mucus that clogs the lungs, damages other organs and usually kills people
in their 30s.

   The first challenge in gene therapy is figuring out how to get the desired
gene inside the patient's cells and into enough cells to make a difference in
the disease. Wilson and his colleagues thought they had a great vehicle to
deliver the gene: viruses, which excel at infecting cells and can be modified so
they don't cause illness.

   A second challenge is having the gene stick around so its benefit is
long-lasting. Using a retrovirus seemed ideal. This virus not only gets inside a
cell but also penetrates the nucleus and stitches its genetic cargo permanently
into chromosomes.

   But when doctors tried this to treat cystic fibrosis, a biological problem
emerged. Only a small fraction of any cells become infected when a virus is
introduced into the body. These few infected cells would have to divide and
produce more cells containing the virus (and the desired gene it's carrying) for
the gene to make a difference in the course of the disease.

   But it turned out that lung cells don't divide much, and there are so many of
them lining the lungs that they'd cover half a football field if stretched flat,
Wilson said. The few cells containing the corrected gene were completely
inadequate to do the patient any good.

   Researchers next tried using something more adept at infecting lung cells --
an adenovirus, cause of the common cold. But the immune system attacked the
virus and formed antibodies to it, dooming its capacity to deliver its payload
-- the desired gene -- into cells.

   "I'm convinced it's an insurmountable problem," and that gene therapy won't
work for cystic fibrosis, Wilson said recently at a genetics seminar at
Whitehead.

   Some efforts to help hurt

   But researchers weren't convinced it wouldn't work for other diseases. By
1999, Wilson had moved to the University of Pennsylvania and then led the gene
therapy attempt that resulted in the death of Jesse Gelsinger, who had a rare
liver disorder that leaves the body unable to clear ammonia from the
bloodstream.

   The immune response that had simply made earlier adenovirus gene therapies
ineffective or short-lived turned out to be fatal in the Arizona teen,
triggering massive inflammation in his liver. Clotting factors also were
disrupted, more evidence of an overwhelming immune system attack on the
adenovirus.

   "We weren't even thinking about that. We all thought it was the genes that
would cause toxicity," not the virus, Wilson said.

   Gelsinger's death led to more regulation, suspension of the work by Wilson
and many others at the University of Pennsylvania, and a chilling effect on the
entire field.

   At a cancer research convention in New Orleans in March 2001, Philip Noguchi,
who oversees gene therapy for the FDA, said that applications to do gene therapy
had dropped 50% in 2000, and that patients were reluctant to participate in
experiments.

   "The public has lost confidence in this area, there's no doubt about that.
We're trying to win it back," Noguchi said.

   Meanwhile, other researchers were still using retroviruses for gene therapy,
including French doctors who used them on nine children born with "bubble boy"
disease, an immune system deficiency that's usually fatal within the first year
of life.

   That experiment had been considered the first slam-dunk success for gene
therapy until last year, when two of the children developed a leukemia-like
condition caused by the corrective gene accidentally activating a cancer gene.

   Scientists had long feared such an effect because they can't control where in
a person's chromosomes a retrovirus will insert the good gene it's delivering.

   Dozens of gene therapy experiments in the U.S. using retroviruses were put on
hold. Those that have been allowed to proceed are now moving with great caution
and additional guidelines to try to ensure patient safety.

   "The challenges of gene delivery are so much more difficult that many
originally imagined," said Daley, of the Whitehead Institute.

   Its usefulness as a treatment for some diseases also is being questioned. For
instance, many researchers now doubt that it will defeat cancer, a disease
involving many genes and many pathways that affect how cells turn malignant,
multiply and spread.

   "It probably will never work" for cancer, said Tyler Jacks, director of the
MIT Center for Cancer Research.

   "Trying to block pathways is a lot harder than augmenting one," agreed Doug
Losordo, a Tufts University doctor who succeeded Isner as director of the gene
therapy experiments at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in suburban Boston where
Bettin, the Beloit woman, was treated.

   Isner, the program's pioneer, died suddenly of heart problems at the age of
53 two years ago, just after the National Institutes of Health awarded a $10
million grant to expand his gene therapy experiments because results were so
encouraging.

   Those experiments involve patients with inoperable heart problems and
diabetics with neuropathy, painful and irreversible blockages in the nerves of
the leg. They're given a gene that makes vascular endothelial growth factor, or
VEGF, a substance that spurs new blood vessel growth.

   Two things have helped these experiments succeed where others have failed.
First, it's not necessary to get the gene into all or even most cells to help
the patient. Just getting enough to form some new blood vessels eases the
shortage of blood to the heart or leg.

   Researchers also used a different method to deliver the gene -- a molecular
Baggie called a plasmid -- instead of a virus. The only side effects have been
some swelling at the site of injections.

   Other researchers are trying to use a much smaller virus, adeno-associated
virus, which causes no known disease, to do gene therapy.

   As for the 4-year-old girl and another child who became the nation's first
gene therapy patients in 1990, "both of them are still alive, doing reasonably
well," but aren't cured and have needed about 10 more gene therapy treatments to
keep their disease in check, said Wivel, the former NIH official.

   Wilson, who paid a great personal and professional price for his early work
on gene therapy, still believes in its value and says people need to be more
patient to allow the science to mature.

   "If the way you view the field is clinical applications, you'll probably be
pretty disappointed" at where things stand now, he said.

   Setbacks such as the Gelsinger death have taught valuable lessons, he added.

   "As tragic as this was, I think we've redirected gene therapy and gene
research," Wilson said. "We're a lot smarter about how to deploy the
technology."

   GENE THERAPY STRANDS OF HOPE

   New developments suggest that successful gene therapy +/- using DNA to cure
disease +/- will finally be developed, but progress takes time.

   WHAT IS GENE THERAPY?

   Gene therapy is a catchall phrase for a variety of techniques that introduce
genes into the body's cells. A common way is to tuck them inside viruses that
have been modified so they don't cause disease.

   Virus Therapeutic genes Nucleus Cell Cell's genes Therapeutic proteins

   1 Therapeutic genes are inserted into a virus. 2 Virus enters the cell. 3
Genes are deposited in the nucleus. 4 Therapeutic proteins are created.

   TWO GENERAL APPROACHES

   -- Sometimes researchers try to treat diseases by replacing missing or
defective genes.

   -- Genes are sometimes introduced into cells (such as tumor cells) to make
them vulnerable to drugs or to attack by the immune system.

   Sources: Scientific American, Dallas Morning News research Knight Ridder

   (FOR GRAPHIC SEE MICROFILM OR BOUND FILE)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2003


                             765 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      April 27, 2003 Sunday FINAL Edition

SECTION: ARTS & SOCIETY, Pg. 13F

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: James D. Watson's ultimate DNA tale

BYLINE: Michael Stroh

SOURCE: Sun Staff

BODY:

   DNA: The Secret of Life, by James D. Watson. Alfred A. Knopf, 446 pages.
$39.95.

   Fifty years ago, deoxyribonucleic acid was just one of the human body's many
obscure chemicals, a substance of interest to only a tiny handful of scientists
around the world. And even they weren't sure what to make of it.

   Today, of course, that's all changed. DNA is a cultural and scientific
superstar, its curvy profile plastered on everything from billboards to business
cards. The molecule is used to solve crimes, head off disease, design hardier
crops and probe the origins of our species. The complex story of DNA's journey
out of scientific obscurity, and the social upheaval it has occasionally created
along the way, has been the subject of numerous books and articles over the
years. But now biologist James Watson, one of the scientists who brought DNA to
the fore, has produced a single-volume coffee-table history that is both
lavishly illustrated and engagingly told. In February 1953 Watson and his
research partner Francis Crick solved the long-standing mystery of DNA's
structure by determining its atoms were strung together like a winding spiral
staircase, or double helix. It was a discovery with profound implications, as
the pair quickly realized.

   Soon after the insight, Watson recalls, he and Crick bounced into a nearby
Cambridge University pub where Crick boomed: We have discovered the secret of
life! While memories of what exactly was said that day differ, the Nobel
Committee ultimately agreed with the spirit of Watson's portrayal, awarding the
pair the prize in 1962 for their monumental discovery.

   It's a story recounted in Watson's best-selling memoir, The Double Helix, and
repeated here, lending the book its subtitle. But Watson spends most of his time
chronicling what has happened to DNA in the years since: how the discovery of
DNA's structure led to an understanding of how the molecule stores and passes on
hereditary information and ultimately how it made it possible for scientists to
tinker with the molecule. Much of the material in the book, written with
Harvard-trained geneticist Andrew Berry, seems to have been assembled from other
sources. But what elevates this history above Cliff's Notes status is Watson
himself, who at 75 is widely regarded as the dean of DNA, the elder statesman of
molecular biology.

   Watson's understanding of the science -- he's also written some of the
field's standard textbooks -- and his personal acquaintance with many of the
researchers he mentions lends his account an authority that would be hard to
match. His quirky sense of humor and habit of tossing in gossipy,
behind-the-scenes asides don't hurt, either.

   Watson also doesn't gloss over controversies that have surrounded DNA over
the years, such as the development and occasionally unintended spread of
genetically modified food and failures of gene therapy, which in 1999 killed a
teen-age study subject. Not surprisingly, the scientist argues that setbacks
like this are tragic but inevitable and shouldn't be used to shut down risky
research. More knowledge, not less, is always better in the long run, Watson
believes.

   The book's publication is timed to coincide with both the 50th anniversary of
his and Crick's discovery and a companion five-part PBS series scheduled to air
this month. For anybody who has felt bewildered by DNA-related headlines and
wondered how we were able to come so far so fast, this book offers the perfect
way to catch up.

   Michael Stroh has covered science and technology for The Sun since 1998. He
began writing about the subject at Science News in 1992. He also worked at The
Sacramento Bee and the Los Angeles Times.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2003


                             766 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2003 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   APRIL 27, 2003 Sunday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CHOICES; Pg. 4J

LENGTH: 929 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH'S SNARE;
GENETIC ENGINEERING WILL MAKE US LESS THAN HUMAN, AUTHOR ARGUES

BYLINE: MARTA SALIJ FREE PRESS BOOKS WRITER

BODY:
'Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age'
THREE STARS out of 4 stars
By Bill McKibben
Times Books, 227 pages, $25

   Some books start a veritable waterfall of connections in a reader's brain --
but not always the connections the author intended.

   Such a book is Bill McKibben's "Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age."
McKibben is deeply worried about the threats posed by genetic engineering and
robotics, among other technologies, to strip our human lives of meaning.

   Yes, of meaning. His worries are nothing less than that, and he passionately
and eloquently describes why he fears that using technologies to enhance human
abilities will create humans who have no choice but to despair that their lives
have no purpose. Who will despair, that is, more than humans already do.

   But the form and the force of his arguments illuminated a different corner
for me, and I found myself wondering why community, service and faith weren't
more central to the debate.

   To try to create a super-race of humans, with super-high intelligence,
uniformly great beauty and ultra-long lives seems quite obviously bad, at least
to McKibben and me.

   But is it bad because the superhumans will be unhappy? Is that the strongest
possible point McKibben could make?

   Elegant arguments

   McKibben is a science writer with solid environmentalist stripes. His "The
End of Nature" was a gracefully written argument that man imperils all life when
he thinks that everything else in nature exists to serve him.

   "What if the ending to our story has already been written, our compass
already set?" he writes at the end of a chapter on genetic engineering in the
new book. "What if we have been programmed, or at least must suspect each time
we choose a path that we have been nudged in that direction by our engineered
cells? Who then are we?"

   McKibben focuses on two technologies that could move us into a "post-human"
future: "germline genetic engineering," in which genes are altered in an embryo
to enhance intelligence or beauty or health, and nanorobotics, in which humans
are implanted with infinitesimally small devices to run faster, see farther,
live longer.

   He isn't worrying about what is called "somatic gene therapy," introducing
healthy genes into people with a specific illness, such as sickle cell anemia or
cystic fibrosis. And he isn't concerned that much with creating robots separate
from ourselves.

   But he thinks that allowing germline engineering and half-cyborg humans makes
it too easy to cross a line from healing people to enhancing them, with
dangerous results.

   What happens when your unenhanced kids are followed by a generation of kids
with 30 extra IQ points? Or to your oldest, with just 30 extra points, when your
youngest, with 60 extra points, is born?

   It's curious that McKibben addresses only in passing instances in which human
technology has already crossed lines for some people. Amniocentesis lets parents
know their baby's sex and has allowed Chinese and Indian parents, among others,
to abort girls more often than boys. McKibben does talk a little about that.

   But he skips over in-vitro fertilization, which gives parents more control
over what kind of children they will have. He sees IVF as a technology without
potential unwanted social change, and I'm not sure of that.

   Scientists are coming closer to connecting genes with traits such as
intelligence. Once it's possible to read the genes of various candidate embryos,
what's to stop parents from implanting only those embryos with the highest
intelligence? Won't that create the same problems as germline engineering?

   What it means to be human

   McKibben's main arguments are about what it means to be human, and few
writers in this field have tried as thoroughly to address the human dimension of
technology.

   He begins the book with a beautifully written passage on running. McKibben is
an amateur marathoner, and he says he feels intense meaning when he runs farther
or faster than he thought he could. That meaning will be lost to athletes who
have been engineered to run far or fast, he says.

   This is a rare misstep in logic for him. Gene-enhanced runners will find
satisfaction in outstripping their genes, just as we do.

   But what's this idea that "being the best you can be" is the purpose of human
life?

   Yes, I know: A huge part of our culture suggests just that. But I just
finished reading a book on the cycles of history, "The Fourth Turning," by
William Strauss and Neil Howe, and a book on personal faith in God, "Grace," by
Mary Cartledgehayes. It's impossible for me to take a definition of "humanness"
as "overcoming personal limits" seriously.

   Isn't it our connection to each other, our obligations to each other, that
makes us human? Isn't that where we should look for meaning?

   And therefore, shouldn't we halt this research because, for example, it would
almost certainly widen the terrible disparities between rich and poor when the
rich can afford to add 30 IQ points to their children and the poor can't?

   McKibben doesn't make these arguments central, but to be fair, he doesn't
miss them entirely. "People are OK. I'm OK, you're OK, the lady who stands there
forever talking with the cashier at Shop'n Save is nonetheless, deep down, OK,"
he writes when he says that humans are good enough without engineering.

   I would never disagree with that. All the more reason to make our obligations
to our fellow humans central.

   MARTA SALIJ is the books writer for the Free Press. Contact her at
313-223-4530 or salij@freepress.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2005


                             767 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      April 27, 2003 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 2940 words

HEADLINE: Pair's model helix made world do a double take;
DNA structure has altered fields from health care to justice

BYLINE: SUSANNE QUICK AND MARILYNN MARCHIONE squick@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Few discoveries have changed the course of human history, requiring people to
re-evaluate their concept of nature and place within it.

   The taming of fire was one, as was the Mesopotamian invention of the wheel.

   Fifty years ago last Friday, another such discovery occurred. It appeared in
the scientific journal Nature, and it described the physical structure of DNA:
the molecular blueprint of life.

   That find, by James Watson and Francis Crick, launched humankind into a whole
new dimension of scientific understanding.

   It has since propelled people into a world where they can pick the sex of
their children, grow legs where flies' wings should develop, clean oil spills
with genetically modified bacteria and realize that in terms of our molecular
makeup, we aren't much different from a worm.

   It also has affected the daily life of nearly every person on the planet.
From the medicines we take and the court battles we fight, to the foods we eat
and the clothes we wear, gene technology plays a role.

   Indeed, nearly 80% of soybean and 70% of cotton plants grown in the United
States were genetically modified, according to 2002 statistics from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.

   For thousands of years people have understood the concept of heredity. The
domestication of plants and animals were experiments in gene selection. Five
thousand years ago, early Americans bred together particularly tasty, bountiful
and hardy strains of a plant called teosinte. After several generations of this
manipulated breeding, a new plant was created, one we call corn.

   "We knew a lot about what a gene did," said Jim Crow, retired professor of
genetics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. "We just didn't know what it
was."

   That changed when Watson, an American biologist, and Crick, an English
chemist, met at Cambridge University in 1951.

   Discovering life

   Both had read "What Is Life?" by Erwin Schrodinger, who argued that life was
simply the process of storing and passing on biological information. Chromosomes
were the bearers of this information, he surmised. For this system to work, all
the information of life had to be packed into every cell. This required that
each cell be equipped with some sort of "hereditary code-script."

   The genius of what Watson and Crick did was pull from the work of others and
weave it into a coherent whole; indeed, they performed no experiments of their
own.

   They built models out of metal and cardboard cutouts. One construction
finally made sense.

   It was simple in form; a double-stranded helix that coiled round and round,
like a spiral staircase or piece of rotini.

   Each strand is connected to its mate by rungs, which are composed of four
chemicals called bases.

   Each rung has two bases that can form only two combinations: adenine with
thymine, or cytosine with guanine. In other words, if adenine was found at a
particular location on one strand, thymine would be found at the same place on
the other strand.

   This is what Watson and Crick published on April 25, 1953. And the power
their discovery unleashed was enormous.

   It challenged our perceptions of the past and present, and paved an uncertain
road for the future.

   "We knew that a mouse and an elephant were different," said Crow, "but, we
didn't know why two different species couldn't be mated."

   "Today we take it for granted that differences between species, genera,
families, even kingdoms involve changes in DNA," Crow wrote in a recent Nature
article. "Yet, before molecular technology, there was considerable doubt."

   Molecular analyses since have shown that modern humans arose in Africa, some
150,000 years ago; and that we share 98.5% of our DNA with chimpanzees -- our
closest living relatives on the planet.

   DNA testing has established that we are connected to all living creatures by
a common molecule, and it has shed light on how we -- and all species -- evolved
and differentiated.

   In a sense, the history of genetics could be loosely compared to human
evolutionary history.

   Just as Homo erectus -- an ancestor of modern humans -- observed and captured
fires caused by nearby lightning strikes, early geneticists understood, but
could not harness, the power of the gene.

   It took a quick-witted Neanderthal to pick up two stones, rub them together
and make a fire to change Pleistocene human culture and technology.

   And in that vein Watson and Crick collected chemical, physical and X-ray
information to build a 3-D model of DNA; culminating in a product that had no
less an effect on the world than those first Neanderthal sparks.

   Altering our medicine

   But DNA is not only a tool for discovering our past. We also are using it to
change the future.

   It has already fundamentally changed the field of medicine, and is predicted
to do so even more in the future.

   For instance, we now understand that some diseases are caused by tiny changes
in a single gene. Cystic fibrosis is caused by a change in one of the bases,
resulting in overproduction of sticky mucus in the lungs and damage to other
organs.

   Other diseases involve multiple genes whose identity, importance and
interplay are just starting to be discovered.

   We now know that all cancers are genetic -- the result of flawed genes
inherited from birth or, far more commonly, damaged during life. A key area of
cancer research involves exploring genes that cause or allow cancer to spread,
and developing targeted tests and drugs based on that knowledge.

   "People are treated today, in most cases, as they were 50 years ago," with
chemicals that kill healthy cells along with cancerous ones because there's no
way to distinguish the two, said Tyler Jacks, director of the Center for Cancer
Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   But that is changing as a new generation of designer gene drugs emerge. The
first, Rituxan, was approved in 1997 for lymphoma, followed by Herceptin for
breast cancer in 1998 and Gleevec for certain stomach cancers and leukemias in
2001.

   DNA is reshaping medicine in other ways:

   Gene tests: People can find out if they have faulty genes that put them at
higher risk of developing specific diseases, such as Huntington's or breast
cancer, and use that information to make decisions about whether to have
children or preventive treatment such as a mastectomy. They also can screen
embryos for signs of these diseases before pregnancy.

   Gene therapy: Although it's still extremely experimental, scientists are
trying to cure some diseases by giving patients healthy genes they lack. About
200 such experiments are under way in the United States; more than half are to
treat cancer.

   But the field has been plagued by setbacks and concerns that some of these
therapies may cause serious side effects, including cancer and death. In 2000,
the National Institutes of Health set up a hotline for gene therapy patients;
officials counted 652 cases of serious side effects and six unexplained deaths.

   Bioengineered drugs: Genetic manipulation has created new kinds of drugs and
vaccines, starting with Humulin: a human insulin produced by genetically
engineered bacteria, in 1982.

   Personalized treatments: DNA computer chips, called microarrays, can analyze
thousands of genes -- or the proteins they make -- in a single tissue sample,
and reveal which are fueling a patient's disease. They're still experimental,
but scientists hope to use them soon to detect diseases, monitor how treatments
are working and even predict whether a drug will help someone before the first
dose is given.

   "We treat diseases through proteins," and having a tool to show which ones
can help a patient could revolutionize treatment, said Josh LaBaer, a leading
microarray researcher at Harvard Medical School.

   Gene tests already are shaping some treatment decisions. For instance, at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, doctors test bladder cancer
patients for a particular gene. If they have it, chemotherapy is tried; if they
don't, surgery is the only option.

   Research tools: Mice can be engineered to lack or to possess a specific gene
so that they model a particular human disease. These mice then are used to test
drugs and treatments before they're tried on people.

   UW scientists recently figured out how to do this in human embryonic stem
cells -- master cells that can form any tissue in the body -- offering another
potential tool for testing drugs without putting people at risk.

   Cell therapies: For roughly 30 years, doctors have given transplants of adult
stem cells from bone marrow or the bloodstream to treat a variety of cancers.
But other cell treatments, such as fetal tissue transplants for Parkinson's
disease, have produced mixed and often disappointing results.

   Madison scientist James Thomson's isolation of embryonic stem cells in '98
has led to a revolution in thinking about the capabilities of cell therapy and
led to a resurgence of research on all types of stem cells for many diseases
besides cancer.

   Tissue engineering: Researchers are engineering cells to form structures such
as ears and noses on cellular scaffolds in the lab. In one case, a plastic
surgeon at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston made an ear for a child born
without one, and another New England scientist made a chest bone for a boy to
cover and protect his heart, said Robert Langer, a tissue engineer at MIT.

   He recently showed that genetically engineered cells have "shape memory" that
can take a desired form, such as a nose.

   But biological and medical studies don't have exclusive rights to DNA.
Indeed, other fields, such as law and agriculture, have picked up the molecule
and used it for their own needs.

   Genetic analysis

   Since the late 1980s, when ways to analyze an individual's DNA became cheap
and easy, lawyers, forensic experts and detectives started using it as a tool
for defense and prosecution.

   "It is so exact," said Norm Gahn, Milwaukee County assistant district
attorney and a nationally recognized advocate of DNA fingerprinting.

   Scientific courtroom evidence used to consist of just fingerprints,
handwriting and blood type. But with those techniques, the chance for error was
still one in 1,000.

   DNA testing has improved those odds to one in a sextillion; that's a one
followed by 21 zeros.

   "That provided really compelling evidence," said Gahn. "You'd just watch the
jurors as they were presented with this stuff -- all those bands matching up.
And you could see how effective it was."

   New databases that catalog the DNA of every convicted felon make matching
even easier.

   But with such a powerful tool come some formidable questions and concerns
about privacy and abuse.

   "You worry that information will end up in the wrong hands. In the hands of
somebody with the wrong philosophies," said Gahn.

   Other concerns about DNA include privacy and ownership. For instance, who has
rights to someone's genetic material after his or her death, and what are the
ramifications of giant gene-banking efforts under way around the U.S. and in
many other countries.

   "We're not really prepared to understand all the implications of having
genomic information out there," said Bruce Birren, assistant director of the
sequencing center at the Whitehead Institute, a genome research center in
Cambridge, Mass.

   So, as these topics are debated at bioethics forums, in legislative halls, on
talk radio shows and in the pages of books, the science of gene technology
pushes forward.

   And we're only 50 years into it.

   TIMELINE

   DNA'S EVOLUTION

   1953

   -- Feb. 28: James Watson realizes the base pairs of the DNA chains do not
match like with like +/- A-A or G-G +/- rather they pair A-T and G-C. Francis
Crick concurs, and their model falls into place.

   -- April 25: Watson and Crick report their discovery in a paper in the
journal Nature.

   1959: The first human chromosome abnormality, Down syndrome, is identified.

   1960: Messenger RNA, the link between DNA and the protein-making factories of
cells, is discovered.

   1967: Allan Wilson and Vincent Sarich, using the tools of molecular biology,
estimate that humans and great apes diverged about 5 million years ago, not 25
million years ago, as many anthropologists believed.

   1969: A Harvard Medical School team isolates the first gene, a segment of
bacterial DNA that plays a role in sugar metabolism.

   1970:

   -- University of Wisconsin researchers synthesize a gene from scratch.

   -- Peter Vogt and Peter Duesberg identify the first cancer- causing gene, in
a virus.

   1972:

   -- Paul Berg and colleagues cut and splice genes from viruses to create the
first molecules of recombinant DNA.

   -- Bruce Ames discovers that cancer-causing chemicals also cause mutations in
DNA, the basis of the Ames test for carcinogens.

   1975: Scientists meet and call for guidelines regulating recombinant-DNA
research.

   1978: Genentech scientists help clone the gene for human insulin.

   1980: Martin Cline and colleagues create a transgenic mouse by transferring
functional genes from one animal into another.

   1982: -- The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approves the first genetically
engineered drug, a form of insulin called Humulin.

   -- Stanley Prusiner discovers prions, the infectious proteins responsible for
mad-cow disease.

   1983: Kary Mullis devises the polymerase chain reaction, enabling scientists
to multiply rapidly snippets of DNA.

   1984: Alec Jeffreys and colleagues develop genetic fingerprinting +/- using
DNA to positively identify individuals.

   1985: Robert Gallo and Luck Montagnier each publish the genetic sequence of
HIV.

   1986:

   -- Leroy Hood invents the first automatic DNA sequencer.

   -- The FDA approves the first genetically engineered vaccine for humans with
hepatitis B.

   1988: Harvard University acquires the first patent for a genetically altered
animal: a mouse that is highly susceptible to breast cancer.

   1989: The first genetic screening test (to determine sex) is performed on
embryos before they are implanted in the uterus.

   1990: The Human Genome Project, an international effort to map and sequence
human DNA, is officially lunched, and the first federal gene therapy attempted.

   1993: Researchers at George Washington University clone the first human
embryos, and nuture them in vitro for several days.

   1994: The FDA allows the first genetically modified food product to market,
the Flavr Savr tomato. Its bland taste and high price make it a commercial dud.

   1995:

   -- Craig Venter and colleagues are first to decode the genome of a
free-living organism, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae.

   -- DNA microarrays are invented, permitting rapid analysis of large
quantities of DNA.

   -- Mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are linked to hereditary breast,
ovarian and prostate cancers.

   1997: Ian Wilmut and others report they have cloned a sheep, Dolly.

   1998: UW scientist James Thomson isolates human embryonic stem cells.

   1999: First known American death caused by gene therapy: Jesse Gelsinger, 18,
of multiple-organ failure after receiving an experimental treatment.

   2000: Venter and Francis Collins announce together that they have sequenced
the human genome.

   2002: Gene-therapy trials in France and the United States for the bubble-boy
disease are halted after a child undergoing treatment develops a leukemia-like
disease.

   (FOR GRAPHIC SEE MICROFILM OR BOUND FILE)

   Source: Time Magazine

   RIKA KANAOKA / rkanaoka@journalsentinel.com

   DNA 50TH ANNIVERSARY

   ANATOMY OF THE DOUBLE HELIX

   The discovery of DNA's 3-D structure in 1953 was one of the most significant
landmarks of the science history in the 20th century. Here is the basic
structure of DNA.

   Cell: The basic unit of living organisms. Contains fluid material, surrounded
by a membrane made up of double layers of protein and fats. Genes are passed
down through cell division.

   Chromosome: Two twisted strands of DNA. A person has 46 genes, grouped in 23
pairs.

   WHY X SHAPE?

   The unwound DNA in one person would stretch about 600 million miles, more
than six times the distance between the sun and Earth. To make room for it, DNA
strands wrap around coils called nucleosomes twice, then twist into the X shape.
It is thought that only about 4% of DNA is actually useful.

   DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid): Has the shape of the double helix. Made of sugar
and phosphate molecules and nucleotide bases linked by four chemical bases:
adenine, thymine, cytosine and guanine, or A, T, C, G.

   DIRECTION OF THE TWIST

   Human and all other living organisms on Earth have DNA that twists right,
like a screw.

   Sugar and phosphate ribbons: Make up backbone.

   The gene: A segment of DNA that contains the information needed to create
proteins that make up our bodies and control the transmission of genetic traits
to the next generation.

   PASSING INFORMATION

   Adenine always pairs with thymine, and cytosine always pairs with guanine in
normal genes. The sequences along the molecule determine the genetic
information. When a section of the helix divides, its bases are exposed. During
protein synthesis, a replica of the section, made of complementary bases, is
created in the form of messenger RNA, a kind of ribonucleic acid.

   GAG TAG GTT CTC ATC CAA Messenger RNA

   MUTATION

   A simple mistake +/- or mutation +/- in a gene sequence can cause a genetic
disease or predispose a person to a disease.

   Normal gene

   A T C G A T C G C

   Mutated gene

   A T C G T T C G C

   (FOR GRAPHIC SEE MICROFILM OR BOUND FILE)

   Sources: New York Times, Associated Press

   RIKA KANAOKA / rkanaoka@journalsentinel.com

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2003


                             768 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                     April 27, 2003 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: ARTS AND LIVING; Pg. D09

LENGTH: 916 words

HEADLINE: NONFICTION/REVIEW DRAWING THE LINE ON GENETIC ENGINEERING ENOUGH BILL
MCKIBBEN TIMES BOOKS, $25, 271 PAGES

SOURCE: SNELL - Special Writer, The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary - A science writer/humanist/philosopher says gene manipulation will
"destroy the meaning of our lives"

   Imagine the attributes you would claim for yourself, if you had the
opportunity to edit your DNA. You might take out the Alzheimer's gene you fear
is lurking and replace it with a healthful longevity gene, perhaps with some
happy chromosomes spliced in so you can ditch your Prozac prescription. You
might improve on your memory or your ability with languages. While you're
tinkering, you may as well screw in a skinny gene where that fat gene is and
straighten out that nose. And since you've gone this far, why not think bigger,
along the lines of an Olympic gold medal?

   While editing your own genes isn't going to happen anytime soon, editing the
genes of your unborn child is just around the corner if some scientists,
inventors and CEOs get their way. It's possible within most of our lifetimes,
according to Bill McKibben and the scientists he writes about in "Enough:
Staying Human in an Engineered Age." As parents now choose their children's
friends and schools, he says, they may soon choose genes to make their kids more
intelligent, obedient, efficient, cheerful, strong, beautiful or . . . you fill
in the blank.

   This manipulation of attributes is called germline genetic engineering, and
McKibben is emphatically against it.

   Germline genetic engineering depends on the ability to clone. We have been
cloning frogs for 40 years, and it's six years since Dolly the sheep appeared.
As yet, no case of human cloning has been publicly proved. But McKibben warns:
"A few flimsy pieces of legislation are all that prevent 'reproductive' human]
cloning in most (but not all) Western nations." And "once the game is under
way," he says, ". . . there won't be moral decisions, only strategic ones."

   McKibben comes at his subject from the perspective of philosopher, humanist,
environmentalist, informed layperson and experienced science writer (he is a
longtime contributing writer to The New Yorker and author of the acclaimed "The
End of Nature," among other books). But don't jump to conclusions: McKibben is
not a Luddite. He supports, for instance, somatic gene therapies used to treat
existing individuals battling disease.

   McKibben draws the "enough" line at human cloning and germline genetic
engineering, arguing that it will "destroy the meaning of our lives." In
shiveringly imaginative detail, he describes what that loss of meaning will feel
like. Opening the book with a description of his own love of running and the
thrill of pushing his body's limits of endurance, he envisions a future where
such joy is dulled by the knowledge that one has been programmed, like code,
like a machine, to run well. The resulting formula: No individual choice plus no
real fight against the odds equals no authentic accomplishment.

   In case we imagine people might voluntarily opt out of designing their
babies, even when everyone else is doing it, McKibben likens the situation to
performance-enhancing drugs in sports. If athletes want to win in a world that
allows steroids, they can't afford to stay clean. Likewise, if genetic
engineering is permitted, most parents will want to ensure that their children
can compete with their genetically enhanced peers.

   McKibben describes the advanced-tech research of a variety of scientists,
inventors and entrepreneurs. Some, such as Michael West (CEO of Advanced Cell
Technology), he describes as out-of-control zealots obsessed with achieving
immortality. Others, such as the inventor Ray Kurzweil, he takes more seriously,
though Kurzweil's book, "The Age of Spiritual Machines," reads to me like the
wildest, funkiest science fiction. A tiny sampling from a timeline Kurzweil
provides: In the year 2029, "the majority of communication does not involve a
human. . . . Many of the leading artists are machines."

   While McKibben doesn't match Kurzweil's enthusiasm for this machine-dominated
future, he explains convincingly why Kurzweil's predictions are plausible. He
has also listened closely to Bill Joy, the chief scientist of Sun Microsystems,
whose April 2000 Wired Magazine article argues for the relinquishment of
advanced technologies. Thought of by some scientists as a traitorous act by one
of their own, the article, "Why the Future Doesn't Need Us," is in McKibben's
words "one of the great Paul Revere moments of our time, a full-throated and
unhesitating alarum that should scare the hell out of us."

   McKibben has taken up Joy's "alarum" in earnest. He has imagined with
frightening specificity a world without limits on advanced technologies. But he
also begins to outline a world where humans achieve the maturity to set limits
without suppressing creativity, without bowing to scientific authority and
without regressing to religious authority.

   I see McKibben's book as a challenge to all of us -- creative thinkers of all
kinds -- to fill in that outline. How can we lead humanity through a dangerous
paradigm shift, McKibben asks us, away from the idea of the inevitable
advancement of technology and toward sound, embraceable solutions to the world's
problems?

   McKibben discusses "Enough" at 7:30 p.m. Tuesday at Twenty-Third Avenue
Books, 1015 N.W. 23rd Ave.

   Tricia Snell, editor of "Artists Communities," was the director of the
Alliance of Artists' Communities' November 2001 "Future of Creativity"
symposium, held in Chicago, that was also inspired by Bill Joy's "Paul Revere
alarum."

GRAPHIC: Photo - McKibben

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2003


                             769 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2003 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    April 26, 2003 Saturday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: OHSU JOINS WORLD SEARCH FOR AN ANTI-SARS VACCINE

SOURCE: PATRICK O'NEILL - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Scientists predict they possibly could make a vaccine in a year --
the virus is decoded -- but it wouldn't be available for years

   Scientists at Oregon Health & Science University are joining a global race to
find a vaccine against SARS.

   Jay Nelson, director of the university's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute,
said that within two weeks, researchers there will receive samples of the
coronavirus thought to be the cause of SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome.
The virus is a member of a large group that causes, among other things, the
common cold.

   SARS -- first reported in November in southern Guangdong province in China --
has sickened 4,649 people and killed 276 in 27 countries and Hong Kong,
according to a report by the World Health Organization on Friday.

   "We're just starting to get reagents in here to initiate a program to look at
SARS," Nelson said Friday. Reagents are substances used in chemical analysis and
synthesis.

   In a "best-case scenario," he said, the lab could generate a candidate
vaccine within a year. But depending on regulatory hurdles, he added, a vaccine
might not be available to the public for years.

   Depending on the seriousness of the epidemic, regulators may approve testing
shortcuts, he said. But the regulatory machinery could move substantially slower
than SARS research.

   "The thing that's absolutely amazing is how quickly it (SARS) appeared, how
quickly it was isolated and how quickly we can respond to generate vaccines," he
said. Scientists have identified the genetic code for the virus.

   Nelson said the vaccine institute will collaborate on studies with other
groups that he declined to name. He said collaborators approached the institute
because it has access to nonhuman primates -- rhesus macaques -- through the
Oregon Primate Center and because it has biosafety Level 3 laboratories
necessary to handle the virus safely.

   The institute has six Level 3 containment labs -- four in which the
coronavirus itself could be handled and two that are large enough to keep
animals that have been exposed to the virus.

   Level 3 labs are constructed so that the air pressure inside the lab is lower
than outside. That keeps any virus particles from escaping. Air inside the lab
is processed with high-efficiency filters that are regularly disinfected and
changed. Researchers wear surgical gloves and masks or respirators.

   SARS, thought to be transmitted in droplets from sneezing and coughing, is
dangerous because of the speed with which it can bring on potentially deadly
pneumonia.

   Viral infections, such as influenza, can open the door to bacterial
infections that cause pneumonia a week or two after infection. But the
coronavirus implicated in SARS in some cases sends the body's immune system into
overdrive, triggering an accumulation of fluid in the lungs within four or five
days of the beginning of symptoms.

   Although Oregon health officials have investigated several suspected SARS
cases in the state, none has been found. Washington state has 24 suspected
cases, but none has been confirmed.

   The decision by OHSU to develop an anti-SARS drug puts Oregon on track to
help attack a disease that is spreading concern among public health officials
worldwide. Another Oregon biotech lab, AVI BioPharma, headquartered in Portland,
is trying to develop a drug to block the action of the coronavirus after it
invades the host cell.

   The efforts attack the two major avenues to defeat a virus.

   OHSU's vaccine approach seeks to marshal the body's immune system to stop the
virus before an infection can gain a foothold. The AVI approach attempts to
develop synthetic genetic sequences to jam the machinery by which a virus
hijacks a host cell and turns it into a factory for producing more virus
particles.

   Klaus Freuh, an associate scientist with the institute, said large drug
manufacturers have become less and less interested in making vaccines. Profits
are low and the risk of lawsuits involving vaccines -- which are typically given
to millions of people -- are high, he said.

   Vaccine development, he said, "is something that can be done in an academic
setting" because it does not require a huge research infrastructure.

   Nelson estimates that a pilot project to develop a vaccine would cost about
$250,000.

   "We're trying to get funding for this right now, possibly through our new
collaborators," he said. "The problem is that if you go through the normal
(National Institutes of Health) system, it could take nine months to a year to
get funding."

   Before the work begins, the project requires approval from the university's
Institutional Biosafety Committee, which determines whether researchers can
handle dangerous organisms safely. Nelson said that approval normally takes
about two months.

   During the research, scientists will study the virus growing in tissue
culture cells, Nelson said.

   Primates will be inoculated with vaccine candidates and then exposed to the
coronavirus.

   "Unfortunately, as an immunologist," he said, "you have to use animals to
test the immune response."

   Patrick O'Neill; 503-221-8233; poneill@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2003


                             770 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 25, 2003, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME DRUG OK'D FOR US SALE BESTS RIVAL TKT; FABRAZYME MARKET COULD
HIT $200M

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. yesterday won regulatory approval to sell its drug Fabrazyme
for Fabry disease, beating out crosstown rival Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. to
bring the first treatment for the rare genetic disorder to the US market.

   Fabry disease, which affects 5,000 to 10,000 people worldwide, clogs major
organs such as the kidney and heart. Many people who suffer from the painful
disease die in their forties.

      The decision, by the Food and Drug Administration, could effectively give
Genzyme the entire US market, which analysts estimate could be $200 million.

   Genzyme went through a review process that took nearly three years and was
marked by delays and uncertainty. Approval could mark the beginning of a
turnaround for the Cambridge company, which last year trimmed its earnings
forecasts three times as it struggled to manage inventories of its dialysis
drug, Renagel.

   The approval is the first of two expected this month for Genzyme. Its drug,
Aldurazyme, which treats another rare genetic disorder known as MPS 1 syndrome,
was recommended for approval in January by a FDA advisory panel. The agency is
set to rule on the bid to market the drug at the end of the month.

   "It appears Genzyme is turning the corner, or indeed has already turned the
corner," said Dennis Harp, an analyst with Deutsche Banc in New York. "Renagel
sales in the first quarter were quite strong, it's got one FDA approval in hand,
and the prospects look good that next week Aldurazyme will be approved."

   Shares of the company shot up $3 yesterday after the news was released to
close at $39.38, up nearly 35 percent this year. Cambridge-based TKT's shares
fell 88 cents to close at $5.59.

   "We feel very good about this moment and very good for patients in the US who
finally have access to Fabrazyme," said Genzyme chief Henri Termeer.

   Many analysts thought the FDA would delay its decision again, leaving a door
open for TKT to bring its rival drug, Replagal, to the US market first.

   Both Genzyme and TKT submitted applications within weeks of each other in
June 2000 to sell virtually identical drugs to treat the same disorder, a
situation that FDA had never before faced and which turned the competition into
a winner-take-all proposition.

   FDA rules require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease such
as Fabry. The so-called orphan drug act, passed in 1983, gives a company seven
years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in exchange for being the first
to develop a drug to treat a rare disease. Although the FDA has not yet
officially ruled on TKT's drug, an advisory panel in January had recommended
that it not be approved.

   "We're happy patients in the United States now have access to a therapy,"
said TKT's chief executive Michael Astrue. "We're just sad it's not Replagal."

   Patients with Fabry disease lack an enzyme known as alpha-galactosidase that
breaks down certain body fats. The buildup of fat causes intense pain in hands
and feet and an inability to sweat. It eventually causes kidney failure, heart
disease, or stroke.

   Genzyme's approval makes it unlikely that TKT will ever bring its drug to the
US market. Its only hope is to convince regulators that Replagal is safer or
more effective than Fabrazyme.

   Replagal and Fabrazyme, both approved in Europe, replace an enzyme missing in
Fabry patients.

   "Unless TKT can pull a rabbit out of a hat, I think they are sunk in the US,"
said Bill Tanner, an analyst with Boston investment bank Leerink Swann.

   Fabrazyme on its own is not big enough to turn around Genzyme, Tanner said.
Sales of the company's top-selling drug, Cerezyme, to treat a rare genetic
disorder, Gaucher disease, are slowing. Sales of Cerezyme grew 9 percent last
year to $620 million and are expected to grow about 7 percent this year. Sales
of Renagel, which the company is counting on to drive growth, are forecast to
increase 25 percent this year, down from 50 percent growth in 2002.

   Analysts estimate that Fabrazyme and Aldurazyme could eventually bring in as
much as $300 million to $500 million each in annual sales. But this year and
next, their contribution to the bottom line is expected to be far more modest.
Genzyme has said it expects worldwide sales of Fabrazyme to reach up to $75
million this year, of which Tanner estimates less than $20 million will come
from the United States. He expects Aldurazyme to bring in another $20 million,
revenues Genzyme will split with its California partner BioMarin Pharmaceutical
Inc.

   "From 30,000 feet, the approvals look great," Tanner said. "But if Aldurazyme
and Fabrazyme are smaller than people expect or take too long to get off the
ground, that's going to be problematic for Genzyme."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2003


                             771 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2003 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme Gets Approval to Sell Enzyme Drug

BYLINE:  Bloomberg News

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24

BODY:

   The Genzyme Corporation said today that it had won Food and Drug
Administration approval to sell Fabrazyme, a drug that treats a rare
enzyme-deficiency disorder called Fabry disease. The shares of the company rose
8.3 percent.

        The agency approved the medicine under a program that offers incentives
for companies to develop drugs for rare diseases. The F.D.A.'s commissioner,
Mark McClellan, confirmed that the agency had given Genzyme exclusive rights to
the drug for seven years.

    Genzyme had been racing against Transkaryotic Therapies, which failed to
convince an F.D.A. advisory panel in January that its similar drug, Replagal,
worked.

   The medicines, which replace an enzyme missing in 5,000 to 10,000 people
worldwide, are approved in Europe. Both drugs cost about $165,000 a year for
each patient.

   "The fact they got full approval now is very positive for them," said Fariba
Ghodsian, managing partner at Castle Creek Life Sciences Partners, which owns
Genzyme stock. "Clearly it provides them with additional growth."

   Ms. Ghodsian estimates that Fabrazyme may eventually generate $400 million to
$500 million in sales.

   "This is a disease where no treatment is available, which prompted the F.D.A.
to approve it sooner rather than later," she said.

   The agency's action signifies its commitment to quicker approval of
treatments for rare diseases, Mr. McClellan said.

   Genzyme shares rose $3, to $39.38, on the Nasdaq stock market. Shares in
Transkaryotic fell 88 cents, or 14 percent, to $5.59.

   The drug is a version of the enzyme missing in people with Fabry's disease,
Mr. McClellan said. That enzyme is needed to eliminate some kinds of fatty
deposits, which may raise the risk of stroke and kidney damage. The disorder
affects about 1 in every 40,000 males and fewer females, the F.D.A. said.

   "This treatment is given intravenously, and it basically replaces the missing
enzyme," Mr. McClellan said.

   Genzyme has set up a patient registry to follow the long-term progress of
patients.





URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2003


                             772 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             April 25, 2003, Friday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: ISRAELI RESEARCHERS HIT BY MISGUIDED BACKLASH

BYLINE: ANDREA PEYSER

BODY:

   FOR Dr. Andy Marks, the moment of truth arrived after he learned that two
colleagues were expelled from the board of an academic journal - because they
are Israeli.

   The doc, a chair at Columbia University's medical school, next watched in
disgust as another peer was denied access to research material that, ironically,
was to be used to help sick Palestinian children. Why?

   Because the researcher was from Israel.

   Since last year, an international pogrom has been going full-tilt, targeting
Israeli scientists and scholars.

   It started with a petition by two British professors who called for the
blackballing of Israelis in protest of the "oppression" of Palestinians. The
document fails to mention atrocities against Israelis. Yet it drew signatures
from some 120 members of the far-flung, yet close-knit, academic world.

   "What comes to mind is 1933: Hitler," said Dr. Marks, chairman of the
physiology and cellular biophysics department at Columbia.

   "Jewish scientists were suddenly told they couldn't work in the universities.
They couldn't participate," he said. "We all have to talk with our colleagues.
If that goes away, we can't work."

   The doctor, serious and low-key, doesn't normally mix politics and medicine.
But as his moral outrage smoldered, he could not sit by. He's fighting back.

   His new foundation - International Academic Friends of Israel - was formed to
fight anti-Israel propaganda and to keep Israel in the academic loop. Its board
includes Dr. Paul Marks, former president of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Medical
Center, and lawyer Alan Fuchsberg.

   You need big guns to fight hate crimes:

   Miriam Shlesinger, a translator at Bar-Ilan University, lost a relative to a
Hamas terrorist, yet still supports the Palestinian cause. No matter - she was
kicked off the editorial board of the UK-based academic journal The Translator
last June, along with Gideon Toury, in a blind rage of anti-Israeli fervor.

   In chilling e-mails, editor Mona Baker, a longtime friend to both, wrote
Toury, "I do not wish to continue an official association with any Israeli under
the present circumstances."

   Evelyne Zeira, who works in gene therapy at Jerusalem's Hadassah Medical
Center, asked Norwegian researcher Ingrid Harbitz, via e-mail, to provide
material to be used to develop treatments for Palestinian victims of the blood
disorder thalessemia. Harbitz's curt reply: "Due to the present situation in the
Middle East, I will not deliver any material to an Israelitic [sic] university."

   "What is really horrifying to me is, I'm the editor of one of the major
biomedical research journals. My deputy editor is Iraqi in origin," said Andy
Marks. "So I wrote Mona Baker an e-mail, saying that if I followed her lead, I'd
expel him from my journal - which I have no intention of doing."

   The feckless academic never replied.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2003


                             773 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 23, 2003, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
UMASS MEDICAL SCHOOL, CYTRX IN PACT

BYLINE: NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   The University of Massachusetts Medical School has entered into an alliance
with CytRx Corp. to discover gene-based therapies for obesity, diabetes, and
cancer. The deal will make the medical school the California firm's
second-largest shareholder.

   CytRx will issue the medical school about 1.6 million shares of common stock,
valued at about $2.4 million based on the stock's closing price yesterday.

      The collaboration includes a number of licenses related to RNA
interference, a technology scientists believe can turn off harmful genes within
a cell. The method uses RNA, or ribonucleic acid, instead of DNA, which has to
date been the hallmark of gene therapy.

   If the field lives up to its promise, company and school officials said, the
collaboration could lead to therapies for a wide range of diseases.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2003


                             774 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 21, 2003, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 122 words

HEADLINE: Liver is key in diabetes studies

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   The liver is the stand-in for the pancreas in experimental diabetes
treatments for several reasons, researchers say.

   The pancreas, which contains insulin-producing islets or cell clusters,
rarely survives transplant. Donated islets aren't transplanted into the pancreas
because the pancreas is difficult to access and releases digestive enzymes when
cut, preventing healing.

   In gene therapy, viruses used to transport the genes are taken up by the
liver, not the pancreas. Scientists have not yet developed a virus "vector" that
will target the pancreas.

   Fortunately, the liver is a good second choice.

   Insulin's first stop, when released by the pancreas, is the liver. After the
liver, it travels throughout the body.


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2003


                             775 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 21, 2003, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 01

LENGTH: 943 words

HEADLINE: Cure in mice offers hope for diabetics;
Gene therapy triggers cells to produce insulin

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   In an experiment with exciting implications for people with severe diabetes,
Baylor College of Medicine researchers apparently cured mice with Type 1
diabetes - using a gene therapy that prompts cells in the liver to produce
insulin.

   "If this can be applied to humans, it's very, very significant," said Dr.
Roger Unger, director of the Touchstone Center for Diabetes Research at the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical School at Dallas. "There are many
people who have worked in this field, but I think what (Baylor has) done may
have provided the best results thus far."

   "I would say this is the most successful demonstration to date of that
strategy," added Catherine McKeon, senior genetic research adviser with the
National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   The breakthrough, reported Sunday in the online edition of the journal Nature
Medicine, comes amid growing alarm over the large numbers of Americans with
diabetes. Poorly controlled diabetes means unhealthy highs and lows of blood
sugar, which can lead to heart disease, kidney failure, blindness, mobility
problems and fatal comas.

   Type 1 diabetes is the less common form of the illness, accounting for 5 to
10 percent of the 17 million people in the United States with diabetes. However,
unlike Type 2 diabetes, which can often be prevented through diet, weight loss
and exercise, Type 1 diabetes seems to come out of nowhere. It occurs in
children or adults when, for reasons still unclear to scientists, the body
attacks and destroys its own insulin-producing beta cells.

   In healthy humans - and mice - these beta cells are found in the pancreas,
clumped in clusters called islets. In the Baylor experiment, scientists created
fully functioning islets in a different location, the liver.

   "I like to think it may be a breakthrough. It's proof of concept," said study
co-author Dr. Lawrence Chan, chief of the division of diabetes, endocrinology
and metabolism at Baylor. "Theoretically it can be done in humans. It was very
surprising. (The mice) are gaining weight; they're eating. They look happy."

   Insulin, a hormone that "unlocks" cells, allowing glucose to enter and fuel
them, is as critical to life as oxygen. Type 1 diabetics face a lifetime of
daily insulin injections to survive. Potential cures have focused on replacing
those killed-off beta cells.

   In one highly publicized experimental treatment, diabetics, including several
in Houston, have been able to stop taking insulin shots when pancreatic islets
from organ donors were transplanted into their livers.

   However, these patients need multiple transplants to get enough islets, and
they also must take immune-suppressing drugs to prevent organ rejection. The
long-term consequences of such transplants are unknown. And the chronic shortage
of donor organs makes widespread pancreatic islet transplantation impossible.

   A tantalizing possibility - one that would circumvent donor organ shortages
and the side-effects of long-term drug therapy - is coaxing the body to grow its
own replacement beta cells.

   To that end, Chan, a molecular and cellular biologist, and his colleagues at
Baylor and in Japan developed a gene therapy treatment.

   They used the Neurod gene, which regulates insulin production and islet
formation. (Mice without the Neurod gene are born with diabetes.) They added
another gene - the betacellulin gene - which stimulates the growth of beta
cells.

   These genes were inserted into an adenovirus, a source of the common cold,
which had been "gutted" of its ability to cause disease.

   To test the gene therapy, scientists started with healthy mice fed a diet of
ordinary mouse chow. They gave the mice an injection of streptozotocin, a
chemotherapy drug commonly used to induce diabetes in lab mice.

   Researchers then injected the gene therapy into the diabetic mice. Within
seven to 10 days, the high, uncontrolled blood sugar in the mice returned to
normal - and remained normal for the four-month duration of the experiment.

   To test the rodents' ability to handle a sugar boost, researchers gave them
high doses of glucose. The animals' bodies responded normally.

   To understand what happened on a cellular level, the researchers examined the
livers of the mice. They were surprised to find not only insulin-producing beta
cells, but actual islets, the cell clusters that produce the marinade of
hormones necessary for the regulation of blood sugar.

   Chan and his colleagues are trying to figure out which cells were transformed
by gene therapy, whether they were mature liver cells or adult stem cells, which
are found in small numbers in organs throughout the body. Stem cells, a special
type of cells able to transform themselves into other types of tissue, are of
great interest to scientists who want to find ways to grow and manipulate them
to treat injury or disease.

   What's next? Chan said he would like to repeat the experiment in larger
animals, such as monkeys. He'd like to see if there are other genes that produce
even better islets.

   He also wants to transform cells into beta cells or islets in a test tube.
The goal would be to take cells from a diabetic, turn them into
insulin-producing cells, then reintroduce them into the body. Such a method
might be safer than injecting genes carried by a virus into humans, Chan said.

   "This is a mouse experiment, and you cannot immediately jump from mice to
men," cautioned Unger. "In all of science, you go up by little steps."

   However, the possibility of being able to take out a portion of a diabetic's
liver, re-engineer it to produce insulin, then give it back, he said, is "in the
back of everybody's mind."


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2003


                             776 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2003 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc. All rights reserved.
                               The New York Post

                             April 21, 2003, Monday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 029

LENGTH: 1350 words

HEADLINE: SEC'S AGORA-PHOBIA: FRAUD SUIT RESPONDS TO FEARS OVER INTERNET TOUT
SHEETS

BYLINE: Christopher Byron

BODY:

   AN interesting news release crossed my desk the other day. It was from the
Securities and Exchange Commission, and it announced that a fraud suit had been
filed by the SEC in Maryland against an Internet newsletter publisher named
Agora Inc.

   The charge: Selling fake inside information, in the form of "reports" Agora
offered to its newsletter subscribers at $1,000 per report, netting something in
excess of $1 million on one such report alone.

   Plenty of people are doubtless going to rail at the SEC's action in this
matter as an infringement of free speech and all that sort of thing. And, to be
sure, it's never a good idea to look the other way when the government attempts
to regulate what the press, all the way down to the most obscure newsletters,
can and cannot report.

   But this whole business of Internet tout sheets has reached such alarming
proportions, with so many stock promoters now using them anonymously and
illegally to hype the shares of worthless companies, that something simply had
to be done. The SEC action signals a determination to remind the market that,
under the law, stock touts and promoters must have a reasonable basis for making
their claims.

   IT'S about time, too. Thanks to the Internet, the use of fraudulent and
deceptive newsletter promotions to pump up worthless stocks has spread like the
SARS virus.

   In this racket, promoters make outlandish and outrageous claims to give a
temporary boost to the price of some trash stock in the pink sheets or on the
OTC Bulletin Board. Typically, the insiders dump their shares thereafter, the
price collapses, and the poor schnooks who bought into the stock on the hyped
claims in the newsletters are left holding the bag.

   According to the SEC, Agora Inc. ran a variation on this basic pump-and-dump
scheme. As charged in the complaint, the fact that the price of a particular
stock may have gotten a boost from Agora's hype was almost a side issue to the
newsletter publisher's real objective.

   What Agora was really after, according to the SEC, was to peddle
ultra-expensive company "reports" to the public by claiming the reports
contained secret, inside information about the company and its business
prospects. In reality, says the SEC, the information in the reports was little
more than "baseless speculation and outright lies" to separate suckers from
their money.

   To that end, the complaint charges that on May 14, 2002, at least 15 of
Agora's newsletters distributed e-mails claiming analysts at an Agora Inc.
subsidiary called PirateInvestor.com had developed a top executive source at a
New York Stock Exchange-listed company who had provided bombshell information
that was going to make the company's stock price double on May 22.

   TO learn the name of the company, all a reader had to do was hand over $1,000
for a report containing the details. The report buyers received identified the
company as USEC Inc. - a nuclear fuel processing firm that supposedly stood to
benefit from an impending deal with Russia. According to the report, authored by
one "Jay Daniels," the deal was due to be approved by the Bush and Putin
governments and announced on May 22.

   What the report did not say was that the name of its analyst-author, "Jay
Daniels," was actually just a pseudonym for the editor of the PirateInvestor.com
newsletter: Frank Porter Stansberry.

   Nor did the report disclose that the so-called top insider executive at USEC
was actually just the company's in-house investor relations man, Steven
Wingfield - who told the SEC he never made any such statements as Stansberry was
attributing to him as USEC's anonymous top insider executive.

   In any event, the promotion was sufficiently convincing that, according to
the SEC, Agora Inc. sold more than $1 million worth of the reports to more than
1,000 actual buyers.

   What's more, trading volume in USEC's shares jumped more than 10-fold in the
week that followed the promotional hype of May 14, lifting the price of the
stock 27 percent to $9.98 per share.

   Not surprisingly, May 22 came and went with no announcement, and the stock
began to slide. A month later, in June 2002, a deal with Russia was indeed
announced, but the market didn't react one way or another and the stock
continued to slide. As of Friday, USEC was selling for $5.40 per share - not
much more than half its hyped high of 11 months earlier.

   Whether or not the Agora Inc. bunch were intentionally lying in their USEC
promotion, there can be no denying that extreme exaggeration and wild-eyed
over-statements were plastered all over it and, under the law, that can be just
as bad as outright lying. One needs to have a reasonable basis for any
prediction about stock price behavior, and when the prediction is for a stock to
double in price on a single day, you need to have a lot more than the claim of
an anonymous, puffed-up source.

   YET preposterously exaggerated claims and predictions are the stock in trade
of many stock-tout newsletters, particularly in the penny stock arena, and Agora
Inc. is no exception. The SEC complaint points out that Agora Inc. newsletters
routinely lure in subscribers by making preposterous promises and predictions.
Example: "Almost Unbelievable Profits - 4.5 Times Your Money in 48 Hours."

   One of the most colorful promoters in that regard is an Agora Inc. newsletter
editor named James Dale Davidson. Though he is mentioned in the SEC action, he
is not accused of any wrongdoing and is cited simply as an example of an Agora
Inc. promoter with undisclosed ties to the stocks he promotes.

   Davidson insisted strenuously last week that any ties he may have to the
stocks recommended in his newsletters are all fully and properly disclosed.

   BE that as it may, Davidson is no shrinking violet when it comes to bombastic
and extreme predictions. In 1991 he and a former editor of the Times of London,
Lord William Rees-Mogg, co-wrote "The Great Reckoning," a book in which they
predicted financial and political calamity for the entire world in the 1990s.

   According to the authors, there would be global Depression accompanied by a
collapse in real estate. In Russia, a Slavic dictator would seize power in the
face of mass starvation. In the West, the money center banks would collapse, oil
prices would plunge to unprecedented lows, and there would be a mass exodus from
big urban centers, especially from New York.

   Davidson has since turned his talents as a seer to the stock market, where he
has been aggressively hyping a biotech stock called GeneMax Corp., which trades
on the OTC Bulletin Board.

   In the summer of 2002, Davidson declared in one of his newsletter columns
that GeneMax possessed a "breathtaking gene therapy" that offers "incredible
hope for cancer patients" and an "absolutely stunning" opportunity for
investors.

   In fact, GeneMax's total gross revenues since its founding in 1999 amount to
less than $27,000, and any payoff from its alleged "breathtaking gene therapy"
certainly lies years in the future, if at all.

   The stock market agrees, and has hammered down GeneMax's price from $5-plus a
year ago to a current price of $1.78. Many of Davidson's other predictions,
equally strident and self-confident, have proved equally disappointing.

   Now the SEC seems ready to join the issue with all these people and their
soapboxes head on: Just how loudly can you shout "Buy this stock!" before the
regulators cry foul? The SEC's answer: As loud as you want, if you've got a
reasonable basis for your claims.

   Pumped up

   The SEC is suing Internet newsletter publisher Agora, whose editor, James
Dale Davidson, has written financial books. Details:

   * The SEC alleges Agora's "reports," sold to subscribers for $1,000, are fake
inside information on companies.

   * Davidson has been hyping a biotech stock called GeneMax Corp., which has
made less than $27,000 in sales since 1999.

   * Among Davidson's books is "The Great Reckoning: Protect Yourself in the
Coming Depression," which he co-authored.


GRAPHIC: Body builder. Splash News

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2003


                             777 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                    April 20, 2003 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES - INDIANA LIVING; Pg. 1J

LENGTH: 2289 words

HEADLINE: Life's secret code;
The famed discovery of DNA's double helix grew from James Watson's studies at
IU.

BYLINE: BY ABE AAMIDOR ABE.AAMIDOR@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   'We wish to suggest a structure for the salt of deoxyribose nucleic acid
(DNA). This structure has novel features which are of considerable biological
interest."

   So began one of the most important scientific documents in history.

   On April 25, 1953, the British scientific journal Nature published a "letter"
from Indiana University alumnus James D. Watson and Cambridge University scholar
Francis Crick declaring that they had discovered a new model for the physical
structure of DNA, the material for transferring inheritable traits from one
generation to the next.

   It was just a letter -- not the scholarly article one might expect in an
esteemed scientific journal.

   It was a disarmingly simple, even sly way to break the news to the world.

   "The structure has two helical chains each coiled around the same axis. . . .
The novel feature of the structure is the manner in which the two chains are
held together . . . "

   Unzip the two chains, and each could reproduce the missing half.

   Voila!  -- this is how life is passed on from one generation to the next.

   At 950 words, the letter, which came closer to explaining the secret of life
scientifically than anything else that had ever come before it, was shorter than
this newspaper article will be.

   "I was an alpha male," Watson said in a telephone interview with The Star
earlier this month. "There was only one thing that mattered. That was science."

   Watson, now president of the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York state,
was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1962 for his work on
DNA, along with Crick and Maurice Wilkins, whose earlier work provided useful
data for Crick and Watson. Rosalind Franklin, who died in 1958, also contributed
to the effort.

   Watson has matured in recent years to become one of the few celebrity
scientists in America. ("I've been told my autograph is worth as much as Tom
Cruise's," he confessed.)

   The cover photograph for the March/April issue of Seed, a Canadian magazine,
shows a nattily attired Watson posed under studio lights with what is supposed
to be a makeup artist.

   It's a far cry from how people remember Watson in his graduate-student days
in Bloomington. A tall, thin, gawky kid with a huge shock of hair on his head in
the late 1940s (think Buddy Holly without the glasses), Watson had entered the
University of Chicago when he was 15. He won a fellowship for graduate-level
study of zoology in Bloomington at 19.

   "Jim's father had a job at a collection agency for a correspondence school,
so he never made much money," recalled John Richardson, an IU chemistry
professor who was Watson's graduate assistant at Harvard University from 1961 to
1965. "When Jim applied to grad school, it was very important that he had a
fellowship."

   IU gave Watson $900 for the 1947-48 school year, his first on campus. He
lived in a dorm room at 10th and Union streets, in what is now the John W.
Ashton Center.

   Young Watson was studious. Every day, he'd climb the stairs to the fourth
floor of Kirkwood Hall, where the bacteriology department was located.

   "He would eat cold Campbell's tomato soup with a spoon he used to open the
can," recalled Helen Arthur, who was a young lab assistant at the time. "He was
too busy to go out for lunch."

   Though Watson officially enrolled as a zoology student, in part based on his
earlier interest in ornithology (Watson and his dad used to go bird watching
along the shores of Lake Michigan from their southside Chicago home, says
Richardson), it was Hermann J. Muller and Salvador Luria, two spectacular
molecular biologists at IU, who really attracted Watson to Bloomington.

   Muller had just come to IU after allegedly being forced to leave Amherst
College by an anti-communist "Red scare," and Luria was a World War II refugee
from Italy.

   Muller already was a Nobel Prize winner when Watson arrived in Bloomington in
1947; Luria would win his in 1969. Legendary IU president Herman B Wells was
credited with bringing Muller to Bloomington.

   Muller's genetic work was mostly on fruit flies, but Luria and some others at
IU were keying in on the interaction between viruses known as bacteriophages and
the bacteria they invade as a way of unraveling the secrets of DNA.

   "What microbiologists are always looking for are model systems," said Rudolf
Raff, distinguished professor of biology at IU. "Mendel's model systems were
peas. Molecular biologists looked at bacteriophages."

   Luria and Watson were a study in contrasts, Arthur said. While the dapper
Italian would arrive at work in a suit, and then exchange his jacket for a
starched white lab coat, Watson often came to the lab dressed in basketball
shorts, high-top canvas sneakers and what she calls a "ratty" T-shirt.

   But once in the lab, Luria would insist that Watson and his other able
assistants engage in a certain ritual each morning.

   They would meditate by walking around a pole in a tight circle for about 30
minutes.

   "They wouldn't be talking. They would be thinking," said Arthur. "Luria would
say at the end of this mediation, 'Let's discuss today's experiments.' It was a
very relaxed and free feeling in which to question other people's ideas."

   Felt at home at IU

   Watson says it was in Bloomington that he "became a scientist."

   "Indiana was the first place I felt at home because there were people with a
common interest," he said. "The whole thing was, 'What is a gene?' "

   Watson says he had neither a car nor a bicycle while in Bloomington, and
didn't socialize much. He'd walk to the lab every day, and he'd return most
nights, too. At IU, he earned his Ph.D. in zoology.

   It was in Europe that he'd strike genetic gold. In 1950, Watson moved to
Denmark briefly to do post-doctoral work, and then on to Cambridge, the historic
academic community about an hour north of London on the River Cam.

   He knew what he was looking for -- the physical structure of DNA. At
Cambridge he partnered with Crick, a physicist turned biologist who had not yet
completed his Ph.D. In relatively short order the two locked onto the double
helix, as the structure of DNA came to be known.

   "I arrived with a crew cut," Watson said. "The joke was that I looked like I
was in the (U.S.) Air Force. By the time I left Cambridge, my accent was such
that they thought I was Irish."

   Apart from watching an occasional movie, Watson always focused on the prize,
which was identifying the physical structure of DNA. Other scientists around the
globe were in on the chase, as well, and as Watson explained in his 1968
autobiographical sketch, "The Double Helix," everyone wanted to be first.

   It was not unlike the race to be the first pilot to fly solo across the
Atlantic Ocean in a single-engine aircraft. Today, everyone knows Charles
Lindbergh was first.

   Who was the first to try and fail, though?

   Watson declined to describe the science behind his discovery -- those who are
really interested should take a chemistry course, he gently chided. But his
discovery, when it came, seemed too good to be true.

   "Could something so pretty not be right?" he's quoted as saying in an
interview earlier this year. "It was a perfect structure that could solve how
the gene was copied."

   Has practical uses

   The significance of the discovery and later work on coding and sequencing DNA
has been more than academic. The best uses of DNA technology to date have been
in forensics, in either identifying or ruling out suspects based on their unique
DNA; genetic engineering of food crops; and recombinant DNA technology dating
from the 1970s that has allowed for synthesizing human insulin.

   Yet some uses of DNA technology now seem banal -- cloning sheep or solving
paternity lawsuits. And the much ballyhooed contributions to medical science,
other than in helping diagnose certain diseases, have been slow in coming.

   "The big problem with gene therapy is, we don't have a good way of getting
the genes into the people and into the cells to produce the proteins required,"
said Dr. Steven Paul, vice president of Lilly Research Laboratories in
Indianapolis.

   As with many scientists, Watson's best work seems to have been his earliest.
IU's John Richardson notes that "very few papers with (Watson's) name on it"
were published after about 1961, though Richardson says his former mentor always
was helpful in getting other people published and was loathe to take credit for
work unless he truly deserved it.

   "He's more of an administrator now," said Richardson.

   Watson doesn't dispute it; he says his main job these days as president of
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory is raising money.

   Rarely returns

   IU's reaction to the 50th anniversary of the discovery of the structure of
DNA is relatively low-key, though IU contributed to the discovery much as the
Missouri River contributes to the Mississippi.

   Watson has appeared on campus only a couple of times since he left in 1950.
He was to be a keynote speaker at the official opening of Jordan Hall in 1955,
which was to house various life sciences departments, but he stood everybody up.

   He later spoke at the dedication of a new wing to the building in 1984.
Arthur was there.

   "He was very polished. He surprised me," she said. "He had everyone in the
palm of his hand by the time he was finished. I was standing in the back of the
hall, and I was remembering that tall, thin, gawky young man when he came to
campus in 1947."

   ______________________________________________

   THE CHROMOSOME

   Package of genes and other DNA that if uncoiled would stretch more than 6
feet. There are 23 pairs in each human cell.

   Nucleus

   Compartment in the cell that contains chromosomes

   THE CELL

   The basic unit of any living thing. Within its watery contents, in a
specialized structure called the nucleus, is a complete set of all of our genes
- called the genome. Every cell in our body contains this collection of genes
passed down from each of our parents.

   THE DOUBLE HELIX

   The spiraling shape of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) which bears the genetic
instructions for living organisms. It's made of sugar and phosphate molecules,
and nucleotide bases joined by hydrogen bonds. The chemical bases - adenine (A),
thymine (T), cytosine (C) and guanine (G) - are the 'letters' of the DNA code.

   THE GENE

   A stretch of DNA that contains the information necessary to make proteins,
which make up each part of our bodies. Genes control the transmission of traits
from parent to offspring.

   REPLICATION

   In order to make an exact copy of itself, the DNA molecule splits lengthwise.
Each exposed base then joins with another complementary base, creating a new
strand that is identical to the original.

   THE BASES

   The base pairs always come together in the same way - A with T and G with C.
But the sequences along the molecule vary, encoding the genetic information.

   Sources: National Human Genome Research Institute;

   _______________________________________________

   James D. Watson

   Age: 75

   Birthplace: Chicago

   What: Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 1962, for discovery of the
double helical structure of DNA. Leader of Human Genome

   Project 1988-'92.

   Today: President of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory in New York.

   Francis Crick

   Age: 86

   Birthplace: Northampton, England

   What: Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 1962, for discovery of the
double helical structure of DNA.

   Today: Distinguished Research Professor at Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, San Diego.

   Maurice Wilkins

   Age: 86

   Birthplace: Pongaroa, New Zealand

   What: Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, 1962.

   Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin's x-ray diffraction studies of DNA molecules
were invaluable to Crick and Watson. Wilkins shared in the Nobel Prize; as
Franklin already was deceased in 1962, she was not eligible for the prize.

   DNA's roots

   Life on Earth may be millions of years old; understanding of how traits are
passed on began less than 150 years ago.

   1866: Gregor Mendel, an Austrian monk, suggests that hereditary units known
as 'factors' are passed down along family lines to produce recognizable traits.
These are later identified as genes.

   1869: Johann Friedrich Miescher discovers 'nuclein' (later identified as DNA)
in the pus of soldiers wounded in the Crimean War.

   1910: In his study of fruit flies, Thomas Hunt Morgan proves that genes are
carried on chromosomes.

   1926: Hermann J. Muller discovers that X-rays induce genetic mutation and
hereditary changes in fruit flies, showing that the gene is the basis of life
and evolution.

   1952: Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase show that on infection of the host
bacterium by a virus, at least 80 percent of the viral DNA enters the cell, but
that at least 80 percent of the viral protein remains outside, demonstrating
that DNA, rather than the proteins, carries genetic information.

   1953: James D. Watson and Francis Crick show the physical structure of DNA as
a double helix, or intertwined double spiral, suggesting that DNA replication is
possible through the complementary nature of the two strands.

   1977: Frederick Sanger and Walter Gilbert independently develop a technique
to 'read' the chemical bases of DNA.

   1995: J. Craig Venter and Hamilton O. Smith sequence the genome of a
bacterium.

   2000: The Human Genome Project presents its preliminary results: Each of the
body's 100 trillion cells contains about 3.1 billion nucleotide units, but only
about 30,000 genes seem to really matter to human growth.

   Sources: 'Journey to the Genome,' copyright 2000, The New York Times; Francis
F. Steen of the University of California at Los Angeles; Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory; Simon Rhodes / Indiana University; Dring Crowell / Indiana
University.

   Call Star reporter Abe Aamidor at 1-317-444-6472.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2003


                             778 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 20, 2003 Sunday TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.E-1

LENGTH: 1068 words

HEADLINE: THE DNA CHALLENGE

BODY:

   This month, scientists and the media are celebrating two milestones. April 25
marks the 50th anniversary of the publication of the DNA structure, a double
helix, by James Watson and Francis Crick.

    Discovering the composition and structure of DNA revolutionized science and
medicine. A remarkable molecule, DNA stores enormous quantities of information
in the form of genes. Genes are the units of code which are translated into
proteins that carry out life.

    Based on these findings, scientists rapidly developed recombinant DNA
technology, which is the ability to manipulate genes to provide wide-ranging
benefits, including a better understanding of disease, improved medical
diagnostics, beneficial gene therapies and disease-resistant crops.

    Also this April, the Human Genome Project is celebrating the completion of
the human genome sequence, the long string of DNA code that fills our
chromosomes and contains roughly 30,000 genes. A rich source of information,
this sequence will lead to a markedly improved understanding of how complex
disorders like diabetes develop. Moreover, the completed sequence should inform
us about the evolution of genes that raise or decrease our susceptibility to
common conditions like dementia.

    Research teams at Pittsburgh-based universities and biotech companies have
been significant players, both in developing recombinant DNA technologies and in
working with human genome sequence data to help understand and cure ailments.

    As dean of the Mellon College of Science, I appreciate the pivotal role
Pittsburgh has played in achievements to date. The University of Pittsburgh is
renowned for its pioneering work in gene therapy. Carnegie Mellon
University-based research has produced widely commercialized tools that were key
in conducting the Human Genome Project.

    This same work helped to spin off one of the region's first biotech
companies, Cellomics. Research in Pittsburgh, as well as the newly founded
Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse, local foundation support and financial
backing by state and federal governments, all ensure that Western Pennsylvania's
growing biotech industry will expand in the coming years.

    Looking back, we have much to celebrate. But these milestones only point to
greater opportunities ahead. Both the discovery of DNA structure and the
completion of the human genome sequence demonstrate the necessity of
interdisciplinary research to achieve great insight. Watson and Crick made their
remarkable discovery only through a radical integration of physics, biology, and
chemistry.

    Today's interdisciplinary challenge is the daunting quantity of genetic data
generated by molecular biology. Written in the letters A, T, C, and G, the DNA
code forms a string of approximately 3 billion base pairs.

    At first glance, this lengthy code appears too complex to decipher. But it
will become possible to understand. Through their collaborative research,
molecular biologists and computational scientists are processing and mining this
enormous amount of information to answer critical questions, such as how genes
evolve and what functions they assume. These findings, in turn, will help us
understand how human disease occurs.

    Additionally, scientists from widely varying fields, including computer
science, biology, statistics and chemistry are integrating fundamentally
different methods to capture the activity of the thousands of proteins produced
in healthy cells and compare them to the thousands made by cancer cells. This
new science -- proteomics -- will identify molecules that serve as targets for
specific drugs or as markers of a given stage of disease.

    Other researchers working at the intersection of chemistry, biology and
engineering are creating biosensors, medical diagnostics and nanotech devices.
This work takes DNA completely outside its well-described role as an information
template.

    Our culture's increasing assimilation of DNA-based knowledge calls on us,
now more than ever, to educate future generations across disciplinary
boundaries. Most of us are not scientists, yet we may be called on to make
decisions based on DNA, and we have unconsciously become more dependent on
DNA-based technologies.

    We expect these technologies to make life better and resolve pressing
questions. They help families that suffer from inherited genetic afflictions
through early disease diagnosis and management, and they allow us to incriminate
or exonerate individuals accused of wrongdoing. Just this month, DNA
technologies helped clinical investigators point to the culprit responsible for
SARS, the deadly respiratory ailment sweeping the globe. In the coming weeks,
DNA forensics may help us determine whether Saddam Hussein really lies in a pile
of rubble in Baghdad.

    We must have a society educated across disciplines to understand the promise
and limitations of DNA. Pittsburgh is undoubtedly at the forefront. As an
example, through a collaborative project with local universities such as
Carnegie Mellon, families visiting the Carnegie Science Center have explored the
living cell and the emerging specialty of tissue engineering, two topics where
DNA is central.

    Our educational system also is changing to reflect a growing need for
cross-disciplinary understanding. The Mellon College of Science, the Graduate
School of Industrial Administration and the Heinz School of Public Policy are
collaborating to develop a biotechnology management program to launch by 2004.

    Carnegie Mellon also offers an inter-college program in the humanities and
sciences, and it is the only university nationwide to offer an inter-college
undergraduate degree in the natural sciences/mathematics and the fine arts. It
is clear that these initiatives, as well as nationally recognized programs at
other area institutions, will educate tomorrow's leaders in fields such as
science, business, policy development and art.

    This winter, Carnegie Mellon's Regina Gouger Miller Gallery hosted Paradise
Now: Picturing the Genetic Revolution. This exhibit of international art
explored themes of DNA and genetic engineering. The double helix, an icon
familiar to many by now, was not central in the show. Instead, projected across
one large wall were row upon row of letters -- A, T, C, and G -- a
representation of DNA that challenges both artists and scientists to interpret
and understand its meaning.

NOTES:
Richard D. McCullough, Ph.D.. is dean of the Mellon College of Science at
Carnegie Mellon University.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2003


                             779 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 18, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.B-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 827 words

BYLINE: GENE COLLIER

BODY:

   The forlornly anticipated number of first-time jobless claims for last week,
thought to resemble 10,000, came in at 30,000 yesterday, and if you thought the
economy was fully toilet-immersed before that, wait until it absorbs the full
impact of a third Michael Jordan retirement in eight years.

    Jordan retired again Wednesday, and in admittedly micro-economic terms, the
effect on the Washington Wizards alone is expected to approximate 5,000 fewer
tickets sold per game, and even that assumes there are 15,000 goofs in the
greater Washington D.C. area willing to pay handsomely to witness an ongoing
train wreck of a franchise not even Jordan himself could prevent.

    While the availability of Jordan in baggy shorts has long been a leading
economic indicator, there will be no shortage of them in his absence, and each
points the other way from bullish (is it wizardish?).

    For one example, look no further than the rifle team at West Virginia
University, which will soon enough cease to exist, along with the track team and
the men's tennis and cross country teams. A last-minute attempt to sustain some
semblance of the competition through an as-yet-unsanctioned NCAA sport involving
rackets, running and rifles simultaneously, dissolved in anarchy, but at least
not in gunfire.

    West Virginia said it needed to save $600,000.

    Similarly, the PG reported yesterday that Edinboro University will be
discontinuing its men's and women's tennis programs after their current seasons.
We can only hope the region's collective sports psyche can adjust to these
disappearances, and there is evidence that it can. Duquesne, for example,
discontinued men's basketball sometime in the early ' 90s without anybody really
noticing.

    All across the sportscape, regular folks are desperate for cash.

    Amy Zaccardi, the Minneapolis traffic cop who got nudged by a vehicle
operated by Minnesota Vikings' excitable wideout Randy Moss last year, is
reportedly seeking $50,000 for emotional distress, assault and negligence, and
an apology from No. 84. I'm guessing, however, should she get the $50,000, she
might just let Moss slide on the act of contrition and settle for five Hail
Marys.

    The University of Pittsburgh's cost-cutting consciousness was on blinding
display this week with the hiring of Jamie Dixon to coach the defending Big East
Conference tournament champion men's basketball team. Not only did the Dixon
selection save the athletic department hundreds of thousands of dollars a year
for the foreseeable future, it cut to next to nothing the program's projected
March travel expenses.

    I needn't remind you of the Florida Marlins' release of mascot Billie T.
Marlin (and his $80,000 in compensation), and the Disney Company's shedding of
the Anaheim Angels, World Series Champions but bottom-line bums, to fill out the
whole sorry picture.

    The one positive economic aspect of having Jordan in retirement, however, is
the very tangible impact on the financial markets associated with the
possibility that Jordan could unretire at any moment.

    I know he said, "I really feel it's definitely it," this time, meaning the
end of the greatest NBA career in history. But that's a long way from "I really,
really feel it's definitely, definitely it," not to mention any number of
additional befuddling modifiers.

    Even as his court life ended in Philadelphia the other night, Jordan again
gave every indication that he just can't get over himself.

    "The Philly people did a great job," he told The Associated Press after
scoring 15 points in a typically desultory Wizards spanking by the 76ers.

    A great job? Did he expect them to boo? Who does he think he is, Santa
Claus?

    "Obviously, they wanted to see me make a couple of baskets and then come
off. That was very, very respectful."

    Evidently, after six NBA championships and five MVP awards, and 32,292
career points -- at what, $10,000 a point would be one guess -- Jordan still
feels a pang for respect. Since it doesn't appear he'll get it from any
front-office aptitudes, I think you may fully expect Jordan IV: the final,
final, really, really, definitely, definite retirement for some time in 2005.

    I'll give Jordan's absence from the national sports spotlight until about
Thanksgiving, when rumors that he's working out first surface in the Chicago
Tribune. After that, the typical breathless headlines:

    *BARKLEY: 'JORDAN HINTS AT COMEBACK.'

    *JORDAN DENIES COMEBACK PLANS.

    *JORDAN 'JUST SHOOTING AROUND' 14 HOURS A DAY.

    *JORDAN 'GETTING ANTSY' -- BARKLEY

    *JORDAN 'IN BEST SHAPE OF HIS LIFE' -- BARKLEY.

    *BARKLEY 'IN WORST SHAPE OF HIS LIFE' -- JORDAN.

    *BARKLEY 'NOT ALWAYS CRAZY' -- JORDAN.

    *BARKLEY: 'THE HELL I AIN'T.'

    *JORDAN, BULLS MEET SECRETLY.

    *JORDAN, BULLS MEET IN TIMES SQUARE.

    *JORDAN, BULLS ANNOUNCE WORLD-WIDE LAUNCH OF HIGH-END JORDAN RESTAURANTS TO
COINCIDE WITH MJ'S COMEBACK.

    *JOBLESS CLAIMS HIT 12-MONTH LOW.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2003


                             780 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     April 16, 2003 Wednesday FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 3E

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: GenVec to buy biotech Diacrin;
 Stock deal gains it cash, manufacturing capacity

BYLINE: Andrea K. Walker

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   GenVec Inc. will acquire a Massachusetts biotechnology firm in a stock deal
that will increase its manufacturing capacity and more than double the cash it
has to test and develop drugs, the Gaithersburg company announced yesterday.

   GenVec, a developer of gene therapies, has signed an agreement with Diacrin
Inc., of Charlestown to exchange 1.5292 shares of GenVec stock for each Diacrin
share. The companies valued the deal at about $40.4 million, or $2.23 per
Diacrin diluted share, based on GenVec's Monday close of $1.46.

   But after the announcement yesterday, GenVec's shares fell 29 cents, closing
at $1.17 and slicing the value of the deal by nearly 20 percent. Shares of
Diacrin closed up 40 cents at $1.55.

   The deal, expected to close in the third quarter, will garner the combined
company about $50 million in cash and investments by the end of the year. GenVec
now has about $22 million in cash and investments.

   The additional money should last GenVec through 2006, the company said.

   GenVec executives said the cash would allow the company to continue
developing its lead drug TNFerade, a gene therapy designed to enhance the
anti-tumor effects of radiation.

   The company said it also could expand its vaccine business. GenVec is
collaborating with the National Institutes of Health in developing an AIDS
vaccine. It also has a partnership with the U.S. Navy Medical Research Center to
create a malaria vaccine candidate.

   "We just see the whole thing as a big plus all the way around," said Paul H.
Fischer, GenVec chief executive officer.

   With the Diacrim acquisition, GenVec will also gain two clinical trials
testing the use of muscle cell transplants to treat damaged hearts.

   Fischer will remain CEO of the combined companies and Diacrin's current CEO,
Thomas H. Fraser, will become chairman of the board. GenVec's existing
shareholders will own about 45.5 percent of the stock and Diacrin shareholders
will own 54.5. "Essentially it's a merger of equals," Fisher said. "There's an
attempt to have balance and synergy.

   GenVec will keep the headquarters of the company in Gaithersburg and perform
its manufacturing in Massachusetts.

   Analysts said the manufacturing space is important as GenVec's drugs move
along in the development stage.

   "You don't want early-stage companies to spend a lot of money on hard
assets," said Craig West, an analyst with A.G. Edwards & Sons. "They can usually
get by with a small amount of capacity or contract out. GenVec is now getting to
the point where they need to do larger Phase I and Phase II testing. You need
real manufacturing space to do that."

   GenVec employs about 95 and Diacrin about 20. Fisher said the company would
keep about 95 employees on the payroll.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2003


                             781 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2003 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                   April 16, 2003 Wednesday metro Met Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1F

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: Journals tout U of L research on transplants;
Second article tells how team tricked the immune system

BYLINE: HOWINGTON PATRICK, phowington@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   Byline: PATRICK HOWINGTON

   Source: The Courier-Journal

   University of Louisville research to slow the rejection of transplanted
hearts has been published in a prestigious journal.

   The publication Circulation marked the second time in recent months a major
journal has published research on how a UofL team tricked the immune system into
not attacking transplanted tissue.

   The technique, involving coating the tissue with specially engineered
proteins, was invented by U of L immunologist Haval Shirwan. He is chief
scientific officer of the young biotech company ApoImmune, which holds exclusive
licensing rights to his discoveries.

   In addition to having their work published in Circulation last month and the
journal Immunity in December, two members of Shirwan's laboratory researchers
have won "young investigator" awards from the American Transplant Congress. They
will present papers at the upcoming event.

   The article in Circulation, the journal of the American Heart Association,
details how researchers were able to delay the rejection of hearts transplanted
in mice by putting specially engineered proteins on the hearts' surface.

   The transplanted hearts survived 17 days on average - about twice as long as
hearts transplanted without the special proteins.

   The article said this was the first time the heart has been safely
manipulated that way, using a technique that avoids the dangers of gene therapy.

   While the experiment fell short of achieving permanent tolerance of
transplanted hearts, it "showed a beneficial effect that was pretty impressive,"
said Dr. Rob Dowling, director of heart transplantation at U of L.

   Dowling, who wasn't involved in the research, is known for his work with the
AbioCor artificial-heart project.

   More experiments will be needed to determine if the U of L team's techniques
can lead to what Dowling called the "Holy Grail" of transplantation - getting
the immune system to tolerate a donated organ without weakening its defenses
against other potential invaders.

   Currently, organ recipients get lifelong drugs that suppress the entire
immune system. Scientists are pursuing a variety of approaches to change that.
The mice in the experiment didn't receive immunosuppressants.

   "Whoever figures out how to develop transplant tolerance can just get the
first flight to Switzerland (to accept) the Nobel Prize," Dowling said.

   Esma Yolcu of U of L, a principal author of the Circulation article, was a
senior postdoctoral fellow when the research was done and became assistant
professor of microbiology and immunology April 1.

   Other authors were Shirwan, who is director of U of L's Molecular Immunology
Program, and researchers in Israel and at the University of Pittsburgh.

   The article was published online last month by Circulation under a "rapid
track" process to get word of scientific breakthroughs out quickly.

   Yolcu also was lead author of the Immunity article, which described how
"decorating" transplanted pancreatic islets with specially created proteins kept
rats' immune systems from rejecting them.

   The Circulation article took that approach a step further by showing it can
work on solid organs.

   Permanent tolerance probably wasn't achieved because the protective effect of
the proteins waned as they wore off the heart's surface, the article said.

   But when mice also were given follow-up injections of cells coated with the
proteins, survival time was extended to about 24 days.

   That suggests a two-pronged approach might have greater hope of prolonging
tolerance until the immune system permanently recognizes a transplanted heart as
non-threatening. Or, a combination of specially engineered proteins might be
used instead of just one.

   Shirwan, who came to U of L through the "Bucks for Brains" program, said if
further experiments can induce permanent tolerance in mice, the next step could
be tests in primates - then, perhaps, humans.

   Four papers by Shirwan's team have been accepted for presentation at this
year's American Transplant Congress, to be held May 30-June 4 in Washington D.C.
Shirwan said he hopes the presentations will help Kentucky be "known not only
(for) basketball, but ... by the technology."

   The papers earned two awards from the congress for Yolcu and one for
postdoctoral fellow Narendra P. Singh, who co-authored the Immunity article.

   Yolcu, who received her doctoral degree four years ago from Bilkent
University in Turkey, said "I came to this country in 1999, and then I worked
really hard for this result."

   Work for the Circulation and Immunity studies was supported by grants from
the American Heart Association, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, National
Institutes of Health, and the Kentucky Research Challenge Trust Fund, the formal
name of the "Bucks for Brains" program to bring researchers to state
universities.

   Bill Pearse, president and CEO of ApoImmune, said the Circulation article
drew attention from a major East Coast research university, which is talking to
ApoImmune about a possible collaboration.

   The 2 -year-old company was already in negotiations with another university,
and recently signed a research agreement with Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess
Medical Center, a Harvard teaching hospital.

   Meanwhile, ApoImmune's technology to trigger an immune-system attack on
cancer is scheduled to be tested in a clinical trial at Louisville's Jewish
Hospital next year.

   Update

   Last we knew:

   University of Louisville research on a technique to keep the body's immune
system from attacking transplanted tissue had been published in the journal
Immunity, leading to a research agreement between a Harvard teaching hospital
and a Louisville company that has licensing rights to the discovery.

   Update

   The latest:

   The U of L team has published similar research in the journal Circulation,
showing that bathing mouse hearts in a specially engineered protein before they
were transplanted delayed their rejection by the mice who received them.

   Why it's news:

   If perfected, the research offers potentially great benefits to patients. The
published work is a coup for U of L and eventually could mean profits for
ApoImmune, a young Louisville biotech company.

   For more info:

   www.circ.ahajournals.org

   www.apoimmune.com

GRAPHIC: Esma Yolcu, seated, and Haval Shirwin, both of the University of
Louisville, were among the authors of the article about the transplanted hearts
in Circulation, the journal of the American Heart Association. BY MICHAEL
CLEVENGER, THE COURIER-JOURNAL

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2003


                             782 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2003 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            April 16, 2003 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: GenVec to Acquire Mass. Biotech Firm;
$40 Million Stock Deal for Diacrin to Boost Md. Company's Cash Position

BYLINE: Michael Barbaro, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, agreed yesterday to buy
specialty drugmaker Diacrin Inc. for $ 40.4 million in stock, in a move to
bolster its cash reserves.

   Neither company is profitable, but Diacrin's money will help GenVec until it
can produce a marketable medical product. Diacrin, based in Charlestown, Mass.,
is developing a cell-transplant technology designed to repair damaged heart
tissue. GenVec is working on three treatments: TNFerade for cancer, BioBypass
for coronary artery disease and PEDF for blindness.

   Executives said they would exchange each share of Diacrin for 1.5292 shares
of GenVec, valuing Diacrin at about $ 2.23 a share, based on GenVec's Monday
closing price of $ 1.46. The terms of the agreement represent a premium of 94
percent, given Diacrin's closing price of $ 1.15.

   If regulators approve the merger, expected to close in the third quarter,
Diacrin shareholders will own about 54.5 percent of the combined company, while
GenVec shareholders will own 45.5 percent. The companies said they have been in
discussions for about four months.

   GenVec, which reported $ 20.3 million in cash on hand as of Dec. 31, said the
combined company would have $ 50 million at the end of this year, strengthening
its bargaining position as it tries to find partners to help develop its drugs.
Under the deal, GenVec would retain its name and would also gain extensive
manufacturing facilities, eliminating the need for outside contractors.

   "GenVec was product-rich and cash-poor," said Craig D. West, an analyst at
A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc., who owns stock in the company. "Now they are
product-rich and cash-rich."

   The deal was billed as a merger of equals, but it became clear yesterday
that, in the near term, it is about TNFerade, GenVec's cancer-fighting
treatment. The company's chief executive, Paul H. Fischer, said the combined
company will be able to fund its operations through 2006, when he hopes the
product will be ready for federal approval.

   TNFerade, a type of gene therapy, is injected directly into the site of a
tumor and becomes activated by radiation. GenVec is conducting tests for it in
patients with cancer of the pancreas and esophagus.

   "We did not want to be dependent on a partnership or a financing at any
particular time," Fischer said. "This will alleviate the concern of our
shareholders that GenVec will not be able to execute on our business plan."

   Fischer said he plans to keep GenVec's annual cash spending rate under $ 20
million. Today, it stands at $ 18 million per year, while the rate at Diacrin is
between $ 4 million and $ 5 million.

   As a result, Fischer said, GenVec's remaining two drugs -- and Diacrin's
cell-transplant technology -- would require partnerships to move forward with
expensive patient tests.

   GenVec has 95 workers, and Diacrin has a staff of 25. About 30 employees
would be cut, though it is not yet clear where, GenVec said. Fischer is expected
to remain the company's chief executive, and Diacrin's chief executive, Thomas
H. Fraser, is expected to become chairman.

   The deal continues a wave of recent consolidations in the battered
biotechnology sector, which has found that mergers are often a safer alternative
to dilutive equity sales and sometimes stingy license agreements.

   In the past three months, Johnson & Johnson agreed to buy biotech concern
Scios Inc. for $ 2.4 billion; Cambridge Antibody Technology PLC announced plans
to buy Oxford GlycoSciences PLC for about $ 178 million; and NPS Pharmaceuticals
Inc. agreed to pay $ 571 million in stock for Enzon Pharmaceuticals Inc.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2003


                             783 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             April 15, 2003 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: Scientists finish mapping genome

SOURCE: Christian Science Monitor

BYLINE: Peter N. Spotts

HIGHLIGHT:
Findings open door to medical advances, technological gains

BODY:


   In what many are hailing as a historic milestone, researchers have announced
the completion of a project to sequence the human genome.

   The 13-year, $2.7 billion undertaking drew to a close Monday, 50 years to the
month after scientists Francis Crick and James Watson published their discovery
of the structure of DNA, the biochemical instruction book for organic life
archived in the centers of cells.

   Now biologists are unrolling a fresh research blueprint for genome-related
research, drawn for what National Human Genome Research Institute Director
Francis Collins and colleagues have termed "the true dawning of the genomic
era."

   They've assembled the parts list in the right order. Now they hope to
accelerate efforts to understand how the genetic information they've uncovered
yields the complexities and diversity of living organisms.

   "We have opened the door into a vast and complex new biological landscape,"
says Aristides Patrinos, director of the U.S. Department of Energy's Office of
Biological and Environmental Research.

   Even before the project ended, it was having a measurable impact on areas
ranging from medicine to the war against bioterrorism. Researchers say
information from the genome project has allowed them to develop genetic tests
that can help identify broad classes of cancer. Gene therapies, in which
defective genes are identified and replaced, remain in their infancy. But
scientists claim some success in treating mice with sickle-cell disease.

   Microcircuits that can quickly analyze DNA samples placed on them are being
used in equipment designed to test for many of the microbes thought to be the
most likely weapons in a bioterrorism attack.

   Meanwhile, researchers using sequencing and computational techniques
developed for the Human Genome Project are looking for microbes that could help
clean up nuclear waste, refine gasoline more efficiently and with less energy,
or act as a source of hydrogen for fuel.

   The praise and predictions surrounding Monday's announcement of the Human
Genome Project's end has a familiar ring. In February 2001, with fanfare that
included capturing the covers of the world's two leading general-science
journals, researchers with the Human Genome Project and a private human-genome
effort published rough drafts of the sequence.

   Yet the drafts were laced with errors and contained vast gaps in the sequence
of pairings among the four chemical "bases" that combine to form the "runs" of
the now-iconic twisted-ladder structure of DNA.

   The version announced Monday is as complete as today's technology can make
it, researchers say. The error rate has been cut from one mistake in every 1,000
base pairs to one in every 10,000--an accuracy that applies to 99 percent of the
genome's 3 billion base pairs.

   Just as important, researchers add, are the finished product's vast stretches
of uninterrupted genetic information that is expected to radically shorten the
time it takes scientists to hunt for genes.

   "It's a bit like moving on from a first-attempt demo music tape to a classic
CD," says Jane Rogers, director of sequencing at Britain's Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, a key player in the sequencing effort.

   The information and technologies the project has generated already are
profoundly affecting fields ranging from biomedicine and hazardous-waste cleanup
to the study of the origins and evolution of organic life itself.

   Now scientists are moving into a new generation of global research to build
on the Human Genome Project's results. Writing in a forthcoming issue of the
journal Nature, Dr. Collins and several colleagues outline what they see as the
opportunities the completed genome offers for improving medical care, dealing
with environmental issues, and assessing the effect genetic information can have
on "concepts of race, ethnicity, kinship, individual and group identity, health,
disease, and 'normality' for traits and behaviors."

   Christian Science Monitor

GRAPHIC: Associated Press, Francis Collins, director of the National Human
Genome Research Institute, announces completion of the project in Bethesda, Md.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2003


                             784 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2003 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                            April 15, 2003, Tuesday

SECTION: USA; Pg. 02

LENGTH: 1078 words

HEADLINE: Complete genome map opens roads for science

BYLINE: By Peter N. Spotts Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

HIGHLIGHT:
Landmark decoding of DNA structure will impact everything from medicine to fuel.

BODY:

   In what many are hailing as a historic milestone in the annals of modern
science, researchers have announced the successful completion of a project to
sequence the human genome.

   The 13-year, $ 2.7 billion undertaking drew to a close Monday, 50 years to
the month after scientists Francis Crick and James Watson published their
discovery of the structure of DNA, the biochemical instruction book for organic
life archived in the centers of cells.

   Now, biologists are unrolling a fresh research blueprint for genome-related
research, drawn for what National Human Genome Research Institute Director
Francis Collins and colleagues have termed "the true dawning of the genomic
era."

   They've assembled the parts list in the right order. Now they hope to
accelerate efforts to understand how the genetic information they've uncovered
yields the complexities and diversity of living organisms.

   "We have opened the door into a vast and complex new biological landscape,"
says Aristides Patrinos, director of the US Department of Energy's Office of
Biological and Environmental Research.

   Even before the project ended, it was having a measurable impact on areas
ranging from medicine to the war against bioterrorism. Researchers say
information from the genome project has allowed them to develop genetic tests
that can help identify broad classes of cancer. Gene therapies, in which
defective genes are identified and replaced, remain in their infancy. But
scientists claim some success in treating mice with sickle-cell disease.

   Practical applications

   Microcircuits that can quickly analyze DNA samples placed on them are being
used in equipment designed to test for many of the microbes thought to be the
most likely weapons in a bioterrorism attack.

   Meanwhile, researchers using sequencing and computational techniques
developed for the Human Genome Project are looking for microbes that could help
clean up nuclear waste, refine gasoline more efficiently and with less energy,
or act as a source of hydrogen for fuel.

   The praise and predictions surrounding Monday's announcement of the Human
Genome Project's end has a familiar ring. In February 2001, with fanfare that
included capturing the covers of the world's two leading general-science
journals, researchers with the Human Genome Project and a private human-genome
effort published rough drafts of the sequence.

   Yet the drafts were laced with errors and contained vast gaps in the sequence
of pairings among the four chemical "bases" that combine to form the "runs" of
the now-iconic twisted-ladder structure of DNA.

   This time, it's complete

   The version announced Monday is as complete as today's technology can make
it, researchers say. The error rate has been cut from one mistake in every 1,000
base pairs to one in every 10,000 - an accuracy that applies to 99 percent of
the genome's 3 billion base pairs.

   Just as important, researchers add, are the finished product's vast stretches
of uninterrupted genetic information which is expected to radically shorten the
time it takes scientists to hunt for genes.

   "It's a bit like moving on from a first-attempt demo music tape to a classic
CD," says Jane Rogers, director of sequencing at Britain's Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, a key player in the sequencing effort.

   The information and technologies the project has generated already are
profoundly affecting The information and technologies the project has generated
already are profoundly affecting fields ranging from biomedicine and
hazardous-waste clean-up to the study of the origins and evolution of organic
life itself. The project also has laid at society's doorstep challenging ethical
and legal questions about the use of human genetic information.

   Now scientists are moving into a new generation of global research to build
on the Human Genome Project's results. Writing in a forthcoming issue of the
journal Nature, Dr. Collins and several colleagues outline what they see as the
opportunities the completed genome offers for improving medical care, dealing
with environmental issues, and assessing the effect genetic information can have
on "concepts of race, ethnicity, kinship, individual and group identity, health,
disease, and 'normality' for traits and behaviors."

   Several projects already are under way. Last fall, the National Human Genome
Research Institute and collaborators began the International HapMap Project, a
three-year effort to pinpoint genetic variation within the human genome. Another
project aims to build an encyclopedia covering all of the genes that code for
proteins, and other important biochemicals, or that perform other functions.
This would allow scientists to quickly distinguish useful genes from the junk
genes the genome carries.

   Applications for energy

   Meanwhile, the DOE is focusing efforts on one-celled organisms and the roles
they may be able to play in meeting US energy needs and cleaning the
environment. Over the next 10 to 20 years, researchers want to know how
microbes, which make up an estimated 50 percent of Earth's biomass, function at
such a level of detail that they can accurately simulate how organisms will
respond to changes in their environment.

   "We're just beginning to understand how to work with multiple influences"
instead of single determining factors, notes Alta Charo, a professor of law and
bioethics at the University of Madison at Wisconsin. Those multiple influences
can be found in the interplay between genes and environment or the interplay of
many genes within a genome required to trigger a particular set of biological
processes.

   The idea of multiple influences "does not work well within a medical system
whose paradigm is to cure diseases that are presented to it. It requires
thinking from a more preventative point of view," she says. "The Human Genome
Project may push us toward a different organization of the healthcare system, if
we use the information creatively."

   As researchers probe the "sheer number of genetic variances and mutations,
we're going to slowly realize that any individual has genetic variance", that
variance is the norm, and consequently that, in biological terms at least, there
is no idealized "normal."

   The challenge for society as it continues to grapple with advances in
genetics information "is not to say: we won't go there," Charo says. "The
challenge is to say we will go there, and this is how."

   (c) Copyright 2003. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2003


                             785 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 13, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: New plays zero in on the topical

BYLINE: Anne Marie Welsh; THEATER CRITIC

BODY:
 LOUISVILLE -- You could have avoided the 24/7 Iraq War coverage by attending
the annual marathon of play going at last weekend's Humana Festival of New
American Plays.  But even in the Actors Theatre of Louisville complex, you
couldn't avoid the anxious, divided world the war is happening in.

   And mostly, that was a good thing.

   Topical issues and the current climate of fear shaped most offerings during
this 27th running of the national showcase for freshly minted theatrical work.
That made this year's festival, the third under the artistic direction of Marc
Masterson, a cut above last year's disappointing roster of plays.

   Also different this year: The playwrights were a mostly young, just emerging
group of writers, rather than the veterans commissioned previously.  And dark
comedy was their stock in trade.

   It's always tempting to look for a clear winner at Humana, which is named for
the Kentucky foundation that funds the festival, and which brings together
playwrights, actors, agents, producers, theater directors, critics, literary
managers and the like for a weekend of nonstop scouting and schmoozing.

   And while it's never a contest with prizes, this year's smorgasbord -- six
full-evening plays, three shorties and two anthology programs -- did deliver a
crowd-pleaser.  That would be "Omnium-Gatherum," a play of ideas set at a
raucous New York dinner party.

   At least one commercial New York producer wants to stage the comedy
off-Broadway, and some local Louisville patrons -- in contrast to the 200 or so
"special visitors" from the overlapping worlds of theater, journalism,
television and film -- have already seen this serious farce more than once.

   Despite the flaws in a sometimes too-bald comedy that borrows equally from
George Bernard Shaw and Neil Simon, its popularity suggests that people
desperately need to air the issues -- and the opposing points of view -- that
have emerged in the wake of Sept. 11.

   Co-writers Theresa Rebeck and Alexandra Gersten-Vassilaros bring eight
characters representing such natural enemies as a feminist vegan pacifist; a
violence-loving, Tom Clancy-style novelist; and a Middle Eastern scholar to a
gourmet dinner hosted by a bubble-headed Martha Stewart perfectionist.

   While helicopters hover and hostess Suzie serves, the guests chat, drink and
argue about everything from the couscous to Islamism, militarism, sex and civil
rights.  The earliest responses by playwrights to Sept. 11, such as "The Guys"
and even Neil LaBute's "The Mercy Seat," were personal close-ups of the
aftermath.  The buoyant, middle-of-the-road "Omnium-Gatherum" is, by contrast, a
long tracking shot along the lines of Shaw's "Heartbreak House," but with none
of his tragic (and prescient) undertones about the horrific violence unleashed
upon the world by military technology.

   Two other dark comedies -- Kia Corthron's "Slide Glide the Slippery Slope"
and Bridget Carpenter's "The Faculty Room" -- took on headline-grabbing issues.
Corthron's subject is genetics and all manner of variations on cloning,
artificially assisted fertility, gene therapy and genetic engineering.

   A talking, Dolly-like sheep even makes an appearance in this overstuffed
play, which was at its best when the very talented Corthron, with her shrewd
intelligence and ease with dialogue, let her abrasive African-American
characters just breathe and talk, the "issues" be damned.  Perhaps Corthron will
streamline the promising script before "Slope" debuts, in a Mark Taper Forum
production, in Los Angeles in June.

   Carpenter's play also suffered from too-muchness.  Her theme is teen
pathology, though with a twist.  Set in the faculty lounge of a high school
where teachers daily deposit the guns they've confiscated, the play explores the
arrested adolescence of a female teacher who begins acting like her most
troubled students -- cutting herself, bingeing, mood-swinging as she launches an
affair with a student.

   Carpenter also places her finger firmly on the pulse of the alarming social
trend toward religious evangelism, that longing-for-the-apocalypse branch of
Christianity that has helped make Tim LeHaye's "Suddenly Awake" books about the
rapture of "the saved" so popular.  "The Faculty Room" boasted a strong
performance from Greg McFadden as Carver, the new teacher who keeps his wits
amid the sexual-religious-academic mayhem unfolding around him.  But under the
direction of Susan Fenichell, the show goes so far over the top that its
fascinating themes -- and the subliminal link between rhapsodic sexual masochism
and apocalyptic Christianity -- simply disintegrate.

   The affable Actors Theatre of Louisville artistic director Masterson, still
growing into the big shoes of his predecessor, Jon Jory, chose to direct the one
almost-abstract piece on the festival bill, Russell Davis' "The Second Death of
Priscilla." Overlong and monotonous, this symbolic drama seemed set in the mind
of its titular heroine, a woman separated from her body by sexual abuse,
perhaps, or schizophrenia, or some other awful trauma.

   She's haunted by a wolf figure, and by several other victimized women, who
may be her other selves.  Davis mixes images from "The Three Little Pigs" and
"Peter and the Wolf" in this flat tale, which seemed interminable during its
first act, and a bit more watchable during the shorter second act.  Paul Owen's
set design, and Valerie Sullivan Fuchs' videos had a visual beauty echoed in the
ritualistic juggling of performer Jon Held. These lovely elements in Masterson's
staging couldn't disguise the fuzzy and pretentious writing, however.

   Masterson and company also commissioned 16 writers to contribute to
"Trepidation Nation," a sleekly staged if uneven anthology about phobias and
full-blown fears that afflict Americans in the here and now.  Another group of
writer-performers brought the rhythms of hip-hop poetry and further urban
concerns to lobby spaces between shows.

   The weekend's most artistically consistent and polished works were three
highly entertaining 10-minute plays that shared a single program.

   La Jolla Playhouse favorite Lee Blessing showed his "The Roads That Lead
Here," about three slacker sons suddenly (and explosively) forced to grow up by
the dad they call the Eminent.  Superstar dancer (and madman) Vaslav Nijinsky
invades the mind and body of a would-be husband in Jordan Harrison's whimsical
"Fit for Feet," with another spot-on performance from McFadden.  And in Dan
Dietz's "Trash Anthem," a pair of talking cowboy boots implicate the
country-singin' wife who's shot her wandering man.

   With less to say, the short plays generally said it better.  For the major
works unveiled at this Humana 27, editing and rewrites should be the next order
of the day.

   Anne Marie Welsh: (619) 293-1265; anne-marie.welsh@uniontrib.com


GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1,2,3. John Fitzgerald; 1. Tonye Patano (top) is a twin looking
for genetic cures for the sickle cell trait inherited by her adopted sister,
Retta (Shona Tucker), in "Slide Glide the Slippery Slope." 2. The Martha
Stewart-like hostess Suzie welcomes guests from across the political spectrum to
her perfect, post-Sept. 11 dinner party in "Omnium-Gatherum" by Alexandra
Gersten-Vassilaros and Theresa Rebeck. (F-8) 3. Cheryl Freeman (left) and Tonya
Patano (with Dyron Holmes in the back) in playwright Kia Corthron's "Slide Glide
the Slippery Slope." (F-9)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2003


                             786 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 13, 2003, Sunday

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT;Pg. F-6

LENGTH: 852 words

HEADLINE: New plays with regional potential; From 'Lively Lad' to 'Faculty
Room,' four with promise

BYLINE: Anne Marie Welsh; THEATER CRITIC

BODY:
 Even the best of the six full-evening plays unveiled at this year's Humana
Festival suffered problems of tone or emphasis or clarity.  And as my 48 hours
of nearly nonstop play-going rounded to a close, I found myself paddling against
the populist and decidedly sociopolitical current.

   Although the audience favorite, "Omnium-Gatherum," about a contentious dinner
party for the intelligentsia, deserves the stagings it will get, and Kia
Corthron (of "Glide Slide the Slippery Slope") is probably the most gifted of
this year's crop of playwrights, my favorite show was a quirky little comedy
with a very dark undertow called "The Lively Lad."

   Here's a closer look at it and three others with the potential to get around
the regional-theater circuit:

   o "The Lively Lad, a Play With Songs" -- Quincy Long sets his deceptively
dark bit of tomfoolery in a sort of jaunty, Edwardian Gilded Age when the rich
are getting richer, the daughters are demanding more, and the terrible cruelty
behind all the wealth has yet to be exposed.  The metaphor for the slave labor
underpinning this political economy is castration -- yes, the creation of
eunuchs to serve spoiled rich girls until they marry patriarchs like their
indulgent daddies.

   Every now and again, the wealthy widower Jonathan (sublimely silly as played
by Marc Vietor) bursts into a little Gilbert and Sullivan-style ditty as he
attempts to satisfy both his enlightened, Freud-reading girlfriend, who wants to
change the system, and his bratty daughter, Little Eva, who demands her eunuch.
With the cigar-smoking members of the oligarchy at his men's club incapable of
seeing a future they don't dominate, Jonathan lives in a universe parallel to
our own.  Playwright Long, composer Michael Silversher and the cast (especially
Vietor and William McNulty, directed by Timothy Douglas) take this wacky world
seriously enough that it can deftly mock both the Victorian melodramas it
imitates and the ruling class making today's economic and military policy.

   o "Slide Glide the Slippery Slope" -- Twins separated at birth are the main
characters in this provocative, over-freighted dramatic comedy.  Corthron's
writing is incisive when her key arguments over nature vs. nurture are fully
embodied in characters, as they are in argumentative twins Erm and Elo. But
other long riffs on cloning (spoken by a mechanical lamb, Dolly), genetic
engineering and gene therapy often evaporate into abstractions pasted over a
very busy plot.

   Director Valerie Curtis-Newton didn't help matters by allowing most of the
actors in her six-person cast to give shrill, overstated performances.  But when
Erm and Elo reunite with the mother who gave Erm away to a neighbor family,
however, "Slide Glide" reached its emotional potential.  Lizan Mitchell as the
complicated witch of a mother, Dell, centered and quieted the conflicts in ways
that conveyed psychological, not just thematic, truths.

   Corthron's "Breath, Boom" anatomized violence in girl gangs and had
high-profile stagings in London and New York. She's a writer with a lot to say,
though her "Slide Glide" could say more if it were simpler structurally.

   o "Omnium-Gatherum" -- This audience favorite calls to mind not only Shaw's
great debate plays, but also the trenchant first act of Caryl Churchill's "Top
Girls" and the more flaccid humor of Neil Simon's "The Dinner Party." The guests
are fictional, but based on such familiar icons as cultural analysts Edward Said
and Christopher Hitchens, pop celebrities Martha Stewart and Tom Clancy, and the
honored children's advocate, Marian Wright Edelman.

   In the best ways, the play was a true collaboration between authors Alexandra
Gersten-Vassilaros and Theresa Rebeck.  It has two rhythms going for it, and
plenty of variety in the voices.  But when hostess Suzie introduces her surprise
guest, the terrorist Mohammed, the play takes a wrong turn for 15 long minutes
or so, and the tonal disruption extends almost to the limp
we're-all-one-community ending.  The best thing about this energetic comedy may
be that it's written from a perspective beyond the initial shock and pain of
Sept. 11.

   o "The Faculty Room" -- Like Corthron, Bridget Carpenter has the gift of
excess, having stuffed at least two plays into this bustling black comedy about
all things adolescent and the adults who are no wiser than the kids.  So complex
are Carpenter's insights into problems of teen violence, body image,
sadomasochism and sicko religious ecstasy that they could fill a hefty novel.

   Her characters are that rich, too -- a drama teacher, Zoe, who turns into a
case of arrested development; the charismatic (and sociopathic) English teacher,
Adam, who's the cause of her pain and his own loneliness; and the new (and gay)
instructor, Carver, with so much baggage it's kept him singularly sensitive to
his suffering students.  Farcical elements (an always-silent colleague, a nutty
principal testing out a new intercom) get overworked on stage, but could fade
into the tacky room's woodwork if Carpenter can sharpen her focus and decide on
the right trims.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Harlan Taylor; William McNulty (left) is the mad, war-veteran
servant about to operate on one of the patriarchs (Dennis Kelly) in "The Lively
Lad." (F-7)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2003


                             787 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 13, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1128 words

HEADLINE: New plays zero in on the topical

BYLINE: Anne Marie Welsh, THEATER CRITIC

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE

BODY:

   LOUISVILLE -- You could have avoided the 24/7 Iraq War coverage by attending
the annual marathon of play going at last weekend's Humana Festival of New
American Plays.

   But even in the Actors Theatre of Louisville complex, you couldn't avoid the
anxious, divided world the war is happening in. And mostly, that was a good
thing. Topical issues and the current climate of fear shaped most offerings
during this 27th running of the national showcase for freshly minted theatrical
work.

   That made this year's festival, the third under the artistic direction of
Marc Masterson, a cut above last year's disappointing roster of plays. Also
different this year: The playwrights were a mostly young, just emerging group of
writers, rather than the veterans commissioned previously.

   And dark comedy was their stock in trade. It's always tempting to look for a
clear winner at Humana, which is named for the Kentucky foundation that funds
the festival, and which brings together playwrights, actors, agents, producers,
theater directors, critics, literary managers and the like for a weekend of
nonstop scouting and schmoozing. And while it's never a contest with prizes,
this year's smorgasbord -- six full-evening plays, three shorties and two
anthology programs -- did deliver a crowd-pleaser.

   That would be "Omnium-Gatherum," a play of ideas set at a raucous New York
dinner party. At least one commercial New York producer wants to stage the
comedy off-Broadway, and some local Louisville patrons -- in contrast to the 200
or so "special visitors" from the overlapping worlds of theater, journalism,
television and film -- have already seen this serious farce more than once.
Despite the flaws in a sometimes too-bald comedy that borrows equally from
George Bernard Shaw and Neil Simon, its popularity suggests that people
desperately need to air the issues -- and the opposing points of view -- that
have emerged in the wake of Sept. 11. Co-writers Theresa Rebeck and Alexandra
Gersten-Vassilaros bring eight characters representing such natural enemies as a
feminist vegan pacifist; a violence-loving, Tom Clancy-style novelist; and a
Middle Eastern scholar to a gourmet dinner hosted by a bubble-headed Martha
Stewart perfectionist. While helicopters hover and hostess Suzie serves, the
guests chat, drink and argue about everything from the couscous to Islamism,
militarism, sex and civil rights.

   The earliest responses by playwrights to Sept. 11, such as "The Guys" and
even Neil LaBute's "The Mercy Seat," were personal close-ups of the aftermath.

   The buoyant, middle-of-the-road "Omnium-Gatherum" is, by contrast, a long
tracking shot along the lines of Shaw's "Heartbreak House," but with none of his
tragic (and prescient) undertones about the horrific violence unleashed upon the
world by military technology. Two other dark comedies -- Kia Corthron's "Slide
Glide the Slippery Slope" and Bridget Carpenter's "The Faculty Room" -- took on
headline-grabbing issues.

   Corthron's subject is genetics and all manner of variations on cloning,
artificially assisted fertility, gene therapy and genetic engineering. A
talking, Dolly-like sheep even makes an appearance in this overstuffed play,
which was at its best when the very talented Corthron, with her shrewd
intelligence and ease with dialogue, let her abrasive African-American
characters just breathe and talk, the "issues" be damned. Perhaps Corthron will
streamline the promising script before "Slope" debuts, in a Mark Taper Forum
production, in Los Angeles in June. Carpenter's play also suffered from
too-muchness.

   Her theme is teen pathology, though with a twist.

   Set in the faculty lounge of a high school where teachers daily deposit the
guns they've confiscated, the play explores the arrested adolescence of a female
teacher who begins acting like her most troubled students -- cutting herself,
bingeing, mood-swinging as she launches an affair with a student. Carpenter also
places her finger firmly on the pulse of the alarming social trend toward
religious evangelism, that longing-for-the-apocalypse branch of Christianity
that has helped make Tim LeHaye's "Suddenly Awake" books about the rapture of
"the saved" so popular.

   "The Faculty Room" boasted a strong performance from Greg McFadden as Carver,
the new teacher who keeps his wits amid the sexual-religious-academic mayhem
unfolding around him. But under the direction of Susan Fenichell, the show goes
so far over the top that its fascinating themes -- and the subliminal link
between rhapsodic sexual masochism and apocalyptic Christianity -- simply
disintegrate. The affable Actors Theatre of Louisville artistic director
Masterson, still growing into the big shoes of his predecessor, Jon Jory, chose
to direct the one almost-abstract piece on the festival bill, Russell Davis'
"The Second Death of Priscilla."

   Overlong and monotonous, this symbolic drama seemed set in the mind of its
titular heroine, a woman separated from her body by sexual abuse, perhaps, or
schizophrenia, or some other awful trauma. She's haunted by a wolf figure, and
by several other victimized women, who may be her other selves.

   Davis mixes images from "The Three Little Pigs" and "Peter and the Wolf" in
this flat tale, which seemed interminable during its first act, and a bit more
watchable during the shorter second act.

   Paul Owen's set design, and Valerie Sullivan Fuchs' videos had a visual
beauty echoed in the ritualistic juggling of performer Jon Held. These lovely
elements in Masterson's staging couldn't disguise the fuzzy and pretentious
writing, however. Masterson and company also commissioned 16 writers to
contribute to "Trepidation Nation," a sleekly staged if uneven anthology about
phobias and full-blown fears that afflict Americans in the here and now.

   Another group of writer-performers brought the rhythms of hip-hop poetry and
further urban concerns to lobby spaces between shows. The weekend's most
artistically consistent and polished works were three highly entertaining
10-minute plays that shared a single program. La Jolla Playhouse favorite Lee
Blessing showed his "The Roads That Lead Here," about three slacker sons
suddenly (and explosively) forced to grow up by the dad they call the Eminent.

   Superstar dancer (and madman) Vaslav Nijinsky invades the mind and body of a
would-be husband in Jordan Harrison's whimsical "Fit for Feet," with another
spot-on performance from McFadden.

   And in Dan Dietz's "Trash Anthem," a pair of talking cowboy boots implicate
the country-singin' wife who's shot her wandering man. With less to say, the
short plays generally said it better.

   For the major works unveiled at this Humana 27, editing and rewrites should
be the next order of the day. Anne Marie Welsh: (619) 293-1265;
anne-marie.welsh@uniontrib.com

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Tonye Patano (top) is a twin looking for genetic
cures for the sickle cell trait inherited by her adopted sister, Retta (Shona
Tucker), in "Slide Glide the Slippery Slope." 2. The Martha Stewart-like hostess
Suzie welcomes guests from across the political spectrum to her perfect,
post-Sept. 11 dinner party in "Omnium-Gatherum" by Alexandra Gersten-Vassilaros
and Theresa Rebeck. (F-8) 3. Cheryl Freeman (left) and Tonya Patano (with Dyron
Holmes in the back) in playwright Kia Corthron's "Slide Glide the Slippery
Slope." (F-9); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3. John Fitzgerald

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             788 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 13, 2003 Sunday

SECTION: ENTERTAINMENT; Pg. F-6

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: New plays with regional potential;
From `Lively Lad' to `Faculty Room,' four with promise

BYLINE: Anne Marie Welsh, THEATER CRITIC

BODY:

   Even the best of the six full-evening plays unveiled at this year's Humana
Festival suffered problems of tone or emphasis or clarity.

   And as my 48 hours of nearly nonstop play-going rounded to a close, I found
myself paddling against the populist and decidedly sociopolitical current.
Although the audience favorite, "Omnium-Gatherum," about a contentious dinner
party for the intelligentsia, deserves the stagings it will get, and Kia
Corthron (of "Glide Slide the Slippery Slope") is probably the most gifted of
this year's crop of playwrights, my favorite show was a quirky little comedy
with a very dark undertow called "The Lively Lad." Here's a closer look at it
and three others with the potential to get around the regional-theater circuit:
o "The Lively Lad, a Play With Songs" -- Quincy Long sets his deceptively dark
bit of tomfoolery in a sort of jaunty, Edwardian Gilded Age when the rich are
getting richer, the daughters are demanding more, and the terrible cruelty
behind all the wealth has yet to be exposed.

   The metaphor for the slave labor underpinning this political economy is
castration -- yes, the creation of eunuchs to serve spoiled rich girls until
they marry patriarchs like their indulgent daddies. Every now and again, the
wealthy widower Jonathan (sublimely silly as played by Marc Vietor) bursts into
a little Gilbert and Sullivan-style ditty as he attempts to satisfy both his
enlightened, Freud-reading girlfriend, who wants to change the system, and his
bratty daughter, Little Eva, who demands her eunuch.

   With the cigar-smoking members of the oligarchy at his men's club incapable
of seeing a future they don't dominate, Jonathan lives in a universe parallel to
our own.

   Playwright Long, composer Michael Silversher and the cast (especially Vietor
and William McNulty, directed by Timothy Douglas) take this wacky world
seriously enough that it can deftly mock both the Victorian melodramas it
imitates and the ruling class making today's economic and military policy. o
"Slide Glide the Slippery Slope" -- Twins separated at birth are the main
characters in this provocative, over-freighted dramatic comedy.

   Corthron's writing is incisive when her key arguments over nature vs. nurture
are fully embodied in characters, as they are in argumentative twins Erm and
Elo. But other long riffs on cloning (spoken by a mechanical lamb, Dolly),
genetic engineering and gene therapy often evaporate into abstractions pasted
over a very busy plot. Director Valerie Curtis-Newton didn't help matters by
allowing most of the actors in her six-person cast to give shrill, overstated
performances.

   But when Erm and Elo reunite with the mother who gave Erm away to a neighbor
family, however, "Slide Glide" reached its emotional potential.

   Lizan Mitchell as the complicated witch of a mother, Dell, centered and
quieted the conflicts in ways that conveyed psychological, not just thematic,
truths. Corthron's "Breath, Boom" anatomized violence in girl gangs and had
high-profile stagings in London and New York. She's a writer with a lot to say,
though her "Slide Glide" could say more if it were simpler structurally. o
"Omnium-Gatherum" -- This audience favorite calls to mind not only Shaw's great
debate plays, but also the trenchant first act of Caryl Churchill's "Top Girls"
and the more flaccid humor of Neil Simon's "The Dinner Party." The guests are
fictional, but based on such familiar icons as cultural analysts Edward Said and
Christopher Hitchens, pop celebrities Martha Stewart and Tom Clancy, and the
honored children's advocate, Marian Wright Edelman. In the best ways, the play
was a true collaboration between authors Alexandra Gersten-Vassilaros and
Theresa Rebeck.

   It has two rhythms going for it, and plenty of variety in the voices.

   But when hostess Suzie introduces her surprise guest, the terrorist Mohammed,
the play takes a wrong turn for 15 long minutes or so, and the tonal disruption
extends almost to the limp we're-all-one-community ending.

   The best thing about this energetic comedy may be that it's written from a
perspective beyond the initial shock and pain of Sept. 11. o "The Faculty Room"
-- Like Corthron, Bridget Carpenter has the gift of excess, having stuffed at
least two plays into this bustling black comedy about all things adolescent and
the adults who are no wiser than the kids. So complex are Carpenter's insights
into problems of teen violence, body image, sadomasochism and sicko religious
ecstasy that they could fill a hefty novel. Her characters are that rich, too --
a drama teacher, Zoe, who turns into a case of arrested development; the
charismatic (and sociopathic) English teacher, Adam, who's the cause of her pain
and his own loneliness; and the new (and gay) instructor, Carver, with so much
baggage it's kept him singularly sensitive to his suffering students.

   Farcical elements (an always-silent colleague, a nutty principal testing out
a new intercom) get overworked on stage, but could fade into the tacky room's
woodwork if Carpenter can sharpen her focus and decide on the right trims.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: William McNulty (left) is the mad, war-veteran servant
about to operate on one of the patriarchs (Dennis Kelly) in "The Lively Lad."
(F-7); PHOTOBY: Harlan Taylor

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             789 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            April 10, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: LAKEFRONT PICAYUNE; To the Rim; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: Taiwan building links with N.O. universities

BYLINE: By Tina Soong

BODY:

   Yuri Yaotsung Chih, director of the Cultural Division of the Taipei Economic
and Cultural Office in Houston, recently visited the University of New Orleans
and Tulane University to discuss exchange and cooperation programs.

   At UNO, Chih visited Chancellor Gregory O'Brien. Among issues discussed was
the "4-corner cooperation" between Taiwan and Louisiana  --  university to
university, industry to industry, students to students, and faculty to faculty.
Cooperation between the UNO Industrial Park and its industrial or business
partners, with the Shing Tsu Industrial Park in Taiwan and its industrial and
business partners was planned.

   Chih and O'Brien also discussed different exchange and cooperation plans,
including sending a Chinese language teacher, with financial support, from
Taiwan to UNO; and providing a four-year student scholarship to study Chinese at
UNO.

   UNO held a lunch in Chih's honor. Among other professors and administrators
who attended were Bobby Eason, assistant to the chancellor for International &
University Affairs; Alan Artibise, dean of the College of Urban and Public
Affairs; Russell Trahan, interim dean of the College of Engineering; Paul
Hensel, associate dean for Academic and Executive Programs, College of Business
Administration; and Janice Thomas, director of the Office of International
Students and Scholars Affairs. Two student representatives from Taiwan, Chi Kai
Lin and Szu Han Yang of the UNO Taiwanese Student Association also attended.

   During his visit to Tulane, Chih met with James McFarland, dean, and Chiwan
Lee, associate dean of the School of Business, among other people. Chih was
briefed on the school's Asian Executive Master of Business Program. When the
program was founded in 1993, it only had participants from Taiwan. Business
executives from China began to join the program in 1999.

   The program augments executive education programs offered at the National
Taiwan University, National Chengchi University, National Chiao Tung University,
and National University of Science and Technology in Taiwan; and Fudan
University, Beijing University, Tsinghua University and Zhingshan University in
China. The current enrollment includes 30 participants from Taiwan and 20 from
China. Various other issues of expanding the existing programs and initiating
new exchange and collaboration projects also were discussed.

   Chih also met with Ted Chen, director of the Asia-Pacific Health
Promotion/Development program, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine;
and Dr. Paul Whelton, senior vice-president, Tulane University Center of Health
Sciences. Chih was briefed on the Master of Medical Management program, a
reinforcing and retraining executive program between the Department of Health
System Management of the Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine
and the National Defense Medical Center in Taiwan.

   Among other topics discussed were sending doctoral candidates from
universities in Taiwan to do short-term studies at Tulane for supplementary
dissertation research advice and consultations and initiating new exchange and
cooperation programs between Tulane and institutions of higher learning in
Taiwan.

   Shu-Ching Hsu, a postdoctoral research fellow who is the first participant of
the exchange program between Taiwan and the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy,
briefed Chih on stem cell research.

   The major responsibilities of the TECO Cultural Division in Houston are to
provide services to the students from Taiwan, to form a bridge between the
students and the universities and to enhance and expand academic cooperation and
exchange programs between Taiwan and the eight southern states, Chih said.

   Chih encourages UNO, Tulane and other institutions of higher learning to form
sister-school links with different universities, colleges and schools in Taiwan.

   For more information, call Chih at (713) 871-0851, or write to the Cultural
Division, Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Houston, 11 Greenway Plaza,
Suite 2910, Houston, Texas, 77046, or e-mail houcul@houstoncul.org.

   . . . . . . .

   Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2005


                             790 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2003 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            April 10, 2003 Thursday

SECTION: ;To the Rim; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Taiwan building links with N.O. universities

BYLINE: By Tina Soong

BODY:

   Yuri Yaotsung Chih, director of the Cultural Division of the Taipei Economic
and Cultural Office in Houston, recently visited the University of New Orleans
and Tulane University to discuss exchange and cooperation programs.

   At UNO, Chih visited Chancellor Gregory O'Brien. Among issues discussed was
the "4-corner cooperation" between Taiwan and Louisiana -- university to
university, industry to industry, students to students, and faculty to faculty.
Cooperation between the UNO Industrial Park and its industrial or business
partners, with the Shing Tsu Industrial Park in Taiwan and its industrial and
business partners was planned.

   Chih and O'Brien also discussed different exchange and cooperation plans,
including sending a Chinese language teacher, with financial support, from
Taiwan to UNO; and providing a four-year student scholarship to study Chinese at
UNO.

   UNO held a lunch in Chih's honor. Among other professors and administrators
who attended were Bobby Eason, assistant to the chancellor for International &
University Affairs; Alan Artibise, dean of the College of Urban and Public
Affairs; Russell Trahan, interim dean of the College of Engineering; Paul
Hensel, associate dean for Academic and Executive Programs, College of Business
Administration; and Janice Thomas, director of the Office of International
Students and Scholars Affairs. Two student representatives from Taiwan, Chi Kai
Lin and Szu Han Yang of the UNO Taiwanese Student Association also attended.

   During his visit to Tulane, Chih met with James McFarland, dean, and Chiwan
Lee, associate dean of the School of Business, among other people. Chih was
briefed on the school's Asian Executive Master of Business Program. When the
program was founded in 1993, it only had participants from Taiwan. Business
executives from China began to join the program in 1999.

   The program augments executive education programs offered at the National
Taiwan University, National Chengchi University, National Chiao Tung University,
and National University of Science and Technology in Taiwan; and Fudan
University, Beijing University, Tsinghua University and Zhingshan University in
China. The current enrollment includes 30 participants from Taiwan and 20 from
China. Various other issues of expanding the existing programs and initiating
new exchange and collaboration projects also were discussed.

   Chih also met with Ted Chen, director of the Asia-Pacific Health
Promotion/Development program, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine;
and Dr. Paul Whelton, senior vice-president, Tulane University Center of Health
Sciences. Chih was briefed on the Master of Medical Management program, a
reinforcing and retraining executive program between the Department of Health
System Management of the Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine
and the National Defense Medical Center in Taiwan.

   Among other topics discussed were sending doctoral candidates from
universities in Taiwan to do short-term studies at Tulane for supplementary
dissertation research advice and consultations and initiating new exchange and
cooperation programs between Tulane and institutions of higher learning in
Taiwan.

   Shu-Ching Hsu, a postdoctoral research fellow who is the first participant of
the exchange program between Taiwan and the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy,
briefed Chih on stem cell research.

   The major responsibilities of the TECO Cultural Division in Houston are to
provide services to the students from Taiwan, to form a bridge between the
students and the universities and to enhance and expand academic cooperation and
exchange programs between Taiwan and the eight southern states, Chih said.

   Chih encourages UNO, Tulane and other institutions of higher learning to form
sister-school links with different universities, colleges and schools in Taiwan.

   For more information, call Chih at (713) 871-0851, or write to the Cultural
Division, Taipei Economic and Cultural Office in Houston, 11 Greenway Plaza,
Suite 2910, Houston, Texas, 77046, or e-mail houcul@houstoncul.org.

   . . . . . . .

Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2003


                             791 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 8, 2003 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.D-8

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: GREENHOUSE ENDS PURSUIT OF BIOTECH STAR;
 UNABLE TO RAISE $100 MILLION

BYLINE: JOYCE GANNON, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Pittsburgh investors couldn't come up with $100 million needed to attract
Athersys Inc., a Cleveland-based biotech industry hotshot, so the region has
ended active negotiations to try and lure the company here.

    Donald Smith, interim chief executive of the Pittsburgh Life Sciences
Greenhouse, said yesterday that he wasn't able to persuade local investors to
come up with the private equity Athersys wants to build a new headquarters. The
company, which develops therapeutic products for life-threatening diseases and
is engaged in stem-cell research and gene therapy, said it needed $100 million
to expand its building and research capabilities.

    It is considering an economic development package from the city of Cleveland
and has looked for relocation incentives from Phoenix, Minneapolis-St. Paul and
Raleigh-Durham, N.C. Pittsburgh also was on its list.

    Smith said the Greenhouse was not capable of doing such a large deal on its
own and that when he shopped it to local investors, "I did not find an appetite
to syndicate" that level of financing. Inability to raise the $100 million
reflects a sluggish environment for technology investments that's been an issue
for start-ups since the dot.com market collapsed a couple of years ago.

    If Athersys fails to obtain the financing elsewhere, Smith said there still
was a possibility it would consider a presence here in order to tap into local
strength in tissue engineering and cancer research. Smith envisions eventually
developing a Pittsburgh-Cleveland corridor for regenerative medicine research
and development.

    Such a combined hub would benefit from biomedical expertise at the
University of Pittsburgh and the UPMC Health Services as well as Cleveland's
Case Western Reserve University and the Cleveland Clinic, he said. "We recognize
the excellent [resources] in both locations."

NOTES:
Joyce Gannon can be reached at jgannon@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1580.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2003


                             792 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        April 7, 2003 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: Therapies could team up to mend hearts

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER jfauber@journalsentinel.com

BODY:

   Chicago -- With growing promise that two experimental treatments -- gene
therapy and cell replacement therapy -- can treat advanced heart failure,
researchers now are dreaming about the potentially powerful combination of the
two.

   "The current therapies for end-stage heart failure are all fraught with some
degree of problems," said Emerson Perin, a researcher with the Texas Heart
Institute in Houston. "Gene therapy and cell therapy are a marriage made in
heaven."

   While no one yet has combined the two therapies, researchers said the
combination makes sense and is likely to be tried in the near future.

   At the conference of the American College of Cardiology last week in Chicago,
researchers from around the world presented encouraging findings from individual
studies involving either gene therapy or cell replacement therapy.

   In patients with heart failure, sections of the heart wall are dead or
scarred, often as a result of past heart attacks or high blood pressure. The
dead tissue results in less blood being pumped out of the heart. Often the
hearts of patients with advanced heart failure have lost half of their pumping
power.

   About 5 million Americans have heart failure.

   Sometimes they can be treated with drugs or implanted devices that help the
heart pump. In severe cases, a heart transplant can be done.

   But an experimental approach is to create repair patches either by injecting
cells from other parts of the body, such as immature bone marrow cells or
immature muscle cells, or by injecting genes that encourage the growth of new
blood vessels and tissue within the heart wall.

   The therapies are not without risk. There have been some deaths and
complications, such as dangerous arrhythmias, that developed after the
procedures.

   Indeed, many other researchers, including doctors at the University of
Wisconsin Medical School in Madison, have limited their cell therapy work to
animals.

   "There still is too much to be learned about the basic science," said Matthew
Wolff, an associate professor of medicine and physiology and director of the
cardiac catheterization laboratory at UW.

   A case in point is the type of arrhythmia problems in some patients who
received injections of immature muscle cells.

   "The heart is like an electrical slab," he said. "Each cell is connected
electrically to the next cell. The concern is, will they (muscle cells)
integrate themselves electrically into the heart muscle?"

   Still, Wolff said, eventually combining cell and gene therapies makes sense.

   Last week, Danish researchers, presenting the results of one of the largest
gene therapy trials so far, showed that the procedure could be done safely.

   "We could not detect any gene-related side effects," said Jens Kastrup of
Copenhagen University Hospital.

   For the trial, 40 patients received injections through a catheter of a gene
known as vascular endothelial growth factor-A 165. Forty other patients got
injections of a placebo.

   The gene encourages the growth of new blood vessels in the heart, a process
known as angiogenesis.

   Three months later, the patients who got the gene had fewer angina attacks
and about half of the patients showed an improvement of blood flow to the heart.

   Researchers from the Texas Heart Institute also reported their own
encouraging results from a small trial in which immature bone marrow cells were
injected into the hearts of 14 patients. Several of the patients experienced a
dramatically improved ability to exercise, and their hearts showed significantly
improved pumping ability.

   Both the Danish and the Texas researchers now are planning larger trials.

   Kastrup, of Copenhagen University Hospital, said he first plans to do more
gene therapy trials.

   But, he added, "We will probably have to combine these two therapies in the
future."

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2003


                             793 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2003 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 6, 2003 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Part R; Features Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1634 words

HEADLINE: Sliding down the double helix toward peril;
Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age, Bill McKibben, Times Books: 272 pp.,
$25

BYLINE: Osha Gray Davidson, Osha Gray Davidson is the author of, among other
books, "Fire in, the Turtle House: The Green Sea Turtle and the Fate of the
Ocean."

BODY:

   It took 14 years, but Bill McKibben has produced a book that is both a sequel
and an equal to his brilliant "The End of Nature." Not that McKibben has been
coasting all this time. He has produced several fine books and a score of
insightful articles. But nothing he's written in the intervening years has quite
matched his dazzling debut in which he argued, persuasively, that global warming
isn't just a matter of species extinction or the ocean level rising, as dire as
those changes are. By altering our planet's climate, McKibben argued in 1989,
humans have been doing nothing less than permanently changing nature, creating
in essence an artificial world. "The End of Nature" was an intellectual tour de
force and an instant environmental classic.

   "Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age" is an equally ambitious and
important book. In it, McKibben examines the dark potential at the center of
three glittering and converging technologies: genetic engineering and, to a
lesser extent, robotics and nanotechnology. Where "The End of Nature" described
a widening gulf between humans and our environment, "Enough" suggests that an
even more terrifying break looms: a technologically driven division between the
human past and a post-human future. In the name of progress, he asserts, we are
about to engineer ourselves out of existence.

   McKibben is a gifted writer and thinker, and there is no better proof of his
prodigious talents than the fact that he is able to make such a scenario seem
not just plausible but likely. After reading "Enough," the question must be
asked whether or not this dystopia can be avoided.

   McKibben begins by probing the promises and perils of genetic engineering. No
Luddite, he doesn't oppose gene therapies per se. He makes a distinction between
the two technologies now conflated under the single heading of genetic
engineering. The first is somatic gene therapy, by which doctors try to cure a
disease, or at least alleviate its symptoms, by inserting new genetic material
into an existing patient, usually by piggybacking the new gene onto a virus. As
radical and cutting-edge as this technique is, McKibben argues that it is an
extension of existing technology. "The gravitational force that we call
civilization," he warns, "is just strong enough to hold somatic gene therapy in
its orbit."

   Germline engineering, the second technology, is another story. It introduces
fundamental genetic changes by removing a single cell from the earliest stages
of a developing embryo, adding or removing genes, and then inserting the new
cell into an egg whose nucleus has been removed. This new embryo would be
implanted into a woman's womb and allowed to grow. Every cell now contains a
copy of the new genetic information, and these changes will be passed along to
future generations. McKibben holds that germline engineering "will break us free
from the bounds of our past and present and send us winging off into parts
unknown."

   Proponents of germline engineering hail the benefits of this radical
technology. We could, for example, simply "edit out" the malfunctioning gene
that causes cystic fibrosis. Who could oppose relieving suffering of this
magnitude? Probably nobody -- if only it were possible to confine the technology
to solving such problems. But once we start down this path, not even advocates
believe germline engineering will remain in the realm of disease prevention.
Princeton biologist Lee Silver, as McKibben points out, suggests that once we
open this door, we will likely take the next step, removing genetic
predispositions to conditions such as obesity.

   This course is more problematic than it first appears. Not only are we now
looking for a disease and a predisposition to a disease, but we're also talking
about eliminating a condition, which is a short ethical leap to enhancing
positive traits such as raising intelligence quotients. Although enhancing human
intelligence through genetic engineering is beyond current capabilities,
researchers at facilities around the globe are trying to isolate the specific
genes linked to intelligence.

   James Watson, the Nobel Prize-winning co-discoverer of the double helix
structure of DNA, recently took this scenario one step further when commenting
on future applications of germline engineering: "Who wants an ugly baby?" It's a
succinct question that brings us from what began as a lofty plea to end
suffering caused by genetic diseases into a plan for producing better-looking
progeny. Surely McKibben is correct when he writes that "the line between fixing
problems and 'enhancing' offspring is meaningless." Germline engineering isn't a
slippery slope; it's a launchpad on which sits a rocket with a billion pounds of
thrust, waiting for the countdown.

   "Designer babies" may be inevitable, as some researchers believe, but is that
really so bad? McKibben argues that what appears to be a liberating gift of
technology is, in fact, a thief in disguise that will rob our lives of their
most precious attribute: meaning. When advocates extol a happy future populated
by genetically engineered super-athletes, music prodigies and hyper-intelligent
people, McKibben asks us to consider the experience from the perspective of the
recipients of these "gifts."

   What will it mean to run a 6.0-second 100-yard dash without breaking a sweat?
To rattle off an impeccable Chopin Polonaise as if it were "Chopsticks"? Or
solve equations like Fermat's Last Theorem while simultaneously jotting down
your grocery list? What will it mean if these accomplishments are not personal
but merely the fulfillment of your design specs? It will mean nothing, or worse.

   Take the child who is a piano prodigy, whose parents selected that particular
combination of genes innocently, even benevolently. They loved music and wanted
to pass this joy along. Researchers have already isolated genes that influence
and perhaps govern psychological processes. How then do rebelling adolescents
protest when the path selected for them is now governed by cells pumping out
proteins that create particular attributes? What will it feel like to know that
your parents manipulated this most intimate confluence of desire and ability?
Under these circumstances, will you consider yourself a mere player piano, as
McKibben suggests? You may resent your parents, but your deepest loathing will
likely be reserved for your gifted self and for a life robbed of mystery and
meaning.

   McKibben's ability as a polemicist is in full display in "Enough." Not
content to merely present the problem, he convincingly plays out all the
implications. Parents, for instance, who tweak their babies' intelligence would
almost certainly set off a "kind of biological arms race," available only to
those who can afford such procedures. Those who can't will become part of a
biological underclass. Germline engineering will, predicts McKibben, "take the
gap in power, wealth, and education that currently divides both our society and
the world at large, and write that division into our very biology." There will
be the GenRich, and then there will be everybody else. Given that these are
heritable characteristics, the GenRich will over time likely become a new
species. In this scenario, evolution will be based not on natural selection but
on fads, marketing and money.

   Furthermore, McKibben discusses how advances in robotics and nanotechnologies
amplify the threats posed by germline engineering. Crediting Bill Joy, one of
the gurus of the high-tech revolution, who, in April 2000, shocked his peers
with a piece in the influential Silicon Valley magazine Wired, he discusses the
dangers posed by robots engineered to be smarter than humans and by an army of
machines so tiny that they could manipulate molecules.

   Toward the end of "Enough," McKibben focuses upon the Holy Grail of genetic
engineering -- the quest for immortality -- and makes clear the distinction
between scientific altruism and hubris. "Our intention," commented a senior
executive of Advanced Cell Technology, the company that two years ago claimed to
have produced the world's first human embryo clone (albeit one that only grew to
six cells), "is not to create cloned human beings but rather to make lifesaving
therapies for a wide range of human disease conditions, including diabetes,
strokes, cancer, AIDS, and neurodegenerative disorders." But as McKibben points
out, Michael West, chief executive of the firm, may also sound reasonable, but
once he warms to the subject, his tone becomes more obsessive than scientific:
"All I think about, all day long, every day, is human mortality."

   But can we shut the door on these technologies? McKibben believes we can.
Unfortunately, the three examples of possible solutions -- represented by Amish,
Japanese and Chinese societies -- he cites are, at best, shaky. The Amish may
have successfully chosen to do without inventions most of us think of as
necessities, but do they really offer a model that is applicable to the lives
most Americans live? Japan may have rejected the use of firearms for 300 years,
but in the end, they adopted guns. Finally, when China was poised in the early
1400s to dominate the world with its naval fleet, it chose to scuttle the ships,
but that, too, was a temporary decision.

   McKibben may well be right to argue that with a concerted effort we can, as a
society, reject these technological paths, but in reality will it be possible?
The end of nature, first heralded 14 years ago, has only advanced. While
McKibben has crafted an impassioned and elegantly reasoned argument for
rejecting these technologies -- for declaring that while we are far from
perfection, being human is, in a word, enough -- the gravity of "Enough" leaves
little room to believe his words are not a warning but a prediction.

GRAPHIC:  (no caption) PHOTOGRAPHER: Henrik Drescher For The Times

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                             794 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              April 6, 2003 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1108 words

HEADLINE: Getting Into Our Genes

BYLINE:  By Natalie Angier;  Natalie Angier, who contributes science articles to
The Times, is working on a book about the scientific canon.

BODY:

        ENOUGH
Staying Human in an Engineered Age.
By Bill McKibben.
271 pp. New York:
Times Books/Henry Holt & Company. $25.

    THIS spring is the 50th anniversary of the report by James Watson and
Francis Crick on the double-helical structure of DNA, and I'm sorry, but for all
the hushed reverence in both the popular and scientific press, I can't bring
myself to genuflect. Maybe it's because the dreamy twitterings about the
molecule of life haven't been able to compete with the mighty mongerings of war,
or maybe it's because I don't think genes, in and of themselves, are
particularly fascinating or profound. I don't think they hold the master key to
who we are, either as individuals or as a species. Yes, of course they're
important, but only when taken together with the context in which they are
expressed; the give-and-take, shout-and-response that occurs among genes and
cells and bodies and a wide welter of signals from the outside world, during
fetal development, in infancy, in adolescence, in adulthood, yea, till death do
us fall apart.

   I may have been born with sizable slabs of my personality up and ready to
serve, particularly my tendency toward being a self-pitying crybaby.
Nevertheless, I'm also the product of my Bronx Side Story childhood and the tiny
Michigan high school I was flung into after my parents' divorce, and the fact
that I'm a middle child rather than a singleton and that we had cats instead of
dogsas pets, cockroaches instead of crickets as pests. Whatever the sequential
particulars of the three billion DNA subunits that make up my genotype, they are
meaningful only in the context of my phenotype -- my body, my life, my history.

   Hence, I am deeply skeptical that we are anywhere near being able to produce
so-called designer babies, offspring who are genetically enhanced to be smarter,
sexier, funnier and stronger than their parents. I'm inclined to doubt that such
high-precision embryo engineering is even possible. The genome is messy and
complicated, and sorting out which genes encode which proteins, and what is junk
and what essential to gene expression, will take years, decades -- and that's
before we even get to understanding which proteins talk to which and at what
moment during every step of development. So when I read Robert Lanza, the vice
president of Advanced Cell Technology, proclaiming in "Enough" that "we're close
to being able to add 20 to 30 points to your baby's IQ," I feel a surge of
annoyance. Oh yeah? Like the "smart" genetically engineered Doogie (for Doogie
Howser) mouse, which runs mazes well but turns out to suffer from chronic pain?
Like the children who recently were "cured" of their immune disorder through
gene therapy, but were given leukemia in the process? Hey, let's create a kid
with a really good memory! Too bad he keeps remembering his nightmares.

   I like Bill McKibben's work. He is a wonderful writer, and in the 15 years
since his superb "End of Nature," he has been a smart and tireless voice crying
in, and for, the wilderness. But his latest book is not, I'm afraid, "enough"
for me. It failed to persuade me of its central premise, that major threats to
human integrity and human meaning lurk in powerful new technologies like human
cloning, gene therapy, robotics and nanotechnology. For starters, McKibben is
far more in awe of the genome than I am, and far too credulous of the claims of
behavioral genetics. "Genes do matter. A lot," he writes. "Endless studies of
twins raised separately make very clear that virtually any trait you can think
of is, to some degree, linked to our genes." Because genes matter so much, he
says, any attempt to alter or "improve" the genome would represent a radical
break from our past, robbing our lives of purpose and metaphor.

   Yet many very thoughtful researchers have criticized those endless twin
studies, and called into question the resolving power of the genome, its
capacity to stipulate individual traits. After all, there are only 35,000 human
genes, many of them virtually indistinguishable from counterparts in yeast cells
and fruit flies. What's left seems too skimpy to spell out out anything but a
skeletal script for being human. Which means precisely . . . I haven't the
foggiest idea. And neither does anybody else, despite the boldness of the many
predictions that McKibben quotes. The Princeton geneticist Lee Silver forecasts
a genomically golden future of "emotional stability, long-term happiness, inborn
talents, increased creativity, healthy bodies," at least for the children of the
rich. But are there specific nucleic codes for creativity or a given talent like
drawing, say, or composing catchy melodies, or telling jokes and never, ever
forgetting the punch line? And who will decide from which lucky genius the
finest versions of said genes are to be plucked and mass-produced? I've been a
judge on various writing competitions, and I know how decisions about
comparative merit get made. Trust me, the process shouldn't be cloned.

   I'm not being flip here. Questions of how we define traits like creativity or
musicality or emotional stability -- or that old behavioral bugaboo,
intelligence -- are serious issues that McKibben either ignores or impatiently
shrugs off. Scientists will figure it all out, he declares. They say they will,
and it's pointless to quibble over specifics. One day, he warns, a young pianist
will sit sulking over the source of her musicianship, "ever uncertain whether it
is skill and devotion or her catalog proteins that move her fingers so nimbly,
her music soured before it is made," while a minister's son, outfitted with
piety genes, will question the source of his faith, wondering "whether it means
anything or if it's so much (literal) brainwashing." What will you have done to
your newborn, he asks, "when you have installed into the nucleus of every one of
her billions of cells a purchased code that will pump out proteins designed to
change her? You will have robbed her of the last possible chance of
understanding her life." Or maybe she'll do what kids have always done -- and
blame her parents.

   But how likely is this dystopia, really? Genetic sequences, raw or processed,
remain subject to the whims of the world into which they are born, and that
world will speak to the genes and jostle them around in all sorts of amusing,
disorderly ways. McKibben hears with dismay the extravagant scenario proclaimed
by the technocracy, of a human race redesigned to consort with the angels, freed
of aggression and stupidity, greed and obesity, perhaps of death itself, and he
asks that we reject it. Bronx-bred cynic that I am, I'm happy to comply.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                             795 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      April 5, 2003 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 023

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief

BODY:

   UAL considers ending contracts

   CHICAGO - Bankrupt United Airlines parent UAL Corp. intends to end lucrative
contracts for 40 former senior manager and directors while CEO Glenn Tilton
plans to take a second pay cut.

   United spokesman Jeff Green said the airline will save $ 16 million as a
result of ending the contracts. Meanwhile, Tilton said he would cut his own pay
another 14 percent, to a total 25 percent reduction, or $ 712,500.

   Tilton's latest move came a day after Delta Air Lines Inc. CEO Leo Mullin
gave up $ 9 million in pay and as U.S. airlines have appealed to Congress for
federal aid to weather a protracted industry slump.  - HERALD WIRE SERVICES

   Oil prices drop

   NEW YORK - Oil prices fell yesterday as U.S. forces captured Baghdad's main
airport in their advance toward the capital, raising expectations of a swift end
to the war in Iraq. Benchmark U.S. crude futures fell 35 cents, to $ 28.62, down
about 25 percent from a pre-war high of almost $ 40 a barrel.  - REUTERS

   Workers to lose jobs

   About 78 workers with Attleboro metal-mesh fabric maker Whiting & Davis Inc.
will lose their jobs when the 127-year-old company moves to Buffalo, N.Y., the
company confirmed yesterday. The company's main division, which makes safety
garments, will be phased out by the end of June.  - STAFF

   Exec leaves TKT

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., of Cambridge, said Daniel Geffken resigned as
chief financial officer after six years with the biotech company. Geffken's
departure follows a management shake-up earlier this year and a broad staff
cutback.  - DOW JONES

   Vote opens ''chutes'

   PALO ALTO, Calif. - Hewlett-Packard Co.'s shareholders approved a nonbinding
resolution calling for management to ask investors to approve "golden
parachutes" for departing executives, the big computer maker said yesterday. HP
said it would consider the proposal, which it said was narrowly approved.

   Last month, Tyco International Ltd. shareholders backed a similar plan.  -
REUTERS

   Pacts may hit $ 100M

   WASHINGTON - Washington Group International Inc., Fluor Corp. and Perini
Corp. won U.S. Army Corps of Engineers contracts to do design, construction and
maintenance work for the Pentagon. The pacts could each reach $ 100 million in
value, and could call for work to rebuild war-torn Iraq.  - BLOOMBERG

LOAD-DATE: April 05, 2003


                             796 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2003 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 5, 2003, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 90 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF / THE REGION;
TKT FINANCE CHIEF RESIGNS

BYLINE: By Dow Jones

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s chief financial officer, Daniel Geffken, has
resigned after six years at the biopharmaceutical company. Less than two months
ago, Richard Selden resigned as chief executive. At the time, Michael Astrue
became president and chief executive, and David Pendergast became executive vice
president of operations. Geffken's exit wasn't related to the shake-up, a
spokeswoman said. She said Geffken, 46, would take the summer off but probably
won't seek a post in the life sciences field in the future.


LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                             797 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2003 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             April 5, 2003 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 95 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
TRANSKARYOTIC'S CHIEFFINANCIAL OFFICER RESIGNS

BYLINE:  Reuters

BODY:

        Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a biotechnology company whose chief
executive quit in February, said yesterday that its chief financial officer,
Daniel Geffken, had resigned. The company, which is laying off 22 percent of its
work force and is trying to recover from the rejection of its leading drug by a
federal regulatory panel, said the resignation would take effect April 18. In
January, Transkaryotic failed to convince an advisory panel of the Food and Drug
Administration that its drug Replagal would benefit patients with a genetic
disorder called Fabry disease.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2003


                             798 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      April 5, 2003 Saturday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firms court the money to make ideas reality

BYLINE: Becky Gaylord, Plain Dealer Reporter

DATELINE: Chicago

BODY:

   Several Cleveland-based biotechnology companies are eager to launch clinical
trials and test new products. But first they face an even tougher trial: raising
the money to press ahead with that research.

   One of them, Imalux Corp., is developing technology that uses infrared light
to create images of layers of tissue. The machine, about the size of a personal
computer, would allow doctors to screen for diseases such as cancer earlier and
more easily, according to Chief Executive Paul Amazeen. Doctors could see tissue
without having to perform a biopsy that requires surgery and a stay in the
hospital.

   "We're able to see where a tumor starts and normal tissue ends," said
Amazeen, himself a cancer survivor. "The problems are real. We've got a
solution."

   The company has raised $2.9 million, including grants from the state of Ohio,
but is trying to raise $4 million more so it can get the product to market. The
company hopes to do that next year.

   Imalux was one of almost 70 companies, mostly start-ups, in Chicago this week
to present business plans to potential investors at the Mid-America Venture
Forum Conference held by the national lobbying group Biotechnology Industry
Organization. BIO has organized similar events in California and New York that
it says helped raise more than $400 million, but this was the first one focused
on the Midwest.

   The timing is critical for biotechnology companies: Investors are skittish
and cash is scarce. "There's no sugarcoating it," said Carl Feldbaum, BIO
president. "We are in a fairly dismal trough."

   On the hopeful side, in 2002, one in four venture capital dollars invested
went to life sciences, said Mark Heesen, president of the National Venture
Capital Association. The industry's share of venture capital money is growing,
he said.

   But so far that hasn't been a big boost to life science companies in the
Midwest, which haven't drawn venture capital as successfully as those in biotech
powerhouses such as Boston and San Diego.

   Despite that, Cleveland-based Copernicus Therapeutics Inc., which is
developing gene therapies, is trying to raise $15 million. Copernicus Chief
Executive Robert Moen also presented at the event.

   The company is developing a product based on technology originally licensed
from Case Western Reserve University and Ohio University to treat the defect
that causes cystic fibrosis. The market for treating cystic fibrosis, the most
common genetic disorder in North America and Europe, is $2 billion, according to
Moen.

   The company just finished clinical trials with its treatment. Moen said the
outcome was very positive, but he's not yet ready to release details.

   So far, Copernicus has raised about $16 million. It's now seeking more money
to finance more trials and to test treatments for other disorders, such as
hemophilia.

   Several hundred people attended the event, including venture capitalists and
others from the East and West coasts.

   Athersys Inc., which seeks to raise $100 million to finance its expansion and
gene-based drug discovery and adult stem cell work, was there, too.

   The company got a package of incentive offers from Ohio this week, mostly to
help defray the cost of a new headquarters in the Chagrin Highlands office park
if it stays in Cleveland. Athersys is being wooed by at least four other
regions. A decision is not expected soon.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:

   bgaylord@plaind.com; 216-999-5029

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2003


                             799 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2003 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                       April 4, 2003 Friday Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1428 words

HEADLINE: Hospitals looking to open door on fetal surgery center

BYLINE: Tim Bonfield, STAFF

BODY:

   Program could allow closer option for early lifesaving

   By Tim Bonfield

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   Somewhere in Greater Cincinnati almost every day, a diagnostic test reveals
that a baby still months from birth has developed a serious problem.

   A spinal column deformed by spina bifida. Twins suffering life-threatening
blood flow complications. Fluid on the brain. Dangerous abdominal hernias and
other potentially deadly conditions.

   In most cases, anxious parents must wait until after the baby is born before
doctors can attempt treatment, assuming the baby lives that long. But in recent
years, more families have turned to the small-but-growing field of fetal surgery
for help rescuing their unborn children.

   For Tristate families, getting fetal surgery has meant traveling to
Philadelphia, San Francisco or to a handful of other leading centers.

   But within a few months, that need to travel could be sharply reduced because
a coalition of hospitals is working to bring fetal surgery to the Tristate. If
successful, the fetal surgery program would be the only one of its kind in Ohio,
Kentucky and Indiana.

   The fetal surgery project is the brainchild of doctors at Good Samaritan
Hospital's high-risk pregnancy program, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center and University Hospital. Launching the program could cost $5 million to
$10 million, officials say.

   "Fetal surgery is just the tip of the iceberg," says Dr. Baha Sibai, chairman
of obstetrics and pediatrics at the University of Cincinnati. "This program
could open the front for many other things in the future."

   Dr. Richard Azizkhan, surgeon-in-chief at Cincinnati Children's, said fetal
surgery is part of a bigger fetal therapeutics program that has been developing
for more than three years.

   "Despite significant advancements in neonatal and surgical care, many babies
with correctable birth defects succumb before birth," Azizkhan said. "With
scientific advances driven by the now-completed human genome project, the future
will hold surgical, genetic and organ-based therapies that will correct many
life-threatening disorders in utero."

   What is fetal surgery?

   Fetal surgery involves operating on a baby while it is still in the womb.
This can be done with an "open" incision through the mother's abdomen to allow
direct access for the surgeon's hands. Once the surgery is complete, the womb is
sutured and the mother delivers the child weeks or months later.

   More recently, surgeons have increased efforts to develop minimally-invasive
techniques, which involve long, thin instruments poked through small ports and
guided by the latest diagnostic scanners. Early studies indicate that such
techniques reduce the risk of complications, such as premature labor.

   Though still considered experimental in most cases, several hundred such
surgeries have been performed in Europe and the United States. Despite those
cases, the fact that surgery in the womb is possible at all remains a wonder -
and a subject of ethical debate.

   The world's first successful open fetal surgery was performed in 1981 at the
University of California San Francisco to treat a urinary tract obstruction. The
San Francisco center has been working ever since to expand the types of problems
that can be treated with fetal surgery.

   Children's Hospital of Philadelphia has emerged as a leading center for fetal
surgery. And in recent years, Vanderbilt University in Nashville has performed
more than 150 "open" fetal surgeries just to treat spina bifida.

   Since the early 1980s, fetal surgery has been used with mixed success for
several conditions, including urinary tract obstruction, diaphragmatic hernia,
twin-twin transfusion syndrome and a type of tumor at the base of the spine
called a sacrococcygeal teratoma.

   UC already has recruited one fetal medicine expert to town - Dr. Giancarlo
Mari, who is expected to focus on minimally invasive techniques. UC also has
begun acquiring special equipment and lining up support staff needed to launch a
fetal surgery service.

   Meanwhile, Cincinnati Children's has been negotiating for months with a
pediatric surgeon that Azizkhan would only refer to as "world-renowned" to lead
the overall program.

   That doctor would recruit additional fetal surgeons and scientists to the
city, and would work with experts at UC and Good Samaritan. More than 15 experts
from Cincinnati Children's in surgery, neonatology, pediatric cardiology,
genetics, radiology, pathology and laboratory medicine would be involved.

   Fetal surgery would add a powerful boost to the fetal therapeutics program
launched in July 2002 at Good Samaritan Hospital. The hospital's Seton Center
for Advanced Obstetrics and Gynecology is the Tristate's leading program for
high-risk pregnancies, delivering more than 1,200 babies a year after
difficulties with early labor and other complications.

   Since July, a 15-member team of specialists has been meeting every Thursday
to discuss extreme cases. Of more than 100 cases a year that need intense care,
about a half-dozen involve problems that require surgery to treat, said Dr.
William Polzin, a maternal/fetal medicine specialist at the Seton Center.

   "Not every city would need a program like this. But it makes sense in
Cincinnati because of the presence of Children's Hospital, because of the high
volume of cases at Good Samaritan, and because of the city's central, Midwest
location," Polzin said.

   A few other medical centers have launched fetal surgery programs, including
Vanderbilt University and the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill. But
because the science is so new, the demand for fetal surgery and the ability to
provide it remains limited, said Dr. N. Scott Adzick, surgeon-in-chief and
director of the Center for Fetal Diagnosis and Treatment at Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia.

   It could take five to 10 years for a fledgling program in Cincinnati to
mature into a significant program, Adzick predicted.

   "The key is, who will do the surgery? It's very hard, and it costs a lot of
money to do it right," he said.

   A wrinkle in abortion debate

   The very existence of fetal surgery has added complications to the already
controversial abortion debate.

   While some argue that abortion does not differ from infanticide, or the
killing of a baby shortly after birth, others say there is a fundamental
difference between killing a fully developed baby and ending the development of
a fetus that could not survive outside the womb.

   Increasingly, fetal surgery can be performed in early stages, before
functioning lungs develop. When successful, the treatment avoids otherwise
certain miscarriage and death.

   And that raises some difficult questions.

   Should a fetus have a right to receive surgical treatment, independently of
the mother's self-interest and legal rights? Will the existence of a treatment
alternative lead to efforts to ban even early-term abortions for fetuses with
diagnosed birth defects?

   Does a mother have the right to refuse a surgery because she's afraid of the
risk to herself? And if insurers balk at paying for fetal surgery, who would
pay? Parents? Taxpayers?

   Longer term, are families, schools and other public agencies prepared to cope
with technology that would likely produce larger numbers of babies born with
severe medical problems and life-long disabilities?

   While the technology races ahead, many such ethical questions have not been
fully addressed, writes Monica Casper, a sociologist with the University of
California Santa Cruz, in her 1999 book, The Making of the Unborn Patient.

   The future of fetal surgery

   Sibai and others who support fetal surgery say that the biggest benefits will
emerge as the technology develops.

   Replacing open fetal surgery with minimally invasive techniques - when
possible - has already shown reductions in fetal deaths from premature labor.

   As complication rates drop, the types of problems that can be treated with
fetal surgery will expand. And as genetic therapies improve, the entire field of
fetal medicine will transform, he predicts.

   For example, bone marrow, stem cell and organ transplants done early enough
in fetal development would face no chance of tissue rejection because the baby
hasn't developed an immune system yet, Sibai said.

   Launching Cincinnati's fetal surgery program now gives the program a better
chance of being a major player as the field evolves, he said, even though it
will likely remain small for the next several years.

   E-mail tbonfield@enquirer.com

   The Cincinnati Enquirer/GARY LANDERS

GRAPHIC: Dr. Giancarlo Mari (front), UC's director of prenatal diagnosis and
fetal treatment, demonstrates a fetal endoscope with part of a team developing a
fetal surgery program. Also pictured are (from rear left) Scott Baker, research
associate; Dr. Baha Sibai, professor and chairman of the Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology; and Angella Friedman, research associate.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2003


                             800 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2003 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      April 4, 2003 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg.D-2 GENE THERAPY

LENGTH: 885 words

BODY:

   Do you know what a skizzler is?

    Me neither.

    But Ralph Kiner knows, and that's why Ralph is one of my heroes. I was
privileged to be watching the Mets broadcast the day Ralph introduced "skizzler"
to the English language, a language he loved to death.

    "Here's the 2-1 pitch, swung on and there's a uh, uh ... skizzler!"

    I sat bolt upright in the love seat.

    A skizzler?! What is it?!

    Looked to me like a cross between a squibber and a sizzler, although I'd
thought the two were mutually exclusive. A squibber generally comes off the end
of the bat the opposite way, often on the ground. A sizzler is mostly hit
square, often just inside the bag and into the corner for a stand-up double.

    Was it Ralph who said, "... and he slides into second with a stand-up
double"? He or Jerry Coleman.

    I presumed to conclude a skizzler was a squibber that Ralph was surprised to
see move so quickly. I believe my brothers and I immediately went to the back
yard with our Whiffle Ball bats to see who could be the first to hit a skizzler
at beautiful Collier Stadium.

    On Monday, when the Pirates open their home season, they will honor Ralph
Kiner in pregame ceremonies, an idea so superior to bobbleheads it's not worth
underlining. Kiner is 80 now, a Hall of Famer, and the long ago architect of
virtually unparalleled power-hitting prowess for awful Pirates teams. He led or
shared the National League home run title in his first seven seasons (1946-52),
all with the Pirates, something that has never been matched.

    He averaged a homer every 7.1 at bats. Only Babe Ruth and Mark McGwire were
more prolific.

    If for nothing else, the Pirates should honor Kiner as perhaps the one
athlete in the city's history who could keep the citizenry from leaving early.
You didn't dare leave Forbes Field until Kiner's last at bat. So it is told. The
Gospel of the Forbes.

    My Uncle Charlie, often after several refreshing beverages, had the best
Kiner story I'd ever heard until I met Brian O'Neill, one of American's great
columnists. Charlie's story went like this:

    "We were at Wrigley Field, sitting on the third-base side, and Kiner hits
one. And by the time you could turn your head to see where it went, it was
coming back out of the ivy; it got to the wall that fast!"

    Oh, come on! You're shut off.

    O'Neill's is a loving recap of a 30-year-old Kiner's Korner, the postgame
show that was the source of innumerably memorable interviews with sweaty Mets or
their generally victorious opponents, including the famous Choo Choo Coleman
episode which ended with Ralph saying, "What's your wife's name, Choo Choo?" and
Coleman replying, "Uh, Mrs. Coleman."

    In O'Neill's tale, Willie Mays is Ralph's guest. It is near the end of Mays'
career, moments after he'd homered in a Mets victory. Ralph shows a replay of
Willie crushing one and says, "Willie, that's a beautiful swing; you looked like
Arky Vaughan on that one."

    Mays sat bolt upright in his love seat.

    "Aw-kay Vaughan?! Aw-kay Vaughan?! Oh my God, Ralph, please ... I've hit 600
and some home runs. Don't be givin' me no Aw-kay Vaughan, please!"

    I never got to see Ralph play, but growing up equidistant from Philadelphia
and New York, the nine baseball broadcasters in my immediate sphere -- Byrum
Saam, Richie Ashburn and Bill Campell with the Phillies, Ralph Kinder, Lindsey
Nelson and Bob Murphy with Mets, Phil Rizzuto, Bill White and Andy Messer with
the Yankees -- all held high places among the most influential people in my
life. Sick? Oh yeah. Explains a lot, though, doesn't it?

    Of all of them, none was as consistently fun to be with (as in "glad to have
you with us") as Kiner, whose insights not only during but on either side of a
ballgame were just wonderful. He might open a telecast by saying, "Hi everybody,
welcome to Shea Stadium where this afternoon a coupla left-handers will be going
to the, uh, well, actually a lefty and a right, well no, two right-handers
today."

    Saam, Rizzuto, and Ashburn were equally unpredictable, but Kiner represents,
as did a perfect strain of broadcasters that included Bob Prince and Haray
Caray, a lost charm that once attached itself to the game. There's more to that
broadcast role than being precise and congenial and analytical. If you're fun to
be "with," you can say anything and be flat-out loved for saying it. I loved
Ralph because he could be goofy and eloquent ("Cadillacs are down at the end of
the bat.") during the same at bat.

    Today, six years after he left the broadcast booth, Kinerisms are still
sprinkled throughout cyberspace. A Kiner sampler:

    "The Mets have gotten their leadoff hitter on only once this inning."

    "All of his saves this season have come in relief appearances."

    "Kevin McReynolds stops at third, and he scores."

    "On Fathers Day, we again wish you all happy birthday."

    "The Hall of Fame ceremonies are on the thirty-first and thirty-second of
July."

    "Tony Gwynn has been named player of the year for April."

    "Half of Jeff King's extra base hits last year went for extra bases."

    "Hello everybody, welcome to Kiner's Korner, I'm Ron Kiner."

    "Hello everybody, welcome to Kiner's Korner, I'm Ralph Korner."

    "Hello everybody, welcome to Kiner's Korner, This is, uh, I'm, uh."

    Ralph, thanks for being with us. Really.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2003
