
                             1401 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     March 21, 2002 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 02C

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: Next cheating worry: genetic enhancement

BYLINE: From Journal Sentinel wire reports

BODY:

   Still struggling to keep up with cheating athletes who are using new drugs,
Olympic officials met with scientists Wednesday to study the next challenge:
genetic enhancement of athletic performance.

   Stronger muscles and bones, enhanced tolerance of pain, faster recoveries
from exercise, a boost in oxygen efficiency -- those are just some of the ways
athletes may be able to turn discoveries in gene therapy into an advantage on
the playing field.

   "Their possible misuse raises questions that society must address," Dick
Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency, said at the end of a three-day
conference in New York that brought together policy makers, medical experts and
athletes.

   "The same kinds of people who cheat in sport today will probably try to find
ways to misuse genetics tomorrow. We've had a lengthy catch-up with respect to
doping. With genetics . . . we're taking the initiative."

   Though many of the most worrisome genetic therapies are still in the
experimental stage, WADA is seeking to forge a consensus with scientists and
governments about how to deal with potentially huge problems.


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                             1402 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Sports Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 525 words

HEADLINE: OLYMPICS;
Athletes May Next Seek Genetic Enhancement

BYLINE:  By RICHARD SANDOMIR

BODY:

   The International Olympic Committee has seemingly been playing catch-up for
years with athletes who use sophisticated means to mask their use of steroids,
human growth hormone, erythropoietin, or EPO, and other performance-enhancing
drugs.

        Now, through the World Anti-Doping Agency, the I.O.C. wants to
anticipate the possibility that athletes will begin re-engineering certain genes
to strengthen their muscles, increase their oxygen-carrying capacity, block
their pain or speed their pace of healing from injury.

    "The best way to deal with it is to prevent it and move quickly to the
forefront of the technology," Dick Pound, the anti-doping agency's chairman,
said yesterday in Manhattan after a conference on genetic enhancement in
athletics at Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., that was attended by scientists, sports
officials, educators and ethicists.

   The use of drugs, and, perhaps, more startling, the engineering of genes to
enhance performance, raises questions about the notion of what an athlete is. Is
he the product of his genetic makeup, environment and training?

   Or can he add to his natural stew with the latest in scientific advances?

   Pound, a former Olympic swimmer and longtime I.O.C. member, said, "Sports are
designed by people for people -- people are not designed for a particular
sport."

   Still, that purism has been tainted by drug use; altering genes appears to
represent the latest temptation.

   Research into genetic therapy for legitimate medical purposes has been taking
place for years, with only limited success so far. Pound said there was no
evidence that the emerging genetic technology had been used by athletes. Some
experts wonder, though, if illicit efforts are under way to harness the emerging
techniques for athletics. "It's impossible to say there isn't clandestine work
in genetics going on," said Theodore Friedmann, professor of pediatrics at the
University of California's Center for Molecular Genetics in San Diego.

   Christopher Evans, director of the Center for Molecular Orthopedics at
Harvard Medical School, raised the question a different way. "Could a rogue
person be doing this in his basement?" he said. "Probably."

   Pound suggested that genetic enhancement could be widespread among athletes
within five years, underscoring the need to develop ways of detecting such abuse
before it occurs.

   The scientific and sports communities are faced with a dilemma: the same
genetic transfer techniques that would be used for legitimate medical therapies
-- think of an anterior cruciate ligament that does not tear when a ton's worth
of defensive linemen tackle a running back -- could also be used illicitly.

   "How do we distinguish enhancement from treatment?" said Joseph Glorioso,
director of the Pittsburgh Human Gene Therapy Center at the University of
Pittsburgh. "Athletes should have rights of access to therapies. But we have to
control the length of expression of the gene, and that will take a lot of
judgment."

   Friedmann said therapy and enhancement were part of a continuum in which a
genetic treatment to heal a short-term injury could also lead to the long-term
enhancement of the athlete's genetic makeup.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                             1403 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            March 21, 2002 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 112 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
SCHERING TO BUY REST OF COLLATERAL THERAPEUTICS

BYLINE:  Bloomberg News

BODY:

        Schering agreed to take over Collateral Therapeutics Inc. for $140
million in stock to expand in gene therapy products and heart treatments.
Schering, which is based in Berlin, will pay about twice as much as Collateral's
market value before the deal was announced. It is paying the premium because the
company's experimental drugs will offer treatments for unmet medical needs to a
large number of patients, Schering's chief executive, Hubertus Erlen, said.
Schering and Collateral have been co-developing products that encourage the
growth of more blood vessels, relieving heart ailments. Schering already owns 12
percent of Collateral, which is based in San Diego.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                             1404 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                            MARCH 21, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: S

LENGTH: 371 words

HEADLINE: World Anti-Doping Agency vows to stay on top of genetics technology

BYLINE: Daily News Wire Services

BODY:

   Still struggling to keep up with cheating athletes using new drugs, Olympic
officials met with scientists to study the next challenge: genetic enhancement
of athletic performance.

   Stronger muscles and bones, enhanced tolerance of pain, faster recoveries
from exercise, a boost in oxygen efficiency - those are just some of the ways
athletes might be able to turn discoveries in gene therapy into an advantage on
the playing field.

   "Their possible misuse raises questions that society must address," Dick
Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency, said yesterday at the end of a
three-day conference in New York that brought together more than 30 experts in
biology, genetics and sports medicine with policy makers, legal experts and
athletes to explore the issues facing sports concerning gene transfers.

   "Gene therapy has enormous potential to revolutionize medicine's approach to
curing disease and improving the quality of life," Pound said. "Unfortunately,
this same technology, like many others, can be abused to enhance athletic
performance. . .The same kinds of people who cheat in sport today will probably
try to find ways to misuse genetics tomorrow.

   "We've had a lengthy catch-up with respect to doping. With genetics. . .we're
taking the initiative."

   College Football

   * Miami promoted longtime offensive line coach Art Kehoe to assistant head
coach.

   * Former South Carolina running back Derek Watson was found guilty of
marijuana possession in Greenville.

   Philly File

   * Wings goalkeeper Chris Sanderson was named the National Lacrosse League's
Defensive Player of the Week.

   * Mandy Clemens scored twice as the Charge played to a 3-3 tie against the
Washington Freedom in a scrimmage at Richmond, Va.

   Sport Stops

   * Michele Kwan finished first in the women's qualifying group at the World
Figure Skating Championships in Nagano, Japan. Americans Kyoko Ina and John
Zimmerman earned the bronze mdeal in the pairs event, won by China's Zhao Hongbo
and Shen Xue.

   * Seve Ballesteros criticized protege Sergio Garcia, saying he asked for
appearance money to play in the Seve Trophy. The event in Ireland, April 19 to
21, features Britain and Ireland against a team of top Europeans.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2002


                             1405 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 21, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: Schering AG to acquire its S.D. gene-therapy partner

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Collateral Therapeutics, a biotechnology company that is developing gene
therapies to treat heart disease, agreed yesterday to be acquired by its German
research partner, Schering AG.

   The deal, a stock swap valued at about $140 million, provides a needed boost
to the nascent gene-therapy field.  Gene-therapy companies, several of which are
in San Diego, have struggled in recent years to overcome disappointing study
results and the highly publicized death in 1999 of a patient enrolled in a
gene-therapy clinical trial.

   Schering, which already owned a 12 percent stake in the San Diego biotech,
will pay about twice as much as Collateral's market value before the deal was
announced.  Collateral's stock doubled yesterday, rising $5.28 to close at
$10.37.

   Wall Street analyst Albert Rauch said the Berlin drugmaker is paying a high
price, considering the current stock value of Collateral and other gene-therapy
companies.  But he said Schering will still get a promising product in
late-stage development at a relative discount.

   "The potential is pretty big," said Rauch of Ladenburg Thalmann & Co.
"Schering saw a company they were partnering with that had a great potential
product, and it made sense to pay a premium to get the product all to
themselves."

   Collateral's lead experimental therapy, Generx, is designed to treat patients
suffering from angina.  About 6 million Americans have angina, a painful
disorder that occurs when the heart doesn't get enough oxygen, usually because
arteries feeding blood to the heart are clogged.

   Generx is a disabled virus that delivers a human growth-factor gene to the
heart.  Once there, the gene triggers heart cells to produce a growth hormone,
which in turn stimulates the growth of new blood vessels, according to the
company.

   Collateral hopes that Generx, if successful, will provide an alternative to
bypass surgery, angioplasty procedures and heart medicines such as beta blockers
that are used to treat angina.

   About 900 patients are now being enrolled to test Generx in final, Phase III
studies in Europe and the United States.  If successful, the studies would
provide the basis for Schering to seek regulatory approval to market the gene
therapy.

   Several other companies in San Diego, including Ceregene, Vical, GenStar
Therapeutics, Selective Genetics, Canji and MediGene, also are testing
experimental gene therapies for a variety of medical conditions.  So far, no
gene therapy has been approved.

   Jack W. Reich, chairman and chief executive of Collateral, said the deal will
ensure the continued development of the company's therapies while safe-guarding
investors against the market vagaries that haunt biotech stocks.

   Collateral's stock, like that of most biotech companies, has careened wildly
since the company went public in 1998. In the past 52 weeks, the stock traded as
high as $19.56 and as low as $2.81.

   "We've had to navigate very difficult waters in the external world," said
Reich, whose company employs 75 in San Diego.  "Schering is not subject to the
downturns that the biotech industry experiences, and they have unlimited
capital."

   Reich said Collateral will remain in San Diego and that no significant
layoffs are anticipated.

   Subject to regulatory and stockholder approval, each Collateral share will be
converted into 0.1847 of a Schering American depositary receipt, which
represents one ordinary Schering share.  The deal is expected to close by July.

   Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237; penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com



LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2002


                             1406 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 21, 2002, Thursday

SECTION: SPORTS;Pg. D-10

LENGTH: 774 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gives Olympic officials new reason to worry

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 Still struggling to keep up with cheating athletes using new drugs, Olympic
officials met with scientists to study the next challenge: genetic enhancement
of athletic performance.

   Stronger muscles and bones, enhanced tolerance of pain, faster recoveries
from exercise, a boost in oxygen efficiency -- those are just some of the ways
athletes may be able to turn discoveries in gene therapy into an advantage on
the playing field.

   "Their possible misuse raises questions that society must address," Dick
Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency, said yesterday at the end of a
three-day conference that brought together more than 30 experts in biology,
genetics and sports medicine with policy makers, legal experts and athletes to
explore the issues facing sports concerning gene transfers.

   "Gene therapy has enormous potential to revolutionize medicine's approach to
curing disease and improving the quality of life," Pound said.  "Unfortunately,
this same technology, like many others, can be abused to enhance athletic
performance.

   "We've had a lengthy catch-up with respect to doping.  With genetics . . .
we're taking the initiative."

   Though many of the most worrisome genetic therapies facing sports are still
in the experimental stage and may be at least five years away from being used,
WADA is seeking to forge a consensus with scientists, governments and sports
officials about how to deal with potentially huge problems.

   The "grave new world," as Dr. Gary I Wadler of the New York University School
of Medicine termed the promises and perils of gene therapy, might include such
fantasies as "designer babies" programmed genetically to become potentially
great athletes.

   NBA

   New Orleans Arena is "first class," but NBA commissioner David Stern insists
that alone will not determine if the Charlotte Hornets move there.  Stern toured
the arena with a relocation committee of seven NBA owners.  Their
recommendations are expected by April 9, when the league could vote on the move.
The Hornets need support from at least 15 of the league's 29 other teams.

   In about two months, the team has sold more than 8,000 season tickets and 55
luxury suites at New Orleans Arena.

   Sports and courts

   A jury found former NFL player Dexter Manley guilty of evidence tampering for
attempting to swallow less than a gram of cocaine during a drug bust at a
Houston motel.  He remains free on $20,000 bail pending his sentencing,
scheduled for April 5 . . . Former South Carolina running back Derek Watson was
found guilty of marijuana possession, likely ending his chances of returning to
the Gamecocks.

   Football

   Defensive tackle Lional Dalton agreed to a seven-year, $22 million contract
with the Denver Broncos after spending the last four seasons with Baltimore . .
. Tight end Byron Chamberlain agreed to a contract with the Minnesota Vikings,
who had been in danger of losing a fourth starter to free agency . . . Tackle
Mark Smith agreed to a two-year contract with Cleveland after a season in which
he joined the Browns and played in all 16 games . . . Former Miami running back
Lamar Smith agreed to a three-year, $4.3 million contract with the Carolina
Panthers . . . University of Miami running back Frank Gore damaged the anterior
cruciate ligament in his right knee in practice and will require surgery.  Also,
Miami head coach Larry Coker promoted longtime offensive line coach Art Kehoe to
assistant head coach.

   Horse racing

   Two horses broke down in the first race at rain-soaked Aqueduct, and track
officials canceled the rest of the nine-race program.  In the 7-furlong race
over a track listed as muddy, Emily's Pleasure broke her left ankle while
running around the far turn.  She was euthanized on the track.  A few seconds
earlier, odds-on favorite East Coast Country injured her right front tendon but
continued around the track before jockey John Velazquez was able to pull up the
horse.

   Tennis

   Mardy Fish, a hero for the United States in his Davis Cup debut last month,
overcame a slow start to cool off Michel Kratochvil 3-6, 7-5, 6-1 on the opening
day of the Nasdaq-100 Open in Key Biscayne, Fla. American winners in women's
play included Lilia Osterloh and Marissa Irvin.  Britain's Greg Rusedski
advanced to a second-round match against defending champion Andre Agassi, who is
seeded ninth.

   Et cetera

   Russian long-distance runner Zhanna Malkova was suspended for two years by
the French Athletics Federation after failing a drug test, the sports newspaper
L'Equipe reported . . . Speedskater Casey FitzRandolph said he wants to compete
in his third Winter Olympic Games in 2006.


LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2002


                             1407 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 21, 2002 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 580 words

HEADLINE: Schering AG to acquire its S.D. gene-therapy partner

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Collateral Therapeutics, a biotechnology company that is developing gene
therapies to treat heart disease, agreed yesterday to be acquired by its German
research partner, Schering AG. The deal, a stock swap valued at about $140
million, provides a needed boost to the nascent gene-therapy field.

   Gene-therapy companies, several of which are in San Diego, have struggled in
recent years to overcome disappointing study results and the highly publicized
death in 1999 of a patient enrolled in a gene-therapy clinical trial. Schering,
which already owned a 12 percent stake in the San Diego biotech, will pay about
twice as much as Collateral's market value before the deal was announced.

   Collateral's stock doubled yesterday, rising $5.28 to close at $10.37. Wall
Street analyst Albert Rauch said the Berlin drugmaker is paying a high price,
considering the current stock value of Collateral and other gene-therapy
companies.

   But he said Schering will still get a promising product in late-stage
development at a relative discount. "The potential is pretty big," said Rauch of
Ladenburg Thalmann & Co. "Schering saw a company they were partnering with that
had a great potential product, and it made sense to pay a premium to get the
product all to themselves." Collateral's lead experimental therapy, Generx, is
designed to treat patients suffering from angina.

   About 6 million Americans have angina, a painful disorder that occurs when
the heart doesn't get enough oxygen, usually because arteries feeding blood to
the heart are clogged. Generx is a disabled virus that delivers a human
growth-factor gene to the heart.

   Once there, the gene triggers heart cells to produce a growth hormone, which
in turn stimulates the growth of new blood vessels, according to the company.
Collateral hopes that Generx, if successful, will provide an alternative to
bypass surgery, angioplasty procedures and heart medicines such as beta blockers
that are used to treat angina. About 900 patients are now being enrolled to test
Generx in final, Phase III studies in Europe and the United States.

   If successful, the studies would provide the basis for Schering to seek
regulatory approval to market the gene therapy. Several other companies in San
Diego, including Ceregene, Vical, GenStar Therapeutics, Selective Genetics,
Canji and MediGene, also are testing experimental gene therapies for a variety
of medical conditions.

   So far, no gene therapy has been approved. Jack W. Reich, chairman and chief
executive of Collateral, said the deal will ensure the continued development of
the company's therapies while safe-guarding investors against the market
vagaries that haunt biotech stocks. Collateral's stock, like that of most
biotech companies, has careened wildly since the company went public in 1998. In
the past 52 weeks, the stock traded as high as $19.56 and as low as $2.81.
"We've had to navigate very difficult waters in the external world," said Reich,
whose company employs 75 in San Diego.

   "Schering is not subject to the downturns that the biotech industry
experiences, and they have unlimited capital." Reich said Collateral will remain
in San Diego and that no significant layoffs are anticipated. Subject to
regulatory and stockholder approval, each Collateral share will be converted
into 0.1847 of a Schering American depositary receipt, which represents one
ordinary Schering share.

   The deal is expected to close by July. Penni Crabtree: (619) 293-1237;
penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1408 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            March 20, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: Welcome to New Orleans

BODY:

   The NBA is in town today to take the measure of New Orleans.

   The question the seven league executives have to answer is this: Would the
metro area be a good home for the Hornets? The answer seems abundantly clear to
many people in these parts: Yes, definitely.

   Our visitors may still need to be persuaded, of course. They may know New
Orleans as a place to have fun. They may have experienced its delectable cuisine
and trend-setting music. They may know the median income, the trends in
population and the name of the area's lone Fortune 500 company.

   To know those things is not enough, however. As with any community, there are
subtleties that can't be expressed in statistics and truths that are masked by a
party-town reputation.

   To start, this is not a frivolous place. People here love a good time, and
they celebrate like few others. Mardi Gras, St. Patrick's Day, Wednesday, any
day can be an excuse for a parade.

   But this area is also home to one of the world's busiest ports, as well as to
a $40 million high-tech ship design center and the nation's largest naval
architecture school. This is not only the birthplace of jazz but of the Higgins
landing craft, which proved invaluable on D-Day. Medical researchers here are
exploring gene therapies, making advances in tropical medicine and unraveling
the mysteries of cancer.

   The New Orleans area is steeped in tradition, but it also is a place that
reinvents itself when need be. When the oil industry went bust in the 1980s,
community leaders worked harder to cultivate tourism. Now, with the state's
assistance, the plan is to broaden the economy and cultivate higher-paying jobs
by investing in biomedical research and other technologies.

   As for income, people in the New Orleans area may not make as much money as
those in Houston or Atlanta or Charlotte, but tens of thousands of fans have
bought Saints season tickets every year for the past three decades. This has
been true even though there were far more losing seasons than winning ones.

   Contrary to claims from Charlotte, sports fans here also supported the Jazz
when that team made its home in New Orleans. Attendance hovered right around the
league average, even though the Jazz never finished higher than fourth in their
division.

   Several league attendance records were set at the Superdome, in fact. On a
Wednesday night in 1977, for instance, 34,194 fans watched the home team take on
Dr. J and the 76ers. True, the records were set on discount nights, and tickets
were much cheaper in those days, but it is also true that Jazz fans were
plentiful.

   Now, more than 8,100 season tickets and 55 luxury suites have been sold for
team that isn't here yet. That's 2,000 more season tickets than were sold in
Charlotte this season -- where actual games are being played -- and 43 more
suites than even exist in the arena there.

   Also unlike Charlotte, elected officials and business leaders here have
worked to find ways to make the Hornets move financially attractive. The
governor's support in particular has been crucial. And the spirit of cooperation
-- between New Orleans and surrounding parishes and between this metro area and
Baton Rouge -- bodes well for the area's future.

   The New Orleans area has its woes, no doubt about it, but there is one other
thing to remember about this place and its people. The fact that there is a city
here in the midst of the swampland defies logic and nature.

   As Peirce Lewis wrote in "New Orleans: The Making of an Urban Landscape":
"What other city had such an illogical and dangerous site, but insouciantly went
about its mixed business of commerce and fun in defiance of threats from
pestilence, flood and hurricane?"

   No other city, only this singularly charming and resilient place.

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2002


                             1409 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             March 18, 2002 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; Features Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1540 words

HEADLINE: Capsules;
If Toilet Training Is Trying, Maybe It's Just Too Early

BYLINE: DIANNE PARTIE LANGE, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:

   Learning to use the potty is a demanding challenge for a toddler. It requires
a range of skills that don't all develop at once. Nor are the skills acquired as
early as many experts thought. New research shows that most children aren't
ready to move from diapers to training pants until after the child's second
birthday, or about six months later than is often recommended. The study,
published in Pediatrics, the journal of the American Academy of Pediatrics,
should reassure many parents who are frustrated by their toddler's apparent lack
of progress.

   For the first time, researchers have pinpointed 11 "readiness skills" needed
for toilet training, and they have learned about some specific differences
between the sexes. For girls, the first skill learned is usually controlling
their bowels all night. The average age for this milestone in the 126 girls
studied was 22.1 months. For boys, the earliest skill acquired is understanding
"potty words." Among the 141 boys studied, the average age for learning the
lingo was 24.5 months, which is later than it is mastered by girls.

   With few exceptions, girls achieve all the toilet training skills earlier
than boys. But new data suggest that boys and girls take the same amount of time
to accomplish toilet training. "Girls just start earlier," says researcher
Timothy R. Schum, associate professor of pediatrics at the Medical College of
Wisconsin in Milwaukee.

   Most kids are ready to begin toilet training between 24 and 30 months, he
says.

   *

   Antidepressant Trials May Not Reflect Real World

   When a doctor gives you a prescription, the assumption is that the drug has
been proved to work in people similar to you. But this is often not true of
antidepressants, concludes a study in the American Journal of Psychiatry.
Clinical trials of antidepressants have such stringent criteria for those on
whom the drugs are tested that researchers believe the results may not apply to
many depressed people in the real world.

   The people who participate in drug studies are moderately to severely
depressed, whereas those who are prescribed antidepressants represent a range of
depression, including mild forms of the disorder, says researcher Mark
Zimmerman, associate professor of psychiatry and human behavior at Brown
University in Providence, R.I. Most of the studies also fail the reality check
by excluding people with a history of drug or alcohol abuse. And several exclude
those with eating or anxiety disorders. These problems often accompany
depression, says Zimmerman.

   Zimmerman and his colleagues reviewed the standards used to include and
exclude study subjects in 31 antidepressant trials. Then they applied the most
commonly used criteria to 364 patients treated for depression at Providence's
Rhode Island Hospital. About 85% of them failed to meet the criteria and would
not have qualified for an antidepressant trial. Yet 90% of those whose medical
charts were available had been prescribed antidepressants by psychiatrists.

   Showing that drugs help a select group of people with depression doesn't mean
they will be any better than a placebo for people with a milder form of the
condition or whose illness is complicated by other problems, says Zimmerman.
"And if these drugs aren't working better than placebo, then the people taking
them are potentially being exposed to side effects unnecessarily."

   *

   Severe Sweating Condition May Have Genetic Cause

   People who perspire uncontrollably are often too embarrassed by their
condition to admit it to anyone, including their doctors. We're not talking
about an occasional nervous sweat, but rather sweating nearly all the time--a
condition known as hyperhidrosis. Now that researchers at UCLA have found that
the syndrome runs in families, they hope people understand their problem is a
medical one that they've probably inherited and so will be more willing to seek
treatment.

   The researchers investigated the family histories of 49 people with
hyperhidrosis, and their systematic review was published in the Journal of
Vascular Surgery. The study revealed a genetic pattern. Children of people who
sweat too much have a one-in-four chance of having the problem. A parent of a
child with hyperhidrosis has a one-in-10 chance of having it.

   Samuel S. Ahn, director of UCLA's Endovascular Program, estimates that as
much as 5% of the population has hyperhidrosis--not 1%, as was previously
thought.

   For now, surgery to snip the nerve that triggers palm sweating is 100%
effective. But Ahn, who is a pioneer of the technique, hopes that one day gene
therapy will offer an easier cure.

   *

   Study Shows Herb Can Be Effective Against Impotence

   Yohimbine, an herb believed to be helpful for impotence, hasn't been entirely
replaced by Viagra. Web sites are devoted to it, and supplements are sold at
convenience stores. Still, controversy surrounds the natural remedy.

   The American Urological Assn. says yohimbine isn't effective and shouldn't be
recommended to treat erectile dysfunction. But the authors of a study published
recently in the Internal Journal of Impotence Research beg to differ. "Our data
suggest that yohimbine treatment should be revisited," they said.

   A decade ago, yohimbine proved helpful for psychologically caused impotence,
but it didn't seem effective when the problem was organic, meaning caused by a
health problem or a medication. According to researcher Andre T. Guay, director
of the Center for Sexual Function at the Lahey Clinic Northshore in Peabody,
Mass., the problem with the earlier studies was that they included smokers. More
recently, smoking has been identified as a risk factor for impotence. So the
Lahey Clinic researchers decided to investigate yohimbine in nonsmokers.

   Only 18 40- to 80-year-old men with organic impotence were included in this
research, but measurements of the drug's effects on them was objective and
precise. The men allowed themselves to be tested with instruments that measured
their nighttime erections on several occasions at home. They also completed
detailed questionnaires and kept a log of their sexual activity. They took 5.4
mg of prescription yohimbine three times a day for four weeks. Then the dose was
doubled for four weeks.

   Half of the men responded and half didn't, but in those who did, improvement
was significant. They were able to have intercourse more than 75% of the time
they tried. By definition, those with erectile dysfunction fail half the time,
says Guay.

   According to Guay, the drug had negligible side effects. Now, he says,
research comparing yohimbine to placebo in nonsmokers needs to be done.

   Yohimbine may turn out to be best for men with mild impotence and few health
risk factors, the Lahey clinic team reports. It might also be useful in
combination with drugs that don't quite do the trick alone. Yohimbine is
different from the over-the-counter type, sometimes called yohimbe. "Those sold
without a prescription are usually an extract or an alkaloid, and there's no way
of knowing how much of the active ingredient you're actually getting," Guay
says.

   *

   Two Nutrients Show Anti-Aging Promise in Early Studies

   Have you had your L-carnitine today? What about your alpha-lipoic acid? If
you didn't, you could be missing out on nutrients that may make you feel more
energetic, maybe even younger. At least that is what animal experiments are
beginning to show.

   When L-carnitine and alpha-lipoic acid were added to the food and water fed
to old laboratory rats for a month, they had more energy and scored higher on
memory tests than rats that didn't get the pick-me-ups. According to three
studies recently published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, the animals on the experimental diets were peppier, and their memory
and ability to learn, pay attention and explore were improved. Now studies are
underway to see if supplements of the nutrients also help rats live longer.

   "What happens to old rats may not happen to old humans," says the studies'
author, Bruce N. Ames. Still, he's encouraged enough to have initiated human
clinical trials using natural lipoic acid and L-carnitine.

   As the body ages, hundreds of each cell's energy factories, or mitochondria,
slow down, explains Ames, who is professor of molecular and cell biology at UC
Berkeley. The two nutrients he studied appear to jump-start these cellular power
plants. Alpha-lipoic acid, which is an antioxidant, gets rid of the destructive
free radicals. And L-carnitine boosts the activity of a particular enzyme
essential to the mitochondria. Restoring youth to the mitochondria increases the
cell's metabolism, and it produces even more of its own anti-aging antioxidants.

   Ames believes it's very difficult for people to consume enough of these
micronutrients in their diets, but he isn't recommending health food store
supplements just yet. For one thing, he says, they contain a synthetic mixture
of lipoic acid, only half of which is active. UC Berkeley has a patent on a
supplement that combines natural alpha-lipoic acid and L-carnitine. One clinical
trial of the pill has been completed, though the results have not yet been
analyzed, and two other studies are planned.

   *

   Dianne Partie Lange can be reached by e-mail at DianneLange@cs.com.

GRAPHIC:  For the first time, researchers have pinpointed the 11 "readiness
skills" needed for toilet training. PHOTOGRAPHER: LAURA DWIGHT / Corbis

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2002


                             1410 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       March 15, 2002 Friday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BYLINE: FROM STAFF REPORTS, THE PLAIN DEALER

BODY:

   AUTOS

   Avon Lake plant to be idle next week

   About 740 hourly workers at Ford's Ohio Assembly Plant in Avon Lake will be
off next week because of a lack of demand for the Mercury Villager and Nissan
Quest minivans built there. The workers will get almost all of their normal
salaries under the national contract with the United Auto Workers. Sales of the
Villager were down about 38 percent during the first two months of the year,
Ford said.

   STEEL

   Steelworkers to give benefit information

   The United Steelworkers of America is providing information on insurance
options to LTV Corp. retirees and former workers who lost their health benefits
because of the steel maker's liquidation. Information on several insurance
carriers is available from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. weekdays at the union's office, 1700
Denison Ave., Room 109, Cleveland. Insurance meetings will be from 9 a.m. to
noon and 1 to 4 p.m. Wednesday, Thursday and next Friday at Michaud's Towne 'N
Country, 16808 Pearl Road, Strongsville. Contact the union at 216-292-5683 or
800-443-3752.

   MANUFACTURING

   Metal formers say outlook is good

   The Precision Metalforming Association says optimism among manufacturers is
strong. The Independence-based group of stampers and fabricators said 58 percent
of members surveyed this month expect economic activity to rise in the coming
months, and 65 percent expect an increase in orders. Three percent predicted a
further downward turn in the economy, and 6 percent anticipated a drop in
orders.

   Diebold unveils eye-scanning ATM

   Diebold Inc. combined a new iris verification technology with one of its
automated-teller machines at the CeBIT world business fair in Hanover, Germany,
this week. The technology from Dutch printing company Joh. Enschede Security
Solutions compares the colored part of the eye with a digital code of the iris
that is stored in a chip card. The comparison, done through a camera mounted in
the ATM, takes less than a second and replaces use of a personal identification
number. Diebold is based in Summit County.

   BIOTECH

   Copernicus tests gene therapy

   The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation has awarded Copernicus Therapeutics Inc.
$937,000 for tests of Copernicus' nonviral delivery of the Cystic Fibrosis
Transmembrane Regulator gene to affected airway cells. The gene therapy could be
a long-term treatment for the fatal disease, which affects 60,000 people in the
United States.

   AIRLINES

   Delta cuts agent commissions

   Because of financial losses and increases in Internet ticket purchases, Delta
Air Lines Inc. said it will immediately eliminate base commissions paid to
travel agents for tickets sold in the United States and Canada. Delta said it
will keep paying individually negotiated incentive commissions.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2002


                             1411 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                     MARCH 11, 2002, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1222 words

HEADLINE: Vacaville company to unveil huge leap in gene-extracting process

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
A biotech company in Vacaville will reveal today that it has invented a process
to quickly extract full-length genes from the human genome, an innovation that
could speed drug development and fill a huge unknown left by the genome-mapping
effort.

    Large Scale Biology Corp. will explain its process at a scientific meeting
in Seattle tomorrow, but company officials told The Chronicle they have already
used their technique to extract about 16,000 distinct, full-length genes --
about half of all the genes predicted in the genome map.

    If Large Scale's claims are substantiated, the firm might help overcome a
roadblock to research. The genome map is a computer file that tells scientists
where to look for genes among the 3 billion chemical letters that spell out
inherited traits.

    But the map didn't come with microscopic scissors capable of wading into the
tangle of human DNA and snipping out the roughly 1 in 100 chemical letters that
form genes.

    William Wood, director of bioinformatics at South San Francisco's Genentech,
explained why drug developers would like to have a full-length copy of each
gene, with the spurious letters cut away.

    Genes contain the instructions for making the proteins that run every
function in the body. Biotech medicines are either proteins made to remedy an
ailment, or chemicals designed to correct some natural protein that has
malfunctioned. Many experiments therefore begin by isolating a gene and using it
to make the protein of interest, Wood said.

    Wood was unaware of Large Scale's claims when we spoke. I had called him to
ask how many full-length genes had been isolated, to help me judge the
importance of Large Scale's claims. "Maybe a third are available," Wood told me,
"another third we have parts and pieces of, and the rest we just don't have."

    Large Scale's chief scientific officer, Leigh Anderson, will face a jury of
his peers tomorrow when he outlines the gene-extraction process at a scientific
gathering in Seattle, but he gave me this sound bite on the accomplishment:
"We've got more recipes to make these proteins than anybody else."

    Assuming he -- and I -- don't end up eating those words, there remains the
question of how this company of 178 people, with a tiny market capitalization of
$76 million, hopes to profit from its big boodle of genes.

    "There's no way a company of our size could afford to (pursue) 16,000
patents," said chief executive Robert Erwin. "We're working on a hierarchy,"
setting aside any genes already covered by patents and trying to discern which
of the rest are potentially useful and still unclaimed.

    We also talked about his decision to issue a news release, rather than
follow the tradition of submitting a paper to a scientific journal.

    He said that the company would write up its findings for the scientific
press, but that given the high-stakes race to find genes and proteins, he was
primarily interested in the validation that comes from persuading drug and
biotech firms to buy licenses to its discoveries.

    Large Scale is not unique in this approach. In May, I wrote about Genteric,
an Alameda firm developing a technology to deliver DNA in pill form. At the
time, I called gene therapy experts, and found they had never heard of any such
thing -- and no wonder. Genteric had done its basic work without saying a word,
until it had its financial house in order.

    I'm not sure where all this is heading. Heaven help us all if business
reporters end up becoming the gatekeepers of biological discovery. Our recent
credits include lionizing the dot-coms and accepting Enron's audit claims.

    But don't blame me, Large Scale, Genteric, or any of the other firms that
have or will bypass peer review. After all, given that modern drug discovery is
organized along the lines of the Oklahoma Land Rush, we must hope that a loss of
gentility will be offset by a speedup in drug development.

    -- CAPTAIN GENOME: Craig Venter, the scientist who earned fame -- and in
some quarters, obloquy -- by founding a private company to map the human genome,
delivered a witty and insightful speech to a packed room at San Francisco's
Commonwealth Club last week.

    Venter has certainly suffered his share of slings and arrows since June 26,
2000, when he shared a stage with former President Clinton and a rival team of
public scientists to unveil the first draft of the human genome.

    Early this year, Venter was eased out of Celera Genomics, the company whose
founding sparked the genome race between public and private scientists. Celera
is now trying to transform itself into a drug development firm.

    In a jest that suggested his pique, Venter attributed his ouster to the
stock market's "irrational exuberance." He had built Celera into a company with
revenues on the order of $100 million, he said. But that wasn't enough to
justify its enormous market capitalization on Wall Street, and therefore the
company had decided to follow the money -- a task for which he was neither well
suited nor particularly interested, he said.

    Venter also had to dodge another barb left over from the bitter genome race.
Shortly before he appeared in San Francisco, a scientific journal carried a
report from three rival gene-mappers -- academicians Eric Lander, John Sulston
and Robert Waterston -- that more or less accused Celera of copying their data
and failing to produce an independent map.

    They were wrong, Venter told his San Francisco audience. Celera had proven
its alternative gene-mapping method and done its own work. But, he added
graciously, "I do not want to take anything away from the public project,"
voicing his own belief that having two separate efforts arrive at the same
findings was an example of science at its best -- especially since researchers
were shocked that humans had far fewer genes than had been previously supposed.

    In his talk, Venter used the relative scarcity of genes to debunk the notion
of genetic determinism, the widespread supposition that every aspect of health
and even behavior is controlled by the chemical letters in our DNA.

    "People want to be absolved of responsibility, they want to say, 'My genes
made me do it!' " Venter said, taking the opposite view that genes are only a
subset of some larger control mechanism of which science, at this point, hasn't
got much of a clue.

    Indeed, the larger theme of his talk was that when to comes to understanding
the mechanics of life, we have only picked the low-hanging fruit. The most
important discoveries in biology have yet to be made, he said. "I think this is
the most fascinating time to be entering science."

    Venter was coy about his own plans after Celera. He mentioned plans to
create some vehicle to lobby lawmakers in Washington, D.C., into passing a
genetic nondiscrimination bill, but refused to discuss details.

    But he did predict that we're not far from the day when parents will go home
from the hospital with their newborn's genetic profile stored on a computer
file. Who controls that data and to what ends will be one of the pressing
questions on the genetic frontier.

    Venter is hardly the first person to identify the issue. But given his
record, if Venter decides to make passage of a nondiscrimination bill a top
priority, I would hate to be in the faction that lobbied against him.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                             1412 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  March 11, 2002 Monday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: JEFFERSON COUNTY POST; Student Spotlight Column; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 970 words

HEADLINE: FOX HIGH SENIOR EXCELS IN CLASS, IN TRACK, SOFTBALL AND WITH FRIENDS,
FAMILY

BYLINE: Gail Ramspott Special To The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   DeeDee Bryant, a senior at Fox High School, plans to become a research
scientist.

   "Ever since I've had Mr. Jim Christ's anatomy and physiology class, I've
fallen in love with life sciences," she said. "I love studying it and learning
about it."

   As a scientist, DeeDee hopes someday she'll be able to make a difference in
people's lives, maybe even to find a cure for a devastating illness or
paralysis.

   "I think if I'm in that field, I'll not only enjoy my profession but I'll
also be able to help people along the way," she said.

   Next year, DeeDee will attend the University of Notre Dame, where she'll be a
member of the track team.

   An all-state pole vaulter the last three seasons, DeeDee looks forward to the
challenge. She's also a member of the varsity softball team at Fox.

   In addition to athletics, DeeDee is a member of the school's Student Council
Executive Board, the president of the Letterman's Club and co-editor of the
yearbook.

   "Yearbook was something I picked up last year, and I really enjoyed it," she
said. "It's something tangible that you can accomplish and see your finished
product."

   She is involved in Team Spirit, an organization that educates students about
drugs and alcohol and was selected to be a DARE role model.

   Currently at the top of her class academically, DeeDee is in the National
Honor Society and Junior Academy of Science of St. Louis.

   DeeDee also has taken part in several Summer Leadership Camps and Winter
Energizer workshops sponsored by the Missouri Association of Student Councils.

   These are experiences she believes have helped her to focus on what she wants
to do with her life.

   "They have been some of the most significant experiences because they make
you really realize what's important," she explains. "It helps you reflect upon
yourself and who you are."

   DeeDee is the daughter of Shari and Mike Bryant of Arnold. She has three
younger brothers: Andy, Robbie and Blake.

   Here is what DeeDee says:

   * My favorite subjects are: AP biology and AP calculus. Biology because I'm
really interested in learning about biotechnology and genetic engineering, and
calculus just because it's fun.

   * If I could change one thing at my school, I would: add more school spirit.
I wish there were more people who would show up and support the things Student
Council does to raise the energy level. I'm pretty spirited; I like to do the
goofy stuff. I just wish we had more support.

   * The most important thing I've learned in high school is: to value
individuality. So many people give in to peer pressure. I feel that I've learned
to have more will power here. It's come from my teachers and my sponsors. Mr.
Easton, my Student Council sponsor, is kind of a role model. He's showed me what
to do to be what I want to be.

   * My favorite thing about high school is: that you have responsibilities but
you still get to have fun. You have freedom, but you don't really have to take
care of everything for yourself. It's the best time of your life.

   * My favorite style of music is: country, but I listen to everything.

   * I'm most proud of: being able to do everything I've done and still have
fun. I've kept straight A's all through high school, but I'm still able to go
out on the weekends, still able to help the school and to help the community
through Student Council. I'm glad I was able to set my goals high enough, and
now to be close to reaching them.

   * The perfect evening out, for me, is: going somewhere with all my friends
and just being able to goof off and be dumb for a while. I'd just go out to
dinner and act silly, to relax for one evening.

   * No one ever says I'm: unmotivated.

   * If I won $1 million, I would: go to Australia to visit my friend who was a
foreign exchange student here.

   * I know I'm growing up because: everyone else seems like a little kid to me
now. All my brothers' friends seem so little.

   * My favorite pastimes are: lifting weights or sleeping.

   * My favorite food is: strawberries.

   * If I have to cook, I make: spaghetti. It's the only thing I know how to
make.

   * If I could spend one hour with anyone, I would chose: Stacey Dragila, the
world record holder for outdoor pole vaulting. She won an Olympic gold medal in
2000. She is someone who formed a path for the future of women in the sport.
She's an American, and she's just excelled.

   * If I could travel anywhere in the world, I would go to: Egypt, to look at
the pyramids.

   * Other people describe me as: outgoing and fun.

   * The best books I've ever read were: "Babbit" by Sinclair Lewis; "Great
Expectations" by Charles Dickens and "Brave New World" by Aldous Huxley.

   * My favorite movie is: "A League of their Own."

   * My favorite times with my family are: when we have family craft night. We
pick a craft for the evening, and we all try to put it together. I have no
artistic abilities, so mine aren't too good. When my friend who was a foreign
exchange student left to go back home, we all made him placemats.

   * The greatest challenge I've overcome in my life was: back in elementary
school when I broke my elbow and had to have three pins put into it. They didn't
expect me to get full range of motion back. I worked through it with therapy,
and now I'm fully recovered.

   * The last time I cleaned my room, I found: my English textbook that I 'd
thought I had lost. It was a big relief.

   * My personal heroes are: my parents because of all they've done to give us a
good life. They try to give us everything we want and need, and they have had to
sacrifice for us.

   * My future plans are: to attend the University of Notre Dame next year. I
will be pole vaulting there and majoring in biology and premedicine. After that
I want to go to graduate school and get a Ph.D. in molecular biology or an M.D.
to do research in genetics or gene therapy.

NOTES:
STUDENT SPOTLIGHT

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; Photo - DeeDee Bryant

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                             1413 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2002 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        March 10, 2002 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. E-05

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: Let values decide genetic testing

BYLINE: Gail Schoettler,

BODY:

   My tiny son struggled for every breath as we raced to the  emergency room.
His first asthma attack terrified both of us.

   Over the next decade, he suffered frequent, frightening bouts of  asthma.
Then, miraculously, he outgrew his suffocating illness. He  is now a healthy
adult who plays sports and hikes and climbs in  his beloved Colorado mountains.

   I feel so lucky. Some of my friends aren't as fortunate. One  has a daughter
who is slowly wasting away from a hereditary  disease. Another lost a 2-year-old
son from an inherited illness,  while a third friend watched helplessly as three
nieces and  nephews died in their early teens from a shared genetic disorder.

   Parents will do almost anything to spare their children  anguish. Yet, even
in their suffering, children bring joy with  their humor and courage. All this
comes to mind as I ponder the  decision of the Chicago mother who genetically
tested her eggs  before in-vitro implantation. She wanted to make sure her
children  did not inherit her gene for early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

   I cannot fault her decision. Given the chance, I would  probably do the same
thing. But I also wonder what other human  qualities may be 'selected out' when
one ensures that a particular  gene is not in an embryo. Is there something
remarkable that will  never happen? Or will it be only suffering that will be
avoided?

   Natural selection has undergone extraordinary change since  Darwin first
wrote about evolution. Medical advances allow us to  fight disease with genetic
therapies as well as to avoid passing  genetic defects to our offspring. While
there is always talk of  limiting these technologies and using them only for
specified  treatments, there is no going backward.

   We worry about using carefully selected embryos to produce  the 'perfect'
child: brilliant, attractive, a little super-human.  Most of us believe that
selecting an embryo for gender or certain  desirable physical characteristics is
unethical. But where and how  do we draw the line? When people want something
that is available  but restricted, they will find ways to get it. There will
always  be doctors or clinics somewhere in the world willing to profit  from
someone's desire to obtain a prohibited service or drug or  technology.

   We should also worry that the ability to select a healthy or  desirable human
embryo will be available only to the rich. Unable  to afford such care, poor
people will continue to have children  who could be subject to genetic diseases
they carry. What, then,  is the impact on a health system where the rich need
fewer  services and the poor need more? Will we be living Hitler's dream  of a
powerful super race dominating all lesser beings?

   The Chicago mom has given us the opportunity to debate  ethical questions on
both personal and societal levels. There are  no easy answers. I am trying to
figure out my own ethical  guidelines for using genetic-selection technology.
Several seem  appropriate to me.

   I would genetically select an embryo if I knew I carried a  gene for a
terminal illness that I could pass on. I would not do  so to obtain what I
thought were desirable physical or mental  characteristics or to eliminate the
chance of diseases that are  treatable but debilitating. I would probably not
make such a  choice if the odds of passing on a faulty gene were low.

   We cannot legislate ethics; these are intensely personal  decisions. We
cannot know the unforeseen consequences of making  such genetic choices because
we will never know the contributions  of the children who never were. I cannot
imagine a world without  the joy my three children have brought to it. But I
also cannot  imagine how I would deal with the certain agony they would suffer
if I passed on a terrible genetic disease to them.

   Medical technology has given us wondrous tools to improve  the quality of
human lives. It has also given us grave ethical  dilemmas. We must look to our
own deeply held values to make the  right choices. No one else can do it for us.

   Gail Schoettler (gailschoettler@email.msn.com) has been a U.S.  ambassador,
Colorado lieutenant governor and treasurer, and a  school board member.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                             1414 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     March 10, 2002, Sunday, Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1536 words

HEADLINE: Next: An artificial pancreas;
Medical giant Medtronic says that an elusive goal in diabetes care may soon be
within reach.

BYLINE: Terry Fiedler; Staff Writer

BODY:

   In the world of diabetes research, the artificial pancreas has long been
regarded as the Holy Grail.

        How long has the quest gone on?

        "Forever," quips Dr. Gerald Bernstein, past president of the American
Diabetes Association.

        "After 35 years of research, it's still around the corner," said Dr.
David Sutherland, director of the Diabetes Institute for Immunology and
Transplantation at the University of Minnesota.

        But Fridley-based Medtronic Inc. believes the seemingly distant and
elusive product is much closer to reality than many believe.

        Terry Gregg, president of the Medtronic MiniMed subsidiary, estimates
that Medtronic could bring "a true artificial pancreas" to market in as few as
three years. The system would include an implanted sensor, information processor
and implanted pump that together perform major functions of a natural pancreas,
improving and extending the lives of hundreds of thousands of people.

        Clinical trials are underway to test the concept of an artificial
pancreas, and many pieces of the Medtronic system already are in use in one form
or another, Gregg added. He estimates the project's price tag to be more than
$200 million.

        The need is great. An estimated 16 million Americans have diabetes, with
about 1 million having the most serious type 1 diabetes, in which the pancreas
no longer produces enough insulin.

        Diabetes and its often-severe complications, including cardiovascular
disease, blindness and circulatory problems, result in $100 billion in hospital
bills annually, making it the most expensive chronic illness. Given the vast
numbers, stock analysts consider diabetes treatments to be one of Medtronic's
most important growth opportunities, along with treatments for congestive heart
failure.

        In type 1 diabetes cases, the body's immune system has attacked the
insulin-producing cells, called islet cells. Without enough insulin _ the
hormone that lets sugar move from the blood into the body's cells _ sugar can
build to dangerous levels.

        "Glucose [sugar], when elevated in the blood, is a poison, as sure a
poison as arsenic or lead," Bernstein said.

        An artificial pancreas would mean diabetics no longer would have to
their prick fingers several times a day for blood tests to determine how much
insulin they need, nor worry about injections by needle or pump.

        Instead, their blood would be monitored constantly and insulin dosages
administered automatically day and night, perhaps 100 times a day, and in more
precise measure than is possible when the adjustment is made a few times per
day.

        The improved consistency and accuracy of such insulin dosages could keep
sugar from reaching dangerously high or low levels that lead to the debilitating
and even fatal complications.

        Bernstein lauds Medtronic's work on the project but warns that the
coordination of the findings from an implanted sensor with the pump dosage is a
daunting task.

        "The mathematics," he said, "are more complex than for sending up a
rocket ship."

        Indeed, Gregg said Medtronic will spend about three-fourths of its
development funds on the sensor alone.

        Bernstein, an associate clinical professor at the Albert Einstein
College of Medicine in New York City, also is an executive of a Toronto-based
company called Generex Biotechnology that's working on an insulin that can be
delivered through an aerosol to the inner cheek.

        His view is that Medtronic will have plenty of competition in developing
meaningful breakthroughs for diabetics in the next few years. Prominent among
the alternatives, he said, is gene manipulation.

        Differing outlooks

        Sutherland of the University of Minnesota thinks improvement in islet
(the insulin-producing cell) transplant procedures could make that the preferred
near-term treatment. The university is a leader in islet transplants.

        But Dr. Eugene Barrett, director of the Diabetes Center at the
University of Virginia, discounts gene therapy for diabetes as "on the distant
horizon" and views islet transplantation as facing "major barriers." He sees a
mechanical artificial pancreas as most likely to make a major impact in the next
few years.

        Medtronic entered this race to address one of the most potentially
lucrative medical markets in the world only recently. It acquired
California-based MiniMed and an affiliated company for $3.7 billion last year.

        The deal brought together the largest maker of mainly external insulin
pumps, MiniMed, which now holds more than 80 percent of that U.S. market, with
the world's largest maker of implantable medical devices.

        Gregg, who joined Medtronic through the acquisition, said the
development costs of an artificial pancreas had put a strain on MiniMed and were
among the reasons MiniMed agreed to the purchase. MiniMed's 2000 revenue was
about $300 million. Through Medtronic, which has annual revenue approaching $6
billion, the researchers gained much deeper pockets.

        "There are very few organizations that could fund that [project] over a
long period of time," Gregg said.

        He said, though, that Medtronic offered much more than money.
Medtronic's expertise in conducting clinical trials, implanting medical devices
and developing sophisticated sensing technology will be vital to the product's
development.

        The company's manufacturing experience is another advantage. "They do
25,000 drug-pump implants a year" for pain relief and other treatments, Gregg
said. "We do a handful in comparison."

        Similar technology

        Perhaps most important, MiniMed can pick from Medtronic's extensive
technology base in developing the artificial pancreas. The electronic guts of a
pacemaker, for instance, already have been retrofitted for devices that provide
deep brain stimulation to address symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

        Gregg notes that Medtronic's Chronicle implant, which monitors vital
signs and records them to be sent to doctors via the Internet, has a transmitter
"identical to the one we need for a stand-alone, fully implantable sensor."

        Gregg added that the company is the only one today with an implantable
pump delivering insulin even on an experimental basis.

        Medical technology company analyst Thomas Gunderson of U.S. Bancorp
Piper Jaffray agrees that Medtronic is in a strong position. "What you have here
is a combination of resources that is hard to match," he said.

        Gunderson added that Medtronic is "taking technology that is here today"
and linking it together, giving it a good chance of being first to market ahead
of some of the other experimental treatments.

        Even without the artificial pancreas, Medtronic's MiniMed sales are
growing 25 to 30 percent a year. Prudential Securities analyst Sandra
Hollenhorst estimates that MiniMed will reach sales of $570 million in the
upcoming fiscal year.

        MiniMed as a stand-alone company also was very profitable, with gross
profit margins of 68 percent vs. 70 to 75 percent for Medtronic companywide. It
promises to make a lot more money if it reaches the Holy Grail.

        "Diabetes is at the top the list of unmet medical needs," Hollenhorst
said. "In the long term, it's a market Medtronic will dominate."

        _ Terry Fiedler is at tfiedler@startribune.com.

        Diabetes: What is it?

        Diabetes is a disease in which your body can't convert food into energy.
Normally, your body breaks down food into sugar which goes into the blood.
Rising blood-sugar levels signal the pancreas to make insulin, which unlocks the
body's cells and lets the sugar move into the cells. The cells use the sugar for
energy.

        But in Type 1 diabetes, affecting more than one million Americans, the
body's immune system destroys the insulin-producing cells of the pancreas.

        In Type 2 diabetes, which affects an estimated 15 million Americans,
either the pancreas doesn't make enough insulin or the cells can't use insulin
efficiently.

        What can happen?

        Diabetes can lead to blindness, kidney, nerve and heart disease and is
the seventh leading cause of death in the U.S.

        1. A sensor the size of the tip of a ball-point pen is inserted through
a vein and into the superior vena cava in the heart. It continuously monitors
glucose in the bloodstream.

        2. A data processing and transmitting unit implanted in the upper right
sternum area and connected by a lead wire to the sensor, processes information
collected by the sensor.

        3. A "personal pump communicator," a record keeping device worn
externally like a pager uses radio waves to receive information from the
transmitter unit and communicates a recommendation for therapy to the pump.

        4. The pump, a 3" diameter device implanted just above the belt line on
the right side of the body, delivers insulin via catheter to the peritoneal
cavity (near the pancreas), where it is absorbed by different parts of the body,
including the bloodstream and organs.

        Sources: American Diabetes Association, Medtronic

        Star Tribune graphic

        Research by Jane Friedmann


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2002


                             1415 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 9, 2002, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: CLONE, STEM CELL WORK CURES MICE POTENTIAL THERAPY FOR HUMANS SEEN

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Cambridge researchers have combined cloning and embryonic stem cell therapy
to treat a genetic disease in mice, the first time the controversial techniques
have helped cure an animal.

   The experimental finding bolsters the prospect of treatments arising from two
of medicine's most divisive new fields, researchers said, even as Washington
lawmakers consider outlawing the science when applied to humans.

      Scientists at the MIT-affiliated Whitehead Institute yesterday reported
creating cloned embryos from immune-defective mice, then transplanting
genetically altered stem cells from the embryos back into the mice, which
partially repaired their immune systems - a scientific trifecta.

   "What it means is that instead of therapeutic cloning being some kind of
science fiction goal for the future, we've reduced it to practice in a mouse. It
makes it that much more immediate for application in humans," said Dr. George
Daley, a fellow at Whitehead who, with colleague Rudolf Jaenisch, published the
results yesterday in two papers posted on the online version of the journal
Cell.

   The US Senate plans within weeks to vote on a bill backed by President Bush
that would outlaw all human cloning, and the Whitehead scientists said the
timing of yesterday's release was intended to influence that debate.

   "It's critically important when Congress is trying to outlaw this field of
research. It makes it harder to outlaw something when you have the reality in
hand," said Daley.

   But several complications encountered during the experiment, combined with
the biological caveat that mice cures do not equal human cures, left many
scientists cautious about the work.

   "It's still largely theoretical" that the Whitehead approach would cure
diseases, said Dr. Robert Lanza, chief scientist for Worcester-based Advanced
Cell Technology, which first cloned a human embryo and has done its share of
innovative animal cloning and stem cell work.

   Other local scientists said the Whitehead results validated the excitement
surrounding cloning and embryonic stem cell science, and made the case for
rejecting the proposed cloning ban.

   "If you want to take it to the step of therapeutic intervention for humans,
at some point you need to work with human cells," said Dr. Mary Loeken, a
diabetes researcher at the Joslin Diabetes Center who uses mouse embryonic stem
cells to investigate pregnancy complications in diabetics.

   Opponents of the research said the new development failed to alter the moral
calculus at the heart of the debate.

   "The science that's being used on this research involved destruction of human
embryos," said Susan Gay, a lawyer with the Pro-Life Defense Fund.

   "The cure of one human being at the demise of another human being is
unacceptable."

   It was in the intellectual hothouse of the Whitehead Institute, where some of
the world's most respected scientists trade notes and ideas, that the project
was born early last year. It began in Jaenisch's lab, headquarters for much
cutting-edge cloning work. There, post-doctoral fellow William Rideout and
graduate student Konrad Hochedlinger cloned the sick mice.

   The embryos developed into a mass of about one hundred cells, including an
inner core of embryonic stem cells, which were scooped out.

   Next, using the editing tools of gene therapy, the researchers spliced out
the troublesome DNA, replacing it with corrected versions. Then, the scientists
coaxed the malleable stem cells into becoming hematopoietic cells, or
blood-stimulating cells, which help form the immune system.

   At that point, an unexpected wrinkle: the mice kept rejecting the new cells,
a mystery because scientific theory says host animals would accept cells taken
from their clones without problem.

   "For the last 15 years, engrafting mice with blood derived from embryonic
stem cells has been the Holy Grail of the field," said Daley.

   At this juncture, the work shifted to Daley's lab. Michael Kyba, a
post-doctoral fellow, devised a solution: inserting a proliferation-inducing
gene, called HoxB4, into the cells. It worked. The new cells integrated into the
mice bloodstreams and multiplied.

   The decimated mouse immune systems regained 5 percent of normal immune system
function, which researchers said could be adequate to treat a number of
diseases.

   "I could imagine any genetic blood disorder that is currently treated by bone
marrow transplantation would be treated by this approach," said Daley. "This
includes so-called bubble boy disease, bone marrow storage diseases, sickle cell
anemia, Fanconi's anemia, literally dozens more."

   The process took almost a year to perfect.

   Daley recalled the roller coaster final months, where one night success
seemed close, only to appear miles away the next day.

   "It's been a long hard road to get to this point," he said.  SIDEBAR: STEM
CELL ADVANCE Researchers at the Whitehead Institute have for the first time
successfully reintroduced cultured stem cells into an animal to treat disease.
Using a combination of established genetic and cellular techiques, they were
able to restore some immune function to a mouse that had no immune system.
PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART INFORMATION

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2002


                             1416 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              March 8, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Cloning Used to Treat Defect in Mice

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney, Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON March 7

BODY:

    For the first time, scientists say they have used the ethically sensitive
technology of therapeutic cloning to repair an inherited disease in a lab
animal.

    While still far from human use, experts say this demonstrates the potential
power of the approach to correct many common ills.

    Scientists have used therapeutic cloning to make embryonic stem cells that
can develop into many different kinds of tissue, such as muscle or nerves. But
until now, they have not been put back into an animal to treat a disease.

    The experiments involved repairing an immune system defect in mice. First,
they made clones of the animals to harvest embryonic stem cells. Then they fixed
the genetic defect in these stem cells and put them into the adult animals,
where they partially overturned the immune defect.

    "This really is a tremendous confluence of very, very challenging
technology, wrapping them all together into a model therapy," said George Daley.
"We are the first to do this all the way."

    The experiments were conducted by Daley and Rudolf Jaenisch at the Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass. Two reports on the work
were to be posted online Friday by the journal Cell.

    Therapeutic cloning starts with cells derived from test-tube embryos that
are genetic twins of the recipient. President Bush and some members of Congress
are opposed to cloning of all forms.

    Some scientists, including Daley, have proposed calling the procedure
"nuclear transplantation therapy" to avoid confusion with reproductive cloning,
which produces a whole individual.

    The latest experiments were conducted on inbred mice that had severe immune
deficiency because of a genetic defect that prevented them from manufacturing
antibodies in response to infections.

    The researchers started with skin cells from the adult mice's tails. They
removed the nucleus from a mouse egg and replaced it with a nucleus from one of
the skin cells. In a lab dish, the egg grew into a blastocyst, an embryo
containing about 100 cells, including embryonic stem cells. Unlike stem cells in
the adults, which are programmed to produce one kind of tissue, the embryonic
stem cells can potentially grow into anything.

    Since the embryonic stem cells were genetically identical to the mice, they
carried the same genetic defect. Scientists used gene therapy to fix the bad
gene and then put the stem cells into the animals.

    The goal was to give them stem cells that would make healthy blood cells.
The process worked, although not totally. Disease-fighting cells known as B
cells and T cells make up about 40 percent of the animals' blood. After the
experiment, they made up 3 percent.

    The results suggest that a combination of therapeutic cloning and gene
therapy could be used to cure a variety of hereditary diseases, but they also
show that significant hurdles will have to be overcome if the techniques are
ever to result in total cures.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2002


                             1417 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 7, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: STEVEN SYRE / BOSTON CAPITAL;
CLINICAL TRIALS

BYLINE: BY STEVEN SYRE

BODY:
' THANKSAGAIN FOR ALLOWING ME TO INTERVIEW YOU A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO. YOUR
HONORARIUM SHOULD BE READY IN THE NEXT TWO WEEKS. I WONDERED IF YOU WOULD BE SO
KIND AS TO RESPOND TO A COUPLE OF FOLLOW-UP QUESTIONS."

   These are the opening lines of an e-mail message at the heart of a lawsuit
that provides a rare glimpse of behind-the-scenes tactics in the medical
products world. The case is about two Cambridge biotechnology rivals in an
especially heated race to win US approval for competing drugs that treat the
same rare disease.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., known as TKT, alleges that the consulting firm
Bain & Co. improperly pried confidential medical data from doctors conducting
clinical trials of TKT's drug across the country and then insinuated that other
physicians were finding fault with the treatment. Bain concedes in court
documents that its confidential client was TKT competitor Genzyme Corp.

      On Tuesday, Middlesex Superior Court Judge Allan van Gestel granted a
preliminary injunction to TKT in its lawsuit against Bain, saying that TKT had a
reasonable likelihood of success on the merits. The judge forbade Bain from
talking further to the TKT doctors. Bain has denied the allegations, and Genzyme
officials said they were sure their consultant acted "legally and ethically."

   The roots of this dispute go back to the summer of 2000, when TKT and Genzyme
both submitted applications to the US Food and Drug Administration for approval
of very similar drugs to treat Fabry, a deadly inherited disease that affects
about 2,000 Americans. TKT's Replagal and Genzyme's Fabrazyme are two versions
of the same protein.

   Both companies are seeking orphan drug status, which comes with seven years
of market exclusivity to the first company that demonstrates a breakthrough
treatment. Each has probably spent a few hundred million dollars developing
their drug, and one may find itself shut out of the US market for years.

   This kind of pressure on Genzyme and TKT has already generated plenty of
court action. A federal patent infringement suit filed by Genzyme against TKT's
drug fizzled late last year.

   While Genzyme and TKT wait for a decision from regulators, medical
investigators continue to use their drugs on an experimental basis and report
the details to the companies confidentially. Doctors involved in that process
work exclusively for one company or the other.

   Dr. William J. Rhead, TKT's lead investigator at The Medical College of
Wisconsin Inc., was contacted recently by Bain consultant Laurie Eleanor J.
Herriman, according to TKT's complaint. After a general survey interview, she
sent him an e-mail on Feb. 8 requesting information about Replagal trials. In
part it asked: "Have you noticed any pain or fatigue symptoms between infusions
in patients on Replagal? (as some have reported observing). What about renal
inefficacy with Replagal - possibly indicating a higher dose may be needed? (as
others have observed and suggested)."

   Rhead was offered $250 for his participation in the survey, according to
court documents. He donated the money to a hospital charity.

   TKT argues the e-mail was both proof Herriman had already gained access to
other trade secrets and part of a mud-slinging campaign against its drug.
Genzyme and Bain assert they did nothing wrong and that the survey tactics are
standard competitive research. The lawsuit is "out of balance with the
situation," says Tom DesRosier, Genzyme's chief counsel.

   But history suggests TKT and Genzyme will spend lots of time and money
slugging it out. They are locked in a battle with hundreds of millions of
dollars at stake and a fine line possibly separating success from failure. Any
small advantage may matter, and they are prepared to fight for it.  The Red
Herring

   The 400 money managers attending the Boston Security Analysts Society annual
dinner this week were asked for year-end market predictions. The average of
responses: A Dow Jones industrial average of 10,989.69, a Nasdaq Composite index
of 2,035.63. and a 5.28 percent yield on 10-year US Treasury bonds.

   Steven Syre can be reached by e-mail at syre@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2002


                             1418 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 The Chronicle Publishing Co.

                           The San Francisco Chronicle

                      MARCH 3, 2002, SUNDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: AT WORK; Pg. J1

LENGTH: 1680 words

HEADLINE: INDUSTRY OUTLOOK;

BIOTECH;

 Not just for Ph.D.;

Race is on to train industry's next wave of workers

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Julie N. Lynem

BODY:
As an employee at Genentech, Sherry Heldens is involved in scientific research
that one day could save thousands of lives.

    Heldens does not have a doctorate in molecular biology. She does however,
have something that's just as marketable in the world of biotech: a certificate
from the City College of San Francisco's two-year biotechnology program.

    "There are plenty of ways to be involved without being a scientist solving
all the problems," said Heldens, a scientific manager at the South San Francisco
biotech company who also has a bachelor's degree is sociology. "You can be a
research assistant or work in other service positions. You're not the principal
investigator, but you're supporting those who are."

    These days, biotech firms are on the lookout for people other than the
white-coated Ph.D. Companies want workers who understand life science concepts
and know their way around a lab. As the industry leaps from drug research and
development to production, those trained in manufacturing also will be in high
demand.

    "That's going to be a growing need of the future," said Mary Ann Rafferty,
vice president of organization development at Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. in
Richmond. "As companies take more products to market, they will need a stream of
available talent. Students from those programs will become valuable."

    Since the early 1990s, universities and community colleges have been busy
preparing Bay Area residents for biotech careers. The Northern California
Biotechnology Center, a coalition of 10 Bay Area community colleges, was formed
in 1991 with the purpose of educating the new biotech workforce.

    Educators work closely with the biotech industry to get a better idea of
what skills students need to land entry-level positions in research and
development, quality control, quality assurance and manufacturing.

    The programs, which provide hands-on labs in gas chromatography, cell
culture and fermentation, and other biotechnology techniques, produce top-notch
graduates. Students, many of whom already have bachelor's and graduate degrees
but lack biotech training and experience, are frequently plucked from training
programs before graduation day.

    Even so, biotech educators and industry insiders worry that the number of
qualified graduates may not keep pace with steady biotech growth.

    In a recent survey by the California Healthcare Institute, more than half of
Bay Area bioscience companies - firms involved in biotechnology and biomedicine
- said they plan to add 95 or more employees to their company rosters in the
next few years. Seventy-five percent of those companies plan to expand research
and development; 70 percent expect to expand manufacturing in California.

    The Bay Area's bioscience companies employ more than 85,000 Northern
California residents, according to the Bay Area Bioscience Center.

    While biotech companies blossom, Bay Area biotech training programs continue
to graduate a handful of students each year. CCSF's program, for example,
graduates roughly 20 students a year. Likewise, Solano College's program
typically has about 15 to 18 students enrolled. This past term, Contra Costa
College had only 10 students.

    Nationwide, the numbers are about the same, said Elaine Johnson, director of
Bio-Link, a National Advanced Technological Education Center for Biotechnology
founded in 1998 with a grant from the National Science Foundation. Johnson said
a shortage of local people trained in biotech could cause companies to move or
import workers from abroad.

    "It isn't something people have known about," Johnson said. "Computers did
not have to go through FDA approval, so they became part of everyday life very
quickly. It's easy for people to relate. But with biotech, it takes place in a
building that people don't get access to.

    "They don't see what's going on. The whole industry is growing so rapidly,
but it's invisible."

    Biotech programs are beginning to discuss ways to attract more students,
particularly those fresh out of high school. They're also offering shorter
courses and helping students find more internship opportunities at biotech
firms.

    Most students in Contra Costa's biotech program find out about it through
word of mouth, said Kate Levine, its program coordinator. Most students have at
least a bachelor's degree. Levine would like to tap into the recent high school
graduate group.

    "It's the best kept secret in the Bay Area," she said. "Unfortunately, it's
not a secret we're trying to keep."

    Companies hope biotech programs graduate more students in the coming years.
Geron, a Menlo Park cell therapy company, is not currently hiring any
entry-level people. But the company wonders if the staff will be there when the
time comes to expand.

    "Most of us are moving toward that (production)," said Jeannine Niacaris,
vice president of human resources at Geron. "But will we have the resources and
manpower when we reach that point?"

    Some biotech firms already are thinking ahead, hiring graduates from
two-year programs, graduates who would not have gotten a second look before. In
the late 1990s, companies often sought workers with bachelor's degrees,
believing they would be more prepared. But employees with four-year degrees
often left to pursue other opportunities, said Jim DeKloe, director of Solano
College's biotech program.

    "What they found is that the bachelor's level biology majors would stay
about a year and then go off to graduate school," DeKloe said. "All of a sudden
the companies would have to train someone new. Most companies have undergone a
change in philosophy. They prefer students trained at the community college
because they have a more realistic view of what they're getting into."

    Cell Genesys, a gene therapy company in Foster City, has hired several
students from the Solano College program, said Steve Aeby, a Cell Genesys
consultant.

    The company is in phase three of clinical trials for its next product and
has built a manufacturing facility in Hayward. Cell Genesys expects to begin
increasing hiring at the end of this year.

    "We're all looking for the same experienced people, and there's not enough
people to begin with," Aeby said. "We want to make sure that the message gets
out to people that there's a great future and opportunities to come here. We're
doing what we can to attract the right talent."

    Genentech has long recognized the value of hiring employees at all levels,
said David Nagler, vice president of human resources. The biotech powerhouse has
ongoing contact with community colleges to make sure skills are up to date.

    In 2000, Genentech launched a co-op program with local community colleges.
Students work full time in the summer and part time during the school year.

    The company plans to hire about 750 people a year over the next five years,
Nagler said. About one-third of those jobs will be positions that currently do
not exist.

    "They're selling themselves short," said Nagler of two-year graduates who
think they don't have a chance in biotech. "They may be screening themselves out
of a career opportunity."


    E-mail Julie N. Lynem at jlynem@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), (1) Angela Trimble put cells on a slide for inspection in a
class at City College of San Francisco's biotechnology training program. / John
O'Hara / The Chronicle, (2) William O'Connell called for an associate at City
College of San Francisco. / John O'Hara / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2002


                             1419 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 28, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: HEADLESS HEALTH AGENCIES

BODY:

   AT A TIME OF heightened danger of bioterrorism, a priority of the Bush
administration should be to have top-notch people in all of government's
important health offices. But four such positions are vacant. Two have gone
unfilled for months because of political deadlocks.

   With the news last week that the head of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention is leaving, the Bush administration needs to find someone to fill
that post, along with a surgeon general, a director for the National Institutes
of Health, and a commissioner for the Food and Drug Administration.

      The consensus candidate among health specialists for the NIH job is Dr.
Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious
Diseases. Unfortunately, Fauci has learned from administration officials that he
is likely not to be nominated, in part because he is reluctant to forfeit the
leadership of the infectious diseases institute while heading the NIH.

   That should be a negotiable issue in the case of a researcher-administrator
as skilled as Fauci, but he has also been opposed by religious and social
conservatives who have not forgiven him for his support of research using tissue
from aborted fetuses. If the Bush administration disqualifies all candidates
with a record of supporting research using fetal tissue or embryonic stem cells
beyond the limits set by President Bush last August, it could end up with a
depleted pool of contenders.

   Politics has also been a factor in filling the position of FDA head, which
has been vacant for more than a year. The Bush administration originally wanted
Michael J. Astrue, a senior vice president and general counsel for Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. of Cambridge. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, chairman of the Health,
Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee, turned thumbs down on Astrue,
believing that the agency should not be led by someone from the biotech
industry.

   The administration more recently considered Dr. Alistair J.J. Wood of
Vanderbilt University, a specialist on prescription drug safety. But the
pharmaceutical industry let it be known that it opposed his nomination.

   The agency with the greatest front-line responsibility for coping with
bioterrorism is the CDC. Its departing head, Dr. Jeffrey P. Kop lan, is given
credit for strengthening the CDC's ability to respond to bioterrorism but was
criticized on Capitol Hill for his - and others' - failure to recognize the
extent of the anthrax threat. A new CDC head will have to make crucial decisions
not just about anthrax but about preventive measures for other threats,
including smallpox. Just as it would be irresponsible for the administration to
go into war without a chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, it would be
foolhardy not to fill the CDC post as quickly as possible.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2002


                             1420 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 26, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 2421 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH SENSE / JUDY FOREMAN;
FOR EYE PATIENTS, PROGRESS ON A VEXING DISEASE

BYLINE: BY JUDY FOREMAN

BODY:

   Imagine going through later life seeing everything, from your morning coffee
to your bedtime book, with a hole in the middle of the picture. If this hole
continues to spread, it eventually could wipe out almost all of your central
vision - the part you need for doing things like reading and recognizing faces.

   The problem is macular degeneration, a disease in which a small region called
the macula in the center of the retina becomes damaged. One in every three
Americans over 65 is at risk, with absolute numbers likely to increase as baby
boomers age.

        To be sure, cataracts and glaucoma are big problems, too, though they
are comparatively easy to treat. Macular degeneration, the leading cause of
legal blindness in the developed world, has been difficult to treat - until
recently.

   Thanks to an explosion of recent advances, including better adaptive
equipment, surgical techniques, experimental drug strategies, and dietary
supplements, many people with macular degeneration may now be able to lead
fairly normal lives.

   For example, L.B. Patrick, 75, continues to design aircraft systems at the
Dukes Inc. facility in Northridge, Calif., despite being one of 1.8 million
Americans who has sustained vision loss because of macular degeneration.

   His continuing productivity is fueled by two things: A new drug, which he
took as part of a UCLA study, has restored part of his central vision; and new
"adaptive technology," specifically a video magnifier, allows Patrick to see
fine details as he drafts new aircraft parts.

   The eye is one of evolution's most stunning successes. Light comes in to the
eye through the cornea and the lens, both of which help focus light onto the
retina, a curved layer of delicate cells that line the back surface of the
eyeball.

   The retina detects light (photons) via light-sensitive nerve cells called
rods and cones. The rods are responsible for black and white vision, the cones
for color images and fine focusing. The highest concentration of cones is in the
macula, which is the size of the eraser on a pencil.

   Tiny as it is, the macula "is responsible for all of fine vision - reading,
driving, recognizing faces," said Dr. Frederick Ferris, clinical director of the
National Eye Institute. The rest of the retina is used for night vision, some
stereo vision and peripheral vision.

   In healthy, young eyes, scavenger cells called retinal pigment epithelial
cells, or RPEs, act like garbage collectors, picking up cellular debris. But
over the years these cells lose their capacity to process and dispose of
garbage. The result is that debris -yellow spots known as drusen - pile up under
the retina.

   Macular degeneration occurs in two ways, "wet" and "dry." In the dry, or
"atrophic," form, which is more common but less treatable, the scavenger cells
get sick and die. Usually, this happens slowly and causes only partial
central-vision loss.

   The wet form is less common, more serious but, ironically, more treatable -
with a new class of drugs, with lasers, and with combinations of lasers and
light-sensitive drugs.

   The wet form is caused by a proliferation of new blood vessels that grow into
the macula, as the body tries to heal the damage from the drusen. When these
vessels leak - a process that can happen overnight - the result can be a total
loss of central vision, in other words, a blind spot in the middle of the visual
field that can render a person legally blind.

   For some people, a high dose vitamin and mineral regimen seems to help
prevent progression to more advanced disease. A study published in October and
sponsored by the National Eye Institute focused on a regimen now marketed as
Ocuvite by Bausch & Lomb.

   It consists of 500 milligrams a day of vitamin C, 400 international units of
vitamin E, 15 milligrams of beta-carotene (which may be harmful to smokers), 80
milligrams of zinc oxide and 2 milligrams of copper as cupric oxide. If all 6
million Americans with moderate macular degeneration began taking the regimen
now, "in the next five years, more than one quarter of a million people would be
saved from macular degeneration and blindness," notedFerris of the National Eye
Institute.

   Avoiding tobacco and staying generally healthy also can help protect eyes.

   Lutein, a micronutrient found in spinach, kale and other vegetables, may also
help prevent degeneration, but the evidence so far is not compelling, and some
specialists fear that lutein supplements may block the body's ability to absorb
lutein from vegetables.

   As for treatment, doctors don't have much to offer for the dry form.

   For the wet form, the key is destroying the new blood vessels that grow into
the macula, or at least stopping them from leaking, without damaging the macula
in the process.

   "For a long time, we have used lasers to obliterate the offending new blood
vessels," said Dr. Steven Schwartz, director of the retina division of the Jules
Stein Eye Institute at the University of California at Los Angeles. "The problem
has always been that we destroy the macula at the same time."

   A more sophisticated approach, approved in April 2000 by the US Food and Drug
Administration, uses "photodynamic therapy," or PDT. In this treatment, a green
dye called verteporfin, or Visudyne, is injected into a vein in the patient's
arm. Doctors wait 10 to 20 minutes for the dye to circulate to the eye, where it
prefers to settle in abnormal (not healthy) vessels. Then, a low-power laser
beam is focused on the back of the eye. This activates the drug, which then
attacks the "bad" vessels in which it has collected, while sparing the nearby
retina.

   It's an exquisitely precise procedure, said Dr. Joan Miller, an
ophthalmologist at the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary in Boston. "What
we're trying to do is injure the new blood vessels that are only a few microns
[less than a hair's breadth] away from retinal cells."

   It's also expensive - at least $1,200 per treatment for the dye alone,
although many insurers do pay. About two-thirds of those treated experience a
halt to the progression of disease, but only 10 percent get improvements in
vision. In general, photodynamic therapy stops blood vessels from leaking for
only about two months, so patients have to be retreated every three months for
two years. Other studies using different dyes are underway, although one recent
trial, of a substance called SnET2, failed to live up to expectations.

   An emerging and even more elegant strategy is to use drugs to block the
formation of new blood vessels in the first place, a concept pioneered as a way
to cut off the blood supply to tumors by Dr. Judah Folkman at Children's
Hospital in Boston.

   A handful of anti-angiogenesis drug strategies are now in human trials. All
of the drugs are injected into or just behind the eye under local anesthesia.
The drugs are designed to block a substances that make new blood vessels grow,
including a substance called VEGF.

   One study, involving a single injection of a drug called rhuFab V2, was led
by Schwartz of UCLA and published a year ago in Investigative Ophthalmology.
Though it's unclear if this drug will make it to market, the study showed the
drug was safe at low doses and led to short-lived but dramatic visual
improvement in more than one-quarter of patients.

   Elsewhere, some researchers are testing gene therapy to block new blood
vessel growth. Others are testing steroids, including one called anecortave
acetate, that may block new blood vessel growth when injected into the orbit
around the eye.

   The National Eye Institute is exploring surgical alternatives, including a
randomized trial to see whether delicate surgery to remove abnormal blood
vessels preserves central vision.  Elsewhere, a few surgeons are doing
translocation operations, or detaching part of the retina and moving it away
from the troublesome new blood vessels to an area where there are no such
vessels. Early research suggests this can lead to improvements in vision, but
the risks are high: Some patients lose their vision.

   Taken together, the medical and surgical advances, along with increasingly
sophisticated assistive technology, mean that "many people with this condition
retain very usable peripheral vision," said Rich Godfrey, patient liaison at the
Schepens Eye Research Institute in Boston.

   Amy Bower, a 42-year-old oceanographer at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution in Falmouth, put it this way: "I have tried not to let it slow me
down." Although macular degeneration has forced her to give up driving and solo
cycling, she still rides tandem with her husband of three years, a sighted guide
whom she met through a program for blind sailors at the Carroll Center for the
Blind in Newton.

   Recently, she led a 15-person scientific expedition to study currents in the
Indian Ocean aboard a research ship equipped with ClearView and other aids. She
and her husband also sail for fun. Best of all, this summer they'll adopt a
baby.

   Judy Foreman's column appears every other week in Health-Science. Her past
columns are available on Boston.com and www.myhealthsense.com. Her e-mail
address is foreman@globe.com.  SIDEBAR 1: MACULAR DEGENERATION PLEASE REFER TO
MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.  SIDEBAR 2: THE AMSLER GRID PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM
FOR CHART DATA.  SIDEBAR 3: VISION DEVICES ARE OUT THERE

   If you think you have macular degeneration, it's crucial to get a second
opinion from a retinologist, or retinal specialist. If you turn out to have
advanced vision problems, you should see a low vision specialist for help
finding helpful devices.

   There are many such devices now on the market. Some magnify words through
systems that connect to a TV or computer monitor. Others use special goggles to
display magnified words. There are also smaller gadgets such as talking clocks
and watches.

   Here is a partial list of companies and how to reach them:

   Optelec makes ClearView, a video magnifier based on closed circuit TV
technology. Call 1-800-828-1056 or visit www.optelec.com.

   Enhanced Vision Systems has a portable, hand-held device that scans a page
and blows up the image onto either goggles or a TV monitor. Call 1-800-440-9476
or visit www.enhancedvision.com.

   Telesensory Corp. makes video magnifiers and other devices. Call
1-800-804-8004 or visit www.telesensory.com.

   Vision Technology Inc. offers video magnifiers and other machines. Call
1-800-560-7226 or visit www.visiontechinc.com.

   For more information on macular degeneration, contact: The Lighthouse
Organization at www.lighthouse.org, Maxiaids at www.maxiaids.com, The L,S & S
Group at www.lssgroup.com, the National Eye Institute at www.nei.nih.gov, the
American Academy of Ophthalmology at www.aao.org, the Foundation Fighting
Blindness at www.blindness.org, Research to Prevent Blindness at www.rpbusa.org,
Schepens Eye Research Institute at www.eri.harvard.edu, the Association for
Macular Diseases Inc. at 212-605-3719, and the Macular Degeneration Foundation
at 1-800-924-4393.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, An altered photo depicts what a person with macular
degeneration might see if he or she were looking at this golfer. / PHOTO / ST.
LUKE'S CATARACT & LASER INSTITUTE

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2002


                             1421 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    February 25, 2002 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 978 words

HEADLINE: Advances usher in a new age in which drugs fight viruses

BYLINE: Robert S. Boyd INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

BODY:

   A new age may be dawning in the battle against one of humanity's oldest and
deadliest enemies: viruses.

   Scientists say we are just entering an "antiviral era" comparable to the
amazingly successful antibiotic era that began with the discovery of penicillin
before World War II.

   "Fifty years ago, we were just beginning to produce antibiotics," said
Dorothy Crawford, a microbiologist at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland.
"Today we're in exactly the same position with antiviral drugs."

   Viruses are tiny bits of genetic material, so small they can be seen only
when magnified 100,000 times. Like miniature burglars, they sneak into a cell,
take over its nucleus, multiply wildly and destroy it.

   They are responsible for a host of ailments ranging from pesky common colds
to the devastating HIV epidemic and incurable killers such as Ebola, again on
the prowl in Africa.

   Now, more than two dozen antiviral drugs have been approved to treat HIV, flu
and herpes, while others have looked good in tests for the common cold.

   Deeper understanding of viral diseases and fresh defenses against them are
coming along just when experts are warning that the smallpox virus could be the
most fearsome weapon of a bioterrorist attack.

   Unlike bacteria - much larger germs that can usually be controlled by
antibiotics - most viruses cannot be defeated with existing medications.
Vaccines have been powerful tools against viruses, including smallpox and polio,
but mostly by helping the body ward off infection. Antibiotics work only against
living organisms, and viruses lack most of the features of life. They cannot
move, eat or reproduce on their own, but must depend on the genes they steal
from their unwilling host.

   In addition, viruses evolve rapidly. A new strain capable of causing a global
epidemic, like the flu virus that killed 25 million people in 1918 and 1919,
could emerge at any moment, Crawford wrote in her recent book, The Invisible
Enemy: A Natural History of Viruses (Oxford University Press).

   Some scientists even speculate that a future "doomsday virus" combining the
worst features of smallpox and Ebola could wipe out the human race. Joshua
Lederberg, a Nobel Prize-winning biologist at Rockefeller University in New
York, has called viruses "the single biggest threat" to human life on the
planet.

   "Barring what we do to one another, if anything is going to wipe out
humankind, it will be a virus," Lederberg said.

   Virus research has lagged behind bacterial studies in part because they are
so small that no one could see them until the electron microscope was invented.
And unlike bacteria, which kill human cells but do not merge with them, a virus
takes over the DNA of a cell and becomes an intimate part of it.

   Because viral growth is so interconnected with cell growth, until recently
many scientists thought that destroying a virus while leaving the cell it
invaded intact would be impossible.

   But now, more than 70 years after the discovery of penicillin, the battle
lines against viruses are being redrawn.

   "There are parallels to antibiotics," said Frederick Hayden, a researcher at
the University of Virginia in Charlottesville, who has developed a new antiviral
drug that reduces the length and severity of the common cold. It works by
altering the shape of the cold virus so it cannot sneak through a human cell's
protective membrane.

   "It makes more sense to treat the primary cause of a viral infection than
just provide relief for the symptoms," Hayden said.

   New medicines to treat flu, shingles and other herpes viruses came on the
market in the 1990s. Among the available antivirals: acyclovir, valacyclovir and
famcyclovir for shingles and genital herpes; and amantadine, rimantadine,
zanamivir and oseltamivir for the flu.

   In the last decade, limited success against the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), the cause of AIDS, has been achieved with the use of a "cocktail" of two
or three new antiviral agents. More than a dozen such agents have been
developed, with varying benefits.

   In recent months, researchers have reported a number of seemingly minor
advances that illustrate the accelerating progress against viruses.

   A team of German scientists announced in November that they have made the
first live-action movies of a virus breaking into a human cancer cell and
gliding on tiny protein "tracks" toward the nucleus. The feat was accomplished
by attaching fluorescent molecules to a virus and taking videos of the lights as
they moved. The video technique "will be significant for helping us understand
how the virus enters the cell," said Jude Samulski, a researcher at the
University of North Carolina's Gene Therapy Center in Chapel Hill. "Previously
no one knew what exactly was happening during the first hour or two after the
original virus attack."

   Also, Jonathan Yewdell, a viral expert at the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, announced the discovery of a new flu gene that could
explain why some flu strains are deadlier than others.

   And David Sanders, a biologist at Purdue University in West Lafayette, Ind.,
found a flaw in a protein that allows viruses to enter cells and cause cancer in
mice. The discovery might lead to ways to block viruses from entering human
cells, he said.

   According to Crawford, most scientists used to think it was impossible to
destroy viruses without harming healthy cells.

   "This pessimism has been proved wrong," she wrote. "Safe antiviral drugs are
now on the market [and] we are likely to see an explosion of these products over
the next 10 to 20 years."

   Robert S. Boyd's e-mail address is rboyd@krwashington.com.

   For More About Viruses

   Everything you always wanted to know about viruses can be found at a site
called "All the Virology on the WWW":
www.tulane.edu/(tilde)dmsander/garryfavweb.html

GRAPHIC: CHART;
Two Types of Germs Compared (SOURCES: Schaum's Microbiology; World Book; Knight
Ridder Tribune)

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2002


                             1422 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 24, 2002, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 5128 words

HEADLINE: Kimberly Blanton is a member of the Globe Magazine staff.;
CORPORATE TAKEOVER EXPLOITING THE US PATENT SYSTEM, A SINGLE COMPANY HAS GAINED
CONTROL OVER GENETIC RESEARCH AND TESTING FOR BREAST CANCER. AND SCIENTISTS,
DOCTORS, AND PATIENTS HAVE TO PLAY BY ITS RULES.

BYLINE: By Kimberly Blanton, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A FEROCIOUS SNOW FLIES outside Myriad Genetics Inc.'s office, flush against
the Wasatch Range standing guard over Salt Lake City. A moose has wandered down
from the mountains and is loping through the parking lot. Inside the nondescript
brick building, a marvel of industrial medicine is taking place: genetic tests
that tell thousands of women each year whether they are among an unlucky
minority with a high risk of developing breast cancer.

   Myriad became the dominant player in breast cancer testing after its founder,
Mark Skolnick, discovered a gene responsible for breast cancer in September
1994. He and his team of scientists followed clues from big Mormon families
whose genealogical rec ords dating to the pioneers are stored in vaults carved
into the granite of the Wasatch mountains. One family, tagged "Kindred 2082,"
had 18 women with breast cancer, eight with ovarian cancer (the same gene is
linked to both diseases), and two with both cancers. After decoding the gene,
Myriad invested thousands of hours and millions of dollars to design a test for
mutations, nature's mistakes that can cause a gene to malfunction and generate
cancer cells.

         Today, ordering a genetic test from Myriad is as easy as buying a book
from Amazon.com, and the tests are conducted with assembly-line precision. But
why would any woman want to know her genetic fate? Because for those women born
into families plagued by cancer, it can be better to know than to be ignorant.
If a woman tests positive for a mutation, she may take preventive meas ures,
such as a mastectomy. A negative result can ease a woman's fears. "We know we're
making a difference in people's lives," says Dr. Gregory Critchfield, president
of Myriad's laboratory division, during an interview at the company's
headquarters. "To me, it's one of the most exciting businesses that anyone could
ever hope to be in."

   If the discovery of the breast cancer gene put Myriad on the map, United
States Patent 5,693,473 ensures its place there. Awarded on December 2, 1997,
the patent grants Myriad broad rights to determine how the breast cancer gene,
named BRCA1, is used by other scientists or biotechnology companies; to charge
royalties for its use in research or development; and even to bar its use
entirely in any product. Another patent covers Myriad's later discovery of a
second breast cancer gene, BRCA2.

   But while patents protect Myriad's investment in the genes and help the
company raise money for research, they also have enabled the company to enforce
a near-perfect monopoly on full sequencing, or chemical analysis, of BRCA1 and
BRCA2, genetic testing once scattered around the country in university and
medical school laboratories. By flexing monopoly rights not tolerated in the
manufacture of consumer products - anything from toasters to lemon squeezers -
Myriad is able to dictate terms under which academic researchers may or may not
perform their own tests on the company's patented genes and sometimes even
determine which proj ects they can pursue. Physicians and geneticists say their
academic freedom is being crimped by the limits imposed on them by patents, with
the toll ultimately falling on the same women whom Myriad seeks to help.

   The controversy swirling around Myriad's patents goes to a fundamental
question about all gene patents:  Is there something wrong with a patent system
that allows one company - or any institution, for that matter - to "own" the
genetic ma ter ial found in every human being?

   While there is little interest in Congress for delving into patent
protections at the heart of the nation's free-enterprise system, geneticists say
that the urgency of this issue will only grow. Myriad and other trailblazers
have some 1,300 human-gene patents in force - there are often multiple patents
on a single gene - while other companies and universities have been rushing to
patent thousands of genes since the decoding two years ago of the entire human
ge nome, comprising some 30,000 to 40,000 genes. Some corporations are seeking
patents on genes numbering in the hundreds.

   The gene-patent issue is also sending shudders through Europe's and Canada's
research communities, where Myriad is engaged in a heated legal fight to ensure
the same kind of patents on the breast cancer gene that it has secured in this
country. Geneticists in other countries view this as an unwelcome invasion of
US-style patent practices that shut out scientific inquiry and lock them into
endless legalities. "It doesn't seem that's really what science is all about,"
says Douglas Easton, who runs the genetic epidemi ology unit for the University
of Cambridge in England. "It would be much better if what's basically a proc ess
of [gene] discovery - it's not really a proc ess of invention - could not be
patented."

   DR. ALLEN BALE OF THE YALE UNIVERSITY School of Medicine is in the prime of
his career. Five years ago, he discovered the "human patched" gene responsible
for hereditary basal cell carcinoma. Now 47 years old, he sees patients with the
rarest genetic disorders. He can pursue any question that tickles his curiosity
- or so he thought.

   Bale's work on breast cancer genes, once a third of the research in his lab,
has been snuffed out by restrictions imposed by a licensing agreement between
Myriad and Yale. Myriad, empowered by patents that specify the sequence, or
ordering, of the four nucleotides present in BRCA1 and BRCA2, licenses dozens of
the nation's most prestigious teaching hospitals, medical schools, and cancer
clinics, including Yale's, to do their own, limited genetic tests for known
mutations. For example, the medical institutions are permitted to screen for
mutations common in Ashkenazi Jewish women. But the licenses do not allow
university faculty to perform full-blown genetic sequencing tests for patients -
the kind of tests that Bale was doing in the lab for his own research.

   To keep from violating Myriad's patent, Bale was forced to withdraw from one
ambitious proj ect to study women with early-stage breast cancer. Bale and Dr.
Elizabeth Claus, also at Yale, had submitted a grant proposal in May 1997 to the
National Institutes of Health to study whether this sub-group carried BRCA1/2
mutations. Months later, Yale signed a licensing agreement with Myri ad for
testing patients at the Yale Cancer Center that effectively barred Bale from
participating in his own study.

   Claus has begun the five-year study without him.  Rather than have Bale do
the sequencing, she sends her research subjects' samples to Myriad's lab in
Utah. Myriad, says Bale, referring to a folder with meticulous notes of each
conversation with executives, "made it really clear nobody but Myriad can do
sequencing."

   Sitting in his office, piled high with medical-journal articles, Bale is
comfortable in well-worn blue khakis and beat-up tennis shoes. But patents and
licensing agreements make him tense. He seems incredulous of the need to bother
with patents at all; it's as though an alien landed in his lab, and he must
figure out how to communicate with it. To be fair, Bale says, when he talks with
Myri ad executives about how the patents are encroaching on his research, the
executives don't seem to understand where he's coming from either.

   Indeed, Myriad's Critchfield roundly denies that the company interferes with
research. On the contrary. He insists that the company promotes research by
making its genetic test available to all and by slashing the test fee for
academics doing NIH-funded research. NIH researchers paid $1,200 last year for a
test that costs patients $2,680. "We've actually collaborated and stimulated
research to a great degree," Critchfield says.

   That may be true, but research that crosses the line into commercial use
violates Myri ad's patents. And Myri ad defines what is commercial: According to
a copy of an agreement provided to the Globe by one university - not Yale -
researchers are permitted to sequence BRCA1/2 "provided that no fee is charged
for such tests" and "no direct clinical use shall be made of any research test
results." Critchfield explains, "If you give test results back to patients, it
crosses over the line, and it's no longer a simple research test." That, he
says, "is really a very bright line."

   For geneticists like Bale, that is also a straitjacket. It is difficult to
enlist patients for blind studies in which test results are not disclosed. Even
if patients can be recruited that way, a study might be biased if the most
desirable subjects are discouraged from taking part: women in families with a
high incidence of breast cancer. Bale charged patients for the test.

   Bale could certainly send his research samples to Myri ad. But that misses
the point. He prefers his own sequencing techniques. And there's much still to
learn about breast cancer genes, which are unusually large and complex. For
example, Bale is interested in tackling whether he can find a way to sequence
sections of the gene not yet sequenced, "the intermolecular glue that connects
the bits of coding."

   But Myriad's patents stand in the way. Beyond that, to researchers like Bale,
they seem to mock science. A cure, a discovery, a breakthrough - all come
through painstaking research in the lab and accretion of results, sometimes
apparently insignificant, and even failures. Losing his share of NIH funding for
the proj ect with Claus "had a major financial impact on our lab," he says.
What's worse, gene patents have "a chilling effect on the work we do," says
Bale, who was inspired to become a scientist by a 10th-grade biology teacher in
Springfield, Massachusetts. "There are things I won't even think about doing
anymore, because I don't want to get involved in patent issues." Pushed to
explain how he feels, the unsentimental Bale says, "It's making me feel
disappointed about what the life of a scientist is like now."

   With genes now deemed "property," Bale and his collaborators on the skin
cancer discovery have no choice but to seek a patent of their own. But their
motivation, he says, is far different from Myri ad's profit motive: The patent
is "purely a defensive move," to preempt a company from patenting the gene and
profiting from his discovery.

   Throughout the genetics world, attention to patents is increasingly competing
with attention to science. Michael Watson, executive director of the American
College of Medical Genetics in Maryland, which has come out against gene
patents, says university labs must relinquish samples to a company with a patent
that can profit from the information contained in them. "If you can't do the
test," he says, "someone else does it and gets to use clinical information
you've accumulated over decades."

   There are practical concerns, too, when patent holders bar teaching hospitals
from genetic testing. Medical residents don't learn the procedure and don't
understand the genetics that underlie it, says Dr. Debra Leonard, who di rects
the molecular pathology lab at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.
She says her work is repeatedly frustrated by a deluge of corporate letters
concerning patents on genes involved in Alzheimer's disease; cystic fibrosis; a
neuro degenerative disease called spinocerebellar ataxia type 1;
hemochromatosis, an iron-overload disorder; Canavan, a rare brain disease that
afflicts children; and others.

   "You have no idea how long I studied to be able to do this," says Leonard,
who is in her mid-40s. "Imagine a lawyer who is told: You can't have any clients
who have had car accidents. That part of your practice is carved out. I am being
told I can't practice part of my medical profession - that it's owned by
somebody else."

   Sharon calls herself "a member of the shot-and-missed club." She survived
cancer in her left breast 30 years ago, only to have it reappear in her right
breast a decade later. But ovarian cancer in 1990 was the worst, ravaging her
hope as the chemotherapy weakened her hands and feet and caused double vision.
After a hysterectomy, an oopho rec tomy to remove her ovaries, and chemotherapy,
she returned to the hospital for a second surgery to determine whether the
ovarian cancer had been excised. She waited three days for the results. "Those
were the longest three days of my life," Sharon, now 60, recalls. "I really
didn't want to go through a lot more."

   During all those years that Sharon endured illness, long before there were
genetic tests, she believed her cancers were hereditary. Both her grandmother
and older sister died of ovarian cancer, and her younger sister survived breast
cancer. A well-to-do resident of Southern California with glittering sapphires
on each hand, Sharon would do anything in her power to help her only child,
Julie, avoid the family's cruel fate. At a restaurant in downtown Los Angeles,
Sharon and her daughter agree to tell their story if their last names are
withheld.

   Julie was a young adult living in Washington, D.C., in the early 1990s when
the race to find the breast cancer gene was in full swing. She recalls being
mesmerized by a magazine cover, its headline glaring up at her from a coffee
table: "Is Breast Cancer Genetic?" It was an urgent personal question.

   To help her daughter, several years later Sharon went to the Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center in Los Angeles. Dr. Maren Scheuner counseled her and ordered
Myriad's BRCA1/2 test for her. The doctor explained that since Sharon had
already had cancer, it made more sense for her to be tested first. If a mutation
of BRCA1/2 were detected in Sharon, a second test on her daughter would then
determine whether Sharon had passed the mutation on. Sharon's test, Myri ad
reported back, was negative.

   Sharon wanted to be happy about the results, but "I didn't believe it." Nor
did Scheuner. A physician with extensive training in genetics - she was a
genetics major in college and earned a master's degree in genetic counseling
prior to medical school - she knew that Sharon's result didn't square with the
family's prevalent cancers.

   Meanwhile, Julie's cancer clock ticked, making her feel like "a walking time
bomb." It is hard to fathom the dark avenues of Julie's reasoning as she
explains that her mother's negative test result was worse than a positive, which
would have given her the information she needed to make difficult decisions to
have her breasts and ovaries removed. "I was left with no direction," she says.

   Scheuner, who created Cedars-Sinai's genetic risk assessment program, was
determined to figure things out. "That is where the art of practicing medicine
and being a clinical geneticist is," she says. "Knowing when you need to go that
one step further and say, this family history is too striking, and,
statistically, I'm very concerned there's something there. I haven't found it
yet."

   Hope came at a genetics conference on the West Coast, where Scheuner heard
researchers from the Institut Curie in Paris pre sent a paper about a technique
for finding rare mutations, known as "big deletions," in French women. Scheuner
approached Cu rie's researcher at the conference. Intrigued by Sharon's case,
the French researcher agreed to test Sharon's DNA.

   Less than 10 percent of breast cancer is hereditary, with the vast majority
of mutations in BRCA1/2 genes being small, or point, mutations, errors in gene
coding. A slim percentage of mutations are "big deletions." These are actual
missing pieces of DNA that can also cause the gene to malfunction and cause
cancer. Myri ad's test was not designed to detect big deletions.

   Scheuner, encouraged by Myri ad, mailed Sharon's blood to Paris. The test
came back positive. At the time, the finding was so unusual that Sharon's case
was published in the Journal of Medical Genetics. Next, Institut Curie tested
Julie. It was genetic roulette, a 50-50 chance she carried her mother's
mutation. Again, it was positive. "With a positive test result," Julie recalls,
"I felt like, all right, I know what I'm going to go do."

   With so few US academic labs performing breast cancer tests for patients,
it's not surprising that Sharon and Julie had to go all the way to Paris for
answers, says Leonard at the University of Pennsylvania.  To be fair,
geneticists only recently have begun to understand the role of big deletions in
breast cancer and to tackle the technology for finding them. But, Leonard says,
"It took a long time for the deletion issue to come up. Maybe it would've come
up sooner if more academic labs had been doing this research."

   Last summer, as Julie turned 31, she had a double mastectomy to prevent what
was, to her, inevitable cancer. Julie was unconsolable when she awoke from
surgery, with her husband and parents hov er ing close. But it would have been
even more difficult to have had that mastectomy without the proof of cancer in
her genes, she says. If not for the French test, "I don't know what I would've
done."

   The cancer time bomb Julie spoke of continues to tick for her and her
offspring. She wants children but must become pregnant soon, before she has her
ovaries removed. There's a chance she will pass the genetic defect to her
children. "One of my major questions is 'What do I do when I have children? How
do I get them tested?' "

   Myriad Genetics, having locked down US patent rights on BRCA1/2, is seeking
to do the same at the European Union's patent office. It is not going as
smoothly as it did in the United States. European and Canadian medical
institutions and government health ministries are battling to block Myriad.
Institut Curie's attorneys, arguing that Myri ad could have testing halted at
the same lab that performed Sharon's and Julie's tests, filed a formal
opposition to Myri ad's patent application in Europe. "Monopoly is not good for
genetic testing," says Dr. Dominique Stoppa-Lyonnet, a member of Institut
Curie's faculty, "because the commercial interests are stronger than the quality
interests."

   Myriad's dominance over breast cancer gene testing for patients has stifled
debate of the merits or shortcomings of patents in some corners of the medical
community. Medical staff at numerous university hospitals and nonprofit research
centers declined interview requests, including Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in New York and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston. Even the
National Institutes of Health had to be reminded numerous times that it is part
of the US Department of Health and Human Services before officials agreed to
explain NIH's agreement with Myriad for cut-rate testing for NIH-funded
research.

   There are reasons for the reticence. These institutions' licensing agreements
with Myri ad are, like most business documents, confidential. And some breast
cancer experts, who pride themselves on their independence, may not be eager to
discuss their relationship to a company whose patents hinder work in their
field. But the main reason for the silence is that Myri ad, as sole purveyor of
BRCA1/2 sequencing for patients, holds power over the doctors relying on it for
their livelihood. As Michael Watson of the American College of Medical Genetics
puts it, "Without them, you can't legally test."

   Myriad also uses its unique position to court physicians with gold-plated
reputations. Barbara Weber, a physician at the University of Pennsylvania Health
System and head of breast cancer genomics at the university, has an ongoing
relationship with Myri ad. In the past, she has worked as a paid, outside
consultant to the company and even owned Myri ad stock. Today, she's involved in
a research collaboration with Myriad.

   Weber was the exception to those who declined interviews, and her openness
about ties to Myriad - past and present - was refreshing. During an interview in
her airy office high above the UPenn campus, she explains that she severed her
consulting arrangement "so that I can say what I want without tainting myself
internally about these things." She sold the stock for the same reason. Weber
also feels free to criticize Myriad at one point during the interview, remarking
on a "nasty" letter that UPenn once received from a company attorney.

   At other times, she sounds like a Myriad cheerleader. Weber feels strongly
that the company's US patent "has not in any way affected people's ability to
get tested." While it is true that Myri ad has the only clinical test, it is
also "the only lab that's had the resources to really do this right. We've been
very impressed with their accuracy, turnaround time, and response to our
questions."

   The goal of her research collaboration with Myri ad is to develop a new
genetic technique that the company can commercialize to test for those rare big
deletions. Her reputation among breast cancer geneticists is well-established:
Weber was among those involved in the early-1990s race to find a breast cancer
gene. If she can design a test for big deletions - others are working on the
same problem for Myri ad - the company would have a follow-up test to offer
high-risk patients, like Sharon and her daughter, who test negative on its
sequencing test. Weber is "very much on the case and a very important
collaborator," says Dr. Thomas Frank, vice president of medical services for
Myri ad.

   Weber receives no money from Myriad for this work. But Myriad has saved her
valuable lab time by cloning and sequencing reagents she needed to develop her
technique. Myri ad also handed over anonymous patients' samples and records to
her.

   Collaborations with industry are hardly unusual in academia. In fiscal 2000,
UPenn's Center for Technology Transfer, on behalf of faculty, entered into 82
agreements with companies for product development. Nationwide, some 4,000 such
collaborations between industry and academia were signed in 1999, the most
recent figures available.

   If Weber's test works, and if Myriad commercializes it, her share of
royalties, she says, "wouldn't be very much money." She's unsure whether she
would accept royalties anyway. "Would it be worth it to go through the hassle of
trying to get royalties? I don't know. Maybe not." But if she does, she will
disclose it. "Everybody will know, every time I give a talk, that I have this
relationship where I get royalties for the test from Myriad."

   If not money, then what is in it for Weber? "What's in it for me," she says,
"is figuring out if we can make the test work, and can we find ge nomic
deletions this way."

   While Weber is on Myriad's "A team," Margaret Reece isn't even in the game.
Reece works in a cramped basement lab at Baystate Medical Center in Springfield
with peeling paint, old equipment, and a small $200,000 annual budget. But four
years ago, that didn't prevent Reece from stumbling onto something exciting.

   A jolly soul with a passion for immuno histo chem istry - a technique of
studying the proteins generated by genes - she was helping a graduate student
find a quick and dirty way to screen for BRCA mutations. She knew from the
literature that "tails" on BRCA proteins are cut off in genes with mutations.
Through nifty detective work and late nights, her group figured out a way to
swab DNA from buccal cells in the mouth and then test for the presence of a
tail.

   Her technique, though not as thorough as Myri ad's sequencing test, was
easier and cheaper - breast cancer's equivalent to a Pap smear, which is
essentially an initial screen for cervical cancer that may lead to follow-up
tests. But was Reece's technique reliable? First, she swabbed the mouths of
people hanging around the lab. All negatives, as expected; none had a family
history of breast cancer. She also tried it out on a small group of Bay state
patients who were also undergoing Myri ad's sequencing test. The Q-tip test's
results matched Myri ad's, except for one "odd ball."

   Excitement rumbled through the lab over the remarkable results. But Reece
realized that, without further verification, it would likely wind up in "the
journal of nonreproducible results." Lab technician Lorrie Adams, who worked
alongside Reece, explains: "We don't let ourselves get excited until we're
really, really sure, so we do it over and over and over. It was exciting to
realize it actually worked, and it could be significant for women."

   In breast cancer genetics, many roads lead to Myriad, as Reece discovered. To
validate her new buccal-cell screens and win federal approval to take it into
clinics, it must be compared in rigorous experiments with Myri ad's
"gold-standard clinical test." When she does go to Myriad, could the company
conceivably refuse to help her, a potential competitor, perfect her product?
"There is no way Myriad would be able to refuse doing tests for patients," Reece
insists. "No way."

   A Myriad spokesman declined to discuss the legal matter.

   Myriad's patent, on the other hand, could be a roadblock. Baystate has
obtained a US patent on Reece's buccal-cell technique. But the two patents,
Baystate's and Myri ad's, may be on a legal collision course. Baystate's
attorneys have written Myri ad, saying that her screen does not infringe on its
BRCA patents, Reece says. But, she speculates, "if anything sal a ble came out
of my research, Myri ad might try to say they owned the sal a ble part of it."

   Reece worries more about the overall impact of patents on science than on her
own situation. Myri ad's patent, for example, covers not only genetic mutations
and testing technology but also therapies based on the breast cancer gene. "As
an academic, I am concerned about it," Reece says. "It's not just Myri ad.
Everybody's out patenting genes, and my concern is we're going to have
everything so locked up in intellectual property rights that nobody's going to
be able to do anything, or if they do anything, they're not going to be able to
use it."

   In March 2000, theatergoers heading to the red velvet seats in the John F.
Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington were handed a Playbill for
the upcoming performance of Wit. It starred Judith Light as Vivian Bearing, PhD,
an eminent and lonely poetry scholar who has ovarian cancer. As disease consumes
her, professor Bearing's biting British wit prevents her - and the play - from
plunging into despair.

   Tucked into the Playbill was an advertisment for Myriad Genetics Inc. It
pictured an earnest woman with her left hand held against her right breast and
asked: "If you could discover your risk for a second breast cancer or for
ovarian cancer, would you? There is no stronger antidote to fear than
information."

   Today, as then, the company wants to sell more tests. The Playbill ad was a
rare appeal directly to women. Myri ad mainly relies on a US sales force
visiting hospitals and clinics and educating and selling gynecologists,
oncologists, and primary care physicians on the test. Myri ad tests some 10,000
women each year. The potential market could be nearly double that: Last year,
about 200,000 women were diagnosed with breast cancer; up to 20,000 of those
cases were hereditary.

   Each blood sample mailed to Myri ad's lab by doctors for their breast cancer
or ovarian cancer patients brings in more than just a fee. Each sample adds to
Myri ad's databank of DNA and patient profiles. Myri ad posts the varieties of
mutations publicly on the Internet for researchers. These data are also
scrutinized by Myriad.

   Thomas Frank, whose medical degree is from Washington University in St.
Louis, is Myri ad's liaison with doctors who order tests. He is devoted to
getting to the bottom of a puzzling test result found in some women. Some
mutations are known to be harmful and cause cancer. Others are innocuous
alterations in a BRCA sequence that don't lead to breast cancer. And then there
are the puzzles; not enough is known about these mutations to determine whether
or not they do cause cancer.

   As samples with similar, unknown mutations come in, Myri ad can compare those
patients' family histories and build a case to determine whether they are linked
to cancer.  Frank has shrunk the unknowns, from 20 percent of all mutations
detected in 1998 to 12 percent. His "personal goal" this year is to get below 10
percent.

   Diagnostic tests are only the first step for genetic medicine. Geneticists
and biotechnology executives, including Frank, speak of an exciting future in
which medicine increasingly revolves around using new drugs and therapeutics
that treat a disease, such as cancer, based on the disease's genetics.  For
breast cancer, for example, scientists hope to target the proteins generated by
a gene, altering the protein in a way that interferes with the creation of
cancer cells. They also en vi sion drugs tailored to the unique genetic
characteristics of an individual patient.

   Genetic-based drugs may be years in the future for breast cancer, but the
research has already begun at Myri ad, which is interested, for example, in how
BRCA2 interacts with other genes in the body to cause a breast cancer tumor.
It's also pursuing drug targets involving genetic mechanisms for cell division
that may be responsible for various cancers. Tumors, Frank explains, may look
the same under the microscope but might not have the same genetic origin. "We
may find that drugs will act differently, or better, or worse in hereditary
cancers," he says, "but unless we know the underlying biology, we can't treat
the cancer."

   Where Frank envisions medical advances, others see a wall of gene patents.
Myri ad's patents on BRCA2, according to its US Patent and Trademark Office
filing, cover "the therapy of human cancers which have a mutation in the BRCA2
gene, including gene therapy, protein replacement therapy and protein mimetics."
For therapies relying on BRCA1, Myriad sold those rights to Indianapolis-based
Eli Lilly and Co. but retained rights for sequencing BRCA1.

   Will these companies or others use their gene patents to monopolize the
market for genetic therapies or cures? Will they deem some therapies
unprofitable and unworthy of pursuit? Will some university researcher who spent
a lifetime seeking a cure for breast cancer be thwarted by a patent dispute with
Myriad? Or will another avoid pursuing breast cancer research at all?

   "To even look at any part of the breast cancer gene, you have to pay Myriad,"
says Lori B. Andrews, an expert on gene patents at the Chicago-Kent College of
Law at Illinois Institute of Technology. "Myriad can say, 'Don't look at that,
because we're thinking of looking at it.' Or maybe Myriad isn't looking at it
because it won't affect many people."

   It's too early to know how gene patents will play out. What is known about
the breast cancer genes, Andrews says, is that Myriad's patents put the company
squarely in the driver's seat.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photographs by Lane Turner / The Boston Globe

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2002


                             1423 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    February 22, 2002 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg.A-14

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: PRESIDENT DROPS PICK FOR FDA LEADERSHIP

BYLINE: STEWART M. POWELL , HEARST NEWSPAPERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   President Bush was back to square one yesterday in his 13-month quest for a
new Food and Drug Administration commissioner after abandoning a leading
candidate who had irked the drug industry by supporting wider federal oversight.

    White House spokeswoman Anne Womack said Bush would continue his search for
"the most qualified" candidate for the FDA post, adding that there was no
timetable for choosing a nominee.

    Alastair Wood, a pharmacologist and assistant vice chancellor of the medical
school at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tenn., was notified by the White
House that he was no longer being considered for the post, Vanderbilt spokesman
John Howser said.

    Wood favored regulating pharmaceutical companies' advertising and allowing
three prescription medications for allergies to be sold over the counter. Such a
move could have cost drug manufacturers millions of dollars.

    Wood had been undergoing White House checks for the post, but his name had
not been formally submitted for Senate confirmation.

    The FDA's top official is currently Dr. Bernard A. Schwetz, a veterinarian
serving as acting principal deputy commissioner.

    The commissioner's post has been vacant since the resignation last January
of Dr. Jane Henney, appointed by President Bill Clinton.

    Bush's backup candidates include:

    * Lester Crawford, a former FDA official who has led a food-safety think
tank backed by the food industry.

    * Michael Astrue, an executive with the Boston-area biotechnology firm,
Transkaryotic Therapies.

    The FDA, created in 1931 to keep impurities and hazardous materials out of
Americans' food, drugs, cosmetics and medical devices, regulates products that
account for about 25 cents of every consumer dollar spent in the United States.

    "The president never made any announcement about this position," Womack
said. "Until the president does, we simply don't speculate or comment on anyone
who may or may not be under consideration."

    Womack denied that the president's decision to drop Wood was swayed by the
pharmaceutical industry or campaign donations by the drug industry to Republican
candidates including Bush.

    Bill Allison, of the non-profit, non-partisan Center for Public Integrity,
said the White House decision to drop consideration of Wood underscored the
success of the pharmaceutical industry in pressing the Bush administration to
select "someone for that post who would be friendly to them."

    Allison said the absence of an FDA commissioner has complicated efforts by
the Bush administration to revise priorities within the $1.5 billion-a-year
agency.

    The agency's workload has expanded since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. FDA
scientists are now involved in combating potential bio-terrorist threats to the
food supply and approving production of vaccines that would be used to counter a
bio-terrorist attack, including anthrax vaccine and smallpox vaccine.

    Critics contend the Bush administration has sought candidates for the FDA
post that would be compatible with the industries that are regulated by the FDA
-- drugs, food and medical products.

    But Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., chairman of the Senate committee that
oversees the FDA and who would vet any nominee for FDA commissioner, has
signaled that he will not endorse any candidate with ties to the regulated
industries.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2002


                             1424 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 18, 2002 Monday ONE STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-6

LENGTH: 1026 words

HEADLINE: BUZZ WORDS WITH BAD VIBES?;
 IN THE EMOTIONAL STEM-CELL RESEARCH DEBATE, ADVOCATES ARGUE THAT 'THERAPEUTIC
CLONING' IS A MISNOMER

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   So where do you stand on the nuclear transplantationissue?  Never heard of
nuclear transplantation, you say?

    Think it has something to do with repositioning of nuclear missiles? Or
maybe with the disposal of nuclear wastes? Think again.

    Nuclear transplantation is the term preferred by some scientists and
politicians for a process better known as "therapeutic cloning."

    This technique might someday be used to produce embryonic stem cells that
are genetically compatible with an individual patient. A cloned embryo of the
individual would be made and then destroyed so doctors could harvest its stem
cells, which might be used to rebuild the patient's damaged tissues or perhaps
employed for gene therapy.

    To date, nobody has even attempted therapeutic cloning. But it combines two
notions that, individually, are controversial -- embryonic stem cell research
and human cloning -- and the arguments pro and con extend to what people should
call it.

    "People are fighting for the hearts and minds of the American public ... and
words are one of the weapons," said Ruth Faden, director of the Bioethics
Institute at Johns Hopkins University.

    In an article entitled "Please Don't Call it Cloning!" in the journal
Science last week, a leading biomedical researcher, Johns Hopkins' Dr. Bert
Vogelstein, and the presidents of the National Academy of Science and the
Institute of Medicine argued that therapeutic cloning is an inaccurate and
misleading term and should be abandoned.

    They contend that most people associate "cloning" with the cloning of human
beings, or "reproductive cloning." The vast majority of both the public and the
scientific community is opposed to cloning humans because of safety and moral
concerns.

    Therapeutic cloning is conceptually different, they maintain, because the
intent is not to produce a copy of a human, but just to produce stem cells, a
cell type that scientists believe could be used to produce almost any type of
replacement cell -- neurons to treat Parkinson's disease, pancreatic cells to
cure diabetes, cardiac muscle cells to repair heart damage.

    The technique for producing cloned cells -- somatic cell nuclear transfer --
is the same for both therapeutic and reproductive cloning. The nucleus is
removed from a human egg cell and replaced with the nucleus from a cell from the
individual to be cloned. But because the intent is not to reproduce -- in fact,
most such cells likely could never develop into a human -- Vogelstein and the
others argue for simply calling the procedure "nuclear transplantation."

    Late last year, as Congress discussed a ban on cloning, stem-cell research
proponents such as Sen. Arlen Specter also advocated calling it nuclear
transplantation.

    In this radiation-phobic age, it is unusual for advocates to seek the label
of "nuclear." Usually, just the opposite occurs. When radiologists began using a
technique called nuclear magnetic resonance to produce images of the body, the
industry successfully re-labeled it as "magnetic resonance imaging," or MRI.

    "Cloning is a very hot button issue," said Dr. Timothy Block, director of
the Jefferson Center for Biomedical Research in Philadelphia. "I like to avoid
[the term] because it's so emotional."

    But cloning is not an inaccurate term -- just a very broad one from a
scientific point of view. Scientists use the word to describe any procedure that
produces an exact copy of something -- whether it is a plant, a sheep or just a
single cell.

    "In that sense, a clone is a clone," Faden said last week in Philadelphia at
a conference sponsored by the Foundation for American Communications.

    Ronald Cole-Turner, a professor who studies the relationship between
religion and science at the Pittsburgh Theological Seminary, said a concerted
effort to replace "cloning" in public debate could backfire.

    "I think it smacks of becoming a word game," he said. "If there's anything
that bothers religious people, it's word games."

    Even if the cloned embryos that might be used to produce stem cells don't
have the potential for becoming human beings, they still represent human life
for people of many religions and deserve special moral consideration, he
suggested.

    It is this concern about destroying human embryos that President Bush cited
last summer when he restricted the kinds of embryonic stem cell research the
federal government would sponsor. Researchers now do not obtain embryonic stem
cells from cloned cells, but rather from embryos created by in-vitro
fertilization.

    Just what constitutes an embryo is another debate. How many times must a
fertilized egg divide before it is an embryo? Must it be implanted in the womb
to be an embryo?

    When Advanced Cell Technologies of Worcester, Mass., announced last year
that it had produced a human cloned embryo, many developmental biologists
disagreed, noting that it had divided only a handful of times before stopping.
Even unfertilized eggs will sometimes spontaneously divide that much, they said.

    Look for a number of new terms for embryos to be advanced, Faden said:
activated eggs, reconstituted eggs, cleaving eggs, ovasomes.

    Faden and Cole-Turner agree that cloning may have value as a term because it
is one that many people in the public at least recognize, unlike nuclear
transplantation.

    The bigger problem with the term "therapeutic cloning," from Faden's
perspective, is not "cloning," but "therapeutic."

    Though stem cells obtained by this technique might eventually be used to
treat people, no one has developed such a therapy yet, she emphasized. In the
earliest experiments, there will be no decent prospect for therapy.

    "Right now, the purpose is research," she said, so she favors calling it
"research cloning." A similar change in terminology already is occurring in the
field of genetics, she noted. Despite hundreds of "gene therapy" experiments to
date, no true therapy has yet emerged, so many investigators have begun to refer
to these experiments simply as "gene intervention trials."

    By dropping references to "therapeutic," Faden suggested, "we become a bit
more modest and more honest."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Matt Freed/Post Gazette: Ronald Cole-Turner/"I think it smacks
of becoming a word game.If there's anything that bothers religious people, it's
word games."

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                             1425 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2002 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1268 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Gives Heart Patients Hope

BYLINE:  By JOAN SWIRSKY

BODY:

   "I WANTED anything that would make me feel better and that would avoid
surgery or complications like a stroke," said Dr. Jacqueline Rose Hott, a Great
Neck resident and a former dean of Adelphi University's School of Nursing.

        What was offered to Dr. Hott and two other patients at North Shore
University Hospital in Manhasset turned out to be a trailblazing clinical trial
using gene therapy.

    Fifty medical centers throughout the United States and about 100 patients
participated in the study, which began two years ago. It was sponsored by Berlex
Laboratories of Montville, N.J., a subsidiary of Schering, the German
pharmaceutical giant.

   Like other participants in the trial, Dr. Hott had experienced years of
angina, or chest pain, that required her to wear nitroglycerine patches and to
take medications. She had undergone seven cardiac catheterizations and had had a
stent, a metal coil, inserted in an artery to open blockages, but nothing seem
to work.

   Dr. Lawrence Y. Ong, the director of interventional cardiology at North
Shore, is now screening patients for the second expanded stage of the trial.

   "About 10 percent of patients with severe angina have had angioplasty,
surgery and medication, but they still have chest pain, and cardiologists can't
do anything more for them," he said. "You see a blockage, put in a stent, do
bypass surgery. It's almost like plumbing. But at some point you can't put in
another stent or do another bypass. There is a need to create new ways to get
blood into the heart muscle, and gene therapy gives us a new, theoretically
exciting way of treating patients and relieving their symptoms."

   Ann Way, a nurse who assisted with the gene therapy trial, explained it this
way: "The gene product, which is called fetal growth factor, encourages
angiogenesis, or the growth of new blood vessels. This promotes a greater blood
supply to areas of the heart that need it, and it also improves collateral
circulation."

   Current statistics demonstrate the need for new therapies. The National
Heart, Blood and Lung Institute in Bethesda, Md., says that while the death rate
from coronary heart disease declined 26 percent from 1988 to 1998, it remains
the single largest killer of men and women -- in just about equal numbers -- in
the United States. About 500,000 Americans die of heart attacks every year.

   Gene therapy is not without risks.  For example, anything that promotes the
growth of new cells in the body is not indicated for people with cancer because
it might encourage the growth of cancer cells. So candidates for the trial
underwent six weeks of screening, which included stringent testing for cancer
and three stress tests on the heart.

   Gene therapy must be administered in strictly sterile conditions, so doctors,
nurses and patients "have to wear spaceship outfits like in 'Star Wars,' " Dr.
Hott said.

   Patients must also sign lengthy consent documents that spell out the inherent
dangers of the experimental therapy.

   But for Leo Pappas, a 54-year-old former waiter from Whitestone, Queens, the
risks of gene therapy were "worth it," he said. Although his father, uncle and
grandfather had heart disease, he said, "I never got sick in my life until five
years ago." Since then, Mr. Pappas said, he has had a heart attack,
double-bypass surgery and constant angina.

   "A few months after the operation, the arteries closed up again," he said.
"The doctors said they could clean them out, like Roto-Rooter, and I went every
nine weeks for angioplasty, and then I had stents and medicine. But I still had
chest pains, and I still couldn't walk."

   After undergoing gene therapy, Mr. Pappas, who is still on disability
insurance, said: "I haven't had angioplasty in two years. I started to feel
better, and now I walk a lot, all the time. I'm healthier now."

   Joseph Zaffuto's heart disease became so debilitating that he had to retire
in 1979 from his job as a sewage treatment worker in Manhattan. In the ensuing
years, he had a series of small strokes, a blockage in a carotid artery and a
heart attack. In 1991, he had open-heart surgery, followed by six angioplasties
and two stents. But his angina continued.

   Mr. Zaffuto, an Oceanside resident who is 72 and has just celebrated his 52nd
wedding anniversary, said he agreed to gene therapy on his physicians' advice.
"My doctors told me I should be grateful that I was a candidate, so I went for
it," he said.

   Mr. Zaffuto's last stress test and electrocardiogram were improved, he said,
but he remained skeptical because he continued to have chest pain. "When I
learned that they gave me the gene, it was mind over matter," he said. "It felt
easier to walk the 200 feet to take out the garbage and to climb the stairs to
my apartment. I have angina occasionally, but if I know I'm going to do
something strenuous, I still pop a pill."

   The double-blind study ensured that neither the researchers nor the patients
knew who was receiving the genetic material or a nonmedicinal substitute.

   The procedure requires an overnight hospital stay. The patient is mildly
sedated, and a slender catheter is threaded through the groin up to the heart.
Using an "instant X-ray" called fluoroscopy, the doctor is able to see the area
of compromised blood flow. The genetic material, which is attached to an
inactivated cold virus, is injected directly into an artery.

   "It's important to do studies like this carefully, so your own excitement
doesn't influence the results," said Dr. Ong, the North Shore cardiologist.
"This is a new age of therapy, and I can't pretend to know where it's going to
go. There will be steps forward and steps backward, but in spite of the steps
backward, the research is continuing, and hopefully this will be a completely
new mode for treating patients."

   Last summer, when the initial trial ended, the three North Shore patients
learned that they had actually received the genetic material. "It was a little
daunting not knowing if I was going to get the gene product or the placebo,"
said Dr. Hott, who is the author of a textbook on clinical research and is a
practicing psychotherapist and sex therapist.

   After the procedure, she said she developed mild cold symptoms. "But I didn't
suspect anything until I didn't have any more angina, and I didn't need the
nitroglycerine patch or any pills," she said. "That's when I suspected that
maybe I was getting the gene therapy."

   A few weeks ago, her symptoms returned, and Dr. Hott, who describes her age
as "fitting the under-75 criterion," had another angioplasty.

   Progress, Dr. Ong explained, is determined by the degree to which symptoms
abate, as measured by follow-up stress tests and the patient's anecdotal
reports. "We can't simply do another catheterization and visualize the progress
because the genes work on the tiny blood vessels, the capillaries, on a
microscopic level," he said. "In animal studies, new vessels can be seen on a
microscopic level, but angiograms can't visualize capillaries in humans."

   Dr. Stanley Katz, the chief of cardiology at North Shore, said: "Gene therapy
has the potential to progress to the point of routine use in a wide variety of
circumstances, in the heart as well as the legs, especially when other options
have been exhausted. The kind of patient that could benefit the most is the
heart-failure patient who has severe limitations and no definitive treatment
options left."

   Mrs. Way was more sanguine. "As a nurse, you usually treat one patient at a
time," she said. "But with gene therapy, if it works, I feel that it will help
not one patient, but potentially millions of patients for years and years to
come."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the cardiac catheterization lab at North Shore University
Hospital, from left, Dr. Lawrence Y. Ong, Ann Way and Dr. Stanley Katz. (Chris
Maynard for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2002


                             1426 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2002 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    February 17, 2002, Sunday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; MAPPING THE GENOME: One year later; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2217 words

HEADLINE: MAPPING THE GENOME: One year later;
Researchers staking claims in new frontier

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

   The celebrated publishing of the human genome sequence last February was no
surprise at Bill Pederson's home in Eden Prairie. Like millions of other
Americans, the Pedersons keep track of genetic research because they have a
life-or-death stake in it.

        Lupus killed two of Pederson's sisters, and now it's attacking him. No
one knows why the disease hits, but genes are a factor. University of Minnesota
scientists are using genomic tools to study Pederson, 53, and others to identify
the culprit genes and learn how they work.

        A year after scientists got access to the genome sequence, nothing so
dramatic as a cure for a major disease is within reach. Breakthroughs of that
magnitude weren't expected at this point. Still, scientists are exhilarated
about the power the genome has given them to push into new frontiers on cancer,
heart disease and other disorders.

        "Every day is an adventure because you have so many genes to play around
with," said Dr. Ashley Haase, who directs the university's Biomedical Genomics
Center.

        Graduate students are publishing results of genomic experiments that
their professors couldn't have done even a couple of years ago.

        "I don't like to sound cheesy, but this is a revolution," said Lisa
Herron, a Ph.D. student at the university who is decoding the genome of a
bacterium that infects hospital patients and cows.

         Scientists are studying many of the tiny invaders that make people and
animals sick.   These microbes represent "the lowest hanging fruit in the
genomics field," said Vivek Kapur, who co-directs the Genomics Center. Their
genomes are relatively simple, and the goal is to learn how the microbes can be
blocked from infecting people, he said.

        Another rapid advance for the overall research is in diagnosing
diseases, Haase said. In cancer, for example, genomic studies are making it
possible to classify and diagnose tumors more accurately and thus target
treatment more effectively.

        "It hasn't reached clinical practice yet, but you can imagine it getting
there reasonably soon," Haase said.

        Also coming soon to the neighborhood clinic are prescriptions that are
tailored to a person's genetic profile rather than the one-size-fits-all drugs
that haven't worked for some patients.

        'U' in gene race

        Minnesota was not a real player in the genome project. Now, however, the
state is jumping into the race against other research institutions to make use
of the sequence for medicine and agriculture.

        At the University of Minnesota, two new buildings dedicated to genomic
research and related studies are expected to open within a year. More than 100
new scientists have been recruited.    The Mayo Clinic in Rochester also is
vying to play a prominent role.

        At least a dozen Minnesota companies are trying to develop therapies and
drug ingredients using genes and related proteins. For example, HTS Biosystems,
based in Minneapolis, is making tools to help companies mine proteins for new
drugs and diagnostic tests, said Doug Astry, vice president of marketing and
business development.

         The state Legislature pitched in to the overall effort last year by
appropriating $10 million for the Biomedical Innovation and Commercialization
Initiative, which seeks to help companies translate biotech discoveries into
products.

        Lupus studies

        The lupus studies illustrate how researchers are investigating diseases.

        In a refrigerator at the University of Minnesota, Pederson's DNA is
stored in tiny wells on a laboratory tray. In all, researchers have obtained
samples from 1,750 people for studies supported by the National Institutes of
Health and the Lupus Foundation of Minnesota.

        An initial goal for the research is to compare DNA from people with and
without lupus in order to spot differences that could identify genes associated
with the disease. For starters, that information could help improve diagnosis.

        To understand why lupus patients pray for better diagnostic tools,
consider Pederson's struggle to explain the problems that began in November 1996
with fatigue.

        In January 1997, he was found to have double pneumonia and infectious
mononucleosis. In February, doctors said his blood chemistry was out of whack.
In June, his spleen was removed, and in August a blood clot almost stopped his
heart.

        All of this was mind-boggling to a busy electrical engineer who hadn't
been hospitalized since birth. Life had been rich and full for Bill and Elaine
Pederson, who reared three children while running a family business and hauling
a mint-condition 1957 MG to auto shows.

        The next crisis came in December 1997. He was in an airport in Denver
trying to get home for Christmas when he started "feeling terrible and sweating
like crazy." He made it to Minneapolis. But the next morning, he collapsed in
the living room.

        "He said, 'I love you and the kids,' and then he stopped breathing,"
Elaine Pederson recalled.

        It was another blood clot, but he survived.

        It took two more frustrating years before doctors could definitely say
his problems were caused by systemic lupus erythematosus. His immune system was
attacking his body's connective tissue. The damage can occur in kidneys, heart,
blood vessels or elsewhere. Because the disease takes many forms, it is tricky
to diagnose. Thus, most patients struggle for years with no clear explanation or
effective treatment.

        "This disease is a huge puzzle," Pederson said.

        Complicating his diagnosis was the fact that lupus typically strikes
young women. Even though two of his sisters had died from it years earlier,
doctors didn't expect him to get it.

        Pederson believes that one of his sisters could have survived if her
lupus been diagnosed earlier. So, he insists that doctors monitor his children
for early signs of the disease. His greatest hope is that genome studies will
produce results in time to help them.

        Book of life

        The microscopic genome that gives so much hope often is called the book
of life because it holds instructions that every cell in the human body needs to
communicate with other cells, produce proteins and perform other functions. The
instructions are encoded in sequences of DNA's four chemical bases, usually
denoted by the letters A, C, T and G.

        The hoopla last February came because scientists had spelled out the
exact order of most the 3.2 billion characters of the genome. The job won't be
finished until 2003 because researchers still are filling gaps and checking for
errors.

        Meanwhile, the bulk of the sequence is available to other researchers.
As with lupus, a leading goal for medical research is to locate genes that
influence diseases. The genome project advanced that effort by several years,
said Dr. Timothy Behrens, who directs the lupus study.

         To grasp the significance of the change, think of the genome as if it
were the United States as seen from a satellite, he said. It was largely an
abstraction with few visible landmarks to show where and how to find a gene.

        "We were doing the Lewis and Clark thing, and it was extremely
time-consuming," he said.

        Now, he said, the genome provides a road map on which scientists are
filling in the genetic equivalent of county lines, towns and major landmarks.
Much work remains to be done, Behrens said.

        Sophisticated laboratory equipment and computer technology developed for
the genome project is being used to further the research. Robots manipulate tiny
drops of DNA, lending efficiency and accuracy to the work.

        In the lupus study, researchers are closing in on six genome regions.
Behrens predicts that some lupus genes will be identified in three to five
years.

        Another goal is to understand how the disease advances.   With Pederson,
for example, exposure to the sun triggers lupus flareups. Researchers have asked
him to donate more DNA when that happens because they want to study what's going
on inside his cells.

        "We already are seeing certain inflammatory pathways that are turned on
in lupus patients but not in other people," Behrens said.

        If drugs could be developed to block such pathways, that would be
welcome news for Pederson. He is holding his own with current drugs.

        More remote, Behrens said, is the day when gene therapy might fix
defective DNA, curing lupus and other diseases.

        Another long-term goal is to search for genes that might explain whole
groups of diseases. Lupus is one of several autoimmune diseases, including
rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, juvenile (Type 1) diabetes and others.
The university team is recruiting families with a history of at least two of
those disorders for genetic studies to be done in collaboration with research
groups in California and New York.

        An ultimate goal for genomic research is to understand the nature of
disease and to unlock mysteries of what happens in cells when the body responds,
said Haase, who studies genes related to AIDS.

        "You start to see whole patterns of things," he said. "Then you start to
write about this, and it's a story that you've never done before. . . . It isn't
a single story because it has serialized chapters. It's more like writing a
novel or a symphony."

        The big breakthrough stories, such as a basic understanding of cancer,
won't be written for five years or more, he said, but some important chapters
could come earlier.

        "How soon that's actually going to happen is difficult to say," he
added. "Maybe you'll get the data and all of a sudden you'll have great ideas.
Or maybe you'll get the data and you'll sit there scratching your head for a
while."

        _ Sharon Schmickle is at sschmickle@startribune.com.

        Gene research:

        Here is a sampling of some other genome-related research now underway:

        - Ethanol: Cargill Inc. of Minnetonka is experimenting with the genome
of yeast used to make the corn-based fuel. "Think of yeast as a little factory,
a micron factory," said Douglas Cameron, director of biotechnology. "The genome
is the blueprint of that factory. If you are trying to get yeast to be a better
producer of ethanol, then it's helpful to understand the blueprint of the
factory."

        - Designer drugs: Scientists believe that genetic differences explain
why the most commonly used drugs don't help some patients. For example,
scientists at the University of California, San Diego, are collecting DNA from
800 people, some with normal blood pressure and some battling high blood
pressure, in a search for differences that might help personalize prescriptions.

        - Vaccines: Using DNA microarrays to study how how genes respond to
invading germs, scientists are learning the chemistry the body uses to mobilize
cells against danger. The findings at the Whitehead Institute of Biomedical
Research in Massachusetts could lead to vaccines that simulate the response more
effectively.

        - Cancer: Scientists are sorting through genes that underlie cancer,
hoping for better treatments. For example, 100 genes have been linked to breast
cancer.

        - Crops: Research teams at the University of Minnesota are collaborating
with scientists worldwide on spelling out the genomes of corn, rice and even
trees. The goal is to spot plant diseases and improve plant breeding.

        - Drug abuse: Substance abusers' genes differ from those of nonabusers,
according research at the National Institute on Drug Abuse. The research someday
may tell who is susceptible to addiction.

        - Early human history: Geneticists at the University of Utah are mining
the genes of people from India to learn about human migrations. They have shown
that Indian women are more similar to Asians than are Indian men, suggesting
that most of the people who migrated from western Europe into India were men.

        Life on a chip

        Research labs use DNA microarrays to examine many genes on a chip about
the size of a microscope slide. The arrays help identify genetic variations for
a range of research areas, including pathways of disease in the body, genes
linked to tumors, drug abuse and heart disease. The technology could help
diagnose diseases and tailor therapies for patients.

        Comparing tumors

        1. Genetic material is isolated from patient's tumor cells.

        2. Computer-controlled robots fix tiny droplets of known genes onto the
array. Each spot represents a single human gene.

        3. Test probes, created from a patient's tumor, are chemically labeled
with fluorescent markers that emit light of different wave lengths.

        4. The probes are exposed to the array. They bind, like Velcro, to
matching parts of genes being tested.

        5. A laser scans the array for fluorescent spots and measures whether
genes linked to certain conditions, such as cancer, are present at higher
levels.

        6. Complex results are analyzed using computers.

        7. Studying spots

        Researchers can identify differences in tumors that appear identical
under the microscope.

        Source: National Human Genome Research Institute; Dr. Patrick M.
Gaffney, University of Minnesota Medical School.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2002


                             1427 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                February 16, 2002 Saturday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: ARIZONA LIVING; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 808 words

HEADLINE: NEW TEST FOR NEWBORNS SCREENING PINPOINTS RARE DISORDER

BYLINE: By Kerry Fehr-Snyder, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Most new parents are excited to share the news of whether their newborn isa
boy or girl.

   But for Adina and Robert Hayton of Mesa, the joyous occasion turned into
anightmare.

   "It was very scary, it was very embarrassing and we asked for people tostay
away from the hospital," Adina said. "They told us at the hospital not tocall
the baby 'her' and to instead say 'the baby' or 'our baby.' "

   The gender confusion was a result of Baby Hayton being born with a
raredisorder known as congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which sometimes
causesambiguous genitalia.

   Born in September, Baby Hayton was not screened for the disorder, whichoccurs
in 1 out of 15,000 births. But starting this month, babies born inArizona will
automatically undergo the potentially life-saving test.

   "It's exciting for us in that we'll be able to pick up these kids rightaway
before they get really sick," said Dr. Khalid Hasan, a pediatricendocrinologist
at Phoenix Children's Hospital.

   On Feb. 1, the state health department began screening newborns for CAH,which
can lead to mental retardation and even death if not treated with
dailymedication.

   The new test marks the first newborn screening added to Arizona's
testingprogram since it began in 1994. The state already tests babies for seven
otherdisorders, including hypothyroidism and sickle cell anemia. With the
recentopening of an obstetrics department at Del E. Webb Memorial in Sun City
West,all Valley hospitals also offer newborn hearing tests.

   Like the other genetic tests in the state's screening program, nurses
prickeach newborn's heel and squeeze blood onto a card that is later tested at
theArizona health department's lab. The blood is drawn before the baby
isreleased from the hospital.

   "It's one prick and five drops of blood, so we don't have to take any
extrablood from the baby," said Ruthann Smejkal, program manager of the
newbornscreening program.

   Ideally, the sample is taken 48 to 72 hours after birth, time enough forthe
stress hormones from birth to have subsided.  Taking blood earlier thanthat
often produces readings that show CAH is present even when it isn't. Afollow-up
test is needed to confirm the results.

   In some ways the test is more crucial for baby boys than girls. Boys
don'thave any outward signs of the genetic disorder, which is caused by the
adrenalglands not making enough cortisol and, in some cases, aldosterone, both
ofwhich are hormones.  The body also may produce too much androgen, a class
ofmale hormones. In the worst cases, children also suffer from "salt
wasting"that leaves them dehydrated.

   The only indication that boys are afflicted with the disorder usually
comesfive to 10 days after birth, when they face a crisis that can
includedehydration, lethargy, poor feeding, cardiac arrest and even death.

   Girls, who may exhibit similar symptoms, can be easier to spot because
theymay be born with ambiguous genitalia and require surgery.

   That's what happened with Baby Hayton, now 5 months old.

   Born Sept. 6, Baby Hayton had no vaginal opening, something doctorsinitially
didn't notice. They told her parents that they had a baby girl.

   But seven hours later, doctors returned to tell the couple that somethingwas
wrong and that the baby may have one of four disorders.

   That's when hospital staff suggested the couple not refer to the baby as
agirl and instead use more general terms, such as "the baby."

   Adina refused, insisting that she knew she had a baby girl and would callher
Savannah. Robert demanded an ultrasound, which revealed their newbornappeared to
have a uterus and ovaries.

   Doctors told the couple that Savannah may have CAH but could have threeother
disorders, including ones associated with mental retardation. It tookeight days
for the results of blood work, which confirmed that Savannah hadCAH.

   "Out of the four bad cards, we were dealt the best," said Adina.

   Savannah's diagnosis prompted the Haytons to get their nearly 4-year-oldson,
Jake, tested. Like his baby sister, Jake had CAH. His pediatrician hadmissed the
symptoms.  Eventually, it became apparent something was wrong. Thelittle boy
grew a whopping seven inches in five months because his body wasproducing excess
testosterone.

   Adina's oldest child, Morgan, was not affected by the disorder.  Bothyounger
children must take medicine to replace cortisol and aldosterone threetimes a
day. Savannah also is undergoing surgery in March at Cornell MedicalCenter in
New York City to correct her genitalia.

   Meanwhile, Adina said she is anxious for gene-therapy experiments toproduce a
long-term solution that will save her children from takingmedication for the
rest of their lives.

   She's also happy that all newborns are being tested for the disorder sothey
can receive early treatment.

   "I'm hoping that no parent will ever have to go through this," she said.

GRAPHIC: Newborns undergo many tests. Melissa Booth checks Jeremiah Tsosie's
hearing at Scottsdale Healthcare-Osborn. Blood destined for laboratory tests is
drawn from Jeremiah Tsosie's heel.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2005


                             1428 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  February 13, 2002, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1286 words

HEADLINE: GRIM WAITING GAME PATIENTS WITH RARE FABRY DISEASE FEAR DRUG WON'T BE
OK'D IN TIME FOR THEM

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Dom Grieco was born missing a crucial enzyme. As he grew into adulthood, a
fatty substance was silently building up in his body, clogging his cells, heart,
and kidneys.

   In a strange way, Grieco is lucky. Most of the several thousand people
worldwide with the rare inherited disease known as Fabry die by the age of 40.
Grieco was diagnosed when he was 55.

      The disease usually destroys the kidneys, then the heart. In Grieco, now
60 and living in Deerfield Beach, Fla., the disease is mounting its primary
attack on the heart, and it seems to have progressed more slowly than in most
cases.

   Though this twist of nature has bought him time, it has also conspired with
the forces of bureaucracy, business, and science to keep from his reach a drug
that could save his life. Grieco is one of about 2,000 US patients who had hoped
that one of two drugs from competing Cambridge companies would be approved in
December 2000.

   But that date, as well as many others, has come and gone, and there is still
no treatment for Fabry in the United States. Although some patients were treated
in clinical studies, many more like Grieco weren't eligible. In his case, the
disease's unusual progression kept him out of the studies.

   In a year of waiting, Grieco has watched a friend die of the disease as
patients on a growing list of other countries get the drug. He has heard of
other deaths, and he lives each day knowing that his own heart, now dependent on
a pacemaker, might give out.

   "It's a waiting game," Grieco said. "Like everyone else, my organs could
fail. And our only hope is that the treatment comes through."

   No one outside the Food and Drug Administration - and the agency does not
comment on such matters - can be certain of the reasons for the yearlong delay
in approving the drugs. The companies also declined to comment in detail on the
approval process. But in varying degrees, most industry insiders say the
competition between the two companies has made matters worse.

   Within weeks of each other in the summer of 2000, Genzyme Corp. and
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. submitted applications for nearly identical drugs
to treat Fabry disease. The unprecedented situation raised a number of difficult
scientific and policy questions.

   Under the so-called orphan drug act, designed to encourage the development of
drugs for rare diseases, the first company with a breakthrough treatment wins
seven years of market exclusivity - a provision that seems to turn the
competition into a winner-takes-all contest and has sparked a firestorm of
speculation about what FDA would do.

   Analysts have scrutinized every development for signs, dividing into three
camps: those who believe only Genzyme's drug, Fabrazyme, will be approved; those
who think TKT's Replagal will be the sole drug to reach the market; and those
who predict regulators will find a loophole that allows them to approve both.

   "Orphan drug laws dictate that only one product can get approved, and the one
that will be approved is the one that is clinically superior," said Ron Renaud,
a biotech analyst at Bear Stearns who falls in the Fabrazyme camp. "Someone has
to decide which drug is better, and I think that's what FDA is doing."

   What most analysts do agree on is that the dueling applications have added to
the complexity of understanding an already rare and perplexing disease. The
world's specialists on Fabry - a scant resource to start - are allied with one
company or the other, making it difficult for the FDA to find an unbiased
adviser to help understand the disease and resolve differences.

   Though the drugs are nearly identical - both replace the enzyme missing in
Fabry patients - Genzyme gives patients five times as much drug as TKT and takes
longer to infuse. The drugs were also evaluated using different measures,
raising questions about which are more appropriate. And little is known about
the long-term effects of either drug, a concern some believe is behind the
delay.

   While some say the added complexity has simply made it hard for regulators to
judge the safety and effectiveness of the drugs, others think regulators are
wading through the differences in an effort to pick the better of the two drugs.
Still others suspect the decision is being held up by questions of policy, not
science.

   The top spot at FDA has been vacant since the former commissioner, Jane E.
Henney, resigned in January 2001. Industry insiders say the lack of leadership
has made the regulatory agency increasingly cautious, slowing approval times and
avoiding controversial decisions.

   "I don't know how the FDA can avoid controversy in this situation," said
Jennifer Chao, an analyst with Leerink Swann who said Replagal is the better
drug. "Whichever way they decide to go, there will be consequences."

   If only one of the drugs is approved, patient advocates fear the losing
company could take the case to court, further delaying the availability of the
drugs.

   If both are approved, however, the strength of the orphan drug act could be
threatened.

   "It's reasonable to assert that in the absence of clear leadership, people at
the FDA might be afraid to make difficult decisions, and this is certainly a
difficult decision," said Mark Augustine, a biotech analyst with US Bancorp
Piper Jaffray.

   Lynda Leibowitz remembers the day more than two decades ago when her husband,
Chaz, was diagnosed with Fabry disease. Even less was known about it then - just
that it was hereditary and most people died in their 30s, of kidney failure or
stroke.

   "That's a pretty devastating thing to hear when you're in your 20s,"
Leibowitz said.

   Over the years, she and Chaz learned about how the disease prevented him from
sweating, how it caused awful stomach problems, and destroyed his kidneys. In
1991, Chaz became one of the first Fabry patients to get a kidney transplant, a
fact that later kept him out of trials for the Genzyme and TKT drugs.

   By June 2001, when two prestigious medical journals published results from
those studies, the disease had severely damaged Chaz Leibowitz's heart. He was
on a respirator in a Florida hospital when doctors told him that, in some
patients, the drugs had reversed damage caused by the disease. He died a few
weeks later, at the age of 47.

   "I don't think he ever got his hopes up for the drug," Leibowitz said. "But
it was frustrating for me. From a medical background, I know we have to be
careful. By the same token, there are people out there who have no other hope."

   Gary Grosso tries to focus on the good things in his life - his family,
especially his young nieces, his friends, and occasional fishing trips. But
waiting takes its toll. Grosso, 39, doesn't qualify for ongoing clinical trials
because he's had a kidney transplant.

   He had heard there might be studies this year of Fabry patients who'd had
transplants, but those plans hinge on the drugs being approved. And as he waits,
it becomes harder not to think about how much time he has, what symptoms might
appear next, and whether his heart might fail.

   Grosso understands the FDA must have concerns about the drugs. But without
knowing what they are, he said, it is difficult to be patient, especially when
the drugs are available in other countries, including those in the European
Union, as well as Norway, Switzerland, and New Zealand.

   "We're at risk every day we live with this disease," Grosso said. "If we can
stop this disease from killing the other 5,999 people who have it, then we
should. We should save as many lives as we can now, and then talk about doing
more clinical trials."

   Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at naoki@globe.com.  SIDEBAR: FABRY
DISEASE PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, 1.  Dom Grieco, at home in Florida, says his "only hope
is that the treatment comes through." / AP PHOTO 2.  Henri A. Termeer, CEO of
Genzyme. His firm is competing with Transkaryotic Therapies for exclusive rights
to market the first-ever drug for Fabry disease. / GLOBE FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2002


                             1429 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 13, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1700 words

HEADLINE: Mind recollected; Experimental gene therapy aims to restore functions
lost to Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Scott LaFee; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In less than 72 hours, people would shave her head, drill holes through her
skull and insert long needles deep within her brain, but Lola Crosswhite was
unperturbed.

   Well, maybe a little perturbed.  There was, after all, a CNN camera crew
filming her every move.  And a reporter was plunked in the living room of her
downtown condominium, busily scribbling down her every utterance.

   That was a bit disconcerting.

   But they were there for good reason, she supposed.  Years from now, people
might not remember Lola Crosswhite, a 73-year-old woman with soft, graying hair
and a quiet manner, but they might remember because of her.

   Crosswhite is one of the first people to test a new gene therapy for
Alzheimer's disease, a degenerative condition that strips the mind of memory and
function.

   More than 4 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer's, predominately women.
Experts say this figure will double within 20 years, triple within 50. The
disease strikes most often after the age of 60. It is the principal cause of
elderly dementia.  And it's incurable -- at least for the moment.

   Last April, neuroscientists and doctors from UCSD and the Veterans
Administration Medical Center in San Diego performed the first gene therapy
procedure aimed at slowing, if not reversing, the effects of Alzheimer's.

   Doctors implanted genetically modified skin cells from a 60-year-old Oregon
schoolteacher back into her brain.  The idea, said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski, who
heads the study with Dr. Hoi Sang U, a UCSD neurosurgeon, and Dr. Leon Thal,
director of the UCSD Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, was simple: Skin cells
taken from the patient were genetically altered in the lab to express human
nerve growth factor, a protein that acts like a kind of brain cell stimulant.
Then they were injected into the patient's brain, potentially preventing new
cell death and promoting growth of new neural connections.

   In earlier studies, the approach had produced dramatic improvement in
monkeys.  "There are always unknown factors when you transfer a technique from
animal to human," said Tuszynski.  "We don't know with any certainty yet that
this will prove to be protective or beneficial to humans."

   Or even safe.  The researchers must begin with a first-phase safety trial,
this one involving eight patients, ages 59 to 78, all with early stage
Alzheimer's. The Oregon woman was the first.  A second volunteer underwent the
procedure last May. Crosswhite would be third -- with a difference.

   The first two volunteers received cell injections at just one site in their
brain.  Lola would receive them at two.  The first two patients were doing fine.
Would doubling the number of injected cells alter that result?

   The operation

   6 a.m., Dec. 6, 2001: In the dark before dawn, Crosswhite's daughter, Diana,
drives her to UCSD's Thornton Hospital where Tuszynski, U and their team will
perform the brain surgery/gene therapy.

   Months earlier, they had taken skin scrapings from Crosswhite, genetically
modified them and cultured sufficient numbers in the lab.  Crosswhite would be
the third patient to undergo the therapy, but the first to experience multiple
skull drillings and injections in two portions of her brain.

   Nurses shave her head, then place her on a gurney where she is partially
sedated.  Doctors want her as conscious as possible during the operation.

   "When you're working inside a person's brain, it's good to be able to talk to
them, ask them questions, make sure you're not doing something you don't want to
be doing," said U.

   Next, a specially designed metal frame is fitted around and screwed into
Crosswhite's head.  The frame will keep her head absolutely immobile, a critical
necessity for two reasons:

   1. The location where the researchers plan to deposit the modified cells is
not large, a thumb-sized region of the inner brain called the nucleus basalis of
Meynert that is particularly vulnerable to Alzheimer's. The actual target area
is even smaller, slightly more than a centimeter in length (about half the
diameter of a penny) and two millimeters in width (twice the thickness of a
nickel).

   2. The researchers will inject only a few drops of material, which will
disperse no more than two millimeters.  It's critical that the cells are placed
exactly where they need to be.

   9:37 a.m.: The air inside Operating Room 2 smells like a dentist drilling
teeth.  Crosswhite lies on a wheeled bed in the center of the room.  She is
almost invisible beneath a tent of blue-green hospital sheets.  Only her head
and shoulders extend.  Her bare shoulders are elevated off the bed by the head
frame; her head swathed yellow in antiseptic Betadine and masked in plastic
film.

   Neurosurgeon U drills a pair of dime-sized holes on the top of her head, a
bit toward the back.  He stops at the dura, a tough membrane beneath the skull
that contains and protects the brain.  The dura is rough and chalky white.  It
pulses.  Asked how she feels, Crosswhite says the operating room is cold.

   11:35 a.m.: Doctors wheel Crosswhite out of the operating room, down a hall,
onto an elevator and over to a suite of rooms housing a massive magnetic
resonance imaging machine.  The entire surgery is expected to take 10, maybe 11
hours.  Much of it will be spent here, with Crosswhite undergoing multiple MRIs
to precisely fix and confirm the three-dimensional locations where the needles
will be inserted.

   Tuszynski, U, Thal and others wait anxiously for the MRI images to be
generated.  They gather around the plastic sheets, peering at the revealed
architecture of Crosswhite's brain.  They discuss the final spatial coordinates
for the needle insertions.  The discussion is intense and mathematical.

   "This is the critical moment," said U.  "This is the time when we cannot make
any mistakes."

   12:40 p.m.: Back in the operating room, U fits metal rings into the holes in
Crosswhite's skull.  These will help anchor the equipment needed to insert the
needle probes.  Later the rings will hold screw-in plugs closing the holes.

   U gingerly twists 3-inch needle probes into the brain.  Precision markings on
the head frame, which looks like a giant protractor, help guide him.

   Besides location, the scientists and doctors must determine how many
injections to make.  Although the surgery is considered minimally invasive, it
still means physically penetrating the brain, which increases the risk of
infection, hemorrhage or worse.

   "The procedure really isn't that intrusive, and we're introducing less than a
50th of a teaspoon of material, but there always seems to be a temporary effect
whenever you go into the brain," said Tuszynski.

   3:46 p.m.: Crosswhite is back in OR2 after another set of MRIs, this time to
confirm that the needle probes are exactly where they should be.  The
researchers are ready to inject the modified cells.

   A mini-assembly line is created.  The cells are syringed from a pencil-thin
tube less than 2 inches long.  They float, invisible, in a milky liquid.
Tuszynski and U carefully feed a long, thin needle through a probe into
Crosswhite's brain.  When they reach the first designated location for cell
deposit, Tuszynski slowly compresses the syringe, releasing the prescribed
amount of cells.  Then he and U wait, moving neither the needle nor themselves.

   "If we pulled out the needle immediately," said U, "the needle would act like
a piston and pull the cells back up the track."

   After five minutes, a nurse hands Tuszynski another cell-filled syringe and
the sequence is repeated, this time at a slightly shallower depth.  It's
painstaking work requiring precision and care.

   The doctors will repeat this process eight more times, totaling five cell
insertions in each hole.  It will take them another hour or so; the entire
operation won't be finished for another hour or more beyond that.

   Past is prologue

   Crosswhite comes through the surgery with flying colors.  She's released from
the hospital the next day and feels good enough to take a skiing vacation a
couple of weeks later.

   She doesn't remember much about the surgery.  "I remember getting my head
shaved, getting on the gurney.  Then they said I was going to be sedated and
that's it.  The next thing I remember was the next day.  I felt surprisingly
good, except for a really stiff back.  It still aches."

   In early January, exactly one month after her surgery, Crosswhite visited
UCSD for a battery of cognitive tests.  Although the focus of her procedure was
basic health safety, scientists will regularly assess her cognitive skills and
compare them with results of similar tests taken before the surgery.

   It's too early to know whether the gene therapy helped, but Crosswhite is
optimistic.

   "If anything is different, it's that I don't have this feeling I have to hang
onto information.  I used to have to stop and consciously think about
remembering something, which is really tiring.  I still forget things sometimes,
but I seem to be doing better."

   Crosswhite has resumed her daily life.  She has more ski trips planned, and
maybe a summer diving trip to the Caribbean.  "Nobody's said I can't do these
things," she says.

   More people know about her condition, largely because she's had to explain
why her head was shaved.  But her hair is growing back, and friends seem to be
genuinely appreciative that she volunteered for the trial and surgery.

   "We're all about the same age.  They realize Alzheimer's could happen to
them," she said.  "This is the first time they've heard there was hope."

   If all goes well, the second phase of the clinical trials will begin in one
year, said Tuszynski.  It will address the question of whether the gene therapy
actually slows or ameliorates the effects of Alzheimer's. It will involve 50 to
80 patients in the first stage of the disease, some of whom will receive a
placebo.

   Researchers are hopeful, which is saying something, given the inexorable
nature of Alzheimer's. The history of medicine is fraught with touted therapies
and cures that failed or never lived up to expectations.  There's no telling yet
whether this technique will be different, but Tuszynski, U and their colleagues
believe it has a real chance.


GRAPHIC: 4 PICS | 1 DIAGRAM; 1,2,3,5. Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune photos 4.
SOURCES: UCSD; Union-Tribune research | PAUL HORN / Union-Tribune; 1.
Neurologist Mark Tuszynski squeezes the first genetically modified cells into
Lola Crosswhite's brain. Neurosurgeon Hoi Sang U holds the probe. 2.
Post-surgery, Crosswhite looks forward to resuming her active life. 3. During
the daylong surgery, researchers repeatedly scanned Crosswhite's brain to plot
and confirm the locations where genetically altered cells would be deposited. 4.
Alzheimer's breakthrough? A UCSD procedure involving genetically modified skin
cells may help delay the progress of Alzheimer's disease. (F-4) 5. Lola
Crosswhite has resumed her normal life after receiving an implant of genetically
modified skin cells into her brain -- an experimental treatment for Alzheimer's
disease. (F-4)

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2002


                             1430 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 13, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1671 words

HEADLINE: Mind recollected;
Experimental gene therapy aims to restore functions lost to Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In less than 72 hours, people would shave her head, drill holes through her
skull and insert long needles deep within her brain, but Lola Crosswhite was
unperturbed. Well, maybe a little perturbed.

   There was, after all, a CNN camera crew filming her every move.

   And a reporter was plunked in the living room of her downtown condominium,
busily scribbling down her every utterance. That was a bit disconcerting. But
they were there for good reason, she supposed.

   Years from now, people might not remember Lola Crosswhite, a 73-year-old
woman with soft, graying hair and a quiet manner, but they might remember
because of her. Crosswhite is one of the first people to test a new gene therapy
for Alzheimer's disease, a degenerative condition that strips the mind of memory
and function. More than 4 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer's,
predominately women. Experts say this figure will double within 20 years, triple
within 50. The disease strikes most often after the age of 60. It is the
principal cause of elderly dementia.

   And it's incurable -- at least for the moment. Last April, neuroscientists
and doctors from UCSD and the Veterans Administration Medical Center in San
Diego performed the first gene therapy procedure aimed at slowing, if not
reversing, the effects of Alzheimer's. Doctors implanted genetically modified
skin cells from a 60-year-old Oregon schoolteacher back into her brain.

   The idea, said Dr. Mark H. Tuszynski, who heads the study with Dr. Hoi Sang
U, a UCSD neurosurgeon, and Dr. Leon Thal, director of the UCSD Alzheimer's
Disease Research Center, was simple: Skin cells taken from the patient were
genetically altered in the lab to express human nerve growth factor, a protein
that acts like a kind of brain cell stimulant.

   Then they were injected into the patient's brain, potentially preventing new
cell death and promoting growth of new neural connections. In earlier studies,
the approach had produced dramatic improvement in monkeys.

   "There are always unknown factors when you transfer a technique from animal
to human," said Tuszynski.

   "We don't know with any certainty yet that this will prove to be protective
or beneficial to humans." Or even safe.

   The researchers must begin with a first-phase safety trial, this one
involving eight patients, ages 59 to 78, all with early stage Alzheimer's. The
Oregon woman was the first.

   A second volunteer underwent the procedure last May. Crosswhite would be
third -- with a difference. The first two volunteers received cell injections at
just one site in their brain.

   Lola would receive them at two.

   The first two patients were doing fine.

   Would doubling the number of injected cells alter that result? The operation
6 a.m., Dec. 6, 2001: In the dark before dawn, Crosswhite's daughter, Diana,
drives her to UCSD's Thornton Hospital where Tuszynski, U and their team will
perform the brain surgery/gene therapy. Months earlier, they had taken skin
scrapings from Crosswhite, genetically modified them and cultured sufficient
numbers in the lab.

   Crosswhite would be the third patient to undergo the therapy, but the first
to experience multiple skull drillings and injections in two portions of her
brain. Nurses shave her head, then place her on a gurney where she is partially
sedated.

   Doctors want her as conscious as possible during the operation. "When you're
working inside a person's brain, it's good to be able to talk to them, ask them
questions, make sure you're not doing something you don't want to be doing,"
said U. Next, a specially designed metal frame is fitted around and screwed into
Crosswhite's head.

   The frame will keep her head absolutely immobile, a critical necessity for
two reasons: 1. The location where the researchers plan to deposit the modified
cells is not large, a thumb-sized region of the inner brain called the nucleus
basalis of Meynert that is particularly vulnerable to Alzheimer's. The actual
target area is even smaller, slightly more than a centimeter in length (about
half the diameter of a penny) and two millimeters in width (twice the thickness
of a nickel). 2. The researchers will inject only a few drops of material, which
will disperse no more than two millimeters.

   It's critical that the cells are placed exactly where they need to be. 9:37
a.m.: The air inside Operating Room 2 smells like a dentist drilling teeth.

   Crosswhite lies on a wheeled bed in the center of the room.

   She is almost invisible beneath a tent of blue-green hospital sheets.

   Only her head and shoulders extend.

   Her bare shoulders are elevated off the bed by the head frame; her head
swathed yellow in antiseptic Betadine and masked in plastic film. Neurosurgeon U
drills a pair of dime-sized holes on the top of her head, a bit toward the back.

   He stops at the dura, a tough membrane beneath the skull that contains and
protects the brain.

   The dura is rough and chalky white.

   It pulses.

   Asked how she feels, Crosswhite says the operating room is cold. 11:35 a.m.:
Doctors wheel Crosswhite out of the operating room, down a hall, onto an
elevator and over to a suite of rooms housing a massive magnetic resonance
imaging machine.

   The entire surgery is expected to take 10, maybe 11 hours.

   Much of it will be spent here, with Crosswhite undergoing multiple MRIs to
precisely fix and confirm the three-dimensional locations where the needles will
be inserted. Tuszynski, U, Thal and others wait anxiously for the MRI images to
be generated.

   They gather around the plastic sheets, peering at the revealed architecture
of Crosswhite's brain.

   They discuss the final spatial coordinates for the needle insertions.

   The discussion is intense and mathematical. "This is the critical moment,"
said U.

   "This is the time when we cannot make any mistakes." 12:40 p.m.: Back in the
operating room, U fits metal rings into the holes in Crosswhite's skull.

   These will help anchor the equipment needed to insert the needle probes.

   Later the rings will hold screw-in plugs closing the holes. U gingerly twists
3-inch needle probes into the brain.

   Precision markings on the head frame, which looks like a giant protractor,
help guide him. Besides location, the scientists and doctors must determine how
many injections to make.

   Although the surgery is considered minimally invasive, it still means
physically penetrating the brain, which increases the risk of infection,
hemorrhage or worse. "The procedure really isn't that intrusive, and we're
introducing less than a 50th of a teaspoon of material, but there always seems
to be a temporary effect whenever you go into the brain," said Tuszynski. 3:46
p.m.: Crosswhite is back in OR2 after another set of MRIs, this time to confirm
that the needle probes are exactly where they should be.

   The researchers are ready to inject the modified cells. A mini-assembly line
is created.

   The cells are syringed from a pencil-thin tube less than 2 inches long.

   They float, invisible, in a milky liquid. Tuszynski and U carefully feed a
long, thin needle through a probe into Crosswhite's brain.

   When they reach the first designated location for cell deposit, Tuszynski
slowly compresses the syringe, releasing the prescribed amount of cells.

   Then he and U wait, moving neither the needle nor themselves. "If we pulled
out the needle immediately," said U, "the needle would act like a piston and
pull the cells back up the track." After five minutes, a nurse hands Tuszynski
another cell-filled syringe and the sequence is repeated, this time at a
slightly shallower depth.

   It's painstaking work requiring precision and care. The doctors will repeat
this process eight more times, totaling five cell insertions in each hole.

   It will take them another hour or so; the entire operation won't be finished
for another hour or more beyond that. Past is prologue Crosswhite comes through
the surgery with flying colors.

   She's released from the hospital the next day and feels good enough to take a
skiing vacation a couple of weeks later. She doesn't remember much about the
surgery.

   "I remember getting my head shaved, getting on the gurney.

   Then they said I was going to be sedated and that's it.

   The next thing I remember was the next day.

   I felt surprisingly good, except for a really stiff back.

   It still aches." In early January, exactly one month after her surgery,
Crosswhite visited UCSD for a battery of cognitive tests.

   Although the focus of her procedure was basic health safety, scientists will
regularly assess her cognitive skills and compare them with results of similar
tests taken before the surgery. It's too early to know whether the gene therapy
helped, but Crosswhite is optimistic. "If anything is different, it's that I
don't have this feeling I have to hang onto information.

   I used to have to stop and consciously think about remembering something,
which is really tiring.

   I still forget things sometimes, but I seem to be doing better." Crosswhite
has resumed her daily life.

   She has more ski trips planned, and maybe a summer diving trip to the
Caribbean.

   "Nobody's said I can't do these things," she says. More people know about her
condition, largely because she's had to explain why her head was shaved.

   But her hair is growing back, and friends seem to be genuinely appreciative
that she volunteered for the trial and surgery. "We're all about the same age.

   They realize Alzheimer's could happen to them," she said.

   "This is the first time they've heard there was hope." If all goes well, the
second phase of the clinical trials will begin in one year, said Tuszynski.

   It will address the question of whether the gene therapy actually slows or
ameliorates the effects of Alzheimer's. It will involve 50 to 80 patients in the
first stage of the disease, some of whom will receive a placebo. Researchers are
hopeful, which is saying something, given the inexorable nature of Alzheimer's.
The history of medicine is fraught with touted therapies and cures that failed
or never lived up to expectations.

   There's no telling yet whether this technique will be different, but
Tuszynski, U and their colleagues believe it has a real chance.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 1 DIAGRAM; CAPTIONS: 1. Neurologist Mark Tuszynski squeezes the
first genetically modified cells into Lola Crosswhite's brain. Neurosurgeon Hoi
Sang U holds the probe. 2. Post-surgery, Crosswhite looks forward to resuming
her active life. 3. During the daylong surgery, researchers repeatedly scanned
Crosswhite's brain to plot and confirm the locations where genetically altered
cells would be deposited. 4. Alzheimer's breakthrough? A UCSD procedure
involving genetically modified skin cells may help delay the progress of
Alzheimer's disease. (F-4) 5. Lola Crosswhite has resumed her normal life after
receiving an implant of genetically modified skin cells into her brain -- an
experimental treatment for Alzheimer's disease. (F-4); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,5. Howard
Lipin / Union-Tribune photos 4. SOURCES: UCSD; Union-Tribune research | PAUL
HORN / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1431 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    February 12, 2002 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: FDA rejects Penn doctor's letter on gene-therapy death

BYLINE: Paul Recer ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Federal authorities rejected a letter of explanation from a University of
Pennsylvania scientist who led a research project in which a teenager died.

   Proceedings will continue to permanently bar researcher James Wilson from
testing drugs on humans.

   In a letter sent to Wilson on Friday, the Food and Drug Administration said
his letter explaining alleged safety problems in his research failed "to
adequately address the violations."

   The letter said Wilson can request a hearing on the accusations or accept a
consent decree that would block him from using human subjects in drug testing.

   A Penn spokeswoman quoted Wilson as saying, "We will continue a dialogue with
the FDA to reach a resolution satisfactory to all parties."

   Wilson was in charge of a gene-therapy experiment in 1999 during which Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died.

   Gelsinger, who suffered from a liver disorder, had been injected with a
genetically altered virus that was designed to put into his body a gene that
would treat the liver condition.

   An FDA investigation concluded that Gelsinger died as a direct result of the
injection. He was the first patient to die in a gene-therapy experiment.

   In November 2000, the FDA notified Wilson that it had found evidence of
numerous violations of the rules for conducting the research project. The agency
also told Wilson that it was starting proceedings to bar him permanently from
conducting further drug research on human subjects.

   Wilson responded by letter last March, and yesterday the FDA notified him
that his response was insufficient to stop the debarment proceedings.

   The FDA said that Wilson "repeatedly and deliberately violated federal
regulations" in the research.

   Among violations cited were failure to tell research subjects that the
experimental gene-therapy injections could cause sickness and that monkeys
injected with the gene-therapy virus had become critically ill and were put to
death.

   The FDA also said that Wilson changed the rules for the research without
permission of the FDA or his university review board and that he enrolled in the
study patients who were too sick to participate.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2002


                             1432 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           February 12, 2002 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: FDA commissioner's office remains vacant;
Drug makers, Senate at odds over choices

BYLINE: By Ed Silverman; and Robert Cohen; Newhouse News Service

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- One year into President Bush's first term, the corner office at
the Food and Drug Administration is still unoccupied.

   The delay in naming a commissioner can be traced to a behind-the-scenes tug
of war as the White House tries to find someone acceptable to both drug makers
and a Senate controlled by Democrats.

   "The White House knows our views," said Jim Manley, a spokesman for Sen. Ted
Kennedy, D-Mass., who has vowed to block any nominee seen as beholden to the
drug industry. "It is incumbent on them to have someone without ties to the
industry."

   The vacancy is crucial because the commissioner wields a $1.7 billion budget
used to oversee everything from product safety to responsible advertising. And
with concerns about bioterrorism, the need to rapidly approve drugs and vaccines
has taken on greater urgency.

   Drug makers, in particular, are chafing over delays in approving new
medicines and are haggling over the details of a 5-year-old law that sets the
amount of money the industry will pay the FDA for product reviews.

   That law is up for renewal this year.

   "It's inexcusable for the administration not to have filled this job by now,"
said a drug company executive who asked not to be named. "The agency is in total
limbo. Everyone is afraid of their shadows. No one will make a decision -- and
that's not helping us."

   Alastair Wood, a Vanderbilt pharmacology professor known for his stringent
views on drug safety, has emerged as a leading contender. But his candidacy is
strongly opposed by some drug industry executives because of his outspokenness.

   Other potential nominees include David Sundwall, who heads the American
Clinical Lab Association, a nonprofit group of doctors and lab technicians, and
Lester Crawford, a veterinarian and head of a food-safety research group.

   One candidate who had been under review was Michael Astrue, an executive with
Transkaryotic Therapies, a biotech company. But Kennedy's opposition forced the
White House to withdraw him from consideration.

   The White House declined comment.

   Officially, drug makers aren't taking a position on any candidate, but Jeff
Trewhitt, a spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of
America trade group, did say there's a strong desire to get a permanent
commissioner in place "as soon as possible."

   "There's quite a lot going on at the FDA, and it requires a leader who has
the ear of the White House and the Department of Health and Human Services," he
said.

   Consumer advocates like Wood because of his stance on drug safety. In
particular, he lambasted the FDA's handling of the Rezulin diabetes drug, which
was recalled. In a 1999 editorial in the Journal of the American Medical
Association, he wrote that drug makers should shoulder the costs of follow-up
safety tests.

   "He's appropriately critical of the FDA for letting drugs on the market or
not taking them off, as the case may be," said Sidney Wolfe, a frequent critic
of the FDA who heads Public Citizen Health Research Group.

   As a member of an FDA advisory panel, Wood supported allowing consumers to
buy some allergy drugs without a prescription. The move is opposed by Aventis,
Schering-Plough and Pfizer, which could lose hundreds of millions of dollars in
sales.

   A Vanderbilt spokesman, John Howser, said the White House requested that
neither Wood, 55, nor the university comment.

   A lobbyist for the Generic Pharmaceutical Association reserved comment but
said important issues included closing loopholes in existing legislation that
prevent generics from being approved sooner.

   Another key issue is the Prescription Drug User Fee Act. The law, which
requires drug makers to pay for reviews, is up for renewal this year, but drug
makers are haggling about the size of the fees and how they would be applied to
generic companies.

   "I don't mean to understate the case, but let's put it this way: Whoever
becomes the next commissioner will face several big issues," said Steve Bende,
the group's vice president for regulatory affairs.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                             1433 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   February 12, 2002, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 14B

LENGTH: 1199 words

HEADLINE: Transplants outside our species?

BYLINE: Anita Manning

BODY:
Until recently, the idea of breeding animals to use as spare parts for humans
who need organ transplants seemed far-fetched.

   But recent discoveries are bringing a futuristic fantasy a step closer to
reality.

   Scientists at two competing companies recently announced they had
successfully genetically altered and cloned pigs that are missing one of two
genes that cause rejection of donated organs. In itself, the finding does not
clear the path to animal-to-human transplantation, a process scientists call
xenotransplantation.


   But "we think this could be a very important development," says David Sachs,
professor of surgery and immunology at Harvard and director of the
Transplantation Biology Research Center at Massachusetts General Hospital.

   "The reason xenotransplantation is so important to the field of
transplantation is that paradoxically, we've done so well with transplants
within one species that we've reached a limitation, the lack of . . .  organs."

   UNOS, the United Network for Organ Sharing, says nearly 80,000 people are on
its waiting list for organs, including 50,790 awaiting a kidney and 18,710 who
need a liver. Each day, 114 more people are added to the waiting list, but many
will never receive the transplant they need. In 2000, UNOS says, 5,794 people
died waiting.

   One potential solution to the organ shortage is pigs. Unlike chimpanzees,
baboons or other closer human relatives, pigs are plentiful and already are used
for food. While they generally grow to be about 1,000 pounds, one strain has
been bred specifically to grow to only 200 pounds, and their organs are about
the same size as those of adult humans. While there has been ongoing concern
about the possibility of transmitting a specific pig retrovirus, the new,
smaller pigs appear unable to transmit the retrovirus, at least in laboratory
experiments.

   Heart valves taken from pigs and sterilized are commonly used to replace
diseased valves in humans, and tissues taken from cows are used for bone and
vascular grafts, but whether the use of pigs or other animals as donors of whole
organs becomes acceptable, even to those who need organs, is anyone's guess.

   "It is very much an individual perspective. This is not something one person
can decide for someone else," says James Burdick, professor of surgery at Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine.

   Significant scientific obstacles remain, including further genetic
engineering to remove the second copy of the gene responsible for causing the
rejection of implanted organs. But even if such problems are overcome, Burdick
says, questions surrounding the ethics of using animals as donors remain.

   "I will predict that if a really effective treatment process comes out of
this and if it involves the use of pigs specifically for this purpose, it will
be found in the general convictions in this country to be acceptable ethically,"
Burdick says. "If someone has an objection to it, one would have to have a more
strenuous objection to the use of this animal for food. You would have to get to
a point where the country thinks it's unethical to eat pork. If you can save a
life with a kidney, that's a lot different than providing someone with pork
chops for dinner. I think that's the way the country will come down on this."

   Animal welfare advocates, many of whom oppose using pigs for pork chops, are
even more opposed to using them as human organ donors.

   "I see ethical problems in using pigs either way," says Alan Berger,
executive director of the Animal Protection Institute in Sacramento. In addition
to concerns about how animals used in medical experiments are treated, he says,
"there are bigger moral and ethical issues when you genetically alter an
animal."

   Berger, who serves on an advisory committee to Health and Human Services
Secretary Tommy Thompson, says it's also impractical and dangerous to use
animals as organ donors.

   A major concern, he says, is the risk of transmitting a disease from animals
into humans. "The biggest problem is not something we know or have identified,
it's the unknown disease," Berger says. "We don't know what viruses might enter
the human body and stay there. We really haven't put live cells in a person's
body that may last a long time. Assuming they ever get to that point, the
potential for mutation to cause some disease is certainly there."

   Also lacking, he says, is a formal system for monitoring patients or their
family members following transplant, so if a disease did emerge in patients, it
could, in theory, be spread to others.

   "It could be some type of latent virus like HIV," Berger says. "Some things
being opened up here are downright scary. We don't have surveillance techniques
that are even in the ballpark of being able to protect public health."

   Ongoing medical research into alternatives, including artificial organs,
tissue engineering, stem-cell research and gene therapy, may make
animal-to-human transplant research moot, he says. "I question going down the
road of wasting real dollars and animals' lives for research that has little
potential. We have to start doing smarter research."

   Advancements in xenotransplantation have been slow, Berger says.

   "There's a big push to get the federal government to start putting in money.
Private money is evaporating because they don't see anything happening in
xenotransplantation," he says.

   Hugh Auchincloss, a transplant surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital and
director of the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation's Center for Islet
Transplantation at Harvard, says the potential for xenotransplantation is "very
real, but I don't think it's likely to be imminent."

   More research is needed, he says, to see whether animals can be developed
that lack both genes responsible for organ rejection, and whether that will
result in long-term survival of animal organs inside humans.

   "If that happens, it will be a major step forward, and the field will move
forward rapidly," he predicts. But until recently, "the longest survival of a
pig islet cell (an insulin-producing cell) in a baboon was 10 minutes. Now, I've
seen data from some groups saying they can get survival up to two weeks. So I
guess that's progress."

   It won't hold much hope for the thousands of people now on transplant waiting
lists, says Anne Paschke of UNOS. "If you're waiting, you're hoping all these
technologies come along in time to help you," she says, though it's clear
xenotransplantation is "not going to be the answer today or tomorrow, but maybe
down the road." The reason it is even considered, she says, is "we don't have
enough donors."

   Whether someone who needs an organ will take one from a pig will depend on
many variables, including the recipient's religious beliefs and sensibilities.
"Maybe there will be a designation (form) one day that will say you will or
won't take a pig organ," she says. "One day, maybe (xenotransplantation) will be
great, but it's not a close answer. And we need help now."

   ---

   For a brochure on organ donation, call 1-800-355-7427 or go to
www.shareyourlife.org

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Grant Halverson for USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Gene Dalton, AP;
Not for him: Ellis Cliborne, with grandson Jordan Cliborne, awaits a heart
transplant at Duke University Hospital, but wouldn't want to try a cross-species
transplant. Transplant material: Pigs at PPL Therapeutics in Blacksburg, Va.,
have been genetically engineered to make their organs more suitable for human
transplants.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2002


                             1434 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     February 11, 2002 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 001

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: Living donor liver transplant cures hemophiliac; Liver transplant from
kin cures man's hemophilia

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   In an apparent medical first, an Abington man who underwent a living donor
liver transplant last summer got a huge bonus benefit - he was cured of his
hemophilia.

   "To this day, it's still hard to fathom," said Tom Wales, a husband and
father of a 12-year-old boy. "Hemophilia has been a part of my life for 39
years."

   As a result of the cure, Wales is now able to play catch with his son for the
first time and is considering taking up skiing once he undergoes a back
operation until now considered too risky.

   Hemophilia, an inherited blood disorder, prevents blood from clotting
normally, causing excessive bleeding.

   "It's a whole new life," said the 39-year-old former welder. "I feel like I'm
reborn."

   It may be the first time that a living donor transplant has been performed on
a hemophiliac, experts said.

   Dr. Elizabeth Pomfret, one of four surgeons involved in performing the liver
transplant at the Lahey Clinic, said hemophilia is caused by a deficiency of
factor VIII, a protein made in the liver that allows blood to clot.

   "He tells me all the time the most incredible part of this whole thing is
that he is no longer a hemophiliac," she said. "In the past, anytime he would
suffer any kind of injury, even just a bruise from fooling around with his son,
he would need a transfusion and (an infusion of) factor VIII."

   Like many hemophiliacs, Wales contracted hepatitis C from a blood transfusion
and it eventually caused him to develop cirrhosis of the liver. That's why he
needed the transplant.

   Wales said a liver specialist had told him years ago that a transplant would
cure his hemophilia, but he also told him "they don't do transplants for that
reason."

   He went on a waiting list for a cadaver transplant two years ago, but his
doctors at Lahey Clinic told him he probably wouldn't make it, as it can take
several years to get to the top of the list.

   They said his best hope was a transplant from a relative or friend, where
surgeons take a portion of the donor's healthy liver and transplant it into the
sick patient after removing the diseased organ.

   Wales' brother-in-law, Walter Moran of Hanover, offered and proved a suitable
tissue match.

   "I was blown away," Wales said. "It takes a special person to consider
something like that."

   Wales said he started feeling better immediately after receiving the
transplant.

   Before the operation, he said, "I was sluggish all the time. I probably felt
like I was 60 years old or older. I'd fall asleep during the day."

   Although Pomfret said it was known that a successful liver transplant from a
cadaver would cause his hemophilia to go away, it was not so clear that a living
donor transplant would do the same thing.

   "We just weren't sure if just giving him a piece of a liver would do it," she
said.

   Blood tests taken soon after the transplant, however, showed the new liver
was making plenty of factor VIII.

   "It was really quite remarkable," she said.

   Fewer than 50 hemophiliacs have received liver transplants, said Dr. Arthur
Rabinowitz, hematologist at Lahey.

   But because more and more hemophiliacs are developing end-stage liver
disease, "more and more are getting liver transplants," said Steven Humes of the
National Hemophilia Foundation.

   However, he said he had never heard of a living donor liver transplant
performed on a hemophiliac.

   At the University of Pittsburgh, where pioneering liver transplant surgeon
Dr. Thomas Starzl discovered 13 years ago that a transplant could cure
hemophilia, doctors have performed about 30 transplants on hemophiliacs,
including seven with HIV.

   But none has been a living donor transplant, said Dr. John Fung, chief of
transplantation.

   Nobody, however, is suggesting that liver transplantation be done just to
cure hemophilia.

   "That's not something we would recommend," Humes said, citing the traumatic
surgery involved - for both donor and recipient.

   "Liver transplantation can cure hemophilia but it wouldn't be appropriate in
the absence of liver disease," said Rabinowitz. "The operation has a high
mortality potential."

   Science, instead, is looking to gene therapy to cure the inherited blood
disorder. Researchers at a number of locations are studying inserting enough
healthy clotting factor genes into patients' liver cells for their blood to clot
normally.

   One study, published last year by doctors at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center, raised hopes that the technique may work.

   In the study, doctors inserted a segment of DNA containing the factor VIII
gene into patients' cells. Four of six subjects showed an increase in their
levels of factor VIII.

   The technique was tested on patients with hemophilia A, the most common form
of the disorder, which afflicts 15,000 in the United States. It is the form that
had afflicted Wales.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                             1435 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      February 11, 2002 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 04G

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: 'Gene doping' by athletes foreseen;
Therapy could replace drugs, some fear

BYLINE: MICHAEL STROH Baltimore Sun

BODY:

   For years after he won two gold medals in the 1964 Winter Games, Eero
Mantyranta was dogged by rumors of deceit: The Finnish cross-country skier had
something in his blood, people whispered, something that had given him an edge.

   He never failed a drug test -- but the rumors turned out to be true.

   Scientists eventually discovered that Mantyranta harbored a rare mutation in
his DNA, a genetic quirk that caused his body to crank out more red blood cells
than the average athlete. The extra cells bathed his laboring muscles in oxygen,
providing the boost he needed to glide past competitors.

   Now, as the Winter Games have started in Salt Lake City, sports officials and
scientists fear the day may not be far off when athletes born without such lucky
genes could simply add them later, cheating not with drugs but DNA.

   It's called "gene doping," and the idea behind it is simple: to hijack gene
therapy techniques for curing disease to become better, stronger, faster. Unlike
drugs, such genetic tinkering would be all but impossible to detect, scientists
say.

   Nobody expects genetically enhanced super jocks to turn up in Salt Lake City
-- the technology isn't there yet. But the World Anti-Doping Agency, which leads
the charge against drugs in sports, is concerned enough about future events that
it's planning a summit on gene doping next month in New York. Officials are
eager to gain an edge on dishonest athletes, but after more than three decades
of playing catch-up, few are optimistic.

   "Athletes are probably already ahead of us," says Theodore Friedmann,
director of the human gene therapy program at the University of California in
San Diego and a conference organizer. "They've always used whatever they needed
to win. Death is a secondary consideration."

   Banned substances

   Officials ban a long list of stimulants, narcotics, steroids, hormones and
beta blockers. Most are detectable with a urine or blood test -- 3,500 of which
were being given to Salt Lake City athletes before the opening ceremonies last
week. The notion of genetically engineered athletes may sound like science
fiction, but researchers working on therapies for atherosclerosis, cystic
fibrosis and other diseases have pinpointed genes that have the potential to
become popular in the locker room.

   Take research subject No. F66-52, a.k.a. "Mighty Mouse."

   Caged in the cluttered and somewhat smelly laboratory of Johns Hopkins
University molecular biologist Se-Jin Lee, F66-52 is not your ordinary rodent.
As Lee attempts to remove the furry brown lump from its pen, Mighty Mouse clings
stubbornly to the cage bars. "He's just flexing to show off," Lee jokes.

   But it's true: This rodent is ripped. Every time F66-52 squirms, thick knots
of muscle ripple visibly beneath its shoulders and rump. An unaltered mouse
cowering in the corner of a nearby cage looks wimpy by comparison. To create
Mighty Mouse, Lee and his team blocked the action of myostatin, a gene the
Hopkins researchers have found plays a key -- albeit mysterious -- role in
muscle development. Blocking the gene causes muscles to balloon. The strongest
of these genetically altered mice have four times the muscle mass of a typical
rodent and weigh about 30% more, Lee says.

   The genetic tinkering hasn't resulted in any noticeable health problems --
although, Lee says, his muscle-bound mice appear a tad more docile. Like other
scientists working with so-called "Schwarzenegger" mice, Lee hopes his research
leads to new drugs for people with muscular dystrophy, cancer and other
conditions that cause muscles to wither. But he knows the sick aren't the only
ones who may find blocking myostatin irresistible. "Clearly, there's going to be
the potential for abuse," Lee says.

   Genes that beef up muscles would be ideal for sprinters, lifters and athletes
who need quick bursts of power. Marathoners, cross-country skiers and others who
prize endurance could get a boost from genes that affect the blood.

   One candidate is VEGF, or vascular endothelial growth factor, a substance
that triggers blood vessels to sprout. Although researchers hope it might help
people with clogged arteries and other circulation troubles, scientists fear the
gene could be hijacked by athletes to pipe more blood to their muscles.
Marathoners, notes molecular biologist Peter Schjerling of the Copenhagen Muscle
Research Center in Denmark, typically have four times more blood vessels feeding
their muscles than sprinters. So when it comes to boosting endurance, "the more
blood vessels you have, the better," he says.

   Athletes also are probably eyeing the gene for erythropoietin, or EPO, a
hormone that regulates red blood cell production. Synthetic versions of the
hormone, used by doctors to treat anemia, have become one of the most widely
abused drugs in sports today. The allure of EPO is simple: By boosting the
number of oxygen-carrying red-blood cells, muscles stay fresher longer. (EPO is
what skier Eero Mantyranta's body overproduced as a result of his genetic
quirk.)

   Gene therapy experiments with erythropoietin in animals have shown promise.
In one University of Chicago experiment, scientists boosted red blood cell
concentration in mice to 81% from 49% with a single injection of the EPO gene.
Even a year later, the mice's red blood cell levels remained high.

   Little success in humans

   But after more than a decade of research and hundreds of experiments, gene
therapy for humans has succeeded in treating only a couple of disorders.
(Athletes take notice: One of them involves the VEGF gene.) And there have been
other setbacks: A University of Pennsylvania volunteer died during an experiment
in 1999. The biggest hurdle has been delivering the therapeutic gene to the
cells. To do it, researchers often turn to one of nature's most efficient DNA
delivery services for help: the virus.

   A virus makes a person sick by inserting its genetic material into the DNA of
its host. In gene therapy, scientists disarm the virus, replacing its genetic
material with the therapeutic gene they want to deliver. But even if they get
the virus to deliver the gene to the right target in the body, researchers face
problems. "Once you turn the gene loose, how are you going to turn it off?" asks
Donald Catlin, director of the Olympic Analytical Lab at the University of
California, Los Angeles.

   Most genes in the body aren't designed to be continuously switched "on," but
therapeutic genes delivered by a virus are always on. And that, Catlin says,
could prove deadly.

   With erythropoietin, for example, an always-on EPO gene could flood the blood
with so many red blood cells that it turns as viscous as syrup, increasing the
risks of clots and strokes. In one EPO gene-therapy experiment on baboons,
scientists were forced to constantly dilute the animals' blood to keep them
alive. (For similar reasons, the synthetic drug has been blamed for the deaths
of more than 20 cyclists since 1987.)


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2002


                             1436 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 10, 2002 Sunday FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 1268 words

HEADLINE: DNA TAMPERING IS POISED TO ENTER THE ARENA OF ATHLETIC CHEATING

BYLINE: MICHAEL STROH, THE BALTIMORE SUN

BODY:

   For years after he won two gold medals in the 1964 Winter Games, Eero
Mantyranta was dogged by rumors of deceit: The Finnish cross-country skier had
something in his blood, people whispered, something that had given him an edge.

    He never failed a drug test -- but the rumors turned out to be true.

    Scientists eventually discovered that Mantyranta harbored a rare mutation in
his DNA, a genetic quirk that caused his body to crank out more red blood cells
than the average athlete. The extra cells bathed his laboring muscles in oxygen,
providing the boost he needed to glide past competitors.

    Now, on the eve of the Winter Games in Salt Lake City, sports officials and
scientists fear the day may not be far off when athletes born without such lucky
genes could simply add them later, cheating not with drugs but DNA.

    It's called "gene doping," and the idea behind it is simple: to hijack gene
therapy techniques for curing disease to become better, stronger, faster. Unlike
drugs, such genetic tinkering would be all but impossible to detect, scientists
say.

    Nobody expects genetically enhanced super jocks to turn up in Salt Lake City
-- the technology isn't there yet. But the World Anti-Doping Agency, which leads
the charge against drugs in sports, is concerned enough about future events that
it's planning a summit on gene doping next month in New York. Officials are
eager to gain an edge on dishonest athletes, but after more than three decades
of playing catch-up, few are optimistic.

    "Athletes are probably already ahead of us," says Theodore Friedmann,
director of the human gene therapy program at the University of California, San
Diego, and a conference organizer. "They've always used whatever they needed to
win. Death is a secondary consideration."

    Ancient Greek athletes, historians know, popped hallucinogenic mushrooms.
Roman gladiators took the equivalent of speed before entering the Circus
Maximus. Victorian-era jocks routinely used a variety of performance-enhancing
chemicals, including caffeine, alcohol, nitroglycerin, ether, heroin, cocaine --
even strychnine, a stimulant more famous for its role in rat poison.

    Although drug tests for racehorses were initiated as early as 1910, doping
among two-legged athletes was mostly ignored until the 1960s, when drugs were
blamed for a number of high-profile deaths in international cycling. The first
Olympic drug tests were conducted in 1968 at the Mexico City Summer Games.

    Officials ban a long list of stimulants, narcotics, steroids, hormones and
beta blockers. Most are detectable with a urine or blood test -- 3,500 of which
were given to Salt Lake City athletes before Friday's opening ceremonies. The
notion of genetically engineered athletes may sound like science fiction, but
researchers working on therapies for atherosclerosis, cystic fibrosis and other
diseases have pinpointed genes that have the potential to become popular in the
locker room.

    Take research subject No. F66-52, aka "Mighty Mouse."

    Caged in the cluttered and somewhat smelly laboratory of Johns Hopkins
molecular biologist Se-Jin Lee, F66-52 is not your ordinary rodent. As Lee
attempts to remove the furry brown lump from its pen, Mighty Mouse clings
stubbornly to the cage bars. "He's just flexing to show off," Lee jokes.

    But it's true: This rodent is ripped. Every time F66-52 squirms, thick knots
of muscle ripple visibly beneath its shoulders and rump. An unaltered mouse
cowering in the corner of a nearby cage looks wimpy by comparison. To create
Mighty Mouse, Lee and his team blocked the action of myostatin, a gene the
Hopkins researchers have found plays a key -- albeit mysterious -- role in
muscle development. Blocking the gene causes muscles to balloon. The strongest
of these genetically altered mice have four times the muscle mass of a typical
rodent and weigh about 30 percent more, Lee says.

    The genetic tinkering hasn't resulted in any noticeable health problems --
although, Lee says, his muscle-bound mice appear a tad more docile. Like other
scientists working with so-called "Schwarzenegger" mice, Lee hopes his research
leads to new drugs for people with muscular dystrophy, cancer and other
conditions that cause muscles to wither. But he knows the sick aren't the only
ones who may find myostatin irresistible. "Clearly, there's going to be the
potential for abuse," Lee says.

    Genes that beef up muscles would be ideal for sprinters, lifters and
athletes who need quick bursts of power. Marathoners, cross-country skiers and
others who prize endurance could get a boost from genes that affect the blood.

    One candidate is VEGF, or vascular endothelial growth factor, a substance
that triggers blood vessels to sprout. Although researchers hope it might help
people with clogged arteries and other circulation troubles, scientists fear the
gene could be hijacked by athletes to pipe more blood to their muscles.
Marathoners, notes molecular biologist Peter Schjerling of the Copenhagen Muscle
Research Center in Denmark, typically have four times more blood vessels feeding
their muscles than sprinters. So when it comes to boosting endurance, "the more
blood vessels you have, the better," he says.

    Athletes also are probably eyeing the gene for erythropoietin, or EPO, a
hormone that regulates red blood cell production. Synthetic versions of the
hormone, used by doctors to treat anemia, have become one of the most widely
abused drugs in sports today. The allure of EPO is simple: By boosting the
number of oxygen-carrying red-blood cells, muscles stay fresher longer. (EPO is
what skier Eero Mantyranta's body overproduced as a result of his genetic
quirk.)

    Gene therapy experiments with erythropoietin in animals have shown promise.
In one University of Chicago experiment, scientists boosted red blood cell
concentration in mice to 81 percent from 49 percent with a single injection of
the EPO gene. Even a year later, the mice's red blood cell levels remained high.

    But after more than a decade of research and hundreds of experiments, gene
therapy for humans has succeeded in treating only a couple of disorders.
(Athletes take notice: One of them involves the VEGF gene.) And there have been
other setbacks: A University of Pennsylvania volunteer died during an experiment
in 1999. The biggest hurdle has been delivering the therapeutic gene to the
cells. To do it, researchers often turn to one of nature's most efficient DNA
delivery services for help: the virus.

    A virus makes a person sick by inserting its genetic material into the DNA
of its host. In gene therapy, scientists disarm the virus, replacing its genetic
material with the therapeutic gene they want to deliver. But even if they get
the virus to deliver the gene to the right target in the body, researchers face
problems. "Once you turn the gene loose, how are you going to turn it off?" asks
Donald Catlin, director of the Olympic Analytical Lab at the University of
California, Los Angeles.

    Most genes in the body aren't designed to be continuously switched "on," but
therapeutic genes delivered by a virus are always on. And that, Catlin says,
could prove deadly.

    With erythropoietin, for example, an always-on EPO gene could flood the
blood with so many red blood cells that it turns as viscous as syrup, increasing
the risks of clots and strokes. In one EPO gene-therapy experiment on baboons,
scientists were forced to constantly dilute the animals' blood to keep them
alive. (For similar reasons, the synthetic drug has been blamed for the deaths
of more than 20 cyclists since 1987.)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2002


                             1437 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2002 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 92 words

HEADLINE: National Briefing Science And Health: Spurning Explanation Of Research
Death

BYLINE:  AP

BODY:

        Federal officials rejected a letter of explanation from a University of
Pennsylvania scientist about why a teenager died in a research project.

   The officials will continue proceedings to bar the scientist, Dr. James M.
Wilson, from testing drugs on humans. Dr. Wilson led a gene therapy experiment
in 1999 in which Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died. An investigation by the
Food and Drug Administration concluded that Mr. Gelsinger died as a result of
being injected with a genetically altered virus that was designed to treat his
liver disorder.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2002


                             1438 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           February 9, 2002 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 262 words

HEADLINE: FDA Says Scientist Failed To Explain Gene Test Death

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

    Federal authorities rejected a letter of explanation from a University of
Pennsylvania scientist who led a research project in which a teenager died.

    Proceedings will continue to permanently bar James Wilson from testing drugs
on humans.

    In a letter sent to Wilson yesterday, the Food and Drug Administration said
his letter explaining alleged safety problems in his research "fail to
adequately address the violations."

    The FDA letter said Wilson can request a hearing on the accusations or
accept a consent decree that would block him from using human subjects in drug
testing.

    A University of Pennsylvania spokeswoman quoted Wilson as saying, "We will
continue a dialogue with the FDA to reach a resolution satisfactory to all
parties."

    Wilson was in charge of a gene therapy experiment in 1999 during which Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died.

    Gelsinger, who suffered from a liver disorder, had been injected with a
genetically altered virus that was designed to give his body a gene that would
treat the liver condition.

    An FDA investigation concluded that Gelsinger died as a direct result of the
injection. He was the first patient to die in a gene therapy experiment.

    In November 2000, the FDA notified Wilson that it had found evidence of
numerous violations of the rules for conducting the research project. The agency
also told Wilson that it was starting proceedings to bar him permanently from
conducting further drug research on human subjects.

    The FDA charges that Wilson "repeatedly and deliberately violated federal
regulations" in the research.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2002


                             1439 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    February 4, 2002, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: TECHNOLOGY HUB / BETH HEALY / VENTURE CAPITAL;
VCS APPEAR TO BE MOVING FORWARD

BYLINE: BY BETH HEALY

BODY:

   Venture capital appears to have turned the corner late last year, after six
straight quarters of decline, analysts of national VC data are expected to
announce today.

   Venture investors poured $7.1 billion into start-ups in the fourth quarter,
according to the MoneyTree Survey prepared by PricewaterhouseCoopers, Venture
Economics, and the National Venture Capital Association. That's up 9 percent
from $6.5 billion in the third quarter of 2001. Biotechnology and software led
the charge.

       "It looks like we bottomed out in the third quarter," said Matthew
Littlewood, a partner with PricewaterhouseCoopers in Cambridge. "We see the
fourth quarter as a positive sign."

   Across the country, venture investing totaled $36.5 billion last year, down
from a record $57 billion in 2000. That 36 percent decline felt bad to
entrepreneurs, who complained bitterly all year about the passing of the good
old days. But last year was still the third-biggest year ever for venture, after
2000 and 1999.

   New England took second place, as usual, in the fourth quarter, reaping 16.1
percent of the money invested nationally, or $1.15 billion for 129 companies.
Silicon Valley ranked first, claiming 35.1 percent of the funds, or $2.51
billion for 229 companies. New York, Texas, and Los Angeles followed.

   In a quarter that seemed to be shrouded in a hush - as VCs continued to scrub
and shutter troubled portfolio companies - life sciences start-ups were the
stealth winners. Makers of medical devices and companies involved in
biotechnology grabbed 18.5 percent of all the money invested, up from 8 percent
in the fourth quarter of 2000. With renewed excitement around genetic therapies,
AIDS drugs, and other medical research, this sector resumed its historic
countercyclical role. Medical investing has often been popular when other
sectors grew ice cold.

   Software investing also saw big gains, attracting 22.5 percent of total
investments, up from 17 percent in the third quarter, according to the report.

   On an annual basis, biotech claimed 8.2 percent of all funding, up from 3.5
percent in 2000. Retailing, a category that includes e-commerce, plunged to 10
percent from 18.4 percent.

   VCs were still spending more resources on existing portfolio companies than
on new investments late last year, the study shows. Investing to support
expansion rose to 64 percent of all the money invested, up from 54 percent in
the third quarter. Early-stage deals fell to 15.6 percent of the funds invested,
down from 21.7 percent in the third quarter.

   But there's hope that things are improving, Littlewood of
PricewaterhouseCoopers said. "We are hearing anecdotally that the VCs are
looking at new investments."

   No wonder. They're getting bargains compared with last year. First-round
deals averaged $7 million in the fourth quarter, the study found, down from $10
million in mid-2000.  PRISM VENTURE PARTNERS RAISES ITS 4TH FUND

   Prism Venture Partners is expected to announce today that it has raised its
fourth fund, with $429 million in assets. The fund will be used for deals in
communcations, business infrastructure software, and health care. The firm's
total capital is now at $1 billion.

   Fund-raising is tougher than a couple years ago, says Bob Fleming, founding
general partner at Prism. "We got commitments from existing investors very
quickly. But adding new names and broadening the capital base took longer."

   He's glad not to have a billion-dollar fund, though. "I really am concerned
about billion-dollar funds that say they're trying to do start-up investments,"
he says.  IMAGING AUTOMATION GETS $12M FOR ID SYSTEM

   Now this is good to see. Imaging Automation of Bedford, N.H., raised $12
million for its identity verification technology, aimed at improving airport
security. Massport is deploying the technology at several locations at Logan
Airport. The technology also is used to check the authenticity of documents.

   VCs in the deal include Green Mountain Capital, Liberty Venture Partners,
Keystone Venture Capital, and Zero Stage Capital.

   Beth Healy can be reached by e-mail at bhealy@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: Venture investing in retailing, including e-commerce, has plunged. /
GLOBE FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             1440 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    February 4, 2002, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy trial resumes at Stanford

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

BODY:
Stanford University researchers have quietly resumed the trial of a highly
touted approach to gene therapy by infusing trillions of gene-packed viruses
into the liver of 48-year-old man with hemophilia, officials behind the
experiment plan to announce today.

   The patient has hemophilia B, a hereditary blood-clotting disorder that
affects one in every 32,000 males. Men with the ailment lack a crucial gene, one
that produces a key blood-clotting protein called factor 9. Without it, men are
prone to nosebleeds, bruising and potentially life-threatening hemorrhages.


   So far, the man, whose name has not been disclosed, has suffered no ill
effects from the infusion, but his physicians didn't necessarily expect him to.
The study's goal is to determine whether the approach is safe, doctors say, and
future patients will receive stepped-up doses. Later studies will test
effectiveness.

   Gene therapy is designed to treat diseases by inserting healthy genes into
defective cells, repairing them. Ultimately, physicians hope to insert enough
healthy factor 9 genes into the patients' liver cells for their blood to clot
normally. Before the infusions, physicians insert the genes into virus particles
known as AAV2 vectors. Vectors, usually viruses, carry the genes into the liver
cells' nuclei, where the protein-making process begins.

   Two-phase study

   Research in dogs -- with a type of hemophilia that closely resembles the
human disease -- shows that the genes can churn out factor 9 at levels that are
between 4% and 12% of normal. Only 3% to 5% of the normal amount restores the
ability to form clots, freeing patients from the need for costly daily
injections of genetically engineered clotting factor.

   "We all think this is really promising," says Kathy High of Children's
Hospital in Philadelphia, one of the trial's two lead investigators.

   Sponsored by Avigen Inc. of Alameda, Calif., the study represents the
highest-profile gene-therapy experiment since the September 1999 death of Jesse
Gelsinger at the University of Pennsylvania. Gelsinger suffered from a metabolic
disorder. He died from a toxic reaction to a different vector, one known to be
far riskier than AAV2.

   The new study is being carried out in two phases, at Stanford and Children's
Hospital. In earlier tests of eight patients, doctors injected the gene-bearing
viruses directly into the patients' muscles. But researchers found that each
patient would need multiple shots to make the therapy work.

   Two of the eight produced just 1% of the normal amount of factor 9; the other
six didn't make as much. Even 1% of normal, though, was enough to permit one
patient to cut down on his factor 9 shots.

   "Our goal is to have circulating levels of factor 9 above 3%, and ideally
above 5%. That would essentially cure the person of hemophilia," says John
Monahan, Avigen's CEO.

   Showing promise

   The latest phase of the trial involves eight more patients -- including the
48-year-old man at Stanford -- who have the gene-bearing viruses infused
directly into the liver's main artery, which supplies all of the liver's cells.

   This stage began in August, when doctors at Children's Hospital infused a
dose of gene therapy into a 62-year-old man. He suffered no side effects, but
later tests found traces of DNA from the AAV2 vector in the man's semen.

   The discovery prompted Avigen and the Food and Drug Administration to put the
trial on hold, to make sure that no DNA had entered the man's sperm, where it
could travel to future generations, says co-leader Mark Kay of Stanford.

   High says that tests found no evidence of factor 9 genes in the man's sperm.

   Philip Noguchi, who oversees gene therapy for the FDA, says the agency asked
for further sperm studies, then gave Avigen permission to resume because of the
therapy's "great promise."

LOAD-DATE: February 04, 2002


                             1441 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     February 3, 2002 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1520 words

HEADLINE: DNA 'edge' creates new sports worry;
 Scientists concerned about 'gene doping'

BYLINE: Michael Stroh

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   For years after he won two gold medals in the 1964 Winter Games, Eero
Mantyranta was dogged by rumors of deceit: The Finnish cross-country skier had
something in his blood, people whispered, something that had given him an edge.

   He never failed a drug test - but the rumors turned out to be true.

   Scientists eventually discovered that Mantyranta harbored a rare mutation in
his DNA, a genetic quirk that caused his body to crank out more red blood cells
than the average athlete. The extra cells bathed his laboring muscles in oxygen,
providing the boost he needed to glide past competitors.

   Now, on the eve of the Winter Games in Salt Lake City, sports officials and
scientists fear the day may not be far off when athletes born without such lucky
genes could simply add them later, cheating not with drugs but DNA.

   It's called "gene doping," and the idea behind it is simple: to hijack gene
therapy techniques for curing disease to become better, stronger, faster. Unlike
drugs, such genetic tinkering would be all but impossible to detect, scientists
say.

   Nobody expects genetically enhanced super jocks to turn up in Salt Lake City
- the technology isn't there yet. But the World Anti-Doping Agency, which leads
the charge against drugs in sports, is concerned enough about future events that
it's planning a summit on gene doping next month in New York. Officials are
eager to gain an edge on dishonest athletes, but after more than three decades
of playing catch-up, few are optimistic.

   "Athletes are probably already ahead of us," says Theodore Friedmann,
director of the human gene therapy program at the University of California at
San Diego and a conference organizer. "They've always used whatever they needed
to win. Death is a secondary consideration."

   Ancient Greek athletes, historians know, popped hallucinogenic mushrooms.
Roman gladiators took the equivalent of speed before entering the Circus
Maximus. Victorian-era jocks routinely used a variety of performance-enhancing
chemicals, including caffeine, alcohol, nitroglycerine, ether, heroin, cocaine -
even strychnine, a stimulant more famous for its role in rat poison.

   Although drug tests for racehorses were initiated as early as 1910, doping
among two-legged athletes was mostly ignored until the 1960s, when drugs were
blamed for a rash of high-profile deaths in international cycling. The first
Olympic drug tests were conducted in 1968 at the Mexico City games.

   Officials ban a long list of stimulants, narcotics, steroids, hormones and
beta blockers. Most are detectable with a urine or blood test - 3,500 of which
are being given to Salt Lake City athletes before the opening ceremonies this
week. The notion of genetically engineered athletes may sound like science
fiction, but researchers working on therapies for atherosclerosis, cystic
fibrosis and other diseases have pinpointed genes that have the potential to
become popular in the locker room.

   Take research subject No. F66-52, aka "Mighty Mouse."

   Caged in the cluttered and somewhat smelly laboratory of Johns Hopkins
molecular biologist Se-Jin Lee, F66-52 is not your ordinary rodent. As Lee
attempts to remove the furry brown lump from its pen, Mighty Mouse clings
stubbornly to the cage bars. "He's just flexing to show off," jokes Lee.

   But it's true: This rodent is ripped. Every time F66-52 squirms, thick knots
of muscle ripple visibly beneath its shoulders and rump. An unaltered mouse
cowering in the corner of a nearby cage looks wimpy by comparison. To create
Mighty Mouse, Lee and his team blocked the action of myostatin, a gene the
Hopkins researchers have found plays a key -albeit mysterious - role in muscle
development. Blocking the gene causes muscles to balloon. The strongest of these
genetically altered mice have four times the muscle mass of a typical rodent and
weigh about 30 percent more, Lee says.

   The genetic tinkering hasn't resulted in any noticeable health problems -
although, Lee says, his muscle-bound mice appear a tad more docile. Like other
scientists working with so-called "Schwarzenegger" mice, Lee hopes his research
leads to new drugs for people with muscular dystrophy, cancer and other
conditions that cause muscles to wither. But he knows the sick aren't the only
ones who may find myostatin irresistible. "Clearly, there's going to be the
potential for abuse," Lee says.

   Genes that beef up muscles would be ideal for sprinters, lifters and athletes
who need quick bursts of power. Marathoners, cross-country skiers and others who
prize endurance could get a boost from genes that affect the blood.

   One candidate is VEGF, or vascular endothelial growth factor, a substance
that triggers blood vessels to sprout. Although researchers hope it might help
people with clogged arteries and other circulation troubles, scientists fear the
gene could be hijacked by athletes to pipe more blood to their muscles.
Marathoners, notes molecular biologist Peter Schjerling of the Copenhagen Muscle
Research Center in Denmark, typically have four times more blood vessels feeding
their muscles than sprinters. So when it comes to boosting endurance, "the more
blood vessels you have, the better," he says.

   Athletes also are probably eyeing the gene for erythropoietin, or EPO, a
hormone that regulates red blood cell production. Synthetic versions of the
hormone, used by doctors to treat anemia, have become one of the most widely
abused drugs in sports today. The allure of EPO is simple: By boosting the
number of oxygen-carrying red-blood cells, muscles stay fresher longer. (EPO is
what skier Eero Mantyranta's body overproduced as a result of his genetic
quirk.)

   Gene therapy experiments with erythropoietin in animals have shown promise.
In one University of Chicago experiment, scientists boosted red blood cell
concentration in mice to 81 percent from 49 percent with a single injection of
the EPO gene. Even a year later, the mice's red blood cell levels remained high.

   But after more than a decade of research and hundreds of experiments, gene
therapy for humans has succeeded in treating only a couple of disorders.
(Athletes take notice: One of them involves the VEGF gene.) And there have been
other setbacks: A University of Pennsylvania volunteer died during an experiment
in 1999. The biggest hurdle has been delivering the therapeutic gene to the
cells. To do it, researchers often turn to one of nature's most efficient DNA
delivery services for help: the virus.

   A virus makes a person sick by inserting its genetic material into the DNA of
its host. In gene therapy, scientists disarm the virus, replacing its genetic
material with the therapeutic gene they want to deliver. But even if they get
the virus to deliver the gene to the right target in the body, researchers face
problems. "Once you turn the gene loose, how are you going to turn it off?" asks
Donald Catlin, director of Olympic Analytical Lab at the University of
California, Los Angeles.

   Most genes in the body aren't designed to be continuously switched "on," but
therapeutic genes delivered by a virus are always on. And that, says Catlin,
could prove deadly.

   With erythropoietin, for example, an always-on EPO gene could flood the blood
with so many red blood cells that it turns as viscous as syrup, increasing the
risks of clots and strokes. In one EPO gene-therapy experiment on baboons,
scientists were forced to constantly dilute the animals' blood to keep them
alive. (For similar reasons, the synthetic drug has been blamed for the deaths
of more than 20 cyclists since 1987.)

   If athletes did pull off gene doping, it might be all but impossible to
detect, says Catlin, whose office oversees testing for the U.S. Olympic
Committee and others. Because engineered genes would look identical to natural
ones, officials would need to find other evidence, such as the virus that
delivered the gene. To do that, says Catlin, officials would have to know the
precise spot where the virus was injected, a process that would probably require
a muscle biopsy.

   Sports officials, who have encountered resistance to getting urine and blood
samples, doubt that athletes would surrender a piece of muscle. Even if they
did, that sample might not provide ironclad evidence because one of the most
popular gene therapy delivery vehicles is the virus that causes the common cold.

   Some scientists have begun to discuss - only half in jest - whether the only
way to stop cheating might be to lift the ban on doping altogether. Without a
black market for rogue drugs, the argument goes, at least fewer athletes might
die.

   "There will always be those who cheat, whether it's on their income taxes or
anything else," says Dr. Gary Wadler, author of Drugs and the Athlete. "It gets
back to the issue of money, fame, fortune."

   But opening the door to gene doping and other performance-enhancing drugs
would probably mean whole new record books and a very different Olympics. "We've
actually been joking that we should have an Olympics competition of scientists,"
says Schjerling. The theme? "Who can make the best athlete by any means."

NOTES:
SEE HARD COPY FOR CHART

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / CHART(S), 1. Muscle-bound: The strength of a mouse at a
Johns Hopkins, lab has been genetically enhanced.; , 2. The future of athletic
cheating, 1. JOHN MAKELY : SUN STAFF , 2. LAMONT W. HARVEY : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             1442 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2002 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: Dean and Geneticist Is Named Head of Mount Sinai Hospital

BYLINE:   By BARBARA STEWART

BODY:

   The dean of a Florida medical school who is also a geneticist and
pediatrician was appointed president and chief operating officer of Mount Sinai
Hospital yesterday.

        The new president, Dr. Kenneth I. Berns, said he would initially focus
on financial problems at the hospital, which has been struggling with operating
losses, declining patient revenue and a troubled merger with New York University
Medical Center.

    "That's the first thing we need to do," he said, "stabilize the financial
situation."

   Dr. Berns is leaving the University of Florida Health Science Center, where
he is vice president for health affairs and dean of the school of medicine.

   Dr. Berns has done pioneering work in gene therapy and the study of viruses,
said Dr. Nathan Kase, the interim chief executive of Mount Sinai Hospital and
interim president of the Mount Sinai School of Medicine. He described Dr. Berns
as an able administrator and fund-raiser, and noted that he has headed several
international medical organizations.

   Dr. Berns's appointment is being seen as a step toward improving Mount Sinai
and its departments at a time when hopes for the success of the Mount Sinai-New
York University merger are diminishing.

   Dr. Berns said in a telephone interview that he wanted easier communication
and cooperation among Mount Sinai's branches and departments. "I want a closer
connection between the medical school and the hospital," he said. "And I want to
find links between the bench researchers and the clinical doctors."

   Researchers at the department of gene therapy, he said, would be encouraged
to expand their recent collaboration with the clinical department.

   "I went researchers to be able to apply their discoveries to patient care,"
he said. Mount Sinai's cardiovascular department should be strengthened by the
recent hiring of a group of researchers from Harvard Medical Center, he added.

   The merged entity, Mount Sinai NYU Health, was formed four years ago. Though
the two centers share some billing and computer areas, the research and clinical
departments and the medical schools operate separately and each has its own
board of trustees. There has been no chief executive officer of the merged
organization since John W. Rowe resigned nearly two years ago.

   Mount Sinai and New York University Medical Center have a shared debt of $700
million. Mount Sinai, however, is more financially troubled, with $26.4 million
in losses last year. New York University Medical Center, by contrast, had a
$22.7 operating profit in 2001. Mount Sinai has also seen declining patient
revenue since Sept. 11, and the loss of teams of high-earning doctors to
competing hospitals.

   Initially there were high hopes that Mount Sinai NYU Health would become one
of the country's biggest and most powerful research medical centers with the
prestige to draw money and patients from around the globe. But faculty at the
two medical schools objected strenuously to the idea of combining them, and
staff doctors were no happier with plans to combine the two hospitals or the
departments within each of them.

   Dr. Berns said he hoped to find ways to work with New York University,
despite the uneasy relations between the two organizations during the
partnership.

   "They put it together and it came apart," he said of the merger. "Then they
put it together again and it came apart and now they're just leaving it alone.
It's like trying to merge a sailor and a marine."

   But he said the two organizations could work together, citing as an example
the sharing of New York University's extensive database of research in biology.
That kind of cooperation could be useful whether or not the merger dissolves, he
said. The chief executive officer at New York University Medical Center, Robert
Glickman, said he was open to discussing such cooperation.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 7, 2002

CORRECTION:

   An article on Saturday about the appointment of Dr. Kenneth I. Berns to head
Mount Sinai Medical Center referred incorrectly to his title. He was appointed
chief executive, not also president. Because of an editing error, the article
referred imprecisely to the institution he will lead. It is the medical center
-- comprising Mount Sinai Hospital and the Mount Sinai School of Medicine -- not
just the hospital.

   The article also misstated a title of Dr. Nathan Kase, who served as interim
chief executive. He is interim dean of the medical school, not interim
president.

   The article also misstated the name of the institution that previously
employed a medical team that Dr. Berns said would strengthen Mount Sinai's
cardiovascular department. It is the Harvard Medical School, not Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2002


                             1443 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 31, 2002 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1130 words

HEADLINE: THE WORLD;
;
Lawmakers Ban Stem Cell Imports in German Vote;
Science: Only existing embryos in the country can be used for research,
Parliament decides. Some see a blow to promising treatments.

BYLINE: CAROL J. WILLIAMS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

   German lawmakers Wednesday rejected a move to allow imports of embryonic stem
cells for research, ignoring the pleas of a paraplegic politician as well as the
warnings of scientists that the search for medical breakthroughs will go on
elsewhere.

   The vote after nearly five hours of debate made one concession to the
scientific community, allowing research on 40,000 existing embryos.

   The excess embryos had been created here for in vitro fertilization and
frozen in the event their use in regenerating tissue and organs might one day be
approved.

   However, the "no, but" option--one of three measures facing the lawmakers
Wednesday--clearly forbids using any stem cells created in Germany for infertile
couples in the future or acquiring them from countries with more liberal laws
governing biotechnology.

   Germany has one of the world's most prosperous biotech industries, partly the
result of a generously funded higher education system. But the industry has also
benefited from the return of successful genetics and genome specialists who made
discoveries achievable only in less restrictive environments such as Britain and
the United States.

   Most biotechnology research was forbidden here through the 1980s, chasing the
leading researchers to foreign laboratories, where they developed everything
from artificial insulin to procedures that have helped crack the human genetic
code.

   The curbs on biotechnology have been eased over the past decade, but Germans
outside the scientific community remain deeply distrustful of any activity that
can be construed as human engineering. They also are stridently opposed to
genetic modification of crops and foods.

   Still haunted by the country's Nazi past, when scientists engaged in human
experimentation, Germans remain more wary than many Europeans of the risks of
letting scientific opportunity undermine the dignity of mankind.

   In the process of harvesting stem cells--the master cells that govern the
development of tissues and organs--scientists destroy the fertilized eggs they
are taken from, thus inviting the debate over when life begins.

   As in the clash over abortion, opponents see the fertilized eggs as unborn
life, while proponents see the opposite, saying early-stage embryos aren't
viable outside the womb.

   Supporters also argue that stem cells hold the promise of generating tissues
and organs that could cure the sick and disabled.

   One advocate of the defeated move to approve stem-cell imports, former
Christian Democratic Union leader Wolfgang Schaeuble, who was paralyzed in a
1990 assassination attempt, urged fellow lawmakers to broaden their views about
what constitutes an infraction of human dignity.

   Embryonic stem cells could enable doctors to reverse the afflictions of those
with damaged organs, spinal cords or debilitating illnesses such as diabetes or
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, the conservative noted.

   "Man's striving for ever more knowledge is an aspect of human life that makes
it unique," Schaeuble argued before the packed session of the Bundestag, the
lower house of Parliament. "Scientific freedom to develop the possibilities for
improving the quality of life is part of this inviolable respect for mankind."

   Others pushing for relief from restrictions on embryonic research asked their
legislative colleagues how Germany will react when cures and treatments are
developed in other countries and are available only to those Germans who can
afford to travel and pay for services deemed criminal in their own country. The
deeply emotional debate cut across political lines, with both left-leaning
Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder and the head of the opposition Christian Democrats,
Angela Merkel, arguing for some liberalization and keeping the door to discovery
open.

   The Bundestag members faced three choices Wednesday: to allow imports of
embryonic stem cells for scientific research; to ban such imports but permit
research on excess embryonic stem cells created here for in vitro fertilization;
or to ban any research on the cells.

   The vote came in two stages. The first ballot gave less than 20% support for
importing the cells, with the rest of the votes split almost equally between the
outright ban and the qualified rejection. The latter option won, 340 to 265, on
the second ballot as the disappointed supporters chose the less restrictive of
the remaining choices.

   Supporters of the research got backing from many of Germany's leading
scientific organizations, foremost among them the prestigious Max Planck
Society. Although he expressed disappointment that the most liberal option was
rejected, Peter Gruss, the incoming president of the research network, said he
was relieved that the political leadership refrained from the outright ban.

   "If German scientists are to continue on the way to creating new therapies,
the German Parliament must take up this issue again in the near future to allow
Germany access to human embryos," Gruss said after the voting.

   Pope John Paul II has long lobbied against the use of human embryos for any
scientific research, regardless of whether the embryos were created for that
purpose or left over from in vitro fertilization. But as evidence of the
prevailing mixed emotions and confusion, even heavily Roman Catholic Italy has
no law on the subject.

   Britain allows research on embryos up to 14 days old for fertility purposes
and, since a year ago, for work on developing therapies for serious diseases.
Spanish politicians are pressing for a law similar to Britain's, and French
lawmakers are expected to relax a 1994 ban on such research later this year,
with the bill sailing through Parliament on its first reading last week.

   The Swedish Research Council has also recently deemed therapeutic cloning of
tissues and organs "ethically defensible," although like the French and the
British, the Swedes remain broadly opposed to human cloning.

   Embryonic stem cell research is also controversial in the United States, with
a bill that would outlaw the practice making its way through Congress.

   Work on adult stem cell lines--and on embryos in countries, such as Britain,
where some such work is permitted--is showing much promise as regenerative
therapy that could improve the quality of life for the disabled and prolong it
for the terminally ill.

   Current German laws forbid the creation of embryos for research purposes but
have left vague the legality of importing cell lines. The Bundestag vote, which
will become law after expected upper house approval, now makes it clear that all
embryonic work, except on the existing stock of frozen cells, is forbidden.

   *

   Times staff writer Richard Boudreaux in Rome and special correspondents Ela
Kasprzycka in Warsaw, Janet Stobart in London and Sarah White in Paris
contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC:  German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, left, addresses Parliament in
favor of liberalizing the use of human embryos for research. PHOTOGRAPHER:
Associated Press
 Schroeder, right, listens to Defense Minister Rudolf Scharping during the
often-emotional debate, which lasted nearly five hours. PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated
Press

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2002


                             1444 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 29, 2002 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 3548 words

HEADLINE: Time in a Bottle;
Anti-Aging Boosters Claim Their Products Can Turn Back the Clock. Independent
Scientists Aren't Buying It.

BYLINE: Christopher Wanjek, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:

   Would you like to grow younger, to turn back the clock 10 or 20 years and
double your life span? Thanks to recent scientific advances, your chances are
pretty good . . . if you're a parasitic worm or a fruit fly.

    Humans, who for the most part are more complicated than these creatures, can
reap no such benefits from the continuing flood of anti-aging potions and
precepts, which are at best naively optimistic and at worst fraudulent and
harmful. Yes, credible and independent scientists agree, medical research that
now looks promising may someday lead to methods to slow the physical
degeneration associated with aging and even extend the limits of the human life
span beyond its current estimated 120 years. But, despite claims by those
selling products and regimens, science hasn't done anything like that yet. For
now, every book, powder or pill that promises a fountain of youth -- skin that
doesn't age, organs that keep putting out, an immune system that never weakens,
a mind forever sharp, a sex drive that never droops -- is just plain wrong:
misguided, excessively hopeful or outright deceptive.

    "There is no intervention that has been proven to slow, stop or reverse
aging. Period," said Leonard Hayflick, professor of anatomy at the University of
California, San Francisco, and a cult hero to many serious scientists in the
field of aging.

    Even Deepak Chopra, who has written several books about "reversing" the
aging process, conceded in a phone interview that the most legitimate anti-aging
therapies can only make you healthier, which reduces your risk of dying young --
but they don't make you young nor increase your life span.

    "You can call it a question of semantics," Chopra said about his clients who
feel and act younger than the typical person at their particular chronological
age. This from a man who co-authored a book titled "Grow Younger, Live Longer:
10 Steps to Reverse Aging."

    Chopra's conclusion -- that deadly disease risk can be minimized but life
cannot be "extended" -- sounds obvious, but apparently few want to believe it.
Other books, such as "Ageless Body, Timeless Mind" and "Renewal: The Anti-Aging
Revolution" and "New Anti-Aging Secrets for Maximum Lifespan," have collectively
sold millions of copies in recent years. Some researchers have promoted the use
of, among other things, dog testes to extend age. Pharmacies, once content to
sell hair dyes and wrinkle creams that cover up the signs of aging, are now
hawking dietary supplements that purport to boost sex drive and return youthful
vigor, some as basic as vitamin E and others as exotic as crushed deer antlers.

    Web sites push products with names that would make Rambo proud, such as
AgeForce Ultra Max 400 and Regenesis Plus Recombinant GH. Hundreds of
"anti-aging" clinics have opened across the United States in the past decade,
charging clients upwards of $ 10,000 a year for anti-aging hormone injections,
an unproven and potentially dangerous therapy.

    These naturally derived elixirs are not -- nor do they need to be --
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), a fact that prompted Sen.
Larry Craig (R-Idaho), ranking member of the Senate Special Committee on Aging,
to hold a hearing in September on phony anti-aging products. At the hearing, the
head of one company failed to testify to defend his anti-aging supplement
businesses or products. A September report from the General Accouting Office
stated that some 40 percent of seniors take dietary supplements, many for
conditions related to aging or for "aging" itself.

   The GAO concluded that seniors face both physical and financial harm from to
misleading marketing of such products. Sen. Craig's conclusion was that until
stronger laws are enacted, people must educate themselves about anti-aging
scams.

    For this story, we have depended largely on the work of scientists and
researchers who are independent of the various industries that sell anti-aging
products and treatments to the public. One of the key independent voices in the
field is S. Jay Olshansky, a researcher with the Center on Aging at the
University of Chicago. He thinks much of the anti-aging medicine field is "pure
quackery." Marketers are able to boast of age reversal, he said, because they
rely on so-called biomarkers to measure the rate of aging.

    These biomarkers -- handgrip strength, reflex time and blood flow, to name a
few -- are only an indication of relative health, not age. Yet they are used to
legitimize anti-aging therapies, he said. Techniques as simple as regular
exercise and good nutrition can improve results in these very same biomarkers,
providing a safer and far less expensive alternative to most anti-aging
medicines and treatments. The problem is, there is no accepted way to measure
aging, and everybody agrees that chronological age isn't a very useful standard.

    There's a reason we cannot grow younger, Olshansky said, and it's called the
second law of thermodynamics: Things fall apart. All matter -- and that includes
your sack of bones -- moves gradually toward disintegration.

    Aging as we know it is not a "process" that can be "reversed," he said. It
is the result of an accumulation of damage at the molecular level over the
years, an "inadvertent byproduct of a fixed program of growth and development,"
Olshansky said. Which is to say: Damage happens. Young bodies goof up as often
and randomly as old bodies. A winding protein molecule might fold the wrong way,
regardless of whether its host is young or old. A section of DNA might not
replicate correctly, regardless of whether you are 5 or 50. When this damage
builds up, then you got troubles, Olshansky said.

    A young body can repair itself more efficiently and keep damage to a
minimum. This is true only because the repair mechanism itself -- like eyes,
ears or any other part of the body -- hasn't had time to be compromised by
molecular damage. Yet even if we could transplant a youthful repair system into
an aging body -- which we can't -- that repair system would be just as
overwhelmed tackling the backlog of molecular damage that naturally accumulates.

    We can, through exercise, recuperate loss of vitality and physical
capability due to inactivity, but not the kind due to aging, according to Walter
Bortz of Stanford University Medical School, past president of the American
Geriatric Society.

    "Much of what we think about aging is not aging but disuse," Bortz said. He
describes "disuse" by citing a leg in a cast. The leg shrivels, weakens and
looks old, but it didn't really "age." With exercise, the old-looking,
old-functioning leg can become vital and active again. But it can't get
"younger."

    Bortz said that the minimal damage accumulated at the molecular level
resulting in a decline in overall physical ability is about 0.5 percent per year
after about age 30. This assumes that you keep in tip-top shape. (Several
studies have shown that this rate matches the decline in performance in
professional athletes after their peak.)

    But "if you don't take care of yourself, you start decaying a la Archie
Bunker at 2 percent per year," Bortz said. This rate of decline would make you a
mess by age 65. Disuse leads to sagging muscles and skin, a lack of stamina and
strength, or a weakened immune system -- all the nasty things we associate with
aging.

    As banal as it sounds, Bortz said exercising and eating a healthy diet are
the only proven methods to "look and feel younger" and reduce your risk of dying
or suffering from the age-associated diseases: circulatory disease, cancer,
stroke, arthritis and osteoporosis. This is also the best way to boost your sex
drive, which magazines constantly tell us needs boosting. (How do they know,
anyway?)

    Hormone therapy, one of the mainstays of the anti-aging industry, has no
proven effect on increasing life span, say the academic experts contacted for
this story, and in many cases it may harm you.

    Hormone therapy is nothing new. Cocktails of testosterone, human growth
hormone (HGH) and synthetic versions of the adrenal hormone DHEA have long been
the domain of bodybuilders. They are now being repackaged to baby boomers as
youth injections. The premise is that replacing these hormones -- which are
plentiful in our younger years but almost disappear as we age -- will restore
youth.

    "Hormone therapy is a terribly oversimplified idea," said Huber Warner,
associate director of the Biology of Aging Program at the National Institute on
Aging. "People are willing to inject themselves with hormones for short-term
benefits without having a clue what the long-term effect might be."

    Yes, there may be benefits, both tantalizing and immediate. With HGH
therapy, for one, patients reportedly build muscle mass, lose fat, gain strength
and stamina, improve mental acuity, increase their sex drive and develop more
youthful-looking skin, according to Warner. These are those biomarkers again.

    There are several caveats. Benefits are not guaranteed. Also, to sustain
what you've gained, you must keep up with these therapies or lose it all. This
can be an expensive proposition, with basic hormone therapy as low as $ 500 a
year but rising, with the addition of HGH, to $ 3,000 to $ 10,000 a year.
Besides, there have been no human studies that show the injections extend life.
Mammal studies are not encouraging. For instance, mice lacking growth hormone
routinely live 30 to 50 percent longer than normal mice, and mice that
overproduce growth hormone live 30 to 50 percent shorter, Warner said.

    It gets worse. Growth hormone fuels cancer in mice, as reported by Karoly
Szepeshazi of the Tulane School of Medicine in 2001 in the journal
Endocrinology. Apparently, HGH triggers the release of another hormone, IGF-1,
known to stimulate cancer growth later in life. This well-publicized "smoking
gun" animal study confirms the cancer-causing HGH-IGF-1 pathway previously seen
in numerous test-tube experiments.

    Another blow to HGH, the most popular form of hormone therapy, may come in
the spring with the official release of a long-awaited study from Johns Hopkins
University, a double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial that followed
152 men and women.

    In this study, funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), subjects
over age 65 were given for 26 weeks either HGH alone; a combination of HGH with
either testosterone (for the men) or estrogen (for the women); or a placebo.
Mitchell Harman, now director of the Kronos Longevity Research Institute in
Arizona, said he found a "sliver of good news" in the study. Some participants
increased muscle and lost fat on HGH, he said, while some taking the combo saw a
small increase in strength.

    "That's the bright side," Harman said. "The dark side of the forest is that
there were lots of adverse effects." He cites joint pains, carpal tunnel
syndrome and glucose intolerance. Five of the women became diabetic. Also, the
HGH therapy did nothing for bone strength, which is what it is most often
prescribed for. Although just a "preliminary study with mixed results," Harman
said that at this point, he would definitely not recommend HGH for healthy
adults.

    Other studies reveal that testosterone therapy may lead to an increased risk
for prostate cancer and heart disease, said the National Aging Institute's Huber
Warner. DHEA therapy is a tossup for now, with mixed bits of evidence of
possible benefit and harm. As for melatonin, a hormone associated with sleep
cycles, Warner says that one study a few years ago showed a positive effect, yet
"the whole thing was blown out of proportion" and no convincing data since then
support its efficacy. He calls books such as "The Melatonin Miracle" and "The
Superhormone Promise," which highlights DHEA, "simply irresponsible."

    A co-author of these books sharply disagrees. William Regelson, 76,
professor of medicine at Virginia Commonwealth University (and a taker of
hormone therapy himself), said there is "solid evidence in the literature" that
both "melatonin and DHEA boost the immune system by enhancing interferon
production." Because hormones are not patentable, he said, industry has been
reluctant to fund large studies of their benefits, and NIH has not stepped
forward with money, either. His only regret about popularizing hormones is that
they are available too easily over-the-counter, not regulated by the FDA.

    Warner says hormone therapy has its place, but not as the all-around miracle
worker on "age" and health that many of its supporters describe. Estrogen
replacement therapy in women reduces the risk of osteoporosis and, perhaps,
heart disease. Yet this too comes with trade-offs: an increased risk of breast
cancer, a type of uterine cancer and blood clots.

    Not all hormone therapies come in the form of shots. Hormone "activators"
and natural plant hormones sold as pills, powdered mixes and sprays in health
food stores are cheaper than injections (only $ 50 to $ 100 a month) and
marketed heavily at consumers of anti-aging products. But several factors make
questionable the value of hormones, or hormone precursors, in a pill.

    For starters, Warner said, hormones need to be targeted (via injections) for
maximum effect. Like many supplements, they may pass through the body unused
rather than being absorbed by the proper cells and utilized. Also, in this era
of loosely regulated herbal supplements, bottled hormones vary greatly in
quality, and none needs to be proven effective to appear on store shelves or Web
sites.

    And, as with many other dietary supplements, there are no solid,
independent, long-term studies in a human population proving the value (and the
absence of serious side effects) of such pills.

    The idea that the physical characteristics, or phenotypes, of aging are the
result of cumulative free-radical damage -- and that kinds of chemicals known as
antioxidants can mop up these radicals to retard aging -- is very prominent in
anti-aging products and literature. But this notion is also oversimplified and
as likely to do harm as good, independent researchers say.

    A free radical, a natural byproduct of metabolism, is an atom with an
unpaired electron. Looking for a mate, it steals an electron from the first
thing it encounters -- a cell wall, say, or a strand of DNA. The theft can cause
these structures to malfunction, explained Britton Chance, professor emeritus at
the University of Pennsylvania and an expert on free-radical production.

    Antioxidants are a class of chemicals that render free radicals benign. The
popular antioxidants are vitamin C and E, selenium, beta carotene and,
especially for the anti-aging crowd, coenzyme Q-10. What remains far from
certain is whether these antioxidants taken in the form of dietary supplements
can pass through the human digestive system and go exactly where duty calls, to
the site of free-radical attack, Chance said. Studies have shown positive,
neutral and negative effects of antioxidant supplementation. Studies on
antioxidants derived from diet lean more positively, but even there longitudinal
data suggest that an antioxidant-rich diet reduces the risk of some diseases,
rather than extends one's life.

    Levels of coenzyme Q-10, which is produced naturally within the body and may
collect free radicals almost as soon as they are created, decline with age. Yet
as several studies have shown, only about 2 percent of a coenzyme Q-10
supplement reaches the bloodstream, and likely far less (if any) enters cells.
Thus, scientists are far from concluding that boosting bloodstream levels of
this coenzyme via supplements is a good thing at all, let alone a means to
extend human life span.

    Stopping free-radical damage would definitely be nice, Chance said. This
would, by some researchers' definition, slow the "aging" process by at least
arresting certain types of cellular and DNA damage. This is where caloric
restriction -- perhaps the worst bad news to anti-aging enthusiasts -- comes in.

    Semi-starved mice and rats that get only 70 percent of their usual daily
calories live, on average, 50 percent longer than their rodent friends on a
normal diet. Why? The theory is that, at the molecular level, less food
translates into fewer energy conversions, slower metabolism and thus fewer
free-radical byproducts to wreak havoc.

    This is, once again, an oversimplification, and researchers know it. The
trouble is that the rodents and, it now seems, semi-starved monkeys, don't know
it. They actually appear to be aging more slowly and leading normal lives, some
scientists say. Caloric restriction, however unappetizing an idea, is the one
intervention that very well may slow down the human aging process and increase
human life span beyond 120 years, said Walter Bortz of Stanford.

    Yet caloric restriction remains unproven as an age extender in humans.
Rodent studies are not necessarily applicable to humans because scientists can
manipulate their life spans in a variety of ways. The monkey study has intrigued
many scientists, but monkeys live about 40 years, and scientists still have
another 20 years to go to see whether these animals really live any longer.
There is no way to truly know whether the monkeys are aging more slowly, said
Hayflick, the anatomy professor in San Francisco. This, once again, is a
reflection of the lack of legitimate biomarkers to measure the rate of aging.

    Besides -- and this is the reality check demanded of anti-aging
recommendations -- if consuming 70 percent of current recommendations throughout
your life extends it for, say, a couple of decades, who's going to stick to that
diet for an increased likelihood (but no guarantee) of that payoff?

    Thomas Perls, a longevity expert at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in
Boston, is trying to prove the existence of longevity-enabling genes. These
genes might prevent cancer and heart disease, allowing you to live to an older
age, or they might somehow slow the production of free radicals or do a better
job at repairing the damage.

    "We don't yet know what longevity-enabling genes do," Perls said, but he has
found a possible set of age-enhancing genes on chromosome 4 in his massive study
of centenarians. There can be no gene that controls life span itself, Hayflick
said, because such a gene would have no way to be selected and passed on from
generation to generation. Genes for quickness or good eyesight or sexual
capacity are refined and passed on because they are useful for the animal to
survive long enough to reproduce. A gene to live to 100 cannot evolve through
the process of "survival of the fittest" unless we humans reproduce at age 100
(perhaps one of the scariest ideas in all of anti-agedom).

    Instead, centenarians get to that grand old age of 100 by avoiding disease,
not by a gene that keeps them ticking for unusual lengths of time. Maybe they
had genes that helped, Perls said; maybe they got lucky. Regardless, gene
therapy -- whenever that day might come -- would only allow more people to live
out their natural life spans, not live significantly longer lives. Use genetic
tweaks to cure the feared killers of the aged -- cancer, heart disease, stroke
and Alzheimer's (and doctors are not even close to accomplishing this) -- and
you have boosted life expectancy to about age 95, Hayflick said. You have still
done nothing to change life span.

    The claim that humans will, on average, live past 120 years -- a claim made
by some of the proponents of caloric restriction and gene manipulation -- is not
completely ungrounded. But it is premature. Scientists can make nematode worms
live twice as long as usual by manipulating various genes. But you can make
these millimeter-long parasites live longer just by looking at them the wrong
way. These organisms, unlike humans, have the ability to enter into hibernation.

    The same is more or less true with fruit flies. The more complex the animal,
the less drastic the improvements in life span. Genetically engineered mice do
not live much longer than other mice do.

    In humans the issue is complicated, the University of Chicago's Olshansky
said, because the same genes that allow us to live at all (those that help us
hunt, see, reproduce) often lead to cancer and other diseases later on. This is
called antagonistic pleiotropy, and it may explain the existence of aging
itself, for evolution cares only about getting you to reproduce and rear your
young. Whatever works, works; the ill consequence 20 years later of a bad gene
that did its job when it had to is tough luck.

    Far in the future, scientists just may find a means to slow metabolism and
reduce free-radical damage, perhaps though a friendly version of the caloric
restriction method. Babies born today may, if the science progresses rapidly, be
the first to benefit from life-extending therapies. Yet the science of aging is
brand-new, and we may be as far from life span extension as physicists were from
placing a man on the moon upon the discovery of the electron in the late 1800s.

    "With every generation you have scientists making some claim -- that we're
very close to unlocking the secrets of aging, the fountain of youth," Olshansky
said. "We're not."

   Christopher Wanjek last wrote for the Health section about the benefits and
risks of antioxidants.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             1445 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      January 28, 2002 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 05G

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: Hemophilia B trial edges close to genetic alteration danger zone

BYLINE: NICHOLAS WADE New York Times

BODY:

   In the experimental field of gene therapy, scientists have worked carefully
to avoid the momentous step of making a genetic alteration that could be passed
along to future generations. But now it appears that one experiment may
inadvertently have come close to breaking that barrier.

   The gene therapy trial, halted when the risk was first noticed, has been
allowed to resume, even though the possibility of risk has not been dispelled.

   The trial, conducted by Avigen of Alameda, Calif., is designed to insert a
corrective gene into the liver of patients with hemophilia B, the less common of
two forms of hemophilia.

   Two federal agencies that monitor gene therapy trials, the Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institutes of Health, want to ensure that
corrective genes are not allowed to enter patients' eggs or sperm, known as germ
cells.

   Even though the genes may prevent the patients' disease from recurring in the
next generation, the agencies consider that alteration of the human germ line is
so profound a step that it should not be attempted without further discussion.

   Thus, companies conducting gene therapy trials are required to monitor where
in the body the new genes are being inserted. In October, Avigen announced it
had delayed its hemophilia trial because it had detected the presence of the
gene's vector in a patient's seminal fluid.

   The vector is the disabled virus used by gene therapists to insert corrective
genes into human cells. Gaining entry into the nucleus of human cells is a
technically difficult trick that certain viruses have acquired over the course
of evolution.

   In the hemophilia B trial, the vector carries the correct version of the
human gene for Factor IX, one of the cascade of proteins involved in making the
blood clot.

   Surprising discovery

   It was a surprise to find the vector even in seminal fluid because
experiments with dogs, in which the therapy was validated, showed no sign of
this occurrence. But there was no evidence that the vector had penetrated the
sperm, said Elliott Grossbard, Avigen's vice president for clinical affairs.

   The company sought guidance this month from a National Institutes of Health
panel, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which oversees gene therapy
issues. Amy Patterson, the NIH official who runs the committee, said its members
recommended that the trial should resume but that researchers also should try to
determine if the vector was reaching the sperm.

   The Food and Drug Administration accepted the committee's advice, and Avigen
said last month that it had received clearance to proceed with the trial. The
single patient who has so far been enrolled in the trial will be required to
wear a condom so as to avoid any chance of fathering a genetically altered
child.

   Philip Noguchi, the agency official who oversees gene therapy trials,
described the rationale for the agency's decision. A gene therapy treatment for
hemophilia B might be of great benefit, he said, and would need to be weighed
against the risks, including that of inadvertently modifying the human germ
line. But unless the trial proceeded, the agency could not gauge the possible
benefit, Noguchi said.

   "Our overall plan is to allow the trial to proceed in cautious fashion while
monitoring the potentially adverse finding of vector sequence in the seminal
fluid and at the end of the study to bring it back to public discussion,"
Noguchi said.

   Not everyone is happy with this approach. Eric Juengst, an ethicist at Case
Western Reserve University and a member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, said critics might view the policy as a step down a slippery slope.
If the hemophilia treatment turned out to work, but with unavoidable changes to
the germ line, germ-line gene therapy might sneak into public acceptance by a
side door.

   New twist

   Though most of the many trials of gene therapy have been disappointing so
far, Avigen is using a new and more promising vector called adeno associated
virus. Hemophilia is also a good candidate disease for gene therapy because only
tiny amounts of normal Factor IX can do a lot of good.

   Besides the human Factor IX gene, the Avigen virus carries a piece of DNA
that signals the cell to turn the gene on and make its product. This signal is
recognized only by liver cells, so that Factor IX is made only in the liver.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2002


                             1446 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     January 27, 2002 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2487 words

HEADLINE: Death in test haunts Hopkins researcher;
 Scientist: Friends say the doctor nearly quit after a fatal experiment but
hopes to get back to healing.

BYLINE: Tom Pelton

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   In the final hours of her life, Ellen Roche lay unconscious in a bed at the
Bayview Medical Center's intensive care unit, her shallow breathing forced by a
mechanical respirator. Around her gathered her family, her doctors and an
anxious professor wearing black wire rim glasses.

   The professor, Dr. Alkis Togias, was not there to treat the patient. He was
seeing the horrific conclusion of an experiment he had begun a month earlier,
when he offered the healthy 24-year-old woman $365 to inhale chemicals to
provoke an asthma-like reaction.

   One of those chemicals destroyed her lungs and shut down other organs. And so
on that warm June evening, Roche's family assembled in her hospital room, asked
her doctors to turn off her life support machinery and watched her die.

   That moment had devastating consequences. Roche's family has had to endure a
terrible loss. The Johns Hopkins medical school has been humiliated by federal
regulators, who temporarily suspended all human experimentation at the school in
July and forced an overhaul of its system for reviewing studies.

   And Togias?

   Since he walked out of that hospital room, his career has been frozen in
time. He still goes to work every day. But for months, virtually all he did was
meet with investigators - sitting through hundreds of hours of questions and
turning over reams of documents. The university has not punished him, but it has
not let him resume his studies.

   Although he received supportive e-mails and comments from many fellow asthma
researchers, he feared that other Hopkins scientists blamed him for the
suspension of their work and the taint to the university, said those who know
him.

   Togias became depressed and thought about resigning. But he decided to
continue because asthma research is what he knows and loves, say friends and
colleagues.

   "Togias was very shaken, very hurt," said Dr. Stokes Peebles, an allergy
researcher at Vanderbilt University. "All doctors have patients who die, but you
don't ever want a healthy person to die."

   Six months after the shutdown, the university has reapproved almost all the
2,600 halted experiments - except those led by Togias.

   In addition to canceling the experiment in which Roche was enrolled, the
university aborted or suspended nine of Togias' other studies, involving about
1,100 volunteers. Togias wants to resume two or three of these.

   But the federal Food and Drug Administration, which can prohibit researchers
from experimenting on humans, has not decided what restrictions, if any, it will
impose on Togias, said agency spokesman Lawrence Bachorik. And it is not clear
when the university will allow him to once again recruit volunteers.

   "Hopkins officials have imposed extraordinary measures to ensure that any
future research conducted by Dr. Togias will not only be rigorously re-reviewed
by the institutional review board, but also ... pose no unusual risks," said
medical school spokeswoman Joann Rodgers.

   Togias declined to comment for this article, noting respect and sympathy for
the Roche family, said his attorney. The lawyer, Daniel Kracov, said, "He is
dedicating all of his time to implementing the corrective action plan in full
cooperation with Johns Hopkins."

   That plan requires the vice dean for research, Dr. Chi Dang, to supervise any
studies that Togias conducts. Togias must also take a course in safety
regulations, among other measures.

   Some question whether Togias should ever be allowed to experiment on humans
again because he made so many serious errors in the study that killed Roche.

   Federal investigators concluded that Togias was negligent for giving Roche a
chemical, hexamethonium, not approved for humans, failing to find medical
journal articles that linked the chemical to lung disease and neglecting to warn
volunteers about the risk.

   But Togias' friends say it would be unfair to destroy a promising career
because of one tragedy.

   They describe him as a talented, honest and diligent scientist who feels
terrible about what happened and is working hard to make research at his asthma
center safer.

   Scientists anguish over what to do with researchers like Togias, a
well-meaning doctor who nevertheless violated his profession's guiding principle
of doing no harm. Should his career end? What should happen to a good scientist
who makes a bad mistake?

   Two who pursued healing

   Togias and Roche knew each other fairly well. They often passed each other in
the halls of Hopkins' Asthma and Allergy Center on the Bayview campus in East
Baltimore, one of the world's leading research labs in that field.

   Togias (pronounced Toy-us) is a serious and reserved 44-year-old with wavy
black hair and a gentle accent that hints at his upbringing and medical
education in Greece. He lives on a cul-de-sac in Bethesda with his wife and two
sons, ages 6 and 8.

   He is viewed as a meticulous and gifted researcher, an associate professor of
medicine who has worked at Hopkins for 19 years and written more than 150
articles. He spends most of his time conducting asthma experiments. But Togias
is also a physician, treating asthma patients in a clinic in East Baltimore.

   Roche worked as a lab technician for a colleague of Togias', Dr. John
Schroeder. She was 20 years younger than Togias, an energetic 1998 graduate of
Frostburg State University who grew up as one of five children of a Reisterstown
photographer.

   She was an animal lover, the owner of horses, rabbits, cats and dogs. She
started working at the asthma center in January 1999 because she wanted to
improve her credentials for admission to veterinary school, said those who knew
her.

   Six times during the more than two years she worked at the center, she
volunteered for experiments run by Togias.

   In April, Roche got a call from a postdoctoral research fellow, Dr. George
Pyrgos. He asked her whether she would volunteer in Togias' study of how the
lungs of healthy people work differently than the lungs of people with asthma.

   Roche agreed, probably because she wanted the $365 compensation and was
interested in helping scientists understand the illness, according to an account
Togias gave to investigators.

   About 10:30 a.m. May 4, Pyrgos, working under Togias, gave Roche the chemical
to inhale in Room 3B.45 of the asthma center, five doors down from Togias'
office.

   The next day, Roche began coughing when she inhaled deeply, according to a
university investigation.

   With Togias out of town, she called Pyrgos on May 7 and told him she was
coughing, felt hot, her nose was running and her muscles ached. Pyrgos told her
to return to the lab for tests, which found the volume of air she could breathe
had fallen by more than a third.

   Roche went home, and when Pyrgos called the next day, she said she was still
sick. Her family doctor prescribed cough medicine, but that didn't help. Burning
with a fever of 101 degrees, she went to Togias' lab accompanied by her family.
A scan showed that her lungs were inflamed.

   She and her parents went to the emergency room of the Bayview Medical Center
and then the intensive care unit, where doctors put her on antibiotics.

   The day she was admitted to the hospital, Togias logged on to his computer.
He typed the word hexamethonium into an Internet search engine and found a Web
site run by a medical school that published a directory of drug-induced lung
diseases. The site listed 13 medical journal articles from the 1950s and 1960s
that linked hexamethonium to sometimes-fatal lung damage and the phenomenon
"hexamethonium lung."

   Togias had not known of those articles when he submitted his study for
approval to the university review board. He warned Hopkins officials about them
and immediately halted his experiment.

   Meanwhile, Roche's condition deteriorated. A scan of her lungs May 12
revealed that the delicate air sacs had been so badly damaged that they had the
appearance of ground glass, according to a university report.

   Worried about her progressive lung failure and the bluish color of her skin,
her doctors put her on a mechanical ventilator. They brought in teams of
specialists in infectious diseases, who looked into every possible cause for her
illness, including Legionella and hantavirus. But experts would conclude that
the likeliest cause was hexamethonium.

   During Roche's 24 days in the hospital, Togias visited her and her family
nearly every day. But she kept getting worse. On June 2, with her doctors
reporting that she had no chance of regaining consciousness, her family decided
to remove her from life support.

   Togias expressed his sympathy by attending her wake and funeral. But after
the burial, he broke off all contact with the family, following the advice of
his attorney, said those who know him.

   The death devastated the entire asthma center, in part because so many people
knew and respected Roche and Togias.

   "It hit all of us hard, but it hit him (Togias) especially hard," said Dr.
Susan MacDonald, an associate professor in the center. "I think the world of
this physician, and I also know Ellen, because I worked with her here at the
center. It was a tragedy for the whole university."

   The death prompted three federal investigations and national news coverage.
Regulators examined not only Togias' experiment, but also Hopkins' system of
reviewing and approving studies.

   On July 19, Togias was working in his office when his attorney called to say
he had just left a tense meeting between federal officials and the medical
school dean, Dr. Edward D. Miller.

   The news was grim: The federal Office of Human Research Protection was
suspending almost all human experiments at Hopkins, halting more than 2,000
studies.

   Togias was shocked that his research would lead to such enormous troubles for
his colleagues, said those who know him. Fellow professors wrote him sympathetic
cards and e-mails. But he didn't hear much from colleagues outside his field at
Hopkins and sometimes interpreted that silence as hostility, his friends said.

   Still, he didn't crumble or hide.

   Just five days after the federal shutdown, Togias flew to Colorado to speak
before 80 scientists at the Aspen Allergy Conference.

   Although he was obviously shaken, Togias briefly addressed the issue that was
on everyone's minds before giving his planned speech on the relationship between
asthma and upper airway diseases.

   "It was very awkward, but he was very professional," said Dr. John James, a
co-director of the conference. "He got up and did what he needed to do. People
were impressed that he carried it off."

   But behind the stoic exterior, Togias was despondent and finding it hard to
focus on his work, according to his friends.

   To help come to terms with what happened, he flew to his childhood home in
Athens for two weeks in mid-August. He took comfort in talking with his family
and old friends.

   "He was very down for a while - but after he came back from Greece, he sent
me an e-mail that said, 'Things are looking up,'" said Dr. Hugh Windom, a friend
and asthma specialist in Sarasota, Fla. "The trip seemed to recharge his
batteries. He'll bounce back. I have faith he'll turn it around and get things
going again."

   A burden was lifted from him Oct. 11, when the Roche family announced it had
reached a settlement with Johns Hopkins - later reported to exceed $1 million -
and would not sue Togias.

   But the question remains: How much will this death haunt him?

   'Slap on the wrist'

   It's rare for healthy volunteers such as Roche to die in medical experiments.
When it happens, the researchers responsible are often allowed to continue with
their work, although sometimes with restrictions.

   When a 19-year-old student at the University of Rochester was killed by an
overdose of anaesthesia during a test of her lungs in a 1996 experiment, the
doctor who gave her too much lidocaine got a letter of reprimand from the
university but was allowed to continue his work, said Teri D'Agostino, a
university spokeswoman.

   When 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died during a gene therapy trial at the
University of Pennsylvania in 1999, federal investigators found several safety
violations. The researcher, Dr. James M. Wilson, agreed to stop experimenting on
humans, although he continues to perform basic science research.

   Paul Gelsinger, father of Jesse Gelsinger, said not all researchers who make
mistakes should be punished. But he said he believes scientists should be
sanctioned when they are reckless and design dangerous experiments.

   "What you had with Ellen Roche and Jesse were avoidable errors. If these
people had done the basic science correctly, Ellen and Jesse wouldn't have
died," said Paul Gelsinger. "Our oversight of experiments on humans is woeful.
There is no system in place to sanction these people (such as Wilson and
Togias). All there is is basically a slap on the wrist."

   Roche's family does not want to discuss Togias, according to its attorney,
Craig Schoenfeld.

   Vera Hassner Sharav, president of the Alliance for Human Research Protection,
which is based in New York, said there is no excuse to let researchers
experiment on people and then not hold them accountable when they fail to take
action to avoid tragedies.

   But Dr. Solbert Permutt, a veteran asthma researcher who acted as Togias'
mentor and helped obtain the federal grant that paid for the fatal study,
defends his friend. Roche's death was extremely "unusual and unlikely," he said,
and could not have been predicted.

   "I don't feel any guilt, and I don't believe that Togias feels any guilt in
relation to what happened," he said.

   Today, Togias spends much of his time trying to improve the safety of
research at the asthma center and restarting his career.

   He has offered to give up some of his roughly 1,500-square-foot lab so the
university can build a pharmacy for investigational drugs on the Bayview campus.
This would provide added safety because it would allow pharmacists, instead of
less-qualified people, to prepare experimental chemicals.

   Togias and the 15 employees of his lab are training in federal drug safety
regulations. He has decided not to continue about seven of the 10 studies he was
working on in July, friends said.

   But he does hope to resume a study of the link between cockroach allergies
and childhood asthma in urban neighborhoods, for which he recruited 150 families
at the Claremont public housing complex in East Baltimore.

   Permutt, who brought Togias to Hopkins, said that his friend's character has
become stronger and that his potential to make breakthrough discoveries is still
unlimited.

   "The biggest lesson I have learned from this is, doing work involving human
volunteers is like walking across a minefield," Permutt said. "The mines are few
and far between, and many researchers can spend their entire lives never having
an adverse event. Sometimes we forget it's dangerous work. But the mines are
always there."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Doctor: A friend says a test participant's death left, Dr.
Alkis Togias "very shaken, very hurt."; , 2. Responsibility: Hopkins Vice Dean
for Research Chi Dang (from, left), Dean Edward D. Miller and Internal Review
Committee Chairman, Lewis C. Becker said the school was at fault.; , 3. Victim:
Lab technician Ellen Roche often volunteered to be an, experiment subject., 2.
SUN FILE PHOTO : JULY 2001

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2002


                             1447 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 27, 2002, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. U115

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: WHO'S WHAT, WHERE;
BIOTECHNOLOGY

BODY:

   James A. Haslbeck, strategic accounts, EXACT Sciences Corp., Maynard; Barry
Cohen, vice president of business development, Reny Seger, chief scientific
officer, Keryx Biopharmaceuticals, Cambridge; David Pendergast, senior vice
president/quality and analytical development, Neil Kirby, vice president/global
regulatory affairs, Suzanne L. Bruhn, vice president/program managment,
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Cambridge.

   Send announcements to Who's What, Where, The Boston Globe, Box 2378, Boston,
MA 02107 (e-mail: who@globe.com; fax: 617-929-3183).


LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             1448 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     January 25, 2002 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 542 words

HEADLINE: GenVec's top drug hope to lose backing of Pfizer;
 Md. firm lays action on BioBypass to full agenda, not tests

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that Pfizer Inc. will discontinue financial
backing for GenVec's lead product candidate, but said the decision wasn't based
on results from human tests of the gene therapy.

   The Gaithersburg company sought to put a positive spin on the news, saying
Pfizer no longer will be entitled to royalties from BioBypass. The drug is
designed to treat vascular problems by promoting growth of new blood vessels.
Pfizer has paid GenVec $60 million as part of the collaboration.

   "From a business point of view, it's much better for GenVec to own the drug,"
GenVec Chief Executive Officer Paul Fischer said in an interview yesterday. He
said Pfizer dropped BioBypass because it has an unusually full pipeline of
prospects and that the gene therapy wasn't a good fit.

   Pfizer officials didn't respond to a request for comment.

   Wall Street interpreted the news as a negative for GenVec, sending its shares
down as much as 40 percent before they steadied to close at $3.60, down 41 cents
or 10 percent, on the Nasdaq stock market.

   A.G. Edwards analyst Craig West said the news was negative but not a
catastrophe. "Do I care as an analyst or an investor? No, not really," he said.
The reason: "We're going to get our answer on whether BioBypass works," he said,
because the human tests that have been initiated will continue.

   "I happen to believe that, given the facts presented to us today, it was a
sober, strategic business decision on whether to (continue) to invest in a very
young technology - gene therapy," J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. analyst Franklin M.
Berger said. "The subtext is, who knows what? Does Pfizer know something they're
not telling us?"

   Yesterday, Fischer said in a conference call to analysts that neither company
has any results on the drug's effectiveness from current Phase II clinical
trials, the second of three phases of human testing required by the Food and
Drug Administration.

   The drug is being tested as a treatment for heart disease and, separately,
poor circulation in the lower legs. Results are expected late this year.

   Pfizer will continue backing the Phase II trials for six months. By that
time, Fischer said, the testing should be all but wrapped up, leaving GenVec
with the relatively modest financial responsibility of monitoring the last few
patients. The company said it will be able this year to pay those costs, move
its TNFerade anti-tumor therapy into Phase II trials as planned and initiate a
Phase I trial for its third product, a therapy for macular degeneration - a
disease characterized by bleeding in the eyes.

   The company reported $42 million in cash as of Dec. 31. Fischer said the
balance was adequate to carry GenVec and its development plans until 2004.

   If the Phase II BioBypass results are positive, GenVec would have a
strengthened bargaining position if it chooses to seek a new large corporate
partner.

   BioBypass is made up of a gene encased in a deactivated cold virus that acts
as a transport. The gene gives the instructions for the making of a protein that
encourages blood vessels to grow. It's used in tissues with inadequate blood
flow. The drug is administered directly to the heart by a needle or catheter and
to the leg by injection.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2002


                             1449 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2002 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 25, 2002 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Pfizer to Stop Working on GenVec Heart Drug

BYLINE: Terence Chea, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg company that develops gene-based medicines,
announced yesterday that New York drug giant Pfizer Inc. will end its
participation in the development of GenVec's lead product, BioBypass.

    The news sparked a sell-off of GenVec shares, which fell as much as 39
percent during trading yesterday before climbing back. The stock finished the
day at $ 3.60, down 41 cents, or 10 percent.

    BioBypass is one of the most advanced drug candidates in the experimental
field of gene therapy, which involves treating disease by injecting patients
with new genes. BioBypass treats heart and artery diseases by delivering a gene
that spurs the growth of new blood vessels at damaged areas. Results from
BioBypass's second round of testing will not be available until the third or
fourth quarter of this year, company officials said.

    GenVec's president and chief executive, Paul H. Fischer, said Pfizer's
decision to back out of the partnership was strictly a business decision and not
based on test results from ongoing patient trials.

    Pfizer spokeswoman Betsy Raymond made the same point, saying Pfizer's
decision was based on an evaluation of the company's drug-development strategy,
not trial results.

    "Gene therapy is not going to be part of that overall strategy," Raymond
said. She added that discontinuing the partnership "will allow Pfizer to invest
in other investment opportunities that we think are better aligned with the
growth of our product portfolio."

    In 1997, GenVec entered a partnership with drugmaker Warner-Lambert, which
was acquired by rival Pfizer in 2000, to jointly develop the treatment.
BioBypass is being studied in patients with two conditions: coronary artery
disease and peripheral vascular disease.

    "Without a doubt, this weakens the story," said Craig West, an analyst at
A.G. Edwards & Sons who owns shares of GenVec. "It could delay the development
of the product. It was a disruption in what was a set development plan."

    Pfizer is one of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies. Last year, it
generated $ 32.25 billion in revenue on sales of blockbuster drugs such as the
cholesterol-lowering medicine Lipitor, which had $ 6.4 billion in 2001 sales. By
contrast, BioBypass, if approved, isn't expected to generate more than $ 300
million in annual sales, West said.

    In the next six months, Pfizer will transfer BioBypass and responsibility
for the clinical trials to GenVec. In the meantime, the New York drugmaker will
pay for trials and costs associated with the transfer.

    Fischer said Pfizer has spent about $ 90 million on BioBypass's development
but GenVec will reap the full financial benefit if BioBypass reaches the
marketplace. GenVec will regain full commercial rights to BioBypass and will no
longer share revenue from potential sales if it wins approval.

    After the trials are complete and GenVec officials review the results, they
will decide whether to launch a third round of patient trials, which are needed
to win approval from the Food and Drug Administration.

   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2002


                             1450 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 21, 2002 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; No Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2768 words

HEADLINE: The Wonders of Saliva;
It protects our teeth, fights infection and is sorely missed when absent.
Scientists are fascinated by its medical potential.

BYLINE: ROSIE MESTEL, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Saliva is a humdrum liquid, the stuff of giggles, dribbles and schoolyard
grossness. It's hardly something to take seriously--until, that is, you lack it.
When your glands no longer pump out a normal and robust 2 to 3 pints daily, then
you'll come to appreciate spit for the wondrous substance it is--one that does
far more than render food slimy and digestible.

   Saliva, science has revealed, is much more than water. It is packed with
proteins that help control the teeming hordes of microbes in our mouths. It is
stuffed with substances that make our spit stringy, stop our teeth from
dissolving and help heal wounds. It is brimming with a plethora of hormones and
other chemicals revealing anything from whether one smokes to whether one is
stressed.

   Thus it's no wonder that trouble starts brewing when mouths dry out. Cavities
blossom like flowers in spring. Tongues become sore and fissured, and breeding
grounds for yeast. In a spit-depleted world, speaking and swallowing are
challenges, eating a cracker is the height of recklessness and you wake up with
your tongue glued to your mouth.

   Such indignities will be more frequent in future years because the number of
saliva-depleted people stands to rise, experts predict. Tens of thousands of
Americans receive radiotherapy for head and neck cancers each year--a treatment
that can permanently damage salivary glands. Maybe a million have dry mouths
because their immune systems are attacking their own glands in a disease known
as Sjogren's syndrome.

   But an increasing number of people (25 million by some estimates, and more to
come as the population ages) get dry mouths as a side effect of more than 400 of
today's medications--taken for depression, high blood pressure and more.

   A small band of scientists is fighting back.

   Armed with a deep knowledge of saliva gleaned over decades, this cadre--which
jocularly refers to itself as the "salivation army"--is working to create better
artificial salivas to keep mouths wet and protected and find new drugs to help
saliva flow more freely. They're trying to repair salivary glands with gene
therapy--even to build an artificial gland to implant in the mouth.

   And their vision goes far beyond simply mending the mouth. Just as leech
saliva gave us anticoagulants, researchers hope that our very own spit may yield
new antimicrobial drugs to help battle germs. Or that sick people's salivary
glands can one day be coaxed to make hormones that are needed for their bodies
to heal.

   "The field's quite exciting--we're entering a new phase," says Lawrence
Tabak, a longtime saliva scientist and director of the National Institute of
Dental and Craniofacial Research. "People are trying to translate what they've
learned from nature into things that are going to improve patients' health. To
me, that's the most exciting thing possible--to take these great, basic science
discoveries and translate them into tangibles."

   Tangible breakthroughs on the saliva front can't come too soon for Nancy
Ross-Flanigan, 52, a Detroit area writer who's been pretty much spitless for 11
years, ever since her salivary glands were blitzed during radiotherapy for
tongue cancer.

   Nothing, she says, prepared her for just how dry things would be.

   "I just assumed--well, everybody has dry mouth when they get nervous or
something--that's what I thought it would be like," she says. "That you could
still talk. You could still eat. You wouldn't have to be putting something in
your mouth all the time to have any moisture."

   But her mouth ended up so dry it wouldn't yield spit even when doctors tried
milking her glands with a suction cup stuck inside her cheek. Unless she sipped
water every few minutes, her mouth gummed up, her throat got scratchy, she
croaked, and then she choked. Life's most humdrum events became tinged with new
drama.

   She learned to favor slimy pastas and soups after a series of spectacular
restaurant choking incidents--and a time, on a lunch date, when a wad of bread
wedged fast under her lip, bulging it out like a chipmunk's cheek.

   She experimented with a long stream of over-the-counter mouth moisturizers
that her friends jocularly referred to as "I Can't Believe It's Not Saliva!" She
tried a drug to stimulate her glands. It left her saliva flow almost unchanged
but sent other bodily secretions into overdrive, drenching her with sweat in the
grocery store or office.

   Today, Ross-Flanigan uses over-the-counter pills that coat her mouth with
slime--but mostly she just totes water everywhere. She carries it in sundry
bottles, plastic jugs and on a pouch on her back when she rides out (not quite
as wild and free as she'd like) on her Harley motorcycle.

   It is far from ideal. Water isn't slick like saliva, so her mouth gets dry
and sore. Sinister scenarios color her fantasies of overseas travel: "I think,
'Gee, what if I get captured by terrorists and they won't let me have my spit
bottle?'"

   And sometimes, she says, she just feels plain dorky. Like the time she went
backstage to meet her rock idol, Joe Cocker. There she was, dressed to the sexy
nines in spandex skirt, slinky top, strappy shoes--accessorized by a giant, red,
plastic picnic jug.

   Few people suffering from dry mouth are quite as desiccated as Ross-Flanigan.
But they can still run into nasty trouble, says saliva expert Mahvash Navazesh,
associate professor and chairwoman for oral medicine and oral diagnosis at USC's
school of dentistry (and possibly the only person to possess a plush teddy bear
with "spit queen" inscribed on it).

   She holds up slide after slide depicting only too clearly what she means--raw
tongues white with yeast, teeth brown or black with decay on their ridges as
well as at or under the gumline, where decay is usually rare.

   If only, she says, more dentists and doctors had saliva at least somewhat on
their minds.

   "I don't think people are paying enough attention," she says. "Because of
that, dentists are usually doing damage control. They are treating dental
problems rather than preventing them."

   Early Diagnosis Can Mean Saving One's Teeth

   To Navazesh's mind, the first part of paying attention is measuring saliva
flow properly so you know if there's a lack--and she is an expert at that,
demonstrating her craft one morning on a well-dressed, middle-aged woman who has
been referred to USC with a suspected saliva shortage.

   At Navazesh's request, the patient sits in the dentist's chair, head tilted
upward, eyes open, and drools into a tube for five minutes. Next she chews gum
for five minutes in time with the click of a metronome--and spits into a second
tube. Finally, she sucks a lemon candy (again in time with the metronome) and
spits into tube No. 3.

   The tubes are weighed--the first holding a dribble, the second an inch, the
third nearly two--and saliva output calculated. Finally, the verdict is
delivered: The patient's flow is on the low side and could indicate an early
stage of Sjogren's syndrome.

   Diagnosis is crucial, experts say, because there are things patients and
dentists must do to fight rampant tooth decay. Stringent oral hygiene is
key--brushing and flossing after every meal, daily application of fluoride gels,
monthly tooth-cleaning appointments.

   "I could have gone around the world four times on the money I've spent on my
teeth," says art teacher and Lakewood resident Ruth Eyrich. Her Sjogren's
syndrome was diagnosed in 1985 after her dentist found more than 14 cavities on
one tooth and asked her what the dickens she'd been doing.

   Yet despite monthly visits to the hygienist and everyone's best efforts, she
says, her teeth have slowly crumbled over the years--through a long procession
of fillings, crowns, root canals, bridges and 13 dental implants. She pores over
the pages of "The Moisture Seekers," a Sjogren's newsletter, and hopes one day
she'll read of a big breakthrough.

   It hasn't come yet.

   Thus, along with diagnosis and care, a third line of attack is needed to help
the dry mouth brigade--one that's been sorely neglected, say scientists. Better
therapies.

   "A lot of my patients are suffering--there's no good answer for them," says
Nelson Rhodus, director of the Oral Medicine and Xerostomia Clinic at the
University of Minnesota in Minneapolis.

   Drug companies continue to neglect the dry mouth arena, he says, because they
don't see much money in it. And today's gland-stimulating drugs can only help
people with glands left to stimulate.

   Artificial salivas, unimpressively, have fared no better than tap water in
most clinical trials.

   It's time, experts say, to bring more science to bear.

   A Relatively Recent History of Study

   Saliva science kicked off relatively late in the history of medicine,
recounts Irwin Mandel, grand old man in saliva research and somewhat of a
historian on salivary matters.

   Centuries before Mandel got his hands wet in the lab, physicians thought the
salivary glands were lowly excretory organs--ridding the body of toxins and evil
spirits from the brain. They would dose patients with poisonous bichloride of
mercury, causing saliva to pour from the mouth.

   Even in the last century, scientists only got serious with saliva well after
they'd tackled other bodily fluids like blood.

   ("Saliva doesn't have the drama of blood, it doesn't have the integrity of
sweat, it doesn't have the emotional appeal of tears," says Mandel, a professor
emeritus of Columbia University.)

   But from the '50s onward, Mandel and a handful of others have established
that human saliva is filled with hundreds of useful chemicals, floating around
with millions of bacteria, viruses, yeast and skin cells in what Mandel terms a
"chowder." They've been busily investigating such proteins--and finding that
some are important for maintaining oral health.

   There are long, sticky and stretchy proteins called mucins that are studded
all over with carbohydrates, giving saliva its stringiness so it nicely coats
the teeth and gums. Mucins are a royal pain to study, says Paul Denny, a saliva
molecular biologist at USC. ("They stick to everything," he says with a sigh.)
But they're worth it.

   Studies from various labs suggest that mucins do more than form a physical
barrier protecting the teeth. They also stick to bacteria that cause tooth decay
and gum disease, interfering with their ability to colonize teeth, and helping
our immune cells attack them.

   And mucins are just the tip of the iceberg. Other proteins--with names like
peroxidase, lysozyme, lactoferrin and histatin--as well as our own antibodies
also wreak havoc on bacteria and fungi.

   Some salivary proteins, such as one fondly referred to as "slippy," hasten
the healing of wounds. Some ("slippy" again, among others) neutralize viruses
like HIV.

   Others keep saliva super-loaded with calcium and phosphorus, the stuff of
tooth enamel, so these minerals don't leach from teeth.

   "If saliva were water, we would have little stumps of teeth or no teeth at
all by age 20--we would have dissolved our teeth away," says Frank Oppenheim,
chairman of the department of periodontology and oral biology at Boston
University.

   Some of these proteins have been studied in small trials--such as the
histatins, long Oppenheim's passion, which inhibit the growth of yeast and
bacteria.

   In one histatin study, beagles were first brought to the heights of oral
health by rigorous daily toothbrushing. Then, for 42 days, they ate a diet
causing plaque buildup, and either received histatins in an oral gel or the gel
alone. At the study's end, those given histatins had developed less gum
inflammation and plaque than the other group.

   In another trial, 159 healthy humans refrained from brushing their teeth for
four weeks. Yet again, those using a mouth rinse containing a portion of the
histatin protein developed less plaque and gum inflammation than those who
didn't.

   Currently, a Pittsburgh company, Demegen, is developing a histatin mouth
rinse--one that could be used to fight oral yeast infections in people with
faulty immune systems.

   But some researchers hope that knowledge of spit proteins could improve the
quality of artificial salivas--both in terms of texture and cavity-fighting
clout. Today's faux salivas usually contain a synthetic thickening chemical--but
it makes the fake fluids too thick, says Rhodus. ("If people have cotton-mouth
to begin with, using this stuff is like putting glue in there.")

   With both types of improvements in mind, Dutch scientists, among others, are
busy testing sundry fake salivas seasoned with this or that microbe-fighting
protein. They've developed fake salivas containing synthetic gums or mucins
harvested from pig stomach, which are appreciated for their slithery feel.

   But it's tough to create anything close to a fluid that's been fine-tuned
through millions of years of evolution, says Arie van Nieuw Amerongen of the
Academic Center for Dentistry in Amsterdam. The pig mucins, for instance, are
sticky enough but just aren't stretchy enough.

   "Hardly anybody thinks about spit. But when they miss it, they see how many
properties it has--and how difficult it is to mimic," he says.

   Rats: Gene Therapy Is Still a Long Way Off

   Instead of mimicking saliva, some scientists want to fix the faucet and get
fluid flowing again, using gene therapy. Ross-Flanigan has heard of that: She's
even got some clippings about it in her "saliva" file. She'd do it in a flash if
she thought it would work.

   So far, though, only rats have really had their dry mouths cured, says Bruce
Baum, chief of the gene therapy and therapeutics branch of the National
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research.

   The rats (whose glands were first destroyed with irradiation) didn't grow
spanking-new glands. Instead, tissues that don't normally ooze fluid were
genetically changed into oozers.

   The approach: infecting those watertight tissues with a harmless virus
carrying a special gene, called aquaporin. Aquaporin directs the formation of a
protein that muscles its way into the membrane and forms a pore through which
water can pass.

   Rats may be curable, but Ross-Flanigan won't be able to get the blitzed
remains of her glands studded with water pores any time soon. The strategy
hasn't yet been shown effective in pigs and primates, let alone tested in human
trials.

   Gene therapy, in any case, isn't the only saliva science exciting Baum. His
group is also working hard on an artificial gland--one that would be built from
scratch out of skin cells engineered to ooze fluids. The cells would be coaxed
to grow on a biodegradable tube that would then be implanted in the mouth.

   Baum and an Alameda biotech company, Genteric Inc., are also excited at the
thought that salivary glands can be used as little factories. The glands, both
point out, don't just ooze fluid and proteins into the mouth. They ooze them
into our blood.

   Thus, while you could certainly add genes to improve the quality of someone's
saliva, you could also add genes that would help supply hormones for the rest of
the body: growth hormone, insulin, you name it.

   In fact, says Tabak, you can dream on and on about stuff one can do with this
lowly fluid and the glands that make it. Maybe one day scientists will find a
salivary gland stem cell and build whole new glands from scratch. Maybe one day
all those hormones that are floating around in our spit will allow engineers to
build tiny sensing devices that sit in our mouth, constantly monitoring our
health and telling us off if we light up a cigarette.

   "Imagine it telling you, 'Go see your physician' or 'Danger: You Have Taken
in Too Much Alcohol,'" Tabak says. "You can fantasize about all kinds of
things."

   *

   A Substance of Substance

   Nerve signals from the brain prompt the three main pairs of salivary glands
(the parotic, sublingual and submandibular) to release saliva. The taste, sight
or even thought of food increases the signals.

   What's In It

   Saliva contains hundreds of proteins and other chemicals with a wide array of
properties. Among them:

   * Mucins, proteins that make saliva stringy, protecting the teeth and gums
and fighting bacteria.

   * Histatins, lactoferrin, lyzozyme and peroxidase, proteins that appear to
fight bacteria and yeast.

   * Proline-rich proteins that allow large amounts of calcium phosphate to
exist in our saliva--preventing our tooth enamel from dissolving.

   * Amylase, an enzyme that breaks starch into sugars and begins digestion of
food before it reaches the stomach.

   * Chemicals such as epidermal growth factor and one called SLPI (or
"slippy"') that aid in wound healing.

   * Hormones and drugs that reveal much about our physiology, making spit
useful in crime and medicine.

GRAPHIC:  USC's Mahvash Navazesh examines a saliva sample. Navazesh studies the
decay that can result from a severely dry mouth. PHOTOGRAPHER: LORI SHEPLER /
Los Angeles Times
 Nancy Ross-Flanigan, who always carries water with her to fight dry mouth,
fills a water pack. PHOTOGRAPHER: JERRY S. MENDOZA / For The Times
 Dr. Paul Denny tests saliva samples for different proteins, such as mucins,
which help prevent tooth decay. PHOTOGRAPHER: LORI SHEPLER / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2002


                             1451 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2002 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    January 18, 2002, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 333 words

HEADLINE: Perry creates council to push biotechnology

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ARMANDO VILLAFRANCA, Houston Chronicle Austin Bureau

DATELINE: AUSTIN

BODY:

   AUSTIN - Gov. Rick Perry gave the rapidly evolving field of biotechnology
priority on the state's agenda Thursday by creating the Governor's Council of
Science and Biotechnology Development.

   The council's aim will be to aid biotechnological advances in genetic
research by melding public and private resources to take developments from the
laboratory to the marketplace.

   "It is about finding a gene therapy that will prevent a parent or child from
dying too young from cancer. It is about making improvements to nutrition or the
food supply that can enhance our health," Perry said Thursday while speaking at
Ambion, an Austin-based biotechnology lab.

   Perry said 29 other states have biotechnological research institutes. He
cited work in Massachusetts, California and Michigan.

   "Texas is not lingering back, but we do not have a statewide focus, a
statewide initiative to clearly bring the entrepreneurs in the private sector
together with the academicians and create these extraordinary catalysts in
technology transfer," he said.

   Last February, plans were announced for a $ 633 million biotechnology
research project consisting of 15 buildings on 64 acres next to the Texas
Medical Center.

   At the time, supporters said Houston led the nation in biomedical research
but lagged in developing that research for the marketplace. The BioHouston
project fell behind schedule when the state offered it a $ 20 million loan
instead of a grant, said its president, John Walsh.

   "We have not exercised that right, simply because it changed the economics
for the project significantly," Walsh said.

   The state council will be led by Ashley Smith, president of the Texas
Institute for Rehabilitation and Research in Houston and the outgoing chairman
of a coalition that got the Houston biotechnology park project started.

   Perry said the council will ultimately bring more research dollars to the
state, encourage university researchers to develop products, and create
biotechnology jobs.


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2002


                             1452 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            January 18, 2002 Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 584 words

HEADLINE: $252.7 million bond sale approved;
Money will finance construction projects

BYLINE: By Jack Wardlaw; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- The State Bond Commission voted Thursday to sell $252.7
million in general obligation bonds to finance projects approved by the
Legislature last year.

   State Treasurer John Kennedy, commission chairman, said the bond sale
probably will be held in February or March.

   "We have to choose the bond counsel and do the other paperwork before we can
go forward," Kennedy said. "Interest rates will probably stay pretty favorable,
but there's a lot of paper (bonds) out there. A lot of states are having to
borrow money to balance their budgets right now."

   The resolution for the bond sale was approved with no opposition and little
debate.

   Among the items authorized in the bill are several highway construction
projects financed mostly with federal grants rather than state bond money.
Others include: $68 million for West Bank hurricane protection; $9.9 million for
construction and acquisitions for a Grammy Hall of Fame complex in New Orleans;
$6.4 million for renovation of the state office building in Duncan Plaza in New
Orleans; $6 million for continued construction of buildings in the Capitol
complex in Baton Rouge; and $10 million for a cultural and arts center near the
Capitol.

   In other action, the commission voted 11-1 for preliminary approval of a $67
million bond issue through the Louisiana Public Facilities Authority for student
loans, despite heated objections from Senate President John Hainkel, R-New
Orleans, a longtime critic of the authority.

   LPFA officials said the money is needed to provide loans to Louisiana college
students between July and September 2003. Only about $18 million is on hand, the
commission was told.

   "I'm going to have to vote against your horrible program," Hainkel said. "My
information is that the students could save money by getting their loans at the
bank."

   LPFA officials said their loans will cost students about 3 percent interest,
after a prompt-payment discount is figured in, compared with about 4 percent on
bank loans.

   But Hainkel was not satisfied with that explanation. "You are stealing money
from the children," he said. His vote was the only one against approval.

   Also on Thursday:
   -- A $5.4 million bond issue was approved for land acquisition,
rehabilitation, construction, installation and equipping of cargo facilities at
Louis Armstrong International Airport in Kenner.

   -- Preliminary approval was given to a $6 million bond issue through the
Industrial Development Board of New Orleans for construction and equipping of a
compost facility at 3810 Alvar St.

   -- Lines of credit totaling about $1.6 million were approved for several
construction projects so work can begin or continue in anticipation of the
upcoming bond sale. These include $2.7 million for construction at Fontainebleau
State Park in St. Tammany Parish; $470,000 for air-conditioning equipment at
Southeast Louisiana State Hospital in Mandeville; $4.8 million for construction
within the Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium in Caddo, Orleans and St.
Tammany parishes; $1.6 million for construction at Nunez Community College in
St. Bernard Parish; $6 million for continued construction of the courthouse at
400 Royal St. in New Orleans; $1.2 million for improvements at a playground in
Carrollton; and $1.5 million for construction at Audubon Park.

   . . . . . . .

Jack Wardlaw can be reached at jwardlaw@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-7315.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2002


                             1453 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    January 17, 2002 Thursday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1428 words

HEADLINE: 2 settlements are reached in Allegheny suit;
Health-system creditors and others will get $93.7 million.

BYLINE: Linda Loyd INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Four years after Allegheny health system executives stripped restricted
endowment funds to stem losses of $1 million per day, a bankruptcy settlement
reached yesterday will restore 24 cents for every dollar taken, directing the
money toward health research at the MCP-Hahnemann University School of Medicine
and local health education programs.

   The research and education programs, as well as creditors and some former
Allegheny doctors, will receive a total of $93.7 million from the bankrupt
system's insurers, a bank, and others involved in the case.

   The endowment funds were intended for research for such things as gene
therapy and diabetes, and for medical equipment and education. By the time
Allegheny's eight hospitals here were sold to Tenet Healthcare Corp. in late
1998, researchers and physicians were just beginning to realize that the money -
donated by charities, raised at golf tournaments, and collected from memorial
contributions - was gone.

   Lawyers involved in Allegheny's bankruptcy case reached two agreements, which
will pay a combined $56.1 million to 11,000 unsecured creditors and $22.1
million to the Pennsylvania Attorney General's Office, which represented the
foundations.

   The unsecured creditors, who say they were owed $1 billion, will receive less
than 6 cents on the dollar from yesterday's settlements.

   The settlements mark the end of litigation except for a lawsuit against
Allegheny's former auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers L.L.P.

   In addition, Pennsylvania Attorney General Mike Fisher is prosecuting
Allegheny's former chief executive officer, Sherif S. Abdelhak, on 709 criminal
charges. Abdelhak's trial is scheduled to begin Feb. 25.

   Lawyers for Allegheny's creditors, along with Fisher and Tenet executives,
said they were pleased with the settlements.

   In 1998, The Inquirer reported that the health system had taken millions from
restricted endowments and related funds of Allegheny's hospitals and medical
school before the system went into bankruptcy. Fisher, who filed a claim in 1999
to recover $78.5 million, said he expected the foundations to get an additional
$4 million within four years and as much as $10 million more from the resolution
of other litigation.

   The bulk of an $85.5 million settlement - $48.25 million - will be paid by
four insurance companies that provided liability coverage to the health system's
former directors and officers.

   The rest of that settlement will be paid by:

   Mellon Financial Corp., $28.5 million.

   Reserve funds from the bankruptcy trustee, $7.75 million.

   Allegheny General Hospital, $1 million.

   Of the $85.5 million settlement, $49.5 million will go to the creditors,
$20.5 million to the Attorney General's Office, $9.5 million for civil legal
fees, $4.75 million to former Allegheny doctors, and $1.25 million to a criminal
defense fund to pay attorneys' fees and expenses for three former Allegheny
executives, including Abdelhak.

   In a second settlement yesterday, two insurers will pay $8.2 million, with 20
percent to go to the foundations and 80 percent to creditors. A third insurer,
Reliance Insurance Co., is named in the settlement, but it will pay no money
because it is being liquidated by the Pennsylvania Insurance Department. Those
three insurers issued coverage to Allegheny on July 9, 1998 - only days before
it filed for bankruptcy.

   "We are very pleased with the settlement," said Laura E. Ellsworth, attorney
for the creditors' committee. "We think it puts money in pockets now that would
have dissipated through the course of litigation."

   The settlements result from lawsuits against the health system's directors
and officers, and Mellon Bank and its parent, Mellon Financial Corp.

   This is the second time Mellon has paid money in the Allegheny bankruptcy
case. In late 2000, Mellon paid $14.5 million, and two other banks paid a total
of $37.5 million to creditors to resolve claims that the banks had improperly
received loan repayments shortly before the bankruptcy filing.

   Under yesterday's $85.5 million settlement, Mellon Financial agreed to pay
$28.5 million to resolve lawsuits by the bankruptcy trustee regarding a breach
of fiduciary duty and by Tenet concerning the endowment funds.

   Of the money designated to restore endowments, Fisher said 55 percent would
go to the Philadelphia Health & Research Corp., which was set up in 1998 to
operate and support research and education at MCP Hahnemann University,
including its medical school. An additional 35 percent would go to the Franklin
Health Trust for Philadelphia-area health initiatives, and 10 percent would go
to charities formerly associated with Allegheny General Hospital, Fisher said.

   Donna Gentile O'Donnell, president of the Franklin Health Trust, said the
foundation would use the money for medical research, health education, and
community health-focused partnerships.

   A public hearing about the settlements is scheduled for federal court in
Pittsburgh Feb. 12. On that day, federal district and bankruptcy courts will be
asked to approve the agreements.

   Allegheny, which was based in Pittsburgh, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection for eight of its Philadelphia-area hospitals, with $1.5 billion in
debts, on July 21, 1998. It was the largest health-care bankruptcy in U.S.
history.

   Tenet said it joined the litigation solely to restore the endowments. The
for-profit hospital operator will get no money from the settlement.

   "The collapse of the Allegheny health system was a deep wound on the
health-care system of Pennsylvania," said Barry A. Wolfman, senior vice
president of operations for Tenet's Pennsylvania region. Wolfman said he hoped
that donors could once again feel confident that their contributions would be
protected and used only for their intended purposes.

   After these settlements, the last remaining part of the bankruptcy case is
the PricewaterhouseCoopers litigation.

   A committee representing all creditors sued PricewaterhouseCoopers,
Allegheny's auditor in 1997 and 1998 when the hospital network's finances were
deteriorating. The lawsuit alleges that the firm - then Coopers & Lybrand -
contributed to the system's demise and failed to disclose the deteriorating
finances.

   Linda Loyd's e-mail address is lloyd@phillynews.com.

   Allegheny, From Start to Finish

   1988 Allegheny health system enters the Philadelphia market, buying MCP
Hospital and its medical school.

   1991 Allegheny takes over St. Christophers Hospital for Children in
Kensington, Warminster General in Bucks County, and Rolling Hill in Elkins Park.

   1994 Allegheny takes control of Hahnemann Hospital and its medical school,
which is merged with MCP.

   1996 Allegheny acquires the Graduate Health System: Graduate, City Avenue,
Parkview, Rancocas and Mount Sinai Hospitals.

   Oct. 13, 1997 Allegheny lays off 1,700 employees and closes Mount Sinai.

   June 5, 1998 Sherif S. Abdelhak is fired as Alleghenys chief executive
officer.

   July 21, 1998 Eight of Alleghenys Philadelphia-area hospitals, its medical
university, and hundreds of doctors practices file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection. At $1.5 billion in debts, it is the nations largest health-care
bankruptcy.

   Nov. 10, 1998 Allegheny sells eight hospitals to Tenet Healthcare Corp.
Drexel University takes over the professional schools, including MCP Hahnemann
School of Medicine.

   Dec. 30, 1998 Creditors seek to collect $200 million from Alleghenys
liability insurance providers.

   Sept. 14, 1999 Pennsylvania Attorney General Mike Fisher finds that Allegheny
withdrew $78.5 million from restricted endowments and related funds and spent it
on operations before declaring bankruptcy. Fisher asks U.S. Bankruptcy Court to
restore all of the money.

   March 15, 2000 Three top executives, including Abdelhak, are charged
criminally with liquidating $52.4 million in restricted endowments.

   April 12, 2000 Creditors sue PricewaterhouseCoopers, Alleghenys outside
auditor, seeking millions of dollars in damages.

   May 11, 2001 Common Pleas Court Judge Robert E. Dauer rules that Abdelhak
should stand trial on felony theft charges; he dismisses all charges against one
executive and all but one against another.

   Jan. 16, 2002 Creditors, doctors, and the Pennsylvania Attorney Generals
Office reach settlements totaling $93.7 million with seven insurers and Mellon
Financial Corp.

   Feb. 25, 2002 Scheduled trial date for Abdelhak.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART;
Sherif S. Abdelhak
CHART
Allegheny, From Start to Finish

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2002


                             1454 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          January 16, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 911 words

HEADLINE: The future of cloning research in California

BYLINE: Theodore Friedmann; Friedmann is a professor of pediatrics at the
University of California San Diego, director of the UCSD Program in Human Gene
Therapy and Muriel Whitehill Chair of Biomedical Ethics. He served on the
Cloning Commission for the state of California.

BODY:
 In the aftermath of the successful cloning of the sheep Dolly, the state of
California enacted a five-year moratorium on attempts to apply such cloning
(nuclear transfer followed by implantation) technology toward the creation of a
human being.  The legislation also established an Advisory Committee on Human
Cloning to advise the governor and the Legislature on the future implications of
the technology and to recommend a position that the state should adopt in the
growing cloning debate.

   The resulting multidisciplinary group of California scientists, legal
scholars, ethicists and public policy advisers has now concluded its two-year
analysis of the implications of human cloning.  On the basis of many still
unresolved scientific, ethical, political and policy considerations, the
committee is recommending continuation of the existing ban on the use of cloning
methods for the purpose of reproducing a human being ("reproductive cloning").

   Under this prohibition, cells made in human cloning studies must not be
implanted into a uterus to grow into a human being.  The committee's unanimous
recommendation is based on the fact that animal cloning technology is still
unsafe and inefficient and is likely to produce defects at rates far greater
than normal reproduction.

   The most recent proof of this point is the recent announcement that Dolly has
developed arthritis, not unknown in sheep but usually found in older animals.
Dolly was cloned from cells obtained from an adult sheep, and she may therefore
have had a head start toward developing this or other degenerative age-related
diseases, including cancer.  Obviously, in light of such ignorance, it would be
foolish and unethical to proceed with such unproven and risky procedures in
humans without evidence of counterbalancing benefit.

   Furthermore, the traits for which some cloning proponents wish to clone
humans -- personality, athletic or musical ability, etc. -- are subtle traits
shaped by both heredity and environment and are therefore almost certainly not
likely to be reproduced faithfully in the clone.  In fact, many of committee
members concluded that, even if the cloning procedure eventually were made safe,
a ban on reproductive cloning may still be warranted on the basis of the
insoluble moral and public policy dilemmas.

   However, the committee is convinced by its analysis that applications of some
aspects of the cloning technology hold enormous promise for improving human
health through the development of therapies for terrible and otherwise
inadequately treated human diseases.  These therapeutic uses of the nuclear
transfer technology involve the isolation of the cells found only in very early
embryos ("embryonic stem cells") that have the capacity to develop into all the
cell types found in human beings.

   Methods are very quickly being developed under which such stem cells may be
used to produce specialized cells to replace those damaged in disease, and very
promising results have already been obtained in basic research studies in animal
studies related to important human clinical problems such as Parkinson's
disease, diabetes, muscular dystrophy, coronary artery disease, and others.  For
that reason, the committee is unanimously recommending that those applications
should be permitted in California, although under appropriate oversight and
regulation.

   The issues swirling around human cloning and its applications are very
complex, both scientifically and ethically.  However, it would be medically,
scientifically and culturally foolish to deny the huge good that can come from
this technology and to become paralyzed by arguments of its scientific, ethical
and social difficulties.

   In identifying and coping with the potential ethical complexities inherent in
biomedical advances and their human applications, public unanimity is usually
not achievable.  In the case of the cloning debate, different parts of our
society hold vastly different and irreconcilable ethical and moral views of
human life, when it "begins" (implying that life in the abstract ends when an
individual human dies) and what constitutes a human being.  Those differences
will never disappear, and they should not be used as a basis for denying
important and real progress toward the control of human diseases.  We must learn
to cope with such differences, no matter how deep.

   On the other hand, a good dose of scientific humility and even skepticism is
always welcome in such complicated new biomedical technology.  We are still
early in our understanding of the cloning technology, and we should be wary of
the kinds of facile promises of immediate and easy routes to cures that have
characterized so much of the recent stem cell debate.

   Proponents of therapeutic applications of cloning methods must continue to
point out to our society all the ways in which these advances will eventually be
used to cure disease and prevent suffering, but they also should rely less on
exaggerated and undeliverable promises that do not accurately reflect the
scientific issues and that, if undelivered, will seriously damage public
confidence not only in this technology specifically but also in the broad
processes of biomedical progress.

   We never fully know from which directions medical breakthroughs will come,
but we understand that they will not come unless we seek them out.  In the name
of healing and relief of suffering, continued research in this area is vital.


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; Barrie Maguire

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2002


                             1455 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 16, 2002 Wednesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 903 words

HEADLINE: The future of cloning research in California

BYLINE: Theodore Friedmann, Friedmann is a professor of pediatrics at the
University of California San Diego, director of the UCSD Program in Human Gene
Therapy and Muriel Whitehill Chair of Biomedical Ethics. He served on the
Cloning Commission for the state of California.

BODY:

   In the aftermath of the successful cloning of the sheep Dolly, the state of
California enacted a five-year moratorium on attempts to apply such cloning
(nuclear transfer followed by implantation) technology toward the creation of a
human being.

   The legislation also established an Advisory Committee on Human Cloning to
advise the governor and the Legislature on the future implications of the
technology and to recommend a position that the state should adopt in the
growing cloning debate. The resulting multidisciplinary group of California
scientists, legal scholars, ethicists and public policy advisers has now
concluded its two-year analysis of the implications of human cloning.

   On the basis of many still unresolved scientific, ethical, political and
policy considerations, the committee is recommending continuation of the
existing ban on the use of cloning methods for the purpose of reproducing a
human being ("reproductive cloning"). Under this prohibition, cells made in
human cloning studies must not be implanted into a uterus to grow into a human
being.

   The committee's unanimous recommendation is based on the fact that animal
cloning technology is still unsafe and inefficient and is likely to produce
defects at rates far greater than normal reproduction. The most recent proof of
this point is the recent announcement that Dolly has developed arthritis, not
unknown in sheep but usually found in older animals.

   Dolly was cloned from cells obtained from an adult sheep, and she may
therefore have had a head start toward developing this or other degenerative
age-related diseases, including cancer.

   Obviously, in light of such ignorance, it would be foolish and unethical to
proceed with such unproven and risky procedures in humans without evidence of
counterbalancing benefit. Furthermore, the traits for which some cloning
proponents wish to clone humans -- personality, athletic or musical ability,
etc. -- are subtle traits shaped by both heredity and environment and are
therefore almost certainly not likely to be reproduced faithfully in the clone.

   In fact, many of committee members concluded that, even if the cloning
procedure eventually were made safe, a ban on reproductive cloning may still be
warranted on the basis of the insoluble moral and public policy dilemmas.
However, the committee is convinced by its analysis that applications of some
aspects of the cloning technology hold enormous promise for improving human
health through the development of therapies for terrible and otherwise
inadequately treated human diseases.

   These therapeutic uses of the nuclear transfer technology involve the
isolation of the cells found only in very early embryos ("embryonic stem cells")
that have the capacity to develop into all the cell types found in human beings.
Methods are very quickly being developed under which such stem cells may be used
to produce specialized cells to replace those damaged in disease, and very
promising results have already been obtained in basic research studies in animal
studies related to important human clinical problems such as Parkinson's
disease, diabetes, muscular dystrophy, coronary artery disease, and others.

   For that reason, the committee is unanimously recommending that those
applications should be permitted in California, although under appropriate
oversight and regulation. The issues swirling around human cloning and its
applications are very complex, both scientifically and ethically.

   However, it would be medically, scientifically and culturally foolish to deny
the huge good that can come from this technology and to become paralyzed by
arguments of its scientific, ethical and social difficulties. In identifying and
coping with the potential ethical complexities inherent in biomedical advances
and their human applications, public unanimity is usually not achievable.

   In the case of the cloning debate, different parts of our society hold vastly
different and irreconcilable ethical and moral views of human life, when it
"begins" (implying that life in the abstract ends when an individual human dies)
and what constitutes a human being. Those differences will never disappear, and
they should not be used as a basis for denying important and real progress
toward the control of human diseases.

   We must learn to cope with such differences, no matter how deep. On the other
hand, a good dose of scientific humility and even skepticism is always welcome
in such complicated new biomedical technology.

   We are still early in our understanding of the cloning technology, and we
should be wary of the kinds of facile promises of immediate and easy routes to
cures that have characterized so much of the recent stem cell debate. Proponents
of therapeutic applications of cloning methods must continue to point out to our
society all the ways in which these advances will eventually be used to cure
disease and prevent suffering, but they also should rely less on exaggerated and
undeliverable promises that do not accurately reflect the scientific issues and
that, if undelivered, will seriously damage public confidence not only in this
technology specifically but also in the broad processes of biomedical progress.
We never fully know from which directions medical breakthroughs will come, but
we understand that they will not come unless we seek them out.

   In the name of healing and relief of suffering, continued research in this
area is vital.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: Barrie Maguire

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1456 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 8, 2002, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: BACKFIRING GENES

BODY:

   FOR SEVERAL YEARS, scientists trying to cure cancer with genetic therapy have
placed hopes in one gene in particular, p53. Dubbed "the guardian of the
genome," p53 suppresses the development of tumors, but in a mutated, weakened
form leaves cells vulnerable to stress and more likely to become cancerous. Now
it appears that whatever p53 does to block tumors might also speed the aging
process.

   Animal biology is replete with delicate balances of this kind in which a
protective mechanism like the storing of energy in fat against the danger of
scarcity can under some circumstances lead to obesity. Genes themselves often
have Jekyll-Hyde functions: The same gene that causes sickle-cell anemia is
known to protect against malaria. Still, it was disappointing for scientists to
come up with new evidence that p53, while fending off tumors, also encourages
signs of aging in mice, such as brittle bones, shrunken muscles, thinning hair.

      The discovery, as described in the Jan. 3 issue of Nature, was
serendipitous. Researchers at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston were trying
to create mice with a weakened version of the p53 gene, but instead they
inadvertently made mice with a strengthened version of it. Deeming the mice
useless for the experiment at hand, the researchers set them aside, only to
notice some time later that the rodents had begun to look prematurely aged.

   In further experimentation, it was discovered that the mice with overactive
p53 genes, even though they had few if any cancers, had lifespans 19 percent
shorter than other mice. The researchers surmised that in its "guardian" role
p53 ensures that cells' genetic instructions are copied accurately and, if not,
p53 stops cells from growing and becoming, in some cases, tumors. While it is
uncertain if the results would pertain to human beings, mice and humans are
relatively close on the evolutionary tree.

   An accompanying commentary in Nature pointed out some of the issues the new
study raises. One is the possibility that persons treated with chemotherapy for
childhood cancers might age prematurely, as a result of the p53 gene's proteins
working overtime to cope with the extra cell stress. There is also the risk that
attempts to use drugs to slow the process of aging might have the unintended
side effect of spurring tumor growth.

   From the lofty perspective of evolution, there is nothing really
contradictory about a gene suppressing cancer and promoting aging. Normal
functioning of p53 usually ensures that animals reach reproductive age without
succumbing to aggressive cancers. After that, our genes are telling us, we are
on our own. To avoid looking like the scrawny, thin-haired Baylor mice, physical
and mental exercise and healthful habits generally might be a better
prescription than tinkering with p53.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2002


                             1457 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2002 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2002 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 3; Science Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: After Scare, a Gene Therapy Trial Proceeds

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   In the experimental field of gene therapy, scientists have worked carefully
to avoid the momentous step of making a genetic alteration that could be passed
along to future generations. But now it appears that one experiment may
inadvertently have come close to breaking that barrier.

        The gene therapy trial, halted when the risk was first noticed, has been
allowed to resume, even though the possibility of risk has not yet been
dispelled.

    The trial, conducted by Avigen of Alameda, Calif., is designed to insert a
corrective gene into the liver of patients with hemophilia B, the less common of
two forms of hemophilia.

   Two federal agencies that monitor gene therapy trials, the Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institutes of Health, want to ensure that
corrective genes are not allowed to enter patients' eggs or sperm, known as germ
cells.

   Even though inserting the gene into germ cells might prevent disease in the
next generation, the agencies consider that alteration of the human germ line is
so profound a step that it should not be attempted without further discussion.

   Companies conducting gene therapy trials are therefore required to monitor
where in the body the new genes are being inserted. In October, Avigen announced
it had delayed its hemophilia trial because it had detected the presence of the
gene's vector in a patient's seminal fluid.

   The vector is the disabled virus used by gene therapists to insert corrective
genes into human cells. Gaining entry into the nucleus of human cells is a
technically difficult trick that certain viruses have acquired over the course
of evolution.

   In the hemophilia B trial the vector carries the correct version of the human
gene for Factor IX, one of the cascade of proteins involved in making the blood
clot.

   It was a surprise to find the vector even in seminal fluid because
experiments with dogs, in which the therapy was validated, showed no sign of
this occurrence. But there was no evidence that the vector had penetrated the
sperm, said Dr. Elliott Grossbard, Avigen's vice president for clinical affairs.

   The company sought guidance last month from a National Institutes of Health
panel, the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which oversees gene therapy
issues. Dr. Amy Patterson, the N.I.H. official who runs the committee, said its
members recommended that the trial should resume but that researchers should
also try to determine if the vector was reaching the sperm.

   The Food and Drug Administration accepted the committee's advice and Avigen
said last month that it had received clearance to proceed with the trial. The
single patient who has so far been enrolled in the trial will be required to
wear a condom so as to avoid any chance of fathering a genetically altered
child.

   Dr. Philip Noguchi, the agency official who oversees gene therapy trials,
described the rationale for the agency's decision. A gene therapy treatment for
hemophilia B might be of great benefit, he said, and would need to be weighed
against the risks, including that of inadvertently modifying the human germ
line. But unless the trial proceeded, the agency could not gauge the possible
benefit, Dr. Noguchi said.

   "Our overall plan is to allow the trial to proceed in cautious fashion while
monitoring the potentially adverse finding of vector sequence in the seminal
fluid and at the end of the study to bring it back to public discussion," Dr.
Noguchi said.

   Not everyone is happy with this approach. Dr. Eric Juengst, an ethicist at
Case Western Reserve University and a member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee, said critics might view the policy as a step down a slippery slope.
If the hemophilia treatment turned out to work, but with unavoidable changes to
the germ line, germ-line gene therapy might sneak into public acceptance by a
side door.

   "If by chance one of these accidents did effect a germ-line cure, it would be
an awfully powerful selling point for those who say we should be taking that
position from the beginning," Dr. Juengst said.

   Though most of the many trials of gene therapy have been disappointing so
far, Avigen is using a new and more promising vector called adeno associated
virus. Hemophilia is also a good candidate disease for gene therapy because only
tiny amounts of normal Factor IX can do a lot of good.

   Besides the human Factor IX gene, the Avigen virus carries a piece of DNA
that signals the cell to turn the gene on and make its product. This signal is
recognized only by liver cells, so that Factor IX is made only in the liver.

   Addition of the vector to sperm may prevent hemophilia in a patient's
descendants, but there is also a hazard: if the vector lands somewhere in the 3
percent of the genome that contains the genes, it could disrupt a gene and cause
disease.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                             1458 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2002 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     January 8, 2002 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-2

LENGTH: 373 words

HEADLINE: MOLECULAR MEDICINE REORGANIZED AT PITT;
 GENE, PROTEIN THERAPY WORK CONSOLIDATED

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Medical researchers worldwide are racing to identify the malfunctioning genes
and abnormal or missing proteins that are at the heart of virtually every
disease, and to keep itself at the forefront of this effort, the University of
Pittsburgh is reorganizing its molecular research.

    The Molecular Medicine Institute, announced yesterday, will consolidate work
on gene therapy and protein therapy from across the Pitt medical school and will
be directed by Joseph Glorioso, chairman of molecular genetics and biochemistry.

    The UPMC Health System, which is partnering with the medical school to form
the institute, will provide a still-undetermined amount of money, Glorioso said.
The bulk of the institute's funding will come from existing grants, including
more than $15 million committed by the National Institutes of Health over the
next five years.

    Glorioso acknowledged that much of the early promise of gene therapy -- "It
was supposed to be the cure for everything" -- proved to be hype.

    But he said the science has matured and that gene therapy now may complement
other therapies, rather than replace them.

    For instance, it may be possible to transfer beneficial genes to tissues to
prevent heart arteries opened with angioplasty from renarrowing.

    And it may be possible to relieve chest pain and prevent heart attacks by
using genes that foster the growth of blood vessels to grow new arteries around
blockages in the coronary arteries.

    Last year, Pitt was one of four medical centers selected by the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute as a center of excellence for cardiovascular
gene therapy, he noted.

    The university also will concentrate on gene therapy research regarding pain
control and the treatment of metabolic disorders.

    Pitt also has established a national laboratory for manufacturing vectors --
modified viruses that are used to insert and incorporate beneficial genes into
cells.

    Dr. Timothy Billiar, chairman of surgery, will be the institute's deputy
director.

    Biochemist Paul Robbins will be research director and Dr. John Barranger, a
medical geneticist, will be its medical director.

    The institute will be involved in both pre-clinical research and clinical
trials.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2002


                             1459 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       January 7, 2002 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: '01 medical news brings some joy to the heart

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Last year was a banner year for promising breakthroughs in the treatment and
prevention of cardiovascular disease.

   We should be very glad about that, because the sad state of the hearts and
arteries of Americans continues to be one of the biggest obstacles to longevity
and quality of life in this country.

   An estimated 62 million Americans have cardiovascular disease, which includes
a variety of conditions and adverse health events such as high blood pressure,
heart attacks, angina, strokes, congenital heart defects and congestive heart
failure, according to the American Heart Association.

   A total of 959,000 Americans died as a result of cardiovascular disease in
1999, the most recent year for which statistics are available. That's more than
cancer (550,000); accidents (98,000); Alzheimer's (45,000); and AIDS (15,000)
combined.

   Of course, cardiovascular deaths would drop substantially if obesity,
smoking, a sedentary lifestyle and poor eating habits were eliminated.

   Since that is not going to happen, here are a few of the top advances against
heart disease last year that may accomplish the same thing:

   Coated stents used in angioplasty to open blocked coronary arteries may
nearly eliminate the problem of reblockage, which still occurs in 20% to 30% of
angioplasties.

   As part of two clinical trials, St. Luke's Medical Center is one of several
hospitals testing the devices, which are coated with a medicine that prevents
the formation of scar tissue around the stent.

   Robert Farrell, 66, of West Allis got one in April as part of an angioplasty
procedure at St. Luke's. The avid bow hunter said he feels good and has not
missed a hunting weekend since his procedure.

   The devices could be on the market by the end of this year.

   Heart pump. A new type of implanted heart pump, such as the one inside
Richard Borkowicz of Hubertus, can dramatically improve the survival rate and
quality of life of terminally ill heart patients, according to studies presented
in November at an American Heart Association conference.

   The devices help the heart's main pumping chamber, the left ventricle, to
pump oxygenated blood from the heart to the rest of the body.

   Borkowicz, who got his device 20 months ago as part of a trial at St. Luke's,
said it has dramatically improved his ability to function on a day-to-day basis.

   Support for statins. In the world's largest trial of the cholesterol-lowering
drugs known as statins, researchers found that about a third of all heart
attacks and strokes were cut in high-risk patients, including the elderly,
women, diabetics and even at-risk people with normal cholesterol levels.
Previously, the drugs had been studied mostly in middle-aged men.

   However, other research presented last year found that a significant number
of people who are prescribed statins don't get the complete benefit because they
fail to take the drugs every day.

   Artificial heart. Even though Robert Tools died, the self-contained
artificial heart he and others have received suggests that such devices
eventually will become an alternative to heart transplants for some patients.

   Tools was the first person to receive the AbioCor implantable heart. Two
others also have died. But others are being kept alive by the device.

   Gene therapy continued to show promise in the treatment of heart disease.

   In one small study, patients received the gene responsible for the naturally
existing protein known as vascular endothelial growth factor-2. Most of them saw
substantial improvement in their angina and also were able to walk longer on a
treadmill test, compared with those who received a placebo.

   Imaging studies of their hearts also showed improved blood flow.

   ------------

   John Fauber can be reached at (414) 223-5479 or by e-mail at
jfauber@onwis.com

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                             1460 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2002 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             January 7, 2002 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1768 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells have varied sources;
Amid embryo debate, lives saved, prolonged

BYLINE: By Joan Treadway; Staff writer

BODY:

   Though their two children -- Mariah, just turned 3, and 1-year-old Matthew --
were born healthy and vigorous, Kathy and Tom Gorman wanted to be as prepared as
possible should the future hold any serious medical problems for them.

   It is a worry all parents share, but the Gormans went one step further. They
decided to pay to set aside umbilical cord blood, which carries stem cells
capable of replacing diseased blood cells, from each child in a private cord
blood bank in Arizona.

   The Gormans are among about 150 people from the New Orleans area who have
stored their newborns' umbilical cord blood at the Cord Blood Registry in
Tucson, Ariz., which contains more than 30,000 units. As the national debate
continues over using stem cells from embryos for medical research, the Gormans
and countless others are part of quieter but no less revolutionary wave of
citizens, physicians and scientists already taking advantage of less
controversial sources of valuable stem cells.

   Blood from umbilical cords can be collected, frozen, warehoused and then used
later, if needed, by being transplanted into the child or another family member
who might develop a disease such as leukemia.

   Tom Gorman, a 47-year-old construction company owner, said he thinks of it as
a kind of insurance.

   "I feel comfortable knowing it's there," he said.

Bank on it

   Whether the federal government should help pay for a wider range of research
that uses embryonic stem cells likely will become an issue in Congress later
this year. But such research -- and the bitter controversy it provoked last year
-- is but a small component of the contemporary medical scene.

   A Tulane University doctor, for example, is using donated bone marrow to try
to grow stem cells for eventual use in treating patients. About 50 families
reserve umbilical cord blood for their own use at a small bank at Children's
Hospital in New Orleans, where two first-born children with leukemia have been
successfully treated with umbilical cord blood their mothers stored from their
second babies, who were healthy.

   And the American Bone Marrow Donor Registry, a nonprofit organization based
in Mandeville, arranges transplants involving umbilical cord blood.

   There are public and private cord banks, and the practice of donating
umbilical cords is gaining popularity, experts say.

   "I do not think a lot of people realize that lives are being saved by the
less controversial ways of getting and using stem cells or that there is a
tremendous amount of research going on (in this area),"said Dr. Jeffery Chell,
CEO of a national registry based in Minneapolis that is hooked up to a network
of public cord blood banks and maintains a long list of adults willing to donate
their stem cells to needy patients they don't even know.

   New Orleans Civil District Court Judge C. Hunter King knows how powerful stem
cells can be. He donated some to his brother through a bone marrow transplant in
1996 and helped him survive leukemia for almost two years. This personal
involvement led King to join the board of the National Marrow Donor Program, the
Minnesota nonprofit organization that facilitates stem cell transplants
worldwide using bone marrow, cord blood and other means.

   "The controversy over stem cells from embryos has overshadowed what's going
on in New Orleans and elsewhere, which is a lot," King said.

   King has invited the board to meet in New Orleans in September, and he plans
to include local doctors in the event and drum up support for the idea of
establishing a local public cord blood bank. There, parents from the city's
ethnically and racially mixed population could store their babies' blood for
free, as long as it also was available to the public, particularly minorities
who are underrepresented in the national program.

   Chell, of the national registry, said a public cord bank "would be a
wonderful investment for the community." But he stressed the word "investment,"
saying it would cost at least $10 million to develop.

Public vs. private

   The American Academy of Pediatrics, in a policy statement, encourages the
"philanthropic donation of cord blood for banks at no cost." Absent a current or
potential need for a transplant, however, the group does not advocate private
storage of cord blood as biological insurance, calling the practice "unwise."

   It notes that empirical evidence that children will need their own cord blood
for future use is lacking and that indications for such transplants are limited.

   The Gormans said that no medical problems run in their family and that they
were unaware of public cord banks when they decided to pay about $1,200 in
initial costs and an annual fee of almost $100 to store each of their
offspring's blood.

   "I wouldn't want to go public. I want to know that it's going to be there if
we need it," Tom Gorman said. "We may not -- but what if we do?" Still, he said
that if people can't afford to store cord blood in a private bank, they should
donate to a public bank, where it may benefit someone, someday.

   Donations from parents are how several public blood banks built up supply, to
the point where they have at least 15,000 units to meet the demand coming
through both the Minnesota and the Mandeville registries, said Joan Keller,
director of the registry based in Mandeville.

   Both the American registry and the National registry dealt only with marrow
transplants at first but later adopted newer ways of giving a patient infusions
of stem cells -- from umbilical cord blood and from "peripheral" blood obtained
from a donor's blood stream -- in the past decade.

   In its 15 years, the Minnesota registry has helped arrange about 13,000
transplants for patients with diseases ranging from anemia to lymphoma. It has
about 4.5 million adult Americans registered who stand willing to donate stem
cells from their bone marrow or peripheral blood or both.

Biological versatility

   A stem cell is primitive cell that retains its ability to develop into a
number of tissues and organs. Everyone has such cells, but most of the cells
evolve into muscles, nerves, organs or other specialized tissues before birth,
Chell said.

   "They are the building-block cells of the body," he said.

   Most researchers believe that embryonic stem cells retain a greater ability
to transform into other cells of the body than do stem cells from other sources,
he said, "but we haven't yet proven that."

   Meanwhile, Chell said that through his registry, people are routinely treated
successfully for blood-related diseases, such as leukemia and inherited
disorders, by transplants of cells from sources other than embryos. Depending on
the disease and the patient's age, cure rates vary from 20 percent to 80
percent, he said.

   No matter how the stem cells are obtained, they end up in the marrow of the
recipient, where they replicate and replace diseased blood cells that were
killed by chemotherapy or radiation, he said.

   There are advantages and disadvantages to each method of obtaining stem
cells, Chell said. For example, marrow and the peripheral techniques produce a
larger volume of stem cells, but using stem cells from cord blood, a doctor
could work with a less than perfect tissue match and still get good results.

   Dr. Robert Veith, director of LSU's bone marrow transplant program, said the
peripheral method of obtaining stem cells is more convenient than bone marrow
donation, because the donor doesn't need an anesthetic. The advent of cord blood
"will increase everyone's chance of getting a donor," he said.

State of research

   On the Minnesota-based registry, Louisiana is well-represented, with 12,420
potential donors signed up, Chell said. The American Bone Marrow Donor Registry,
based in Mandeville, has about 100,000 potential donors, one third of them from
Louisiana.

   The Mandeville registry, started in 1984 after a 7-year-old boy died before
he could get a transplant, works with the same medical institutions as the
national program, including Children's Hospital, the LSU and Tulane health
sciences centers and Memorial Medical Center, Keller said.

   Research also is under way at Tulane, where Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of
its Gene Therapy Center, is using volunteers' marrow to grow more stem cells --
a project he hopes will be helpful in treatment. Right now, he is concentrating
on producing large quantities of stem cells.

   At Children's Hospital, Dr. Lolie Yu, director of its marrow transplant
program, said that a small cord bank was established there about six years ago,
where about 50 families of patients now reserve umbilical blood for their own
use. Peripheral blood transplants gained popularity in the early 1990s, while
cord blood transplants came into vogue about 1995, she said.

   So far, Yu said, two patients with leukemia have successfully been treated
with cord blood from the bank. In both cases, mothers had agreed that cord blood
be taken from their second-born, healthy child, stored, and then used to help
their ailing first child. The fee charged to participate in the bank is $3,000.

   Kerry and Lynda Llopis of New Orleans had never heard of cord banks when
their daughter, Alexis, was born six years ago.

   At three, the active, inquisitive toddler was diagnosed with leukemia after a
lump appeared on her neck. Chemotherapy at Children's Hospital put the disease
into remission for a while, but Alexis relapsed last summer, prompting an even
more aggressive treatment regime, said Kerry Llopis, a ceramic tile contractor.
He became his daughter's main caregiver in the family's home on Elysian Fields
Avenue while Lynda continues her job as a state social services manager.

   Fifteen family members were tested in case Alexis needs a transplant, but all
were found to be inadequate matches. So six months ago, a search for a stem cell
donor for Alexis was launched in the Minneapolis-based registry.

   Two potential matches have been discovered: one an adult who could be tapped
for marrow and the other a unit of stored umbilical cord blood, both of which
have been set aside for Alexis, he said.

   "I thank God every day that the possibility (of a matching donor) is there,"
Llopis said. As for Alexis, she said succinctly, "I'm feeling fine."

   Her main concern at the moment seems to be her hair. It fell out from the
treatments but is starting to grow back. She hopes it will be long again, in
time for an older cousin's October wedding, where she will be a junior
bridesmaid.

   . . . . . . .

Joan Treadway can be reached at jtreadway@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3305.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY JENNIFER ZDON Alexis Llopis, 6, is held by her mother,
Lynda, with her father, Kerry, and sister Janae, at the family home in Gentilly
on Wednesday. A search for a stem cell donor for Alexis, who has leukemia, was
launched six months ago, and two potential matches have been discovered.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                             1461 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2002 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   January 6, 2002 Sunday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 4K

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: WHAT'S COMING UP

BYLINE: NANCY CHIPMAN POWERS, Your Week staffer

BODY:

   Help for hospices
The Women's Committee for Hospice Care will host its 14th annual Grand Night for
Hospice Ball on Jan. 19 at the Ritz-Carlton in Dearborn. The committee supports
nonprofit hospices through a grants program. The grants help maintain hospice
services not covered by insurance.

   Elaine Schweitzer of Grosse Pointe Farms is chairing the ball. Her cochairs
are Carol Lynch of Bloomfield Hills and Jinny Runkle of West Bloomfield.

   The black-tie affair will begin at 6:30 p.m. with cocktails and silent
auction. Dinner will be at 7:30 p.m., followed by a live auction and dancing to
the Jerry Ross Band. Tickets are $300 to $500. For reservations, call
734-769-4790 anytime.

   Heartfelt benefit
The Henry Ford Heart & Vascular Institute will hold its fifth annual Red Heart
Blues . . . and All That Jazz! fund-raiser on Jan. 25 at the Marriott at
Centerpoint in Pontiac. Event cochairs are Mado and Dr. Kim Lie of Grosse Pointe
Park and Judie and Roger Sherman of Bloomfield Hills. The event will benefit
research and treatment of cardiovascular diseases with an emphasis on molecular
gene therapy.

   Two awards will be presented in the name of the late Conrad R. Lam, a cardiac
surgeon at Henry Ford Hospital for more than 50 years. Dr. Syed Jafri of
Bloomfield Hills, director of cardiology of the Henry Ford Medical Group's
Downriver Region and senior staff cardiologist at Henry Ford Hospital, will be
honored as Outstanding Physician. Mary Janovich of Bingham Farms will be honored
as Outstanding Philanthropist.

   The Phebe Goldstein Award will recognize Ted Acheson of Bloomfield Hills, a
member of the institute's advisory board.

   Lila Lazarus of WDIV-TV (Channel 4) will emcee. The evening will begin at 6
p.m. There will be cocktails, auctions, dinner and dancing. Tickets are $250 and
$350. For reservations, call 313-876-9259, 9-5 weekdays.

   By Nancy Chipman Powers, Your Week staffer

GRAPHIC: Photo;

Lila Lazarus

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2002


                             1462 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2002 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             January 6, 2002 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Part R; Features Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1654 words

HEADLINE: You Say You Want an Evolution?;
THE IMPACT OF THE GENE: From Mendel's Peas to Designer Babies, By Colin Tudge,
Hill and Wang: 376 pp., $27 THE COOPERATIVE GENE: How Mendel's Demon Explains
the Evolution of Complex Beings, By Mark Ridley, The Free Press: 324 pp., $26

BYLINE: ROBIN MARANTZ HENIG

BODY:

   <elementtype>Text</elementtype>THE IMPACT OF THE GENE: From Mendel's Peas to
Designer Babies, By Colin Tudge, Hill and Wang: 376 pp., $27

   The gene is hot stuff these days. Long before the first draft of the human
genome was published last winter and thrust us into the Age of the Genome, the
gene has been used to explain a whole raft of human facts of life:
susceptibility to malaria or AIDS; traits like adventurousness and shyness;
homosexuality; obesity; the inexplicable competing urges toward fidelity and
straying.

   Now come two books by two of the most highly regarded science writers in
England, both eager to add their voices to the international paean to the double
helix. (And this doesn't even count the recently published "Life Script" by
Nicholas Wade or "Dinner at the New Gene Cafe" by Bill Lambrecht.) Each has
taken a familiar biological argument and recast it, with differing degrees of
success, entirely in terms of the gene.

   In the first, Colin Tudge, author of such notable books as "The Variety of
Life" and "The Second Creation," offers a concise history of the early days of
genetics that culminates in a defense of the controversial field of evolutionary
psychology (the newer, less-inflammatory term for "sociobiology," which caused
an uproar when introduced by Harvard zoologist E.O. Wilson a generation ago and
was immediately branded racist, reductionist and evocative of all the worst
notions of eugenics and the quest for genetic purity). "The Impact of the Gene"
thus becomes two books, one about the past and one about the present, with the
gene providing explanatory power for a contemporary field that Tudge practically
takes on faith.

   In the second book, Mark Ridley (no relation to his countryman and fellow
science writer Matt Ridley, author of the wildly popular "Genome"), a professor
of zoology at Oxford, argues that the evolution of complex animals was by no
means inevitable, is in fact counterintuitive and can best be understood in
terms of the four-letter code of DNA. He borrows his title, "The Cooperative
Gene," from the idea of a "selfish gene" first propounded by Richard Dawkins,
who made the case that not only is a chicken merely an egg's way of making
another egg (a phrase usually attributed to Samuel Butler), but that all of us,
no matter how complex or talented or beloved, are merely DNA's way of making
more DNA.

   "If the business of life is to copy genes," Ridley writes, "most of our
physiology suggests a loss of focus during evolution." By this he means not that
Dawkins is wrong, but that the "selfish gene" idea is insufficient to explain
how life evolved from simple, one-celled beings to the complex, highly organized
living systems that walk on, swim under or fly above the Earth.

   "The evolution of complex life required a mechanism of inheritance with an
inherently random component," Ridley writes. "Somewhere between the bacteria and
us--perhaps at about the stage of simple worms--God did have to start to play
dice." So he creates a little mascot, "Mendel's demon," to help explain the
rules of that celestial crapshoot. Calling it "Mendel's demon" is, of course,
Ridley's nod to Gregor Mendel, the so-called father of genetics, because Mendel
recognized that the units of heredity are randomly reshuffled every time a new
generation is created.

   The theorized behavior of "Mendel's demon," however, isn't demonic in the
least. According to Ridley, it's "a law-enforcing kind of demon. It redirects
the laws of biology to a more creative, rather than destructive, direction." In
effect, it imposes order on a chaotic process, taking the form, ultimately, of
increasing complexity.

   Ridley focuses his argument about the evolution of complexity on a few
crucial points: copying errors in the transcription of DNA and how they are
passed on; natural selection and how it acts on offspring with genetic mistakes;
and the evolution of sex. But despite Ridley's lighthearted touch, reading his
book can be pretty tough going.

   "The Impact of the Gene" is easier to read. The first half is a quick
overview of the history of genetics, devoted primarily to retelling the little
that's known about Mendel, a Moravian monk who spent seven years conducting
research on inheritance patterns in pea plants, presented his results in a
two-part lecture in 1865 and was promptly forgotten. Mendel died in 1884
thinking his conclusions about inheritance must have been wrong--but it turned
out he was merely ahead of his time.

   In 1900, his original paper was rediscovered, and scientists had amassed
sufficient insight by this time to see it for what it was: a brilliant and clear
demonstration of the existence of discrete units of heredity, which within a few
years would be known as genes.

   Tudge tells this story in clear if sometimes plodding prose, hewing
throughout to the interpretation of a single Mendel biographer, a geneticist
from the town of Brno now in the Czech Republic, where Mendel's monastery still
stands. Tudge presents his hero as a genius on the order of Galileo, Newton and
Darwin; "his experiments with peas," he writes, "were beautifully designed,
wonderfully modern in concept, and rooted in a deep understanding of the
problems--problems that now seem difficult to envision largely because Mendel
solved them."

   Unfortunately, what's missing here is a sense of the lively debate that's
been going on for nearly a century about just how much of a genius Mendel really
was, and whether he deserves to be known as the father of genetics. The details
of Mendel's life are in many ways a mystery, since he left behind few papers.
But Tudge chooses to fill in the blanks in sometimes perplexing ways. He
insists, for instance, that Mendel was a "confidant" of some of the most notable
figures in European science of his day, a man who was "indeed well connected"
and "close to the action." In my own view, Mendel was an outsider, isolated by
language, geography, background and temperament, which is what made it so hard
for him to get a hearing for his discovery--especially because it went against
the conventional wisdom that heredity was the "blending" of maternal and
paternal traits.

   Tudge's book is plagued by anachronisms, such as when he says that Charles
Darwin noted a "Mendelian ratio" in certain family trees--even though Darwin had
never heard of Mendel. It's plagued by repetition, too, like his frequent
assertions of what makes an experiment "elegant" or who really coined the phrase
"survival of the fittest" (hint: it wasn't Darwin). It's almost as if Tudge
doesn't expect his readers to be paying attention.

   In "The Impact of the Gene" and "The Cooperative Gene," the final chapters
are devoted to a bit of free-form speculation about what our evolving knowledge
about genetics implies for the future, or for a new interpretation of the
present. For Tudge, the whole point of telling his tale seems to be to make a
case for evolutionary psychology. He spends a lot of time defending some
premises that 30 years ago caused a great howl from the political left
protesting what it interpreted as genetic determinism: that genes underlie much
human behavior, that even acts of altruism and self-sacrifice can be ascribed to
the "selfish gene," that we behave the way we do because it was adaptive at one
time in our species' history and that different behavioral strategies can be
quantified, measured and compared.

   His discussion of these four premises is clear and interesting but marred by
the chip on his shoulder that he reveals in the very first chapter of "The
Impact of the Gene," in which he alludes to the highly politicized nature of
these arguments in the heyday of sociobiology. "The vociferous critics of
evolutionary psychology should do some homework," he writes, "to find out what
it is really about. If they did, they would surely be ashamed of their own
obduracy."

   As for Ridley, his speculative chapters are more fun and less defensive. In
his view, the only thing that has kept humans from evolving to an even more
complex life form is the genetic mutation rate. The complexity of a species is
the result of an evolutionary equilibrium between the mutation rate (which
increases as the number of genes increases) on the one hand, and correcting
mechanisms like proofreading enzymes and sexual reproduction on the other.

   If the mutation rate can be reduced--by routinely freezing young girls'
error-free eggs for use later when they're ready to reproduce, for example, or
by using gene therapy to correct those mutations that do slip by through gene
therapy--then the sky's the limit in terms of life's complexity.

   Ridley imagines a future in which the human species contains within its DNA
codes for other organisms that are held in reserve, to be "called up as
appropriate." If earthly conditions change, through nuclear winter or a denuded
ozone layer or "fire and brimstone," then a whole new species, descendants of
humans but no longer humanoid, can "reinvent themselves as fire-adapted flowers
and cover the scorched earth with fresh foliage. After the deluge, they will
grow up as fish, and swim safely beneath the waves. And when the last trump
sounds, they will express the genes for sinlessness, and their
ten-thousand-million-gene vessels of cooperating and error-conquering DNA will
glide down the rivers of Paradise into eternity."

   This is a grandly optimistic view of the post-apocalypse, one that the author
might not even believe now in light of the events of recent months, but for the
moment it is one from which to take a certain measure of comfort. Should "the
deluge" come, it may take a few billion years before life on Earth reemerges,
but reemerge it will. And it will do so, as it did before, with a staggering
degree of ingenuity, variety and sophistication.

   *

   Robin Marantz Henig is the author, most recently, of "The Monk in the Garden:
The Lost and Found Genius of Gregor Mendel."

GRAPHIC:  (no caption) PHOTOGRAPHER: WENDY WAHMAN / For the Times

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2002


                             1463 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2002 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      January 4, 2002 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 99B

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: La France, Wanda B.

BODY:

   La France, Wanda B. (Nee Makowski) November 13, 1930 to December 26, 2001.
Wanda, age 71, was born in Milwaukee where she graduated from the Columbia
School of Nursing. After marrying Neal in 1952, they relocated to Southern
California where all five children were born. In 1966, the family moved to
Wichita, KS where Wanda and Neal remained for 35 years. Wanda and Neal returned
to San Diego in March, 2001 to be closer to their children. Wanda was able to
enjoy her new California life for only a short but wonderful nine months. She
died at home surrounded by her loving family. She is survived by her caring
husband Neal, their children Jeffrey, Suzanne, Michael, Carolyn and Jeanine and
their families. In lieu of flowers, please donate to: UCSD Cancer Center
Foundation, 9500 Gilman Dr., #0658, La Jolla, CA 92093-0658, Attn: Dr. Michael
Bouvet, Pancreatic Cancer Early Detection and Gene Therapy Treatment, or to the
literacy program of your choice.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2002


                             1464 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2002 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    January 3, 2002, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH LEADERS IN FDA PLEA URGE US TO NAME CHIEF OF AGENCY

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Frustrated by the Bush administration's delay in nominating a commissioner
for the Food and Drug Administration, the leaders of the Massachusetts
biotechnology industry have sent a letter to White House chief of staff Andrew
Card requesting prompt action.

   The letter, signed by chief executives of top companies and others, said the
FDA's review and approval of new drugs has dramatically slowed since former
commissioner Jane E. Henney resigned last January.

      "Recently published industry data strongly suggests that FDA's approval of
new products has slowed to the pace of a decade ago, attributable, at least in
part, to the lack of leadership at the commissioner level," the group of 21
industry participants wrote. "Further, the need for high-level leadership at
this agency is especially critical as the importance of FDA's role in the war on
terrorism, including bioterrorism, increases."

   James C. Mullen, president and chief executive of Biogen Inc. of Cambridge,
said efforts to write the letter took shape at a meeting of the Biotechnology
Industry Organization in early October. He and others were frustrated because
President Bush hadn't even nominated a potential commissioner, he said. The
letter was sent Dec. 17.

   "We just have a leaderless FDA in a very highly regulated industry," said
Mullen. "It's becoming more and more difficult to work with the FDA. I don't
mean that in a way to attack the individuals at the agency, but that's the
result of not having leadership."

   Mullen said he hadn't yet heard back from Card and plans to follow up the
letter this week. The White House did not respond to a request for comment.

   Among those who signed the letter were Henri A. Termeer, president and chief
executive of Genzyme Corp.; Janice T. Bourque, president and chief executive of
the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council; Una S. Ryan, president and chief
executive of Avant Immunotherapeutics Inc.; and Michael Astrue, senior vice
president and general counsel at Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.

   Mullen and other signers said they could have easily added dozens of
additional high-level industry officials to the letter, but they felt that
adding more names and creating a petition-like document would not have increased
the urgency of their message.

   Since Henney's resignation, the FDA has been overseen by acting Commissioner
Bernard A. Schwetz. At least a dozen names have surfaced as possible successors,
but none has been formally put forward by the Bush administration. Most
recently, Astrue was recommended to the administration by Tommy Thompson,
secretary of health and human services. But Senator Edward M. Kennedy, chairman
of the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee, objected to Astrue
because of his background working for biotechnology companies. Kennedy said he
wants a commissioner with no ties to the industry. Astrue was never nominated.

   The FDA oversees testing of drugs, medical devices, and treatments such as
vaccines. Manufacturers must show the products are safe and effective to win FDA
approval to sell them. Review and approval can take more than a year.

   Bourque, the head of the biotech council, said the agency's workload is
likely to increase this year, making the need for a new commissioner more
crucial. "The number of drugs coming to their door for review this year will be
the largest in biotech history," she said.

   The agency also needs a new leader because the law setting the fees that fund
the agency will expire this year. The fees - up to $309,647 for some drugs -
enable the FDA to hire scientists and others it needs to review drug
applications. Congressional hearings on the successor to the current
Prescription Drug User Fee Act could begin next month.

   "The lack of an FDA commissioner is a horrendous situation for the FDA to be
in now," said Kenneth Kaitin, director of the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug
Development. "It's almost inexcusable. They'll be walking into these hearings
without a leader who can articulate a strategy and philosphy for the coming
years."

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached by e-mail at krasner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2002


                             1465 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 2, 2002, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-3

LENGTH: 1107 words

HEADLINE: Tackling illnesses at their roots; Improved stent may be lifesaver for
heart patients

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 Measured by headline size, the top medical stories of last year were the
anthrax scare, the stem cell controversy and the artificial heart.  But some
doctors say a less heralded breakthrough may be the biggest news of all, for it
will soon improve treatment for hundreds of thousands of Americans with heart
disease.

   The development is a surprising improvement in the way doctors do
angioplasties, one that promises to keep these routine procedures from going bad
so they can be done in more people who need them.

   In almost every area of medicine -- cancer, diabetes, infectious diseases and
more -- scientists are making impressive strides, using a molecule-by-molecule
understanding of disease to design drugs and devices that tackle the illnesses
at their roots.

   The latest innovation in treating heart disease shows how this basic
understanding pays off.  It grows from an intimate knowledge of how smooth
muscle cells pile up inside blood vessels in response to the well-intentioned
injury of an angioplasty.  Every year, cardiologists perform about half a
million of these in the United States and double that worldwide, threading
balloons into clogged heart arteries to restore blood flow.

   Often, though, the freshly opened arteries fill in again with scarlike
growth, a complication that has bedeviled angioplasty since its invention in
1977. Doctors have tried lasers, cutting tools, radiation, even gene therapy, to
improve results.  In the mid-1990s, they began leaving behind tiny mesh tubes
called stents to prop open the arteries.

   Some of these help, but nothing solved the problem completely.  The arteries
still narrow up again about 20 percent of the time.

   This history of failure helps explain why doctors are so astonished by what
they heard in September at a European cardiology meeting: Testing showed a new
kind of stent, coated with growth-stopping medicine, is totally effective.  Not
a single artery closed up after angioplasty.

   "It was too good to believe," says Dr. John LaSala of Barnes-Jewish Hospital
in St. Louis.  "Nothing in medicine works 100 percent of the time."

   And yet, as far as doctors can tell, this one nearly does.  Reports on three
other companies' stents, similar but coated with different drugs, soon followed.
In all, about 700 patients have been studied.  The results are remarkably
consistent with almost no failures.

   "It's an enormous breakthrough," says Dr. David Faxon of the University of
Chicago, president of the American Heart Association.  "This is the Holy Grail
for interventional cardiology."

   If no complications emerge, the stents could be on the market this year.
Faxon says they could increase angioplasties by 20 percent to 30 percent,
because doctors will use them in arteries considered too risky before.  These
include buildups in especially tiny vessels, ones that are long or diffusely
clogged and bad arteries in diabetics.

   Artificial heart

   Last year, the new stents were overshadowed by a more dramatic development in
cardiology -- the first artificial heart since the Jarvik-7 in the 1980s.
Doctors at four hospitals have installed Abiomed's AbioCor, a self-contained,
fully implanted heart, in six men.  Three have died, including the first
patient, Robert Tools, who received the surgery in July.

   Nevertheless, the heart itself appeared to work flawlessly, and doctors said
it offers a chance of survival for terminally ill people with congestive heart
failure who do not qualify for transplanted hearts, which are in short supply.

   In cancer research, the biggest news of the year was Gleevec, a new drug
effective against an unusual digestive cancer called gastrointestinal stromal
tumors.  It is also being tested in lung, prostate and brain cancer.

   Standard chemotherapy goes after all fast-dividing cells and kills them
indiscriminately.  But Gleevec follows the new approach to drug design.  It is
aimed specifically at a protein unique to cancer, blocking it without harming
other parts of the body.

   "The importance of it is far more than the drug itself," says Dr. Harmon
Eyre, research director of the American Cancer Society.  "It really is a proof
of principle."

   Some of the biggest news of 2001 involved developments that may be years away
from practical use but lay the groundwork for future breakthroughs.  In
February, scientists published their first examination of nearly all the human
genetic code.  The next task will be learning what all these genes do.  The
answers will likely hold clues for treating many diseases.

   Another field in its infancy is the study of stem cells, the primordial
mother cells that give rise to all the body parts.  Scientists believe these
cells could be used to replace or fix failing organs.

   Growing these cells, however, requires the death of a human embryo.  In
August, President Bush said his administration will pay for this research but
limit funding to work on self-perpetuating colonies of stem cells that already
existed, not new ones.

   For the first time in decades, doctors had to deal with anthrax, spread now
through the mail by terrorists.  Although five died, modern antibiotics and
hospital care often proved effective against the dangerous inhaled form of the
disease.  Left is a mystery: How did two older women in Manhattan and rural
Connecticut catch the bacteria?

   Diet for diabetes

   Another development in infectious disease, however, is likely to affect far
more people.  In November, the Food and Drug Administration approved the sale of
Xigris, the first drug for bloodstream bacterial infections, which kill 225,000
people in the United States annually.  The drug works by curbing inflammation
and clotting, the out-of-control processes that make these infections so
dangerous.

   For doctors treating diabetes, a major development was proof at last of what
many have long suspected: Exercise and weight loss can lower the risk.  A study
found that walking and losing 15 pounds helped people at high risk to cut their
chance of getting the disease in half.

   "This is a major advance," says Dr. Christopher Saudek of Johns Hopkins
University, president of the American Diabetes Association.  "It had never been
proven that a diet and exercise program can have enough effect over a four-year
period to actually reduce the risk of new diabetes."

   For those who already have the disease, researchers made progress toward
developing sensors that continuously measure glucose levels in the bloodstream.
Researchers hope eventually to tie this to an implanted insulin pump that will
release the hormone in precise response to the body's needs, just as the
pancreas does.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Associated Press; Robert Tools, the world's first recipient of
the AbioCor artificial heart, lived with the device for 151 days until his death
Nov. 1.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2002


                             1466 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                January 2, 2002 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: CONFLICTS IN ACADEMIA

BODY:

   MEDICAL RESEARCH

   THERE is no longer any doubt that researchers' financial stakes in the
medical research they conduct has jeopardized patients and skewed results. So
why aren't universities doing more to prevent such conflicts of interest?

   Their lack of initiative has major significance to anyone who sees a doctor
or takes prescription drugs, whether or not they've ever participated in medical
research. The kind of treatments doctors recommend and medications they
prescribe are greatly influenced by research findings.

   But a new government study has found that while universities collect an awful
lot of financial information from researchers, they rarely make it available to
those responsible for ensuring the safety of research subjects. One reason:
Universities often calculate their prestige at least in part by the volume of
high-profile research conducted on campus. Thus, administrators are reluctant to
intrude into the financial details of professors' lives.

   But what is at stake here is much more than privacy and prestige. Any doubts
should have been removed in September 1999, when 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger
died after receiving experimental gene therapy at the University of
Pennsylvania. Mr. Gelsinger had serious liver problems that should have
disqualified him from receiving the experimental drug. He was enrolled in the
study anyway. Unbeknownst to either the university or Mr. Gelsinger's family,
his doctor owned $13.5 million worth of stock in the company that made the
experimental drug.

   Mr. Gelsinger's death sparked congressional hearings and a national debate
about conflict of interest. Last year, the National Institutes of Health held a
two-day conference on identifying and "managing" such conflicts. This spring,
the Institute of Medicine, part of the National Academy of Sciences, called for
creation of an accreditation system for medical research.

   But a study released last week by the General Accounting Office found
lingering problems with the way universities use -- or, most often, don't use --
information about researchers, financial interests.

   Auditors who visited five leading research schools, including Washington
University, found financial information was kept in several different offices,
stored in different formats. That made it difficult to h ead off potential
conflicts of interest.

   Washington University is currently helping to draft conflict of interest
guidelines that could be used at other universities. That, and recently
announced plans to accredit research centers, are positive first steps.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2002


                             1467 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 31, 2001, Monday ,THIRD EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3132 words

HEADLINE: A PAUSE TO REMEMBER THOSE WHO DEPARTED

BYLINE: By Joseph P. Kahn, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   "The excursion is the same," Eudora Welty once wrote, "when you go looking
for your sorrow as when you go looking for your joy."

   Welty, the Pulitzer Prize-winning belletrist from Mississippi, was among the
many notables who died in 2001, a year in which the nation met its deepest
sorrow in terrorism's shadow. Her death closely followed that of the Washington
Post's Katharine Graham, a fellow Pulitzer winner and the doyenne of postwar
American journalism.

      Two giants of American politics were also laid to rest this year. US
Representative John Joseph Moakley, the plain-spoken, common-sense son of
Southie, and former US Senate majority leader Mike Mansfield, the self-effacing
Montanan who later served as ambassador to Japan, both demonstrated over long
careers that men of principle could indeed thrive inside the Beltway.

   All things must pass and so, too, did George Harrison, the "quiet Beatle,"
who lost his battle with cancer at age 58. Carnegie Hall dimmed its lights for
violinist Isaac Stern, the hall's most valuable player in its hour of need.
Hollywood tipped its fedora to Jack Lemmon, an actor of singular intelligence
and versatility.

   Author Ken Kesey boarded the bus for one last ride, cheered on merrily by
fellow Pranksters. Carroll O'Connor, TV's Archie Bunker, bade goodbye with a
scowl on his mug and a twinkle in his eye. Driving ace Dale Earnhardt took his
final lap and Hall of Fame slugger Willie Stargell his last cuts.

   The world community shared similar sentiments in mourning the thousands who
perished in the Sept. 11 attacks in New York, Washington, and Pennsylvania.
Among the victims were former Boston Bruin Garnet "Ace" Bailey, actress Berry
Berenson Perkins, "Frasier" producer David Angell, LA Kings scout Mark Bavis,
author and television commentator Barbara Olson, Port Authority of New York
director Neil Levin, and 479 New York rescue personnel. No list does justice,
however, to the shock and grief felt throughout the world that day, nor to the
loss still felt by thousands of wives, husbands, children, and other loved ones
left behind.

   In France, meanwhile, Marie Bremont and Michel Navratil both passed away this
year. Navratil, 91, was the last male survivor of the Titanic sinking. Bremont,
a former factory worker and seamstress, was believed to be the world's oldest
person when she died on June 6, at age 115.  Politics and law

   In the political arena, Maureen Reagan served her father's presidential
ambitions before taking up the cause of Alzheimer's research. The UAW's Leonard
Woodcock was an erudite and influential labor leader. Harold Stassen of
Minnesota was America's quadrennial presidential candidate. Ohio governor James
Rhodes will be remembered for dispatching National Guard troops to Kent State in
1970. The Washington establishment said goodbye to defense expert Paul Warnke,
Watergate lawyer James St. Clair, and William Rogers, secretary of state under
Richard M. Nixon.

   Springfield's Edward Boland served 18 terms in Congress, lending his name to
amendments in 1982 and 1983 restraining aid to the Nicaraguan contra rebels.
Also from the House ranks were Frank Annunzio of Illinois, Gerald Solomon of New
York, Lawrence Coughlin of Pennsylvania, John Schmitz of California, Norman
Sisisky of Virginia, and Floyd Spence of South Carolina.

   As governor, Meldrim Thomson of New Hampshire was a feisty conservative.
Mayor Abe Beame guided New York City through its fiscal crisis in the 1970s.
Texas prosecutor Henry Wade gave his name to Roe v. Wade. The Rev. Leon Sullivan
spelled out rules for investment in South Africa. David McTaggart helped launch
Greenpeace. Resort owner Neil Tillotson of Dixville Notch, N.H., cast the first
vote in every presidential primary since 1964.  World affairs

   The death of former South Vietnam president Nguyen Van Thieu reminded the
world of earlier conflicts and quagmires. Sir Peter Blake of New Zealand, slain
on an Amazon River expedition, was a world-class yachtsman and ardent
environmentalist. Nepal's King Birenda and Queen Aiswarya were assassinated by
one of their sons. In South Africa, activist Joe Modise and journalist Donald
Woods were antiapartheid heroes. Babu Chiri Sherpa set climbing records before
dying on Mt. Everest. Leopold Senghor, a poet and statesman, led Senegal to
independence. Twelve-year-old Nkosi Johnson of South Africa inspired millions
with his battle against AIDS.

   Also exiting the world's stage were former leaders Victor Paz Estenssoro of
Bolivia, Congo's Laurent Kabila, Juan Bosch of the Dominican Republic, Duong Van
Minh of South Vietnam, and Poland's Henryk Jablonski. Britain said goodbye to
historian John Plumb, cricket legend Donald Bradman, and spymaster David
Spedding. Two WWII heroes - Gerhart Riegner of the World Jewish Congress and
Emilie Schindler, widow of Oskar Schindler - also died this year, as did the
PLO's Faisal Husseini and Chinese dissident Wang Ruowang.  Literary world

   John Knowles wrote "A Separate Peace," a classic coming-of-age novel. Gregory
Corso composed Beat poetry for the ages. Anne Morrow Lindbergh became a prolific
writer after making aviation history. Douglas Adams's "Hitchhiker's Guide to the
Galaxy" mocked modern technology. W. G. Sebald wrote "Austerlitz" and other
masterworks.

   Robert Rimmer raised eyebrows with "The Harrad Experiment," a novel about
contemporary sexual relationships. Peter Maas ripped the lid off the mob and
corrupt cops in books such as "Serpico." Robert Ludlum cranked out "The Bourne
Identity" and other thrillers. Mordecai Richler's funny novels included "The
Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz."

   Great critics don't come along very often, and so the loss of Mortimer Adler,
Auberon Waugh, George T. Simon, and Nora Sayre loomed large this year. Novelist
Jorge Amado satirized Brazilian politics, A. R. Ammons and Agha Shahdid Ali were
acclaimed poets, and Poul Anderson a Hugo-winning science fiction writer. Also
mourned were Indian novelist R. K. Narayan, historian Stefan Heym, illustrator
Fred Marcellino, poet Louis Dudek, and novelist Hermann Field.  Film

   Oscar winner Anthony Quinn, who died in Boston, was best known for playing
the title role in the 1964 film "Zorba The Greek," though he gave dozens of
other incandescent performances. Stanley Kramer directed many classic Hollywood
dramas, including "High Noon" and "Judgment at Nuremburg." Director Herbert Ross
gave life to films like "Funny Girl" and "The Sunshine Boys." William Hanna
delighted fans with his animation wizardry. Harold Nicholas hoofed it up as one
of the dancing Nicholas Brothers. Beatrice Straight won an Oscar for "Network."

   Obits were also written for director Michael Ritchie, lyricist Jay
Livingston, animator Faith Hubley, screenwriters Julius Epstein, and Gordon
Kennedy, producers Howard Koch, Lester Persky, and Samuel Arkoff,
actor-puppeteer Lewis Arquette, and actresses Joan Sims, Jane Green, and Dagmar,
the sultry blonde bombshell of the 1950s.  Music

   In music, R&B singer Aaliyah Haughton died the way far too many pop stars
have: in a tragic plane crash that robbed fans of her blossoming talent. Blues
legend John Lee Hooker was an inspiration to legions of younger musicians. No
less revered were guitar picker Chet Atkins, punk rocker Joey Ramone, zydeco
icon Boozoo Chavis, world music pioneer Chico O'Farril, soul music's Rufus
Thomas, and bluegrass whiz John Hartford. John Phillips led the Mamas and Papas
to fame in the 1960s with "California Dreamin' " and other hits.

   Jazz greats John Lewis, Joe Henderson, J. J. Johnson, Buddy Tate, Al Hibbler,
and Tommy Flanagan all played their final notes in 2001. An older generation
mourned the passing of crooner Perry Como and Les Brown, bandleader of renown.
Fred Neil and Mimi Farina were gifted folk musicians. John Fahey and Sandy Bull
made their guitars sing.

   Susannah McCorkle and Maude Rutherford were talented jazz vocalists. Larry
Adler was the world's foremost harmonica virtuoso. Luis Bonfa popularized the
bossa nova sound. Leon Wilkeson played bass guitar for Lynyrd Skynyrd. Stuart
Adamson fronted the rock group Big Country. Silenced too were Grady Martin, Ron
Towson, James Myers, Ernie K-Doe, Johnny Russell, and Betty Everett, who
popularized "The Shoop Shoop Song." The arts

   The art world saluted Jacques Lowe, JFK's court photographer, who died this
year but whose work lives on. So too for Balthus, the controversial realist
painter; muralist John Biggers; folk artist Howard Finster; photographer O.
Winston Link; painters Morris Graves, Mine Okuba, and Pauline Campanelli; and
Pueblo Indian potter Margaret Tafoya. Daniel Wildenstein was hailed as one of
the world's great art collectors.

   Los Angeles and Miami, two cities known for their distinctive architecture,
lost signature designers in Martin Stern and Morris Lapidus. Landscape architect
Arthur Edwin Bye elevated naturalism to an art form. Hank Ketcham created
"Dennis The Menace," America's favorite imp, while Seymour Reit drew smiles with
"Casper, The Friendly Ghost." Cartoonists Dan DeCarlo, who drew "Archie," and
Dave Graue, who did "Alley Oop," also capped their pens for good, as did George
Gately, creator of "Heathcliff." Theater and dance

   They wrote - and delivered - some of the best lines of their generation. Kim
Stanley sizzled in "Bus Stop" and won two Oscar nominations, one for "Seance on
a Wet Afternoon." Playwright-actor Jason Miller penned "That Championship
Season" and starred in "The Exorcist." Dorothy McGuire enchanted on stage,
screen, and television.

   Jose Greco danced up a storm. Animal trainer Gunther Gebel-Williams was the
circus world's answer to Elvis. Costume designer Freddy Wittop copped a Tony for
"Hello, Dolly!" Genji Ito composed music for experimental theater. Lionel Abel
won an Obie for "Absalom." Norman Rodway and Michael Williams were memorable
Shakespearean actors, Arthur Cantor a legendary producer. Edward Mangum founded
the Arena Stage theater.  Television and radio

   Fans sang a chorus of "Happy Trails" to Dale Evans, television's most popular
cowgirl during the 1950s.  Arlene Francis was a droll panelist on "What's My
Line?" Comedienne Imogene Coca played second banana to Sid Caesar, making up one
of TV's all-time great comedy duos. Trash-talk host Morton Downey Jr. finally
rested in peace, as did everybody's favorite TV Martian, actor Ray Walston.

   Fred De Cordova produced the "Tonight" show during Johnny Carson's long
reign.  Whitman Mayo played Grady on the hit sitcom "Sanford and Son." Troy
Donahue was a teen heartthrob on "Hawaiian Eye" and "Surfside Six."

   Christopher Hewett played "Mr. Belvedere." Ann Sothern starred in two popular
'50s series. Jack Haley Jr. produced many Academy Awards telecasts. Foster
Brooks played the lovable sot better than anyone. Frances Horwich rang the bell
at "Ding Dong School." Media

   In the media realm, no pundit wielded a sharper pen than Herbert L. Block,
the Washington Post editorial cartoonist known as Herblock, who died at age 91.
New Yorker critic Pauline Kael changed the way people thought and wrote about
movies. As biographer and broadcaster, Dick Schaap, who seemed to know everyone,
moved effortlessly between the sports arena and the arts world. Lloyd Shearer
penned a widely read Parade column. Heywood Hale Broun was a jauntily attired
sports journalist and TV commentator.

   The New York Times lost several distinguished alumni, among them reporters
Marjorie Hunter and Tad Szulc, fashion editor Carrie Donovan, sportswriter Phil
Berger, and editorial writer John Oakes. Rowland Evans was an old-school
political junkie and widely read syndicated columnist. Luci Houston, a homicide
victim, took pictures for the San Jose Mercury News. Photographer Will Counts
captured a powerful image of school desegregation in Little Rock.  Sports

   In sports, the New England Patriots lost a pair of family members in 2001,
coach Dick Rehbein and Pro Bowl lineman Leon Gray. Korey Stringer was a mainstay
of the Minnesota Vikings offensive line. Tommie Agee starred for the New York
Mets in the 1969 World Series. Hall of Fame slugger Eddie Mathews graced the
very first cover of Sports Illustrated. Another ex-Milwaukee Brave, pitcher Bob
Buhl, also died this year, as did former major leaguers Curt Blefary, Bo
Belinsky, Gene Woodling, Hank Sauer, Lou Boudreau, and umpire Hank Soar.

   The Red Sox lost two beloved friends in coach Eddie (Pops) Popowski and Helen
Robinson, the team's longtime switchboard operator. Andy Phillip played guard
for the 1957 Celtics when they won their first of 16 NBA titles. The coaching
ranks were thinned by the deaths of the NBA's Larry Costello, college football's
John McKay, Charlie McClendon, and Charley Pell, baseball's Bill Rigney, college
hockey's Shawn Walsh and John Murdoch, and college basketball's Ralph Miller and
Al McGuire, who became a popular TV commentator, as did the late Marty Glickman.

   Diana Golden Brosnihan was a skiing champ and inspiration for all disabled
athletes. Lawrence "Crash" Davis, a minor-league baseball legend, was
immortalized in the film "Bull Durham." Love him or hate him, listeners to
Boston sports-talk radio seldom tuned out when Tom Speers (a.k.a. Butch from the
Cape) weighed in with his salty opinions.  Business

   A legend in the business world, William Hewlett co-founded Hewlett-Packard
and thus helped put Silicon Valley on the map. Mary Kay Ash remade the cosmetics
industry in her own image, complete with pink Cadillacs. Victor Kiam hawked
Remington shavers and owned the Patriots at one time. As CEO of American
Express, Howard Clark reminded us, "Don't leave home without" his card. Ely
Callaway put his stamp on the golf-club industry. Pasta mogul Joseph Pellegrino
turned Wednesday into Prince Spaghetti Day. George Wheelwright III co-founded
Polaroid. Leslie Quick Jr. of Quick & Reilly pioneered the discount stock
brokerage. Chung Ju-yung founded Hyundai.  Academia

   Nathan Pusey led Harvard University through change and through storm during
his presidency from 1953 to 1971. Charles Black Jr. was a constitutional law
expert in Texas. Harvard's Richard Schultes was known as the father of
ethnobotany. Feminist educator Millicent Carey McIntosh was the first married
woman to run a top college when she assumed the presidency of Barnard in 1952.
MIT's Kenneth Hale was an influential linguist. Filmmaker Richard Pendleton
Rogers ran Harvard's film studies program.

   Campus flags were also lowered for Brandeis astrophysicist Jack Goldstein,
MIT computer visionary Michael Dertouzos, Buddhist scholar Harrison Hoblitzelle,
Yale literary critic Naomi Schor, and Harvard biochemist Don C. Wiley, whose
mysterious death in Tennessee this year remains under investigation.  Innovators

   America is built on vision and innovation, and what would the country be
without gadflies like hot rod customizer Ed "Big Daddy" Roth, who once defined
the essence of California cool?  Designer Morison Cousins came up with the
prototype for Tupperware. Admen Harvey Ball (the Happy Face) and Don Tennant
(Tony the Tiger) left their mark on pop culture, too. Robert Moon championed the
ZIP code.  Adolph Levis concocted the ubiquitous Slim Jim. Cliff Hillegass
created Cliff Notes, for better or worse.  Science and medicine

   In and out of the laboratory, sex researcher William Masters deepened our
understanding of human sexuality. Neuroscientist John Lilly blazed his own path
in experimenting with LSD and dolphin communication. Christiaan Barnard made
headlines in 1967 by performing the first human heart transplant. Sir Fred
Hoyle, an astronomer, coined the term Big Bang theory, even though Hoyle didn't
much believe in it. Robert Tools received the world's first artificial-heart
implant. British archeologist T. Geoffrey Bibby unearthed the kingdom of Dilmun,
in Bahrain.  Boston scene

   Boston lost its share of favorite sons and daughters this year, too,
underscoring the changing nature of the city itself. Frederick Langone was a
garrulous, cigar-smoking city councilor, Averil Lashley a City Hall insider who
became a familiar publicist-about-town. James F. "Blackie" Burke was a colorful
state senator. Judge Jeremiah Sullivan also served as a respected state
representative. Gospel singer Ruth Hamilton earned the sobriquet the Cambridge
Jewel. Edward Kondayan, known as "Mr. Eddie," was a retired draftsman and
onetime Sox batboy.

   Judge Eileen Griffin was the first female justice in Western Massachusetts.
Newton's Katherine Mearls Rogan was a champion athlete in her youth. MGH
physician Tom Durant won a United Nations humanitarian award. Cardiologist
Jeffrey Isner pioneered the field of gene therapy.  Ralph Dart served as deputy
commissioner of cultural affairs. Jorge Fidalgo hosted a popular Cape Verdean
radio show. Monsignor Leandre Jeannot was a leader of the Haitian community.
Robert Rohan served nine terms in the State House. Armando Ghitalla anchored the
BSO's trumpet section. Engineer Paul Levenson led the L Street Brownies on their
annual New Year's Day plunge. Barbara Lee was a stockbroker and radio
commentator, Wamsutta Frank James an activist and educator.

   The region also lost publishing executive Richard Gladstone, attorneys J.
Newton Esdaile and Max Beck, Boston University dean Brendan Gilbane,
entrepreneur Jacob Hiatt, costume designer Vivian Dooley, bishops John McNamara
and Lawrence Riley, transplant surgeon Francis Moore, Harvard medical professor
William McDermott, clothing designer Samuel Robert, housing activist Ruby
Jaundoo, diplomat-author John Bovey, hotelier Sigi Brauer, Tufts dean Louis
Calisti, MFA curator Eleanor Sayre, and Donald Campbell, the small-town
physician who modeled for Norman Rockwell.

   Aviators Barbara Gard and Gwen Bloomingdale of Provincetown perished during
an attempted round-the-world flight. They will be sorely missed, as will
producer Bill Weems, engineer Alexander Filipov, consultant Richard Ross, and
philanthropist Sonia Puopolo, all of whom were among the victims of Sept. 11.
At the Globe

   Here at the Globe, we bow our heads this holiday season in remembrance of:
William Doherty, Frank Harris, Jane Godfrey, Joseph Dennehy, Richard Collins,
Susan Epstein Dill, Joseph O'Brien, Daniel Morreo, Betty Ann Robey, Alexander
Bowman, Edward Quigley, George Ramsay, Henry Coughlin, Robert Williams, Leo
Brady, John Toomey, Joseph Considine, Benjamin Robinson, Walter Francis, Richard
McDonough, John Sullivan, Frank Ricciardi, Charles Spencer, Helge Sahlin,
Richard Ahern, and music critic Arthur Hepner. /

   "To the memory nothing is ever really lost," wrote Eudora Welty in "One
Writer's Beginnings." And so to memory are committed all those who now rest in
the sleep of peace - for auld lang syne.

CORRECTION-DATE:  January 1, 2002, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

   The name of George McAndrew Jr., a Globe classified advertising salesman, was
left out of yesterday's year-end roll of departed loved ones.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Among the notables who died in 2001 were (clockwise from top
left) Isaac Stern, Carroll O'Connor, Joe Henderson, Nguyen Van Thieu, Willie
Stargell, Dale Earnhardt, Ken Kesey, and (middle) Berry Berenson Perkins.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2002


                             1468 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    December 31, 2001 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 1210 words

HEADLINE: In 2001, a heralded breakthrough for heart disease

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Measured by headline size, the top medical stories of the year were the
anthrax scare, the stem cell controversy and the artificial heart. But some
doctors say a less heralded breakthrough may be the biggest news of all, for it
will soon improve treatment for hundreds of thousands of Americans with heart
disease.

   The development is a surprising improvement in the way doctors do
angioplasties, one that promises to keep these routine procedures from going bad
so they can be done in more people who need them.

   In almost every area of medicine - cancer, diabetes, infectious diseases and
more - scientists are making impressive strides, using a molecule-by-molecule
understanding of disease to design drugs and devices that tackle the illnesses
at their roots.

   The latest innovation in treating heart disease shows how this basic
understanding pays off. It grows from an intimate knowledge of how smooth muscle
cells pile up inside blood vessels in the response to the well-intentioned
injury of an angioplasty. Every year, cardiologists perform about half a million
of these in the United States and double that worldwide, threading balloons into
clogged heart arteries to restore blood flow.

   Often, though, the freshly opened arteries fill in again with scar-like
growth, a complication that has bedeviled angioplasty since its invention in
1977. Doctors have tried lasers, cutting tools, radiation, even gene therapy, to
improve results. In the mid-1990s, they began leaving behind tiny mesh tubes
called stents to prop open the arteries.

   Some of these help, but nothing solved the problem completely. The arteries
still narrow up again about 20 percent of the time.

   This history of failure helps explain why doctors are so astonished by what
they heard in September at a European cardiology meeting: Testing showed a new
kind of stent, coated with growth-stopping medicine, is totally effective. Not a
single artery closed up after angioplasty.

   "It was too good to believe," says Dr. John LaSala of Barnes-Jewish Hospital
in St. Louis. "Nothing in medicine works 100 percent of the time."

   And yet, as far as doctors can tell, this one nearly does. Reports on three
other companies' stents, similar but coated with different drugs, soon followed.
In all, about 700 patients have been studied. The results are remarkably
consistent with almost no failures.

   "It's an enormous breakthrough," says Dr. David Faxon of the University of
Chicago, president of the American Heart Association. "This is the Holy Grail
for interventional cardiology."

   If no complications emerge, the stents could be on the market in the coming
year. Faxon says they could increase the number of angioplasties by 20 percent
to 30 percent, because doctors will use them in arteries considered too risky
before. These include buildups in especially tiny vessels, ones that are long or
diffusely clogged and bad arteries in diabetics.

   While the new stents didn't get much press this year, there was no lack of
other dramatic developments in science and medicine:

   Artificial heart. The first artificial heart since the Jarvik-7 in the 1980s
made its debut, and this one is fully implantable and relatively portable. By
year's end, doctors had installed Abiomed's self-contained heart in six men. All
had been expected to die within weeks without the implant - indeed, that was a
condition of their admission to the clinical trial - and one did not survive the
operation while two others died later.

   Nevertheless, the heart itself appeared to work flawlessly, and doctors said
it offers a chance of survival for terminally ill people with congestive heart
failure who do not qualify for transplanted hearts, which are in short supply.

   Recipient No. 5 was 51-year-old James Quinn of West Philadelphia, who
received his mechanical heart on Nov. 5 at Hahnemann University Hospital. The
talkative retired baker, a man of devout faith, has repeatedly said he felt the
hand of God pull him through the operation - and transplant surgeon Louis E.
Samuels has called his recovery "miraculous."

   Eight days ago, in his first official excursion from the hospital, Quinn
(with an entourage of family and medical staff) returned to Haven Peniel United
Methodist Church in North Philadelphia, where he has worshiped for years.

   "I truly believe that there was a process involved in all of this," an
ebullient Quinn told the congregation. "I trust my surgeon's education, skill
and devotion and I know that it was God who brought us together at this time.
Yes, there is a God."

   Cancer drug. In cancer research, the biggest news of the year was Gleevec, a
new medicine effective against an unusual digestive cancer called
gastrointestinal stromal tumors. It is also being tested in lung, prostate and
brain cancer.

   Gleevec's history dates back to basic research at Fox Chase Cancer Center and
the University of Pennsylvania in the 1950s.

   Standard chemotherapy goes after all fast-dividing cells and kills them
indiscriminately. But Gleevec follows the new approach to drug design. It is
aimed specifically at a protein unique to cancer, blocking it without harming
other parts of the body.

   "The importance of it is far more than the drug itself," says Dr. Harmon
Eyre, research director of the American Cancer Society. "It really is a proof of
principle."

   Genomics. Some of the biggest news of the year involved developments that may
be decades away from practical use but lay the groundwork for future
breakthroughs. In February, scientists published their first examination of
nearly all the human genetic code.

   The next task will be learning what all these genes do. The answers will
likely hold clues for treating many diseases.

   Stem cells. Another field in its infancy is the study of stem cells, the
primordial mother cells that give rise to all the body parts. Scientists believe
these cells could be used to replace or fix failing organs.

   Growing these cells, however, requires the death of a human embryo. In
August, President Bush said his administration will pay for this research but
limit funding to work on self-perpetuating colonies of stem cells that already
existed, not new ones.

   Infections. For the first time in decades, doctors had to deal with anthrax,
spread now through the mail by terrorists. Although five people died, modern
antibiotics and hospital care often proved effective against the dangerous
inhaled form of the disease.

   The affair also left a mystery: How did two older women in Manhattan and
rural Connecticut catch the bacteria?

   Another development in infectious disease, however, is likely to affect far
more people. In November, the Food and Drug Administration approved the sale of
Xigris, the first drug ever for bloodstream bacterial infections, known as
sepsis, which kill 225,000 Americans a year. The drug works by curbing
inflammation and clotting, the out-of-control processes that make these
infections so dangerous.

   Diabetes. For doctors treating diabetes, a major development was proof at
last of what many have long suspected: Exercise and weight loss can lower the
risk. A study found that walking and losing 15 pounds helped people at high risk
to cut their chance of getting the disease in half.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
West Philadelphia's James Quinn testifies in church. The 51-year-old received a
mechanical heart at Hahnemann University Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2002


                             1469 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            December 30, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. W16

LENGTH: 8258 words

HEADLINE: Informed Consent;
Alan Milstein says he wants to rescue us from unscrupulous doctors, undisclosed
risks and greedy institutions. But is he a shining knight,or an enemy of medical
progress?

BYLINE: Jennifer Washburn

BODY:

    At one end of the long conference table sat the lawyer, a tall man with
silver-and-black hair, prominent cheekbones and a Baltimore accent, dressed in a
charcoal-gray suit and white pin-stripe shirt with monogrammed cuffs. The others
seated at the table wore lightweight dresses, bluejeans, overalls, cowboy boots
and trucker caps. Their faces were somber and expectant. Some had driven
hundreds of miles to Tulsa to be here.

   The lawyer began the meeting with two questions. "Why did you decide to
enroll in this trial?" he asked, his dark eyes sweeping around the table. "What
did Dr. McGee tell you about the vaccine being tested?"

   Phyllis Friesner, an elderly woman with arresting blue eyes, was among the
first to respond. Her late husband, James, had been diagnosed with
advanced-stage melanoma, a deadly skin cancer. He had seen the vaccine --
offered in a melanoma experiment at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center -- as his last hope. According to Michael McGee, the director of the
experiment, the purpose of the medication was to prevent the melanoma from
recurring after it had been surgically removed. But shortly after the injections
began, Phyllis Friesner said, "Jim's tumors started growing rapidly."

   "I asked Dr. McGee, 'Just how good is this vaccine?' " she recalled. "He said
it's the greatest; it's better than any of the vaccines out there. He told us he
was having a 70 to 75 percent cure rate."

   The lawyer nodded his head. "A 70 percent cure rate?" he asked. "Was anyone
else told that?"

   Jeff and Paige Teel, a young couple seated at the far end of the table,
recalled that they had heard the same reassuring figures. Jeff had been
diagnosed with melanoma as well. "We were also told that the side effects would
be minimal," he said.

   A chorus of people responded affirmatively, "Uh-huh."

   Despite McGee's assurances, Jeff Teel went on, the vaccine injections had
made him violently ill. After each one, his temperature rose rapidly; he broke
out in a cold sweat and started to shake uncontrollably. For two or three days
he would vomit continually. The anxiety attacks were terrible," he recalled. "I
felt like my throat was closing; I could hardly breathe."

   Mark Gaffney, a quiet man with a narrow face, deep bags under his eyes and a
forest-green baseball cap, said he, too, had suffered terrible symptoms after
each round of injections. Rolling up his sleeve, Gaffney asked the group whether
anyone else had experienced swelling. His arm was nearly double its normal size,
the pale skin covering his hand and fingers puffed out like a balloon.

   The lawyer looked up from his yellow legal pad. "Who's your physician?" he
asked. "We haven't found another doctor," Gaffney's wife responded.

   This, the lawyer knew, was the reason that many of those around the table had
enrolled in the clinical trial. They didn't have health insurance, they were
terminally ill, and here was a prestigious university offering them treatment
for free. But what most interested him were the things his clients had not been
told. They weren't told the test vaccine had been manufactured by untrained
staff in a small, cramped room at the university without proper sterility
testing or quality controls. They weren't informed that the study was unlikely
to cure its subjects. When the clinical trial was terminated, federal
investigators noted that the informed consent document each patient had signed
had overstated the potential benefits.

   Nor were they warned that the vaccine and another drug that McGee introduced
during the research trial could be harmful to a fetus. Dawanna Robertson, a
young woman with olive skin and brown hair, told the group that she and her
husband had notified McGee immediately when they learned she was pregnant. "I
didn't want anything to hurt my baby," she said. "Dr. McGee told me that it
would be okay, that the vaccine wouldn't reach the fetus because it was in a
sack."

   Soon afterward, however, she developed severe reactions. "One time my throat
swelled up so bad I had to go to the emergency room because I couldn't swallow
my own saliva," she said. "Now, I'm really worried about my baby, Sydnee. She's
sick all the time. When you go to the doctor, you trust him. Just as a human
being, I feel betrayed; I feel like he took advantage of my child, and that's a
big deal to me."

   As the meeting drew to a close, the lawyer told them that he would do
everything he could to hold the University of Oklahoma accountable. What had
happened to them, he added, was not an isolated case but an example of a broader
trend, which was why their lawsuit was beginning to attract national media
attention.

   "The whole country," Alan Milstein promised, "is watching this case."

   He is an improbable crusader in the world of medical research. An attorney
with Sherman, Silverstein, Kohl, Rose and Podolsky in Pennsauken, N.J., Alan
Milstein knew little about clinical research before he filed a much-publicized
lawsuit against the University of Pennsylvania last year. Prior to that case, he
had never even filed a medical malpractice suit.

   But since then, Milstein has become the man to see when it comes to medical
research abuses. His scorched-earth tactics -- suing anyone even remotely
implicated in harming his clients -- have unnerved his academic opponents, among
them some of the nation's most prestigious medical schools and research
institutions. Drawing a connection between these modern-day violations and the
abuses perpetrated by Nazi doctors convicted at Nuremberg after World War II,
Milstein is pursuing an aggressive legal strategy that intimidates and
infuriates many in the clinical research world.

   Milstein has found a fertile field. Experts estimate that nearly 3 million
Americans volunteer annually to participate in 50,000 to 60,000 ongoing clinical
trials. These trials are critical in determining whether the vast array of new
drugs and therapies developed in the nation's laboratories will prove effective
in curing diseases and saving lives. But there has been growing concern about
whether the human subjects who volunteer for these trials are adequately
protected.

   In the past four years, federal regulators have restricted or shut down
research at 20 institutions for violations of rules designed to protect
participants. The crackdown has come at a time when funding for biomedical
research has been skyrocketing, many more clinical trials are being conducted
and an already-weak oversight system of institutional review boards (IRBs) has
been staggering from the strain of too much work.

   It is in this context that Milstein has jumped into the fray. In the past 15
months, he has filed three major lawsuits against university-affiliated research
centers. His first case was filed on behalf of the family of Jesse Gelsinger, an
18-year-old who died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania and whose death prompted a national investigation that uncovered
abuses at dozens of other institutions. More recently, following reports of
multiple deaths and research violations, Milstein filed suit against the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, a world-renowned cancer institute
affiliated with the University of Washington. Finally, there is the class action
suit he has filed jointly with Oklahoma lawyer Robert Seacat against the
University of Oklahoma.

   Milstein has several other cases in the works -- including a recent lawsuit
on behalf of soldiers ordered to be inoculated with a controversial anthrax
vaccine -- and it's no wonder: Until the September 11 attacks drove most other
stories from the headlines, fresh revelations concerning medical research
violations seemed to emerge every few weeks. Over the summer, federal
authorities opened an investigation at the University of Michigan after
receiving complaints that two studies there were performed without the subjects'
consent. The same month, authorities charged senior officials and investigators
at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis with failing to report
"serious unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects."

   One month earlier, Ellen Roche, a healthy, 24-year-old woman, died in an
asthma experiment at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine in Baltimore, one of
the most respected medical schools in the country. A federal investigation found
that Hopkins researchers had failed to obtain information on the links between a
drug they were administering and possible lung damage, even though data showing
this connection were readily available. Investigators also discovered widespread
deficiencies in Hopkins's oversight system and ordered the suspension and
reevaluation of thousands of clinical trials. In another instance, last month
Hopkins moved to discipline a scientist who had been operating a cancer trial in
India without approval from the university or the Food and Drug Administration.

   To be sure, universities and their affiliated teaching hospitals have faced
medical malpractice suits against individual doctors before. But Milstein is
attempting to hold the entire institution liable -- everyone from the president
of the university to the individual IRB members to the bioethicists who advise
institutions on ethical issues. In Milstein's view, the only way to protect
human subjects and bring about reform is to hit universities where it counts: in
their pocketbooks.

   Milstein's lawsuits are wreaking havoc in the halls of academia because of
the high stakes and the ethical questions they raise. The lawsuits are also
focusing public attention on aspects of the research world that many
universities and scientists would prefer to keep private, such as their growing
financial ties to corporate sponsors. At both the University of Pennsylvania and
the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, the principal researchers -- and the
institutions themselves -- had financial interests in companies that stood to
profit from their experiments. The prevalence of the ties has prompted questions
about whether university research centers are bending the rules and cutting
corners on safety in order to make profits.

   "Universities are afraid," says Kendra Dimond, a Washington, D.C., attorney
who represents the health care industry. "Most of them are public institutions,
or supported by public and philanthropic funds, so they can ill afford to have a
lot of bad publicity -- and Milstein knows that."

   Medical research usually begins with extensive laboratory testing in animals.
If the results appear promising, investigators generally file a new-drug
application with the FDA and navigate through three phases of testing on humans.
The first phase, usually performed on 20 to 100 subjects, tests toxicity -- the
way the drug is absorbed into the body, and what dosage levels are safe. The
second phase, conducted on up to several hundred people, tests whether the drug
is effective. According to the FDA, only about one-third of experimental drugs
successfully complete both phases. Drugs that make it to the third phase are
tested on several hundred to thousands of subjects to establish a more thorough
understanding of their effectiveness, benefits and side effects.

   The system is intentionally rigorous in an effort to ensure that only drugs
that are safe and have proven health benefits are released to the broader
public. "Clinical trials are very important to our lives," says Larry Medley,
acting CEO of the Association of Clinical Research Professionals. "We wouldn't
be able to live as long as we do if it weren't for the appropriate study of new
drugs and devices."

   Too often, however, these experiments are conducted with meager oversight and
without proper informed consent. The main mechanism for protecting human
subjects is the institutional review board, federally mandated for most
experimental research. Typically, all large research institutions have their own
IRB composed of faculty members, administrators and at least one independent
representative from outside the institution. But according to a report last year
by the inspector general's office at the Department of Health and Human
Services, "IRBs are inundated with protocols and adverse-event reports. With
limited personnel and few resources, many IRBs are hard-pressed to give each
review sufficient attention."

   Federal oversight is not much better. The General Accounting Office found
that during a recent eight-month period, the Office for Human Research
Protections failed to make any unannounced spot checks of research sites. Even
when federal agencies do inspect a site, it rarely happens while a clinical
trial is taking place; if any violations are found, it is often too late for the
human subjects involved.

   "Too many researchers are not adhering to standards of good clinical
practice," wrote Donna Shalala, then secretary of health and human services, in
an editorial in the New England Journal of Medicine last year. "These were not
isolated incidents on the fringes of science. Instead, these troubling problems
occurred at some of our most prestigious research centers and involved leaders
in their fields of study."

   While acknowledging problems exist, many clinical investigators contend that
waves of litigation, and the negative publicity that inevitably follows, could
have a chilling effect on research and impede advances in medicine. "Litigation
certainly gets everyone's attention," says Robert M. Nelson, chairman of the
institutional review boards at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. "But getting
a monetary award eight years later doesn't do any good for changing practices at
the time of the trial."

   Milstein is unimpressed with that argument. "Everyone accuses me of wanting
to shut down research and slow medical progress," he says. "I'm not trying to
shut down research; I'm just trying to make sure it's done ethically."

   The case against Milstein often gets personal. Boiled down, it is that he's a
plaintiff's lawyer out to make money in a field whose nuances and moral
quandaries he fails to comprehend. Arthur Caplan, a prominent Penn bioethicist
who acknowledges he's still bruised from being one of the early defendants in
the Gelsinger case (he was dropped eventually from the suit), makes the
argument: "No one in bioethics takes [Milstein] seriously. He simply has no
background and no understanding of Phase I and II studies or anything else in
human experimentation ethics . . . He is simply clueless about the area that he
happened to find himself litigating with respect to Gelsinger."

   But Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, sees things differently. "I've done all I
can do to change the oversight system: speaking out, attending hearings. And
where is it now? Hung up in limbo," he says. "It's been my fear all along that
time and money will kill the whole awareness brought about by Jesse's death. I
think Alan's lawsuits are appropriate; they are keeping this issue alive."

   Alan Milstein keeps framed photos of John F. Kennedy and Bob Dylan on display
in his South Jersey law office, and a Grateful Dead wine bottle (labeled "Dead
Red") on his shelf. It doesn't take much prodding for him to pull out his modest
collection of O.J. Simpson memorabilia, including a T-shirt signed by Johnny
Cochran ("I'm a big Johnny Cochran fan"), a Rose Bowl jersey signed by O.J., and
snapshots of Milstein and his legal partners on the L.A. murder scene tour.

   Like his early idol, Dylan, Milstein enjoys thumbing his nose at the
establishment. Does it concern him that his lawsuits might damage the reputation
of prestigious institutions like the University of Pennsylvania? "I went to law
school at Temple," he replies. "I could care less."

   But like his other idol, Cochran, Milstein is making good money pursuing his
personal brand of legal morality. He drives a silver Toyota MR2 Spider
convertible, and his suits are comfortably stylish. Those are about the limits
of his ostentation. "The impetus is not to make money," he says of his medical
research work. But he can't help adding a few moments later, "Do I believe we
are going to make lots of money? I do. It is a pleasant collateral result."

   Sometimes it's possible both to moralize and to make a healthy profit. In the
Gelsinger case, the facts were relatively straightforward; Milstein brought a
traditional medical malpractice claim arguing that Jesse, a young, healthy
volunteer, had died as a direct consequence of the experimental treatment. The
university settled quickly -- without acknowledging wrongdoing. While the amount
is confidential, observers knowledgeable about such cases estimate it was
between $ 5 million and $ 10 million. Milstein's share: 33 percent.

   Any good lawyer might have succeeded with Gelsinger. But elsewhere in the
medical research field, the question of liability is far more complex. In the
Oklahoma case, for example, most of the patients enrolled in McGee's study had
advanced-stage melanoma -- a usually fatal condition for which there are few
treatment options -- making it much harder to prove that any permanent physical
harm was caused by the experiment. Searching for other legal arguments, Milstein
has accused the university of breaching "the right to be treated with dignity,"
and the right to be fully informed about the potential benefits and risks of
experimental research. He finds the source of these rights in the 14th
Amendment's guarantee of life, liberty and property, though his claims have yet
to be tested in court.

   Stephen Hanlon, an attorney who has filed a similar "dignity claim," did so
in a class action lawsuit filed in 1990 against the University of South Florida.
The suit alleged that researchers at a public clinic serving low-income women
with high-risk pregnancies had failed to inform patients of all their medical
options and used a consent document written well above the average patient's
reading level. The case was settled out of court last year for $ 3.8 million.

   "Most lawyers want cases where they can go in and say, 'This is what juries
across the country have awarded; this is what we should be compensated,' " says
Hanlon. "Dignity harm is still an embryonic legal theory -- it has yet to be
upheld in court."

   Hanlon says the odds are stacked against Milstein. "They are going to fight
him as hard as they fought me -- they fought me for 10 years -- because there
are huge stakes here. It involves pharmaceutical companies, biomedical research
institutions -- the amount of money involved is simply staggering."

   "Before the Gelsinger case, I had a lot of cases that didn't really have any
political context to them," Milstein recalled one day as he sat in his sunlit
office. "Sometimes I was on the right side, sometimes on the wrong side. I
enjoyed being a trial lawyer and the challenges of that. But here was a cause I
really believed in."

   Milstein, who is 48, grew up in a

   middle-class household in Pikesville, a predominantly Jewish suburb of
Baltimore. His father owned a liquor store; his mother was a homemaker. After
graduating from high school in the early '70s, Milstein attended the University
of Maryland, where he soaked up the atmosphere of the counterculture. He grew
his hair long and wore bell-bottoms. He became obsessed with the Beats -- he
still enjoys quoting from Allen Ginsberg's poem "Howl."

   It was a major stretch for Milstein to imagine that he would one day become a
lawyer. After graduating in 1975, he got a master's degree in American studies
at the University of Kansas, where he taught courses on the 1950s and '60s,
examining each decade through the lives of prominent artists and dissidents:
Jack Kerouac, Jackson Pollock, Billie Holiday, Kurt Vonnegut, Jasper Johns, Bob
Dylan.

   When he moved back east to Philadelphia, Milstein worked as an art critic for
a small newspaper. "Art history was my passion," he says. "But after I had a
kid, I realized I better start making some money. So I went to law school."

   Over the course of two decades, he became a specialist in insurance
litigation, computer software disputes and product liability, joining Sherman,
Silverstein in 1991 to become chair of its litigation department. Then one day
in December 1999, a banker who had been a longtime client of the firm brought
his brother, Paul Gelsinger, a contractor from Tucson, to discuss the death of
Paul's son, Jesse. Three months earlier, Jesse had died in a novel gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania designed to help find a cure for a
genetic liver disorder.

   Jesse's involvement in the study was strictly humanitarian. He stood to
derive no benefit from the study since his own rare liver condition was already
effectively controlled through medication and a restricted diet. Both Jesse and
his father had been led to believe that Penn's investigators were on the brink
of finding a cure for infants who suffered a more deadly form of Jesse's
disease. "My son knew the study wouldn't benefit him," Gelsinger told Milstein,
"but he thought there was a good chance it might cure the babies."

   But the experiment went badly wrong. The large dose of genetically engineered
viruses that researchers infused into Jesse's liver in September 1999 caused a
massive reaction. His liver failed, his blood thickened into jelly, and his
kidneys, brain and other vital organs shut down. Four days after the initial
infusion he was brain-dead. His death was the first reported fatality in the
gene therapy field -- a much-vaunted new science with heavy Wall Street
financing -- and made international headlines.

   Paul Gelsinger told Milstein that for several months after Jesse died, he had
defended the scientists at Penn, trusting that they had done what they could to
save his son. Later, however, he began to question the circumstances of Jesse's
death. It particularly troubled him that the scientists at Penn were now
publicly stating that the gene therapy "treatment" they were testing was still
in such an early stage that they had no proof of its effectiveness. Gelsinger
said he would never have allowed Jesse to volunteer for the study if he had
known that.

   Milstein was hooked. Despite his lack of expertise in the field, he took the
case immediately. He read everything he could about the history of biomedical
ethics and human experimentation. He became particularly interested in the
brutal experiments performed on Jews, the mentally ill and Gypsies during the
Holocaust. He delved into the darkest chapters of medical research in the United
States, such as the Tuskegee experiment, in which treatment was deliberately
withheld from black men with syphilis between 1932 and 1972, and the human
radiation experiments conducted by the U.S. government during the Cold War. He
began to draw a direct link between these gruesome experiments on unwitting
victims and modern medical abuses. "The history of medicine and science is
littered with subjects sacrificed for the 'greater good,' " he says. And what
began as an intriguing but straightforward legal case was fast becoming a
personal crusade.

   By the time Milstein was ready to file his legal brief against Penn on the
anniversary of Jesse Gelsinger's death in September 2000, federal investigators
had unearthed most of the evidence he would need. The FDA reported that monkeys
given gene-transfer injections similar to the one Jesse received had died or
suffered serious adverse events, yet Penn's investigators had neglected to
notify the agency of those occurrences until after Jesse died and failed to
include this information on patient consent forms. Federal auditors also found
that Penn's researchers had failed to halt the study and alert the FDA, as
required, when volunteers suffered serious toxic reactions prior to Jesse's
participation. And although Jesse's blood ammonia levels were too high to meet
the criteria for enrollment, investigators admitted him anyway. (University
President Judith Rodin, in a letter to alumni, has written: "It is extremely
important to recognize that none of these lapses appears to have had any
connection to the tragic event of Gelsinger's death.")

   Beyond these violations, Milstein's suit highlighted the extensive financial
conflicts surrounding the experiment. Early on, news articles revealed that both
James Wilson, the principal investigator, and the University of Pennsylvania
held stock in a biotechnology company, Genovo Inc., founded by Wilson, which
provided approximately 20 percent of the annual research budget for Wilson's
lab. In exchange for this funding, Genovo had exclusive rights to develop
Wilson's research into commercial products. Both Wilson and the university stood
to profit financially if the experiment was successful.

   No one has proved that Wilson's or Penn's financial stake contributed
directly to the mistakes and misconduct discovered in Wilson's lab -- indeed,
Wilson and Penn strongly deny any link. Still, numerous internal Penn documents
reveal that university officials had extensive discussions about the possible
dangers of such financial entanglements.

   In early 1995, for example, the school convened a Conflict of Interest
Standing Committee to review the matter. "The Genovo case might be the most
important case which the CISC will ever deal with," noted Neal Nathanson, then
Penn's vice dean for research and training.

   One of the first questions the committee raised: "Since Dr. Wilson's research
efforts will be directed towards the solution of a problem in which he has a
financial interest in the outcome, how can Dr. Wilson assure the University that
he will not be conflicted when making decisions that could have an impact on . .
. his intellectual property?" The committee never answered this question.

   The committee raised another prescient question: "How can Dr. Wilson and the
University avoid liability for any damages if a patient died from any products
produced or studied at the University?"

   Even after Penn settled with the Gelsinger family in November 2000, nagging
conflict-of-interest questions remained. Despite the negative publicity
surrounding Gelsinger's death, Genovo was eventually sold to a larger company,
leaving Wilson with stock options reportedly worth $ 13.5, and the university
with an equity stake valued at $ 1.4 million.

   In a written statement, Penn's director of university communications, Lori N.
Doyle, said that the school has placed new limits on the involvement of faculty
members in drug studies when they have an equity stake in companies sponsoring
their research. The statement also called Jesse's death "a terrible tragedy,"
adding, "Our goal is to establish -- and to continually improve upon -- a
national model for clinical research and, in this way, honor Jesse Gelsinger's
memory." According to Doyle, the university has instituted steps to improve
oversight and monitoring of human subject research, including strengthening its
institutional review board.

   The Gelsinger case brought Milstein instant fame, and punched a hole in the
hype and optimism surrounding the hot new field of gene therapy. It also forced
federal regulators to pay closer attention to what was happening in the clinical
research world. What they discovered was startling.

   A few weeks after the Gelsinger case first made headlines, the National
Institutes of Health sent out a circular reminding all gene therapy
investigators that adverse events and deaths must be reported. To their
amazement, officials were suddenly flooded with 652 new adverse-event reports
from some 80 institutions. Although they thought that Jesse Gelsinger was the
first person to die as the result of a gene therapy experiment, it turned out
that at least seven earlier deaths had not been reported to NIH. Further inquiry
revealed that many investigators and their corporate sponsors considered adverse
events "confidential commercial information," and were reluctant to disclose
them.

   Public dismay over the extensive financial entanglements in the Gelsinger
case triggered congressional hearings and a two-day NIH symposium on conflicts
of interest. Here again, Penn was not an isolated case. Academic medical centers
have long received research grants from the pharmaceutical industry. But since
1980, when Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act, the line between academic research
and business has grown increasingly blurred.

   Bayh-Dole allowed universities to patent federally funded research and
license campus-based inventions to private companies. The results have been
dramatic. At virtually every major research university in the country,
professors began launching their own start-up companies, schools invested
capital and bought equity in these new ventures, and administrators eagerly
awaited the next breakthrough discovery that would bring profits to the
university and its researchers. Milstein calls the phenomenon "Nasdaq medicine."

   Ties with industry now permeate academic institutions. The Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, for example, has a five-year, $ 15 million
collaboration with Merck & Co., which grants the firm patent rights to any joint
discoveries. Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, a Harvard-affiliated teaching
hospital, has a similar deal with Novartis Pharmaceuticals for research related
to new cancer drugs. Harvard's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center recently
solicited bids from 40 companies to conduct joint research at a new medical
facility, where they would have first rights to any discoveries.

   Academic administrators say that rising competition for research funds and
limited public support make such relationships necessary. They have a point.
Today 80 percent of clinical trials are funded by private industry, not by
government. Cutbacks in Medicare support for teaching hospitals and the
financial limits imposed by managed care have left academic medical centers
seriously strapped for clinical-research dollars. To top it off, beginning in
the 1990s -- precisely when medical colleges began feeling the financial crunch
-- the pharmaceutical industry started to shift a large portion of its research
dollars away from academic medical colleges to an array of new for-profit
research companies that contract out with physicians in private practice.

   Faced with this heightened competition, some 30 academic medical colleges
have recently set up centralized clinical-trial offices, modeled after those in
the private sector, whose purpose is to streamline academic research, adjust to
industry's faster deadlines, and win back industry grants. Marcia Markowitz,
director of the Office of Clinical Trials at Penn, told an industry trade
publication that "one goal [of her office] is to increase the number of trials,
and thereby increase the revenue."

   Heightened competition has also intensified the quest for human subjects.
"The difficulty here is that the drug and device manufacturers want to get the
clinical trial completed as quickly as possible," says health care industry
attorney Kendra Dimond. She says companies typically obtain patents for a
potential new drug before research trials begin. Those patents have 20-year
expiration dates. "The longer the clinical trial, the more it eats into their
ability to market the product."

   The drive to speed up clinical trials has induced many companies to "replace
careful patient screening practices with a crude reward system," says Vera
Hassner Sharav, president of the Alliance for Human Research Protection, a
nonprofit group based in New York. Industry now commonly pays doctors financial
incentives ranging from $ 1,000 to $ 6,000 for each new patient recruited; top
recruiters earn somewhere between $ 500,000 and $ 1 million a year. At this
year's annual meeting of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology,
an industry representative told a group of investigators, "No longer will you
get $ 2,500 per patient; you will get X dollars if you recruit 5 patients before
week four, and if you don't, that's it and we are going to close the site."

   "In a highly competitive marketplace, with few rules or guidelines governing
recruitment," warned an HHS report last year, such aggressive practices "could
compromise long-valued human-subject protections."

   Others worry that the growing dependence on corporate dollars could erode
academic autonomy and the impartiality of scientific investigators. "The
boundaries between the academic medical colleges and the drug companies are
becoming ever more porous," argues Marcia Angell, a former editor of the New
England Journal of Medicine. "It used to be that academic medical colleges said,
'Okay, we will take this industry grant and do the study, but our researchers
are going to design the study, they are going to retain the data, they are going
to analyze the data.' Now this arm's length relationship has broken down."

   Indeed, numerous studies indicate that industry-sponsored research tends to
favor the sponsor's interests. A recent report in the Journal of the American
Medical Association, for example, found that nonprofit studies of cancer drugs
were eight times more likely to reach unfavorable conclusions than
industry-sponsored studies.

   Considering how many researchers now stand to profit from the experiments
they conduct, it's not surprising that trial lawyers have begun to take notice.
"Alan Milstein has found an issue that of course will resonate with a jury:
'This doctor was making money by putting the subject at risk, and he killed
'em!' " says the Rev. John Paris, a bioethicist at Boston College.

   "You know, it is one thing if the researcher's interest is the advancement of
science for the benefit of mankind. It's a significantly less attractive
proposition when the researcher has stock options in the development of the drug
or technique he's testing. What Milstein is doing is sounding the alarm."

   On the same day he met with his clients in Tulsa, Milstein had breakfast at
his hotel with Cherlynn Mathias, the woman responsible for blowing the

   whistle on the University of Oklahoma's research violations.

   Seated in a large pink booth, Milstein asked Mathias how her job search was
going. When she alerted federal authorities to the problems at the university,
Mathias instantly became an outcast in Tulsa's tightknit medical community.
Unable to find work, she told Milstein, she was preparing to put her house on
the market.

   After the waiter brought over breakfast, Milstein got down to work, pulling a
large pile of documents out of his briefcase. "What does this one refer to?" he
asked, peering over a pair of black-frame glasses low on his nose. It was an
office memo from Mathias updating the staff on her efforts to track down death
certificates for patients enrolled in the mela-noma trial.

   "I was trying to pull together complete records on which of the subjects in
the trial had died," Mathias began. "We didn't even know how many people were
dead! I mean, that's sad."

   Mathias, herself an OU graduate, had taken the job as a nurse coordinator at
the university's health sciences center in the spring of 1999. At first it
seemed like a dream job, she recalled, helping Michael McGee, a respected
surgeon and cancer specialist, oversee the testing of an experimental vaccine
for melanoma victims.

   But things went wrong almost from the beginning. "On my first day of work, I
noticed they were enrolling patients who were not eligible for the study," she
recalled. When she took up the matter with a colleague, she was told, "Oh, you
haven't seen anything yet . . . Dr. McGee enrolls whoever he wants to in his
clinical trials."

   One of Mathias's central duties was to organize the medical charts for
patients enrolled in the study. Mathias told Milstein she originally thought she
could accomplish this by centralizing the data from various different sources.
Eventually, however, she realized that crucial records -- such as reports of
adverse reactions suffered by patients in the experimental program -- simply did
not exist.

   As her misgivings about the research program grew, Mathias said, she went
directly to McGee. He assured her everything was in proper order. But reading up
late at night on federal drug safety regulations, she became more and more
convinced procedures were amiss. She eventually went to Thomas Broughan,
chairman of the university's surgery department. He ordered an independent audit
that revealed safety problems in the manufacture, distribution and testing of
the vaccine that were far graver than anything Mathias had imagined. In March
2000, university officials shut down McGee's study. Still, she said, they failed
to report the auditor's safety concerns to federal regulators. In his annual
report, McGee falsely stated that the study was being shut down due to
"insufficient staff and our inability to release adequate amounts of vaccine . .
. There were no significant safety issues." A similarly misleading letter went
out to former patients.

   When she read the letters, Mathias said, she was so sick with concern that
she consulted with her priest. She told him she was afraid that if she blew the
whistle, she'd lose her job and be ostracized. "And what's the alternative?" he
asked.

   "I can't live with what I know," she replied.

   "Well, you know what you have to do."

   If Mathias hadn't disclosed what she knew to federal authorities, there's no
telling whether any of the problems at the university would have come to light.
The university's institutional review board, which was supposed to oversee the
research experiment, was chaired by Daniel C. Plunket, a colleague of McGee's
who frequently approved major changes to the study protocol under expedited
review without any discussion by the full board. When 11 out of the first 18
subjects enrolled in the trial did not meet the inclusion criteria, Plunket
unilaterally approved these deviations retroactively, according to a subsequent
audit. "The average IRB meeting appeared to take one hour and included dinner to
follow," noted one auditor. "Given the number of active protocols, safety
reports, etc. processed by the chair, it is clear that no deliberative review
could have taken place." Plunket's lawyer said of these findings, "Those
statements are inaccurate."

   Federal authorities apparently weren't watching events any more closely. Two
years earlier, an FDA inspection of the IRB found problems remarkably similar to
those identified after Mathias lodged her complaint. Yet there was no federal
follow-up and the violations were never corrected.

   McGee's attorneys in the past have characterized Mathias as a disgruntled
ex-employee whose allegations are false. Because of the pending litigation,
Michael Atkinson, McGee's current lawyer, said the doctor has no comment to make
at this time. "I plan to vigorously contest the lawsuit and expect Dr. McGee
will be completely vindicated," said Atkinson.

   The University of Oklahoma has acknowledged many of the federal government's
findings but refuses to discuss the lawsuit. Many of the top administrators
involved have either resigned, retired or, like McGee, are in the process of
having their tenure revoked. In a written statement, the university said it has
taken corrective action, such as restructuring its IRB and establishing an
education and training program for all investigators. "The university realizes
that there were problems in [the melanoma] study and the oversight of the IRB
and that is why we have taken the steps that we have," said Gary Raskob,
associate vice president for clinical research, in an interview. "Certainly new
and cutting-edge research is a key priority at our university, and in that sense
we do want to grow and evolve that activity, but we feel that that has to be
done in a way that first and foremost does not compromise the safety of the
subjects."

   Milstein's lawsuit on behalf of 18 of the research trial's patients and their
families is still pending -- and Cherlynn Mathias has moved to a different
state, where she works as a clinical trials auditor.

   The Gelsinger lawsuit is over, but Alan Milstein and his crusade still seem
to haunt the University of Pennsylvania. Earlier this year, he was a featured
speaker at a conference on campus attended by prominent bioethicists,
physicians, lawyers and students. Although it seemed somewhat incongruous for
him to appear at the institution he had sued, Milstein was invited to speak on
"litigating ethics and injury." He appeared comfortable enough -- and eager to
do verbal combat. He quickly stirred things up with a blanket statement: "It's
unethical to ask someone to be a martyr for science."

   "If the risks are too great, then you can't do the experiment," Milstein told
the packed audience. "I don't care if somebody volunteers to participate. If
that experiment is too risky -- well, it is my position that the subject doesn't
have the right to participate."

   An audible gasp rippled through the audience. But Milstein then went a step
further, questioning whether terminally ill patients -- who make up the vast
majority of the subjects enrolled in early-phase research -- can ever give truly
informed consent. His skepticism is rooted in a

   phenomenon known as "therapeutic misconception." Researchers have found
evidence that even when terminally ill patients are explicitly told that they
will likely not benefit from Phase I and II research, many continue to believe
the experiment will help them.

   A medical student stood up to challenge Milstein. "Are you saying that . . .
we cannot allow anybody to enroll in what we codify as early-phase research
because by definition there is no intent for therapy?"

   In effect, Milstein replied, that's what he was saying.

   One of those in the audience that day was Arthur Caplan, the Penn
bioethicist. "There is a horrible dilemma in early-phase research," he said
later. "You have to take the sickest and most vulnerable and tell them that all
medicine can offer is experimentation and the chance to help others. Very few
people want to hear that, and very few researchers want to say that. But
Milstein believes there should be no experiments done unless there is some
possibility of benefit to the subject. Most research in its early stages can't
do that. If you could promise that, then you wouldn't be doing research."

   Caplan agrees with Milstein that the protection system for human subjects is
broken. But he believes lawsuits can only make things worse. If Milstein's
approach catches on with other lawyers, Caplan warned, universities will go
running to Congress shouting that "we want relief from the trial lawyers.
Universities are mad about these suits. They are angry like hornets. They're all
on the phone to some congressional aide saying, 'Give us relief or you are going
to choke off your own golden goose, and you're going to wind up losing cures.' "

   Indeed, when government regulators suspended clinical research at Johns
Hopkins in July following Ellen Roche's death, Hopkins administrators lobbied
hard with federal regulators and Maryland's two senators to get the suspension
lifted, charging that the government's actions were "unwarranted, unnecessary,
paralyzing and precipitous" and "an extreme example of regulatory excess."
Within days, HHS's Office for Human Research Protections relented, allowing
Hopkins to resume many of its testing programs.

   Federal efforts to rein in financial conflicts in human subject research have
met with a similar resistance from academia. Earlier this year, when HHS asked
for public comments on a draft statement of conflict-of-interest principles,
many prominent education associations -- including the Association of American
Medical Colleges and the Association of American Universities -- immediately
called for the proposal to be withdrawn. Rather than work within the government
framework, the organizations were adamant that universities should be left to
develop conflict-of-interest policies of their own.

   Milstein insists he would be much less of a threat to universities if they
cracked down on research abuses. So long as they don't, he says, he intends to
go right on suing. In March, Milstein filed suit against the Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center after an investigative series in the Seattle Times
reported that a failed blood cancer experiment, known as Protocol 126, was
riddled with research violations and instances of improper informed consent.
Officials at the center have denied there was any impropriety in the conduct of
the trial and labeled the newspaper reports unfair and inaccurate.

   But in pursuing the Hutch and other institutions, Milstein wants to go one
giant step beyond a traditional civil lawsuit: He hopes to establish a new
precedent in human rights law by invoking the Nuremberg Code as the basis for a
constitutional claim in U.S. courts.

   Adopted in 1949, the code was part of the verdict issued by U.S. judges in
the famous "Doctors Trial" at the Palace of Justice in Nuremberg, Germany.
During the trial, Karl Brandt, Hitler's personal doctor, and 22 other physicians
and administrators were charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity for
a series of barbaric experiments they performed on Jews, Gypsies and other
targeted minorities.

   Establishing Nuremberg as a legally enforceable standard of conduct for
medical research is "the most interesting part of what I'm attempting to do as
lawyer," says Milstein, who hopes his efforts will one day lead to a Supreme
Court review of one of his cases.

   Many in the medical community are duly alarmed. "Invoking the Nuremberg Code
is very problematic," argues Jonathan Moreno, director of the Center for
Biomedical Ethics at the University of Virginia. "The code came about under very
extreme circumstances: the Holocaust. It is not at all clear that it was
intended to apply to all medical research, in particular clinical research."

   Moreno and other scholars believe that the code's first principle -- "the
voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential" -- is simply too
restrictive for some kinds of research. "There are a lot of subjects who cannot
give informed consent: children, people with mental disorders and dementia," he
argues. "Whole groups would be ruled out of research." He and other ethicists
endorse standards proposed in recent years by the National Bioethics Advisory
Commission to

   enhance protections of human subjects. But if investigators' hands are tied
too tightly, they contend, it could deter breakthroughs in areas such as drug
treatment of mental illness.

   Other prominent legal scholars defend Milstein's approach. "It makes
absolutely perfect sense to use Nuremberg as a cause of action in U.S. courts,"
says George Annas, chairman of the Health Law Department at Boston University's
School of Public Health. "The provisions of the Nuremberg Code were not
articulated exclusively as war crimes," Annas argues. "They are crimes against
humanity, and a series of U.S. courts have already adopted the code," most
recently in two federal district court rulings in 1995 and 1999.

   In Milstein's view, the code's association with the Holocaust enhances rather
than diminishes its value as an ethical standard. "I'm not saying that doctors
who perform unethical experiments today are Nazis." Still, he insists, "I think
it is important that out of the ashes of the Holocaust there is something that
emerges that's going to forever change the way these experiments are conducted."

   What about the fear that Milstein's ethical absolutes would eliminate most
early-phase drug research? "That's not my problem," he replies. "They'll find a
way to continue research."

   Both the Tulsa and Seattle cases are bogged down in pretrial motions and
maneuvers. But Milstein forges ahead. He has filed suit on behalf of another
human research subject in the same University of Pennsylvania gene-therapy
experiment that led to the death of Jesse Gelsinger. And in late October, he
filed a multimillion-dollar lawsuit against BioPort Inc., the nation's sole
producer of an anthrax vaccine, alleging negligence in its manufacture and
testing of the vaccine and injury to U.S. military personnel who were inoculated
during and after the Gulf War. BioPort has already come under heavy criticism
from government regulators for chronic manufacturing deficiencies. Now
Milstein's lawsuit alleges that the company neglected to inform soldiers that
the vaccine "was unlicensed for use to prevent inhalation anthrax" and "no
animal studies or human clinical trials demonstrated either the safety or
effectiveness of the vaccine." BioPort spokeswoman Kim Brennen Root said the
company had just received the suit, and its policy is not to discuss pending
litigation. She added that "we have been working over last two years to fully
meet the rigorous standards of the FDA at our renovated vaccine facility. We
expect that within the next four to six months we will have FDA approval."

   On a frigid day in November, Milstein traveled to Lansing, Mich., to speak at
a small rally of Gulf War veterans and their families. "On this Veterans Day,"
he proclaimed, "particularly during this time of war, America should be treating
its soldiers as heroes, not as guinea pigs."

   Later, speaking by phone, Milstein acknowledged that he believes the anthrax
case could either help advance the cause of reforming clinical trials, or make
him look like an opportunist. "I haven't figured out which," he said.

   Jennifer Washburn is a New York-based journalist and a fellow at the New
America Foundation in Washington. She is currently writing a book on the growing
commercial-ization of higher education for Basic Books.</body>

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2001


                             1470 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                December 28, 2001 Friday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY WILL HELP DRAFT CONFLICT-OF-INTEREST GUIDELINES
FOR RESEARCHERS

BYLINE: Tina Hesman Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Washington University could be a model for avoiding conflicts of interest in
research partnerships with industry.

   The school has been invited to help draft guidelines for governing financial
dealings that could affect the outcome of experiments involving human subjects.
Those guidelines were recommended by the U.S. General Accounting Office in a
recent report.

   Currently, universities are allowed to set their own policies regulating
financial dealings between faculty members and companies that sponsor research.
But the GAO says the federal government should provide more guidance to avoid
conflicts of interest and protect patients involved in human research trials.

   Ted Cicero, vice chancellor for research at Washington University, said he
welcomed tighter regulation of conflicts of interest.

   "Currently we're being held to a standard, but we don't know what the
standard is," Cicero said. More precise federal guidelines would help level the
playing field, he said.

   The investigators based their recommendations on an analysis of
conflict-of-interest policies from five universities - including Washington U. -
that receive large amounts of federal research money and have substantial
interactions with industry.

   Over the past two decades, commercial funding for basic research has
increased dramatically. The National Institutes of Health increased its research
budget from $3 billion in 1980 to more than $20 billion this year. Drug
companies boosted their contributions from about $1.5 billion in 1980 to $22.4
billion in 2000.

   Money from drug companies has garnered the most scrutiny. Government
officials, patient groups and others have expressed concern that academic
researchers with a financial stake in the outcome of clinical trials might not
take proper precautions to protect the safety of people in the studies. The
worst of those fears came true two years ago when a patient in a gene therapy
trial at the University of Pennsylvania died.

   Conflicts of interest, whether real or perceived, can be equally damaging to
the trust people place in academic institutions, Cicero said.

   Washington University sets strict standards, he said. Researchers are
prohibited from conducting clinical trials and holding a substantial financial
stake - more than $10,000 - in the company sponsoring the trial.

   "Our job is knowledge production. I think most companies are in the business
of product development," Cicero said. "We have to be very careful to draw the
line between those."

   The university's conservative stance on what constitutes conflict of interest
may have caused some researchers to leave the university for competing
institutions with more lax requirements, he said. The university has no plans to
relax its standards, he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2001


                             1471 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  December 26, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 2396 words

HEADLINE: THE FRONTIERS OF 2001 TRIUMPHS AND TRAGEDY

SOURCE: RICHARD L. HILL - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: From greenhouse gases to genomes, science helps expand and deepen
our knowledge of the world Each year brings countless advances in science --
headline-making breakthroughs and more modest discoveries -- and 2001 was no
exception.

   The year's most significant event, the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, touched
the scientific community along with the rest of society. The tragedy brought
renewed focus on the threats posed by anthrax and other bioweapons. The attacks
also revived attention on technologies for detecting lethal agents and for
inspecting passengers and luggage at airports.

   As in other years, debate swirled around science-related issues, including
climate change, cloning, stem-cell research, bioengineered crops and endangered
species.

   Top events of 2001 included the landing of a spacecraft on an asteroid, the
implanting of a self-contained artificial heart, the announcement by a
biotechnology company that it had taken the first steps in producing human
embryos by cloning, and January's magnitude 7.7 earthquake that killed more than
20,000 people in India.

   Northwest residents were shaken by the largest earthquake the region had
experienced in a half-century. A magnitude 6.8 earthquake rocked Washington and
Oregon on Feb. 28, causing about 400 injuries and about $2 billion in damage.

   Corvallis native Carl E. Wieman shared the Nobel Prize in physics for
creating Bose-Einstein condensate, a new form of matter that occurs at just a
few hundred-billionths of a degree above absolute zero, or minus 459.67 degrees
Fahrenheit. He is the second Oregon-born scientist -- chemist Linus Pauling was
the first -- to win a Nobel.

   Here's a peek at the scientific adventures coming up in 2002, along with a
few of the past year's significant scientific events.

   FORECASTING CLIMATE

   Climate change will continue to receive international attention.

   This year, a panel of the world's top environmental scientists concluded in a
long-awaited report that "most of the observed warming over the last 50 years is
likely to have been due to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations." The
United Nations-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change forecasts an
increase of from 2.5 to 10.4 degrees Fahrenheit in the global average
temperature over the next 100 years. The National Academy of Sciences reached
similar conclusions in another report.

   President Bush acknowledged the climate-change problem but in March decided
to reject the Kyoto climate treaty, which calls for a reduction in
carbon-dioxide emissions. Bush said the plan was flawed and too expensive, and
he cited uncertainties about the role of human-generated gas emissions.

   Last month, 165 nations agreed to rules aimed at reducing human-produced
greenhouse gases. The United States declined to participate.

   Last week, scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration projected that 2001 would be the second-warmest year on record
for the globe. Depending on conditions in the last two weeks of December, the
average annual global temperature is projected to be 57.8 degrees Fahrenheit,
which is 0.9 degree above the average from 1880 through 2000. The warmest year
on record was 1998, with 1990, 1995 and 1997 also in the top five. SPACE One of
the most attention-getting achievements in space this year came in February,
when engineers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Johns Hopkins
University's Applied Physics Lab landed the NEAR Shoemaker spacecraft on the
asteroid Eros.

   The craft set down on the 21-mile-long, peanut-shaped asteroid, which was 196
million miles from Earth. It was the first time a spacecraft had orbited and
landed on an asteroid.

   In another mind-boggling space encounter, NASA's Deep Space 1 spacecraft
whizzed just 1,400 miles from the rocky, icy nucleus of Comet Borrelly in
September. The ailing craft, which ended its three-year mission last week, sent
back the most detailed photos yet taken of a comet's core.

   Another spacecraft, the 2001 Mars Odyssey, entered orbit around the red
planet in October. It is being lowered into its final science-mapping orbit
about 60 miles above the planet, which should occur sometime in January. The
spacecraft will allow scientists to study the makeup of Mars and search for
frozen reservoirs of water.

   Next summer, NASA plans to launch the Space Infrared Telescope Facility,
which will study the early universe, young galaxies and forming stars.

   Construction on the international space station will continue in 2002. In
October, the station marked a milestone in space history when it completed one
year of continuous international human presence in orbit. Several astronauts and
cosmonauts have served on the spacecraft this year, including Susan Helms, a
graduate of Parkrose High School.

   Look for changes at NASA in the coming year. President Bush has nominated
Sean O'Keefe to head the space agency. O'Keefe has been critical of cost
overruns, estimated in the billions, on the space station program. The agency
was also criticized by an independent task force last month.

   DINOSAURS

   Dinosaur discoveries pop up each year, and 2001 was no exception.

   Paleontologists reported in June that they had found what appears to be the
second-largest dinosaur to walk the Earth. A team led by Joshua B. Smith of the
University of Pennsylvania found the fossil bones of a long-necked plant-eating
sauropod they named Paralitian stromer.

   The dinosaur, found in the Sahara Desert in Egypt, was about 80 to 100 feet
long and weighed 60 to 70 tons. That would make it a mite smaller than
Argentinosaurus, a sauropod found in South America that was about 90 feet long
and weighed about 90 tons.

   Sauropod embryos were found in southern Argentina by Luis M. Chiappe, a
paleontologist with the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County. The
80-million-year-old fossil embryos have inch-long fetal skulls, revealing how
the dinosaurs developed from 15-inch hatchlings into bus-sized creatures.

   The debate about whether birds evolved from dinosaurs was renewed when
scientists said a duck-billed dinosaur fossil found in China last year had a
downy coat covering its body. The fossil, dated between 126 million and 147
million years old, is a dromaeosaur, a small relative of the vicious
velociraptors portrayed in the movie "Jurassic Park."

   Mark A. Norell, a paleontologist at the American Museum of Natural History in
New York, said there was strong evidence that the body coverings originally
served as insulation for warm-blooded dinosaurs and later were adapted for
flight.

   Another fossil found in China, of a mouselike animal that lived 195 million
years ago, may have been the ancestor of all mammals, researchers said. Zhe-Xi
Luo of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh said the animal
weighed just 2 grams, about the same as a paper clip.

   On the more nightmarish side, a research team led by Paul Sereno of the
University of Chicago reported finding in Niger a 110-million-year-old crocodile
longer than a school bus and weighing about 10 tons.

   ANTHROPOLOGY

   Scientists gained more insight into our ancestors this year.

   Archaeologists reported in April that Caral, a 4,000-year-old ancient city in
Peru, is the oldest known urban center in the Americas. Caral and as many as 17
other nearby cities were built about the same time as Egypt's pyramids. Caral,
about 14 miles from the Pacific Ocean, is dominated by six huge mound-shaped
ceremonial platforms made of stone.

   Jonathan Haas of the Field Museum in Chicago and his colleagues reported that
the radiocarbon dates were obtained from reed fibers in woven bags used to carry
rocks from the coast that were then stacked to build the mounds. Construction
occurred about 3,640 to 4,090 years ago, but the site might have been in use as
early as 4,700 years ago, Haas said.

   In Europe, scientists examining the 5,300-year-old mummy called the Iceman
found that the ancient hunter was killed by an arrow. X-rays revealed a flint
arrowhead under the mummy's left shoulder. The Iceman's frozen corpse was found
10 years ago in an alpine glacier by two German hikers near the Italy-Austria
border. The cause of death for the 45- to 50-year-old hunter had been a mystery
until the tiny puncture wound was found.

   Scientists also continued looking for the earliest ancestors of modern
humans.

   An Ethiopian fossil hunter and his colleagues found the teeth and bones of
the earliest known hominid, an apelike creature that lived as long as 5.8
million years ago. The discovery by Yohannes Haile-Selassie of the University of
California at Berkeley interests paleontologists because the age of the early
forest dwellers places them close to the evolutionary split between the lineage
leading to modern humans and the one that produced chimpanzees.

   Anthropologists in northern Kenya also found a 3.5 million-year-old skull
from a hominid that could compete with the famous "Lucy" as the direct ancestor
of modern humans. Meave Leakey and six team members said the skull has a flat
face and a small, chimpanzee-size brain case. They said the hominid is in a
different lineage from the Lucy skeleton, which was found in Ethiopia 27 years
ago.

   Australian scientists reported that they successfully extracted DNA from a
62,000-year-old skeleton, the oldest genetic material ever recovered from human
remains. They said the primitive DNA challenges the leading theory about human
origins, which holds that a small population of Homo sapiens spread throughout
the world from Africa about 100,000 years ago.

   The team, led by Alan Thorne of the Australian National University, said the
research supports the "multiregional" theory, which hypothesizes that humans'
ancestors left Africa about 1.5 million years ago and spread throughout the Old
World. They then evolved simultaneously in two or more areas into modern humans.

   GENOMES AND CLONING

   Two scientific teams published two draft sequences of the entire human genome
in February. Understanding the code gives medical researchers a boost in
understanding genetically caused disorders.

   One analysis questioned the contention that people have only about 35,000
genes, twice as many as the fruit fly.

   Researchers were able to sequence the genomes of other organisms this year,
and more are on their way in 2002.

   Celera Genomics said this year that it had largely deciphered the genetic
code of the mouse, which could lead to insights about human genes and diseases.

   Other researchers decoded the genomes for several disease-causing organisms,
including the anthrax bacterium; the bacterium Salmonella typhimurium, the
leading cause of food poisoning worldwide; the bacterium for the bubonic plague;
and the bacterium of an extremely infectious strain of pneumococcus.

   Scientists also unpeeled the genome of the banana, as well as the genomes of
the Japanese pufferfish and a bacterium from an ocean-floor hydrothermal vent.

   Portland researchers received international attention in January when they
reported in the journal Science that they had inserted a new gene into a monkey
egg that produced a baby monkey.

   Gerald Schatten, Anthony W.S. Chan and their colleagues at the Oregon
Regional Primate Research Center created the monkey, named "Andi" -- a reverse
acronym for "inserted DNA" -- using a technique common on other animals and in
human gene therapy. The experiment was a step in the effort to make genetically
identical monkeys to aid disease research.

   Last month, Advanced Cell Technology in Worcester, Mass., renewed the debate
over cloning when it announced that it had taken the first steps in producing
human embryos. The privately financed biotechnology company said all three
embryos died, with only one reaching the six-cell stage. The company said the
goal of the experiment was not to create a cloned person but to grow embryos
from which stem cells could be harvested.

   In theory, human embryonic stem cells could be used to grow organs and
tissue. The company wants to provide stem cells as replacement cells to patients
with a variety of diseases.

   POTPOURRI

   Here's a sampling of other notable science-related events of the past year:

   * Scientists took advantage of the "solar maximum," the most active period of
an 11-year cycle of sun activity, to study sunspots, solar storms and other
phenomena. The violent eruptions that threatened power grids and radio signals
last spring were the most powerful in 25 years, according to a Stanford research
team. Solar flares stretched for 150,000 miles across the sun's surface. A solar
storm last month produced an aurora borealis on Earth that could be seen across
the northern two-thirds of the United States.

   * The "Lost City," a hydrothermal vent field with towering chimneys found a
year ago in the mid-Atlantic Ocean, is unique in the way it is formed,
oceanographers reported. The fluid circulation in the new class of hydrothermal
vents -- which include an 18-story chimney taller than any seen before -- is
apparently driven by heat generated when seawater reacts with mantle rocks, not
by volcanic heat as at other vents, said Deborah Kelley, a University of
Washington oceanographer.

   * Scientists reported new evidence that an asteroid or comet smashed into the
planet 250 million years ago, unleashing Earth's worst mass extinction. The
impact, which triggered volcanic eruptions and climate change, killed about 90
percent of marine species and more than two-thirds of reptile and amphibian
species. Researchers led by Luann Becker, a University of Washington geochemist,
said they found the new clues to the cataclysm in the form of cosmic stowaways:
helium and argon gases encased in "buckyballs," or buckminsterfullerenes,
soccer-ball-like arrangements of 60 or 70 carbon atoms.

   * NASA tested a huge solar-powered flying wing in Hawaii as part of research
into aircraft designs for Mars. The propeller-driven aircraft reached an
altitude of 96,500 feet before landing on the island of Kauai. The
remote-controlled Helios Prototype broke the 80,200-foot altitude record for
propeller-driven aircraft and the 85,068-foot record for all nonrocket craft.
The $15 million aircraft gets its electricity from 65,000 solar cells covering
its 247-foot-long wing.

   You can reach Richard L. Hill at richardhill@news.oregonian.com or
503-221-8238.

GRAPHIC: 2 Color photos by Associated Press ; 2 color photos

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2001


                             1472 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    December 23, 2001, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 772 words

HEADLINE: Consider possibilities of stem cell research

SOURCE: New York Times

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   This is an unabashed plea to Americans to consider the plight of millions who
suffer from diseases that in theory may be treated or even cured by stem cells.
And it is a plea to consider supporting the necessary research, mired in
conflict over the morality of using human embryos to generate cells with the
potential to become any and all tissues.

   Those opposing the research say it is wrong to destroy embryos to obtain stem
cells. Those supporting it argue that its theoretical ability to help the
living, including children born with now-incurable diseases, more than justifies
destruction of test-tube embryos that would otherwise be discarded from
fertility clinics.

   Many scientists say treatments based on the research are a long way off and
may even be impossible to develop. But we will never know if we do not allow
researchers to try.

   Chances are everyone knows someone with a debilitating disease whose life
could be vastly improved if it were possible to use stem cells to correct the
illness.

   My father, for example, suffered a severe heart attack at age 58 that
permanently damaged a large part of his heart muscle. He survived, but could not
pick up his grandchildren, carry a suitcase or or do the gardening he loved.

   Had there been stem cells to regenerate his damaged heart muscle and the
blood vessels that fed it, his remaining years would certainly have been better.

   The potential to use stem cells to help the 1 million Americans who suffer
heart attacks each year exists. Scientists have used mouse stem cells to restore
damaged heart muscle and blood vessels in mice with induced heart attacks. But a
lot of research, in mice and with human stem cells, is needed before such a
technique can succeed in people.

   Research in mice has suggested the possibility of generating the pancreatic
islet cells that fail to produce the insulin needed to control blood sugar and
to ward off the complications of diabetes.

   At the National Institutes of Health, scientists have coaxed mouse embryonic
stem cells to assemble into hormone-producing clusters of pancreatic islet
cells. But there is still a great deal of work to be done.

   Scientists have tried to counter Parkinson's by supplying patients with fetal
brain cells, but in some cases the inserted cells grew out of control and
produced too much of the needed brain chemical, causing severe symptoms. But
stem cells seem to come equipped with built-in controls that tell them when
enough is enough.

   Another brain disorder that may one day submit to stem cell therapy is
Alzheimer's disease. Though it may seem far-fetched, it may one day be possible
to use stem cells to replace the brain cells that deteriorate in this severe
form of dementia.

   Then there is the as-yet unrealized potential of gene therapy, the
introduction of healthy genes to correct severe genetic diseases such as cystic
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia or Tay-Sachs disease.

   Efforts to use viruses as carriers to introduce healthy genes to replace the
defective ones that cause cystic fibrosis have not worked very well. But
embryonic stem cells could be a better vehicle for gene insertion to correct
inherited gene defects.

   Likewise, by inducing stem cells to develop into a particular organ,
researchers may eliminate the need for some organ transplants.

   Christopher Reeve's spinal cord was severed in a riding accident, rendering
him a quadriplegic. He supports stem cell research for its potential to repair
spinal-cord injuries by bridging gaps in the spine left by accidents like his.

   No one is prepared to say when or whether the promise of stem cells will come
to fruition. A great deal of research must be done, in animal cells and in cells
from human embryos. A number of human stem cell lines exist, and President Bush
has decided that federal money can be used to support the intensive research
needed to develop them into practical therapies.

   But many scientists maintain that existing cell lines are insufficient and
new ones are needed to reach the full extent of clinical applications. Such
basic cells can be found only in very early embryos with cells that have not yet
started to become specific tissues, such as embryos grown in test tubes for
possible use in in-vitro fertilization. Unused embryos are either destroyed or
stored frozen.

   Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, last year broke ranks with abortion opponents who
oppose research using human embryos. In explaining his decision to support stem
cell research, he said, "I just cannot equate a child living in a womb, with
moving toes and fingers and a beating heart, with an embryo in a freezer."


LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2001


                             1473 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    December 22, 2001 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 16C BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 619 words

BODY:

   In the Region

   New patent may force MedImmune to pay Synagis royalties

   MedImmune Inc. could be forced to pay royalties on the profits from its
flagship pharmaceutical product because of a patent issued recently to Genentech
Inc. for a procedure used to make the drug.

   Officials of the Gaithersburg drugmaker said yesterday that they are trying
to determine whether the patent covers the method of antibody production that
the company uses to make Synagis, a drug with sales of $427 million last year.
If so, MedImmune will pay royalties to Genentech for all sales of the drug since
Tuesday, based on an agreement negotiated before the patent was issued.

   MedImmune officials would not disclose the royalty rate or the anticipated
cost but said they do not expect royalties, if paid, to affect earnings
significantly.

   GenVec stock placement generates $13 million

   GenVec Inc. said yesterday that it raised gross proceeds of $13 million in a
private sale of its stock, giving it additional money to pay for testing of its
experimental gene-therapy products.

   Gaithersburg-based GenVec announced the private placement of 3.6 million
shares after the market close. Information on the share price, offering costs
and net proceeds was unavailable.

   The shares were purchased by funds managed by HealthCare Ventures.

   Elsewhere

   5 on Polaroid board got payments before bankruptcy filing

   Six weeks before Polaroid Corp. declared bankruptcy Oct. 12, the company made
cash payments ranging from $63,000 to $272,000 to five board members, according
to documents filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Wilmington, Del.

   Polaroid said the payments were lump-sum disbursements for fees earned over
several years by the directors but put into a deferred-compensation program used
by executives to cut their tax bills. The plan was dissolved in August to save
the administrative costs of managing the money, the company said.

   The payments, made Aug. 27, raise questions about whether the directors - who
oversee a corporation's strategy and guide its most crucial decisions - accepted
payments from the company when they knew it would soon file for bankruptcy
protection from creditors, leaving hundreds of creditors with little hope of
getting anything for their claims.

   Ford will pay to settle racial harassment suit

   Ford Motor Co. will pay $300,000 to 23 black plant workers who filed a
federal racial harassment lawsuit against the automaker.

   The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission said the employees, who work
at Ford's New Model Development Center in Allen Park, Mich., claimed a white
co-worker hung hangman's nooses on his forklift, "mocked what he considered to
be African-American styles of speech and manner of walking" and used "insulting
language."

   The employee was suspended without pay for a month and has since retired from
the company, Ford said yesterday.

   HP, Compaq notify EU of intention to merge

   Hewlett-Packard Co. and Compaq Computer Corp. have notified European Union
regulators of their intention to merge, showing confidence in the $22.2 billion
deal despite opposition from big shareholders, officials said yesterday.

   The request for antitrust clearance followed extensive preliminary talks with
officials in Brussels, Belgium. The deadline for the initial review is Jan. 31,
an EU spokeswoman said.

   Unlike the United States, the EU triggers a strict timetable once it is
formally notified of a planned merger. If problems are not resolved in the first
phase, which lasts one month, an in-depth four-month review begins
automatically.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press, Bloomberg News and Reuters.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2001


                             1474 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     December 21, 2001 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 002

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: St. E's will continue work of gene therapy pioneer

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey Isner's pioneering work on gene therapy will be continued at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center under a $ 10.2 million federal grant.

   Isner, 53, who died of a heart attack last month, won the grant shortly
before his death.

   Officials at St. Elizabeth's yesterday said the National Institutes of Health
has agreed that the grant will still be awarded to the hospital, under the
administration of Dr. Douglas Losordo, who had worked under Isner and has been
named chief of cardiovascular research.

   Isner "was like an older brother to me,' Losordo said. "I was always
committed to the work, but now there's a personal element to it. Now, I want to
see through the work that he started."

   The money will go to establishing a Center of Excellence in Gene Therapy and
will pay for studies testing gene transfer technology to treat patients
suffering from blocked arteries.

   Isner's pioneering work involved giving genetically engineered DNA - known as
VEGF or vascular endothelial growth factor - to cardiac patients to help them
grow new blood vessels to the heart, a process known as angiogenesis.

   One of his studies was shut down in March 2000 by the Food and Drug
Administration, which said the program violated protocols, accepting an
ineligible patient, failing to notify proper review boards of the death of a
patient and other improprieties.

   Isner had been fighting to get the study reopened, learning just prior to his
death that he had won the right to keep going.

   Losordo said Isner's original studies to help those with severe angina due to
blocked arteries will be continued, along with three new studies.

   Two of the new studies will look at the efficacy of gene therapy to improve
heart function in patients with congestive heart failure due to coronary artery
disease and to prevent recurring blockages in patients with coronary artery
disease.

   A third new trial, under the direction of Dr. Allan Ropper, chief of
neurology, will test gene therapy as a treatment for diabetics with a painful
nerve condition known as neuropathy which is caused by insufficient blood flow
to the legs.

   The idea is to grow tiny new blood vessels that feed the nerves, he said.

   The idea was an outgrowth of VEGF treatments for diabetics with blocked leg
arteries - the first patients treated by Isner back in 1994. Some of the
patients noticed that their neuropathy pain had subsided, an unanticipated
outcome of the treatment.

   Some 196 patients will be enrolled in the neuropathy trial starting in the
spring.

   Phil Pilla of Watertown, who had received the gene therapy under one of
Isner's studies, said he was happy to learn the work will continue.

   "It's great," he said. "This program has helped so many people. I'm sure Dr.
Losordo will do just as well as Dr. Isner did. I'm just sorry there was nothing
available to help him."

   The grant will also further basic lab research in gene transfer, including
examination of the basic mechanisms that control heart growth, with the hope
that findings can be applied to the development of new approaches to treat heart
failure, hospital officials said.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2001


                             1475 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  December 19, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BIOTECHNOLOGY; Pg. F4

LENGTH: 97 words

HEADLINE: IN THE PIPELINE;
TKT RAISES OVER $125M IN OFFERING

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI and GLOBE WIRE SERVICES

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it completed its previously announced
public offering of stock, selling more than 3 million shares at $39 apiece and
raising more than $125 million.

      The Cambridge company said it plans to use the money to expand its
manufacturing capabilities, run additional clinical trials, fund research and
development programs, and build its sales and marketing capabilities.

   The company is marketing Replagal, a drug to treat a rare inherited disorder
known as Fabry disease, in Europe and is awaiting US regulatory approval for the
drug.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2001


                             1476 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   December 18, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 548 words

HEADLINE: JUDGE INTENDS TO DISMISS GENZYME SUIT AGAINST RIVAL TKT FREED TO SELL
FABRY TREATMENT

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A federal judge plans to dismiss Genzyme Corp.'s patent infringement suit
against Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., freeing TKT to market its drug to treat
Fabry disease once it is approved by US regulators.

   The move comes two weeks after the judge, in a pretrial motion, interpreted a
key phrase in a Genzyme patent in a way that diminished the Cambridge company's
chances of winning the patent battle against its cross-town rival.

       In response to a request from Genzyme for a clarification of the reading,
the judge on Friday notified the companies of his intent to dismiss the suit.
Genzyme said it plans to appeal in hopes of gaining a more favorable reading of
its patent.

   TKT officials said they expect any appeal to meet with same fate as the
original case. They said dismissal of the case prior to the trial, scheduled to
begin in March, and the judge's unequivocal reading of the Genzyme patent make a
reversal unlikely.

   "We're elated," said Richard F. Selden, TKT's president and chief executive.
"We thought from the beginning that we had an extremely strong case and that it
was inevitable we would prevail. Having said that, the events of the past week
have shown us and the outside world that we are resilient."

   The dismissal of the case comes almost a year after TKT lost its patent
battle against California biotech giant Amgen Inc., effectively barring TKT from
selling its own version of the top-selling anemia drug Epogen in the United
States.

   Although TKT is appealing the decision, the loss of its ability to market its
anemia drug, Dynepo, in the United States sent the company's stock into a
two-monthlong nose dive, hitting a low of $13.84 a share in late March. In
recent weeks, however, better news helped the stock reach a yearlong high of
$44.28.

   The company last week said it had raised $109 million in an offering of
common stock and that a European Union committee had recommended approval of
Dynepo although its ability to market the drug depends on the outcome of an
appeal in a European patent battle with Amgen.

   The dismissal of the Genzyme case "is great news for TKT," said William
Tanner, an analyst with SG Cowen in Boston. "There's no other way to
characterize it."

   The dismissal spares TKT a costly legal battle, freeing millions of dollars
for research and development. It also allows the company to launch Replagal, its
drug to treat the rare inherited Fabry disease, immediately upon approval.

   The company's challenges are not over, however. TKT and Genzyme are still
locked in a race to become the first, and perhaps sole, provider of a treatment
for Fabry disease. Under rules governing the approval of drugs for rare
diseases, the first company to bring a breakthrough treatment to market is
rewarded with seven years of exclusivity.

   The two companies submitted applications to market nearly identical drugs to
treat Fabry disease within weeks of each other in June 2000. The applications
are still pending at the Food and Drug Administration. Analysts say the
unprecedented situation may prompt regulators to find a way to approve both
drugs.

   Shares of TKT rose $1.32 to $42.07, while Genzyme shares rose 32 cents to
$58.89 on Nasdaq.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2001


                             1477 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1480 words

HEADLINE: THE STEM CELL DEBATE;
A Thick Line Between Theory and Therapy, as Shown With Mice

BYLINE:  By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Dr. Brigid Hogan has never worked with human embryonic stem cells -- her
expertise is with mouse cells. But patients with virtually every sort of chronic
disease have found her, and they plead for help.

        "I even hear from patients whose fathers have lung cancer," said Dr.
Hogan, a professor at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine. "They have a
whole slew of problems they think can be treated. They think stem cells are
going to cure their loved ones of everything."

    If it ever happens, it will not happen soon, scientists say. In fact,
although they worked with mouse embryonic stem cells for 20 years and made some
progress, researchers have not yet used these cells to cure a single mouse of a
disease.

   Scientists say the theory behind stem cells is correct: the cells, in
principle, can become any specialized cell of the body. But between theory and
therapy lie a host of research obstacles. Though not often discussed in public
forums, the obstacles are so serious that scientists say they foresee years, if
not decades, of concerted work on basic science before they can even think of
trying to treat a patient.

   Yet as excitement over stem cell research built over the summer, and surged
again with recent reports of experiments with human cloning, scientists and
doctors became deluged with calls from desperate patients who saw salvation
around the corner. Somehow this research has come to be seen as the great hope
for medical science. How, scientists ask, did expectations grow so quickly?

   Though some say the news media overplayed the issue, some scientists say the
problem lies within themselves. The crucial questions involve basic research,
the sort supported by federal funds and conducted in universities. But with
calls by some politicians to ban the work, and to bar any use of tax money to
pay for it, scientists say they feel obliged to stress how important the
research is. And, some say, they now fear they may have promised too much.

   "We're being forced into taking extreme positions by the whole need to try
and convince people of the need to go ahead," Dr. Hogan said.

   Dr. Gail Martin, a mouse stem cell researcher at the University of California
at San Francisco, said: "The expectations have been raised a little higher than
perhaps is appropriate. It became politicized and tied up in the abortion
debate." But, as the exaggerations and talk of revolutionary treatments
continued, few made concerted efforts to set the record straight. And some small
biotechnology companies continued to promise quick cures.

   One problem is simply to find a way to get stem cells to grow into the types
of cells that are needed, and not a mixture of cells.

   Scientists know this is a thorny problem, but their views were not widely
heard when the public and politicians seemed to assume that it was easy to grow
any tissue type desired from embryonic stem cells. In fact, no one has been able
to do this even with mouse cells.

   Using stem cells to cure diabetes, for example, would mean converting them to
islet cells, specialized cells of the pancreas that secrete insulin. And then
the new islet cells would have to be protected from the underlying disease
process that caused the diabetes in the first place. The science is not even
close.

   "Do we know how to make islet cells? No. Do we know how to make kidney cells?
No," said Dr. Shirley M. Tilghman, a mouse molecular geneticist, who is the
president of Princeton. "You can go on and on," she said.

   "In the early days there was a cottage industry of trying to get them to do
different things," Dr. Tilghman said. But the stem cells would never become just
one type of cell, developing instead into mixtures of specialized cell types.

   Few outside the field realize the difficulty of working with stem cells, Dr.
Martin and others said. When mouse stem cells grow in the laboratory, she said,
some of them spontaneously change, with chunks of genetic material moving from
place to place on chromosomes. She said that if such changes gave cells even a 5
percent growth advantage in the laboratory, the altered cells completely took
over the stem cell population within three generations. And if such cells were
put into patients, they could cause cancer.

   Even if all the other problems with stem cells are solved, researchers will
face another problem. The body's immune system will see the new cells as foreign
tissue and reject them. The only sure way to prevent this is to take powerful
immune suppression drugs for a lifetime, trading insulin injections, for
example, for immune suppression.

   The problem would be avoided if the stem cells were derived from an embryo
that was a clone of the patient -- the stem cells of such an embryo would be
genetically identical to the patient's cells. But cloning has its own problems.
Not only do many politicians and religious leaders find it ethically abhorrent
to create a clone and then destroy it as an embryo to extract its stem cells,
but no one has yet come near getting the process to work.

   One company, Advanced Cell Technology, recently announced its first attempts
to create human embryos by cloning. The company failed -- its embryos never grew
or developed anywhere near a point where they would contain stem cells.

   That normally occurs after about five days, when the embryo becomes a sphere
with a ball of stem cells inside. Most of the company's embryos died without
dividing even once, although one made it to an amorphous clump of six cells. In
animals where cloning has succeeded, it remains very inefficient, often
requiring 100 or more eggs to get a single viable clone.

   Finally, researchers must get replacement cells derived from stem cells to
integrate into the body's complex machinery and fill in the blanks left by
diseased or dying cells. That task may pose its own problems, as scientists
found when they tried to supply fetal brain cells to patients with Parkinson's
disease. In some patients, the fetal cells apparently grew too well. They pumped
out too much of the brain chemicals, and there was no way to remove the cells or
turn them off.

   But these cautionary findings were seldom mentioned when advocacy groups for
patients with various disease took up the cause, even though researchers
expressed little optimism for cures any time soon, if ever. The task of getting
stem cells to develop into specialized nerve cells and then getting those cells
to repair the damage in the disease is well beyond today's science, experts say.

   "I have no idea how someone expects that you will inject neuroblasts and they
will run all over the brain and replace your sick and dying neurons in
Alzheimer's disease," said Dr. Davor Solter, a mouse stem cell researcher who
directs the Max Planck Institute in Germany.

   Dr. Martin, who is a co-discoverer of mouse embryonic stem cells and the one
who named them, added, "There are a gazillion issues."

   That is not to say that the issues will never be resolved. Dr. Steen
Willadsen, a Danish scientist and a cloning pioneer who saw the impossible
happen in his field, said demand for stem cell therapies was so great that
scientists would make it happen, sooner or later.

   But Dr. Martin and others say they worry about the short term, concerned by
how the public will react when it becomes clear that stem cells are not an
immediate answer for suffering patients. She and others say they are bracing
themselves for a backlash when treatments fail to materialize.

   "There's almost certainly going to be a backlash," said Dr. James A. Thomson,
the University of Wisconsin scientist who first isolated human embryonic stem
cells. "These are novel, unproven therapies. I believe there is tremendous
promise, but it's going to take years to develop therapies." He said, however,
that the media, not scientists, were at fault for the exaggerated promises.

   "I blame the press," Dr. Thomson said. "It is very compelling to be able to
make new body parts. It captures the imagination."

   But Dr. Inder Verma, a gene therapy researcher at the Salk Institute in San
Diego, said scientists set off the frenzy with their own hyperbole. And, he
said, he has seen this sort of process unfold once before, with disastrous
consequences.

   Gene therapy, Dr. Verma said, had the same sort of promise attached to it two
decades ago. In that field, too, scientists predicted too much too soon. When
gene therapy failed, many turned against it. Stem cell therapy is heading in the
same directions, Dr. Verma said, and some scientists are beginning to worry.

   "We started it," Dr. Verma said, speaking of the debate. Now, he said, "we
withdraw from it because we realize it is going out of control."

   Yet, he said, this time, with abortion politics entwined in the story, the
public backlash may be far worse than it was with gene therapy.

   "In five years, if it doesn't work out, people will turn to us and say, 'You
divided the nation,' " Dr. Verma said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Inder Verma of Salk Institute, left, a gene therapy
researcher, and Dr. Brigid Hogan of Vanderbilt, who works with mouse embryonic
stem cells, say scientists have helped set off a frenzy over stem cells'
potential. (John Russell for The New York Times); (Robert Burroughs for The New
York Times); (Associated Press); (Jeff Miller); (Associated Press) Chart: "The
Path of Stem Cell Research" 1870's 1878 -- IN VITRO IS TRIEDFirst reported
attempts to fertilize a mammal's eggs outside the body, that is, in vitro.
1950's 1959 -- IN VITRO SUCCEEDSFirst report of an animal (a rabbit) produced
through in vitro fertilization in the United States. 1960's 1968 -- A HUMAN
BREAKTHROUGHFirst fertilization of a human egg outside of the body. 1970' 1978
-- IT'S A GIRLFirst in vitro baby, Louise Brown, is born in Oldham, England.
1981 -- EMBRYONIC STEM CELLSMouse embryonic stem cells are derived from inner
cell mass of a blastocyst. These cells demonstrate the potential to
differentiate into nearly all cell types. 1981 -- A U.S. BABYThe first American
in vitro baby, Elizabeth Carr, is born in Norfolk, Va. 1996 -- FROM EMBRYO TO
HEARTMouse embryonic stem cells are induced to begin differentiating down a path
toward heart muscle. 1998 -- HUMAN CELLSDr. James A. Thomson and colleagues
derive human embryonic stem cells from the inner cell mass of normal human
blastocysts. The stem cells show the potential to develop into nearly all of the
body's tissue types. At the same time, Dr. John Gearhart and colleagues report
that embryonic germ cells, derived from fetal tissue, also can develop into the
body's different tissue types. 2000 -- SKIN STEM CELLSResearchers discover that
skin stem cells, which prompt skin regeneration, reside in hair follicles. 2001
-- FEDERAL MONEYPresident Bush announces that the government will finance
research on existing stem cell lines, but not new ones. The National Institutes
of Health reports 72 lines that may be available for federally financed
research. (Source: The National Institutes of Health)

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2001


                             1478 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2326 words

HEADLINE: In Tiny Cells, Glimpses Of Body's Master Plan

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   The human body looks and works like a seamless whole, but it is constructed
of individual units too small to be seen, some 100 trillion living cells. The
designer of the body is evolution, but its builders are the cells themselves.
They proliferate from a single egg, morph into at least 260 different types and
spontaneously organize into a perfectly integrated system of organs and tissues.

        Biologists only dimly grasp the principles of this extraordinary
self-assembly, but they are quickly learning the habits of its principal actors,
a special class of cell known as stem cells. One kind of master stem cell
generates the infant from the fertilized egg and then, its living sculpture
completed, disappears. A class of maintenance stem cells then assumes the duties
of replenishing and repairing the body throughout the owner's lifetime. The
fleeting creators, known as embryonic stem cells, generate every tissue of the
body, but their successors, the adult stem cells, are generally limited in scope
to making a single kind of tissue.

    Stem cells have recently burst from the obscurity of the research laboratory
into the arena of national politics, propelled by assertions that they are
either the fruits of murder or the panacea for the degenerative diseases of age.
Obtained from the surplus embryos generated in fertility clinics, human
embryonic stem cells have not yet been much studied because many biomedical
researchers -- those supported by federal grants -- were forbidden to work on
them until President Bush's decision on Aug. 9 to allow research with embryonic
cell cultures that had already been established.

   For now, the promise of human embryonic cells rests largely on studies of
their counterparts in mice, creatures that possess the same basic mammalian body
plan as people despite a separation of 100 million years of evolution.

   Embryonic cells are a sort of magic clay that can be shaped into organs and
tissues. Biologists try to drive the cells down particular paths of development
by exposing them to the chemical signals and physical stimuli the cells are
thought to experience in the developing embryo. With such methods, mouse
embryonic cells have been induced to develop into the mature cells typical of 19
different kinds of tissue, including those of heart, skin, brain, bone and
pancreas.

Promising Advances

   But the promise of embryonic stem cells for medicine rests on more than their
powers to morph into any body tissue. In the lab, they exhibit another amazing
property -- the ability to assemble spontaneously into structures seen in living
tissues. Researchers do not understand the organizing process and do little to
make it happen; the cells are just engineered to self-assemble, given the right
cues and conditions.

   Last year Dr. Shin-Ichi Nishikawa and colleagues at Kyoto University in Japan
reported that they had coaxed mouse embryonic stem cells to build themselves
into blood vessels. The Kyoto biologists grew the cells on a dish lined with
collagen, the fiber that gives the skin its stretchiness; the collagen may have
alerted the cells that they were in a place where blood vessels were needed.

   In their dish, the precursor cells developed after several days into both the
soft muscle cells that make up the wall of blood vessels and the special lining
cells that coat the walls. And the wall cells and lining cells then
spontaneously assembled into tubes like those of blood vessels.

   Last April, in an even more striking piece of alchemy, scientists at the
National Institutes of Health, including Dr. Nadya Lumelsky and Dr. Ronald D. G.
McKay, described a five-step method for making mouse embryonic cells assemble
into hormone-producing clusters like the islets of the pancreas gland.

   The islets are the source of insulin, the hormone that alerts cells to take
up glucose from the blood, and they also generate three lesser-known hormones
called glucagon, somatostatin and pancreatic polypeptide, each produced by a
different type of cell. The N.I.H. team found that their pancreas-directed
embryonic cells morphed into the four different kinds of pancreatic cells,
assembled themselves in the laboratory dish into structures resembling islets,
and even churned out insulin when exposed to glucose just as real pancreatic
islets do.

   The researchers then injected some of these artificially made islets into
diabetic mice. They continued making insulin, though not enough to cure the mice
of diabetes. Still, the experiment underlined the cells' potential for patching
up the body.

   Human embryonic cells can in principle provide an inexhaustible source of
islets, and of many other critical tissues that are damaged in disease.
Embryonic stem cells possess and can gain access to the entire manual of genetic
instructions for generating and regenerating the body. Given the bare minimum of
appropriate cues, it seems, they will mold themselves into the components of the
right tissue.

   Human embryonic cells are expected to behave in the same general way as mouse
cells, although few studies of them have been done. In August, University of
Wisconsin researchers reported that human embryonic cells could be converted
into blood-forming cells. The finding may prove important to blood banks because
in principle it offers a way of growing an inexhaustible supply of red blood
cells and platelets free of infectious agents.

   Researchers in Israel have converted human embryonic cells into heart muscle,
and other groups are working out ways to drive the cells down paths of
development that lead to brain and pancreas tissue.

High Hurdles

   But research on embryonic stem cells is at an embryonic stage, with many
hurdles yet to be overcome before they reach the clinic. Injected into mice, the
unchanged cells form not an embryo but a grisly tumor full of hair and teeth and
known as a "monster cancer" or teratoma.

   Another obvious problem is that embryonic cells drawn from some tissue bank
may not exactly match a patient's immune system. But embryonic cells seem less
antagonistic to the immune system than are ordinary cells. And there may be
clever ways of getting around the immune incompatibility issue.

   One idea is to repress the genes that make embryonic cells appear foreign to
their host. Another is a co-transplant, that of first inserting blood-making
cells into a patient's bone marrow and then heart-repairing cells made from the
same embryonic line. The blood-making cells can induce immunological tolerance
of their presence, preventing the patient's immune system from attacking any
other cells derived from the same embryo.

Adult Stem Cells

   Embryonic stem cells are of great interest because of their all-purpose
nature. But the body's adult stem cells also hold high medical promise. Adult
stem cells, if they could be extracted from each patient as need arose, could be
used without any risk of immune rejection.

   Most adult stem cells are specialized to repair just the tissue they are
found in. Skin stem cells repair the skin. Hematopoietic stem cells generate all
the cells of the blood and immune system. Intestinal stem cells provide a new
lining for the gut. So far some 13 types of adult stem cell have been
identified, according to the National Institutes of Health.

   Years of effort have failed to bring to light the heart's stem cells,
reinforcing the idea that the heart muscle cells are never renewed in lifetime.
But this dogma came under challenge this year when a flurry of reports suggested
that the heart was the wrong place to look for them. The cells, according to the
challengers, reside in the bone marrow.

   Dr. Donald Orlic of the National Institutes of Health, and Dr. Piero Anversa
of New York Medical College in Valhalla, have found that bone marrow cells
injected into the hearts of mice given heart attacks will develop into both
heart muscle cells and the cells that build blood vessels. The two types of
cells integrated into the stricken heart and improved its function.

   This year they reported taking their research a step further toward an
elegant, minimalist heart attack therapy. They injected animals with two
signaling proteins, known as cytokines, that are known to make bone marrow stem
cells proliferate and rush out into the bloodstream. They then induced heart
attacks in the mice by tying off a blood vessel to the heart.

   The activated stem cells homed in on the damaged heart tissue and grew into
new heart muscle, enabling most of the animals to survive the heart attack.

   The researchers are now testing how effective the treatment is when the
cytokines that mobilize the stem cells from the bone marrow are injected after a
mouse heart attack, not before. If the stricken mice still benefit, "that could
have tremendous clinical importance," Dr. Orlic said.

   Cells from the bone marrow can also turn into liver cells but do so rather
inefficiently. "The natural propensity for hematopoietic stem cells to repair
the liver is poor," said Dr. Markus Grompe, a liver expert at the Oregon Health
and Science University.

   The concept of using cytokines to stimulate adult stem cell production is
already in use in bone marrow transplants. Surgeons used to transplant the whole
marrow because they could not identify the 1 in every 100,000 marrow cells that
is a true stem cell. Now, instead of a bone puncture, the donor is injected with
a cytokine that makes the stem cells proliferate and enter the bloodstream,
where they can be captured by virtue of characteristic marker proteins they
carry on their surface.

   Adult stem cells not only repair the body but conduct vigorous daily
regeneration of its most abraded tissues. A single human skin stem cell grown in
a laboratory dish can generate enough cells to clothe the entire body in skin.

   The hematopoietic stem cells produce billions of new progeny every day to
replace both the white blood cells, which die fighting pathogenic invaders, and
the red blood cells, which last only two months before wearing out. Even the
brain has stem cells, which are estimated to generate one new neuron per 2,000
every day, according to Dr. Fred H. Gage of the Salk Institute. New neurons are
used in the brain regions dedicated to place and face recognition, to the sense
of smell and maybe to other modules.

Clever Stem Cell Tricks

   A salient property of stem cells is one that biologists call asymmetric
division. The body's mature cells do not divide very much, but when they do, a
mother cell produces two identical daughter cells. A stem cell, on the other
hand, can divide to produce one stem cell and one progenitor or transit cell,
which then proliferates into the tissue's mature, fully formed cells. Because
each stem cell regenerates itself on division, the number of stem cells stays
constant.

   A stem cell can also divide into two stem cells, as embryonic cells do when
kept in lab culture. Mature cells kept in culture will divide only about 50
times and then lapse into senescence because of a division-counting mechanism on
their chromosomes that limits their ability to proliferate.

   Embryonic cells have the power to override the division-counting system and
will grow and divide indefinitely. They are in this sense immortal. A single
culture of embryonic stem cells can in principle produce enough cells for
everyone. Adult stem cells, by contrast, proliferate rather poorly in culture.

   Embryonic cells may provide the ideal vehicle for gene therapy, the idea of
introducing genes to correct harmful genetic defects. Gene therapists have long
tried to insert curative human genes into a patient's cells on the back of
harmless viruses. But the virus delivery method has proved inefficient, and it
still lingers under the cloud caused by the death of a patient at the University
of Pennsylvania in 1999.

   Cells in culture can be manipulated much more easily than those in the body.
The physician can select just the cells in which a gene has integrated
correctly, grow them up and insert them into the patient. Researchers have
routinely generated new strains of mice by manipulating mouse embryonic cells,
and some aspects of this technology may prove useful for improving human
embryonic cells.

   As the power and abilities of stem cells become apparent, biologists have
become increasingly optimistic about the chances for treating otherwise
intractable diseases.

   "A multitude of therapeutic uses can be envisioned," Dr. Elaine Fuchs and Dr.
Julia Segre of the University of Chicago wrote recently in the journal Cell.
They cited hope for the treatment of Alzheimer's, spinal cord injuries,
Parkinson's, heart disease, diabetes and baldness.

   Though the body is made up almost entirely of mature cells, its continued
existence depends on a handful of stem cells. The body's hierarchy of cells
resembles that of the pieces in a chess set. Like the queen, the all-purpose
cells of the embryo can perform all permissible moves. The adult stem cells, as
diminished in power as bishops, knights and rooks, can make only a subset of the
queen's moves. The mature cells are mere pawns, with a single role.

   The role of king is played by a special cluster of embryonic cells known as
the embryonic germ cells. The germ cells are set aside at an early stage and
protected from the maturing process that affects all the other embryonic cells.
Migrating to the tissues that will become ovary or testis, the germ cells' role
is to produce eggs or sperm. But if grown in a laboratory dish, the germ cells
display the ability of the embryonic cells to generate all the tissues of the
body.

   Just as chess depends on the fate of the king, the germ cells are central to
the game of life. Under evolution's rules, the body is just a disposable and
temporary container designed to allow the germ cells to get their genes into the
next generation. The promise of stem cell research is that it may allow doctors
to bend the rules of this harsh game just a little, by using the vast generative
power of stem cells to extend life and health.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: "The Body's Master Builders"Embryonic stem cells, the cells from
which all body tissues grow, form about five days after sperm and egg unite,
when the embryo is little more than a hollow blastocyst with an inner mass of
stem cells. At this stage, researchers can remove these stem cells in hopes of
using them to grow replacement tissues to treat a variety of diseases.
Development is directed by a system of signals that cells send and receive as
genes flicker on or off. Creating Organs in the Body GENE EXPRESSIONGenes direct
the cells to migrate. Then, different genes turn on or off, telling cells what
to do in their new location. CELL-TO-CELL SIGNALINGCells are connected by groups
of proteins, allowing the cells to exchange information. ENVIRONMENT-SPECIFIC
SIGNALINGAs they differentiate, cells receive signaling factors from the
surroundingtissues, pushing them to specialize. The endoderm is thought to
giverise to specialized stem cells, which in turn yield all pancreatic cells,
including those that secrete insulin. CELL SIGNALING DAYS 2-3 --The cell divides
again and again. DAY 4 -- Cells begin to differentiateand migrate to
differentparts of the embryo. DAY 5BLASTOCYST DAY -- 1 Egg and sperm meet. DAYS
6-9 -- The embryo implants in the uterine wall. DAY 14 -- The inner cell mass
gives rise to three cell layers that will form all the body's tissues and
organs. ECTODERMMESODERMENDODERM EMBRYONIC STEM CELLSAt this stage, scientists
can remove stem cells from the inner cell mass. In theory, they can be coaxed to
develop into any cell type in the body. Chart: "Creating Organs in the Lab"
Biologists at the National Institutes of Health used embryonic stem cells from a
mouse blastocyst. The cells formed clusters showing characteristics of different
types of tissue. Scientists isolated cells that produced a protein common to
both the cells of the pancreas and the nervous system. The cells were exposed to
a growth signal, and they further differentiated into precursors to pancreas
cells. The growth signal was withdrawn, and the cells assembled into
insulin-secreting clusters. When inserted into mice, the cells produced insulin,
though not nearly as much as normal, healthy pancreas cells. Scientists
encourage cells to differentiate by exposing them to certain factors (proteins)
or tissue types. GENE EXPRESSIONWhen specific genes are active, cells produce
certain proteins that scientists can recognize. CELL-TO-CELL SIGNALINGScientists
allow cells to signal each other, and they begin to differentiate.
ENVIRONMENT-SPECIFIC SIGNALINGScientists can expedite differentiation in the lab
by exposing cells to signalsthey would encounter in the body. CELL
SIGNALINGIslet-like clustersInner cell mass (Sources: Dr. Ronald D. G. McKay,
Dr. Nadya Lumelsky, National Institutes of Health; Dr. Nora Sarvetnick, Scripps
Research Institute) Drawings: (Steve Duenes; Illustrations by Juan Velasco/The
New York Times); (Blastocyst image courtesy of Kathleen Miller, Reproductive
Medicine Associates of New Jersey)

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2001


                             1479 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 18, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 1; Science Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 990 words

HEADLINE: THE STEM CELL DEBATE: PERSONAL HEALTH;
Weighing the Rights of the Embryo Against Those of the Sick

BYLINE:  By JANE E. BRODY

BODY:

   In theory, millions of people suffering devastating diseases may one day be
helped or even cured with treatments derived from human embryonic stem cells.
But human embryos must be destroyed to obtain these stem cells. So research
involving them is mired in controversy, with each side arguing passionately for
the rights of the sick or the rights of the unborn.

        Many scientists say treatments based on the research are a long way off,
and may even be impossible to develop. And opponents say it is wrong to destroy
embryos to obtain the necessary stem cells.

    But advocates of the research say the work could ultimately lead to
treatments that could help the living, including children born with
now-incurable diseases. These possible benefits, they say, more than justify the
destruction of test-tube embryos, embryos that would otherwise be discarded by
fertility clinics.

   Are they right? Different people will answer the question in different ways.
But all Americans must consider the question as they confront the stem cell
debate.

   Chances are everyone knows someone with a debilitating disease whose health
and life could be vastly improved if it were possible to use stem cells to
correct the illness.

   I have known several such people, starting with my father. At age 58, he
suffered a severe heart attack that permanently damaged a large part of his
heart muscle. He survived, but could not pick up his grandchildren, carry a
suitcase or do the gardening he loved.

   Had there been stem cells that could have regenerated his damaged heart
muscle and the blood vessels that fed it, his remaining years would certainly
have been better.

   The potential to use stem cells to help the one million Americans who suffer
heart attacks each year already exists. Scientists have succeeded in using mouse
stem cells to restore damaged heart muscle and blood vessels in mice with
induced heart attacks. But a lot of research, both in mice and with human stem
cells, is needed before such a technique can succeed in people.

   Then there are my cousin Marvin and my friend Betty, both of whom have had
insulin-dependent diabetes for many years, in Marvin's case, since childhood.
Despite careful diets, daily injections of insulin and great efforts to maintain
a stable blood sugar level, both have endured myriad complications of diabetes,
including vision loss, leg ulcers, blackouts and loss of sensation in their
feet.

   Again, stem cell research in mice has suggested the possibility of generating
the pancreatic islet cells that fail to produce the insulin needed to control
blood sugar and to ward off the complications of diabetes.

   At the National Institutes of Health, scientists have coaxed mouse embryonic
stem cells to assemble into hormone-producing clusters of pancreatic islet
cells. But there is still a great deal of work to be done.

   My Aunt Ruth and my friend Joan, who have Parkinson's disease, may also
benefit from stem cell research to produce the brain cells that make dopamine,
the nervous system chemical messenger that is deficient in people with
Parkinson's.

   The disease can strike people in the prime of their lives and can eventually
be fatal. The drugs now used are at best a stopgap measure, not a cure.

   Scientists have tried to counter Parkinson's by supplying patients with fetal
brain cells, but in some cases the inserted cells grew out of control and
produced too much of the needed brain chemical, causing severe symptoms. But
stem cells seem to come equipped with built-in controls that tell them when
enough is enough.

   Another brain disorder that may one day submit to stem cell therapy is
Alzheimer's disease. Though it may now seem far-fetched, it may one day be
possible to use stem cells to replace the brain cells that deteriorate in this
severe form of dementia.

   Then there is the unrealized potential of gene therapy, the introduction of
healthy genes to correct severe genetic diseases like cystic fibrosis or sickle
cell anemia.

   Thus far, efforts to use viruses as carriers to introduce healthy genes to
replace the defective ones that cause cystic fibrosis have not worked very well.
But embryonic stem cells could well be a better vehicle for gene insertion to
correct inherited gene defects.

   Likewise, by inducing stem cells to develop into a particular organ,
researchers may one day eliminate the need for some organ transplants.

   Christopher Reeve, whose spinal cord was severed in a riding accident,
rendering him a quadriplegic, supports stem cell research for its potential to
repair spinal cord injuries, by bridging gaps in the spine left by accidents
like his.

   Many victims of spinal cord injuries are young, otherwise vibrant people now
irreversibly crippled in tragic accidents.

   No one is as yet prepared to say when -- or even if -- the promise of stem
cells will come to fruition. A great deal of research must be done, in animal
cells and in those derived from human embryos. A number of human stem cell lines
already exist, and President Bush has decided that federal money can be used to
support the intensive research needed to develop them into practical therapies.

   But many scientists maintain that the existing cell lines are insufficient,
and that other new ones are needed if stem cell research is to make the progress
needed for it to reach the full extent of clinical applications. Such basic
cells can be found only in very early embryos with cells that have not yet
started to become specific tissues, like the embryos grown in test tubes for
possible use in in-vitro fertilization. Extra embryos are either destroyed or
stored frozen.

   Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, last year broke ranks with fellow
abortion opponents who oppose research using human embryos. Mr. Hatch decided to
support human stem cell research. In explaining his revised view he said, "I
just cannot equate a child living in a womb, with moving toes and fingers and a
beating heart, with an embryo in a freezer."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2001


                             1480 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            December 17, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Metro Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 146 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
IN BRIEF;
Sickle-Cell Cure in Mice

BODY:

   Reported in Gene Trial

   Scientists have cured sickle-cell disease in a strain of mice by using a
powerful gene therapy method that can replace nearly all diseased blood cells
with healthy ones. Patients with sickle-cell disease have blood cells that
deform when oxygen levels are low, creating painful blockages of blood vessels
and producing organ damage.

   Researchers from Harvard University and MIT reported in the Dec. 14 issue of
Science that they used a modified virus to treat the disease. The virus carried
a normal copy of a gene that allows blood cells to carry oxygen without
deforming. When the researchers injected the virus into the mice, the new gene
quickly replaced the defective one in bone marrow cells, where new blood cells
are made. Much more work is required before the technique can be tested in
humans.

   *

   Compiled by Times medical writer Thomas H. Maugh III

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2001


                             1481 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     December 14, 2001 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 034

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: Hub docs make progress in sickle-cell research

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers in the Hub have developed a gene therapy technique that corrects
sickle cell disease in mice and say it may lead to treatments for humans.

   The team of scientists said its therapy dramatically reduced the number of
faulty red blood cells in one model and completely eliminated them in another.

   "Nobody has been able to do as good a job of correcting the disease in mouse
models or to get this high a level of normal, functioning red blood cells," said
Walter C. Ogier, president of Genetix Pharmaceuticals of Cambridge.

   "The challenge will be to move this forward to human trials over the next
several years."

   The incurable blood disease, which affects between 80,000 and 100,000
African-Americans, is characterized by red blood cells that clump and stick to
blood vessels. The inability of the cells to function properly results in
sudden, intense episodes of pain.

   The researchers created a special hemoglobin gene and, using a virus as a
delivery agent, delivered it into the stem cells in the animals' bone marrow.

   The special gene was equipped with a property that caused the stem cells to
produce red blood cells that don't form a sickle shape, said lead author Dr.
Philip Leboulch, of Brigham and Women's Hospital. Leboulch, also vice president
and chief scientific officer of Genetix, said trials in monkeys are planned for
early next year, with human trials in about three years.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2001


                             1482 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 14, 2001, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 776 words

HEADLINE: SICKLE CELL CURE CALLED A STEP CLOSER

BYLINE: By Raja Mishra, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Boston-area scientists say they have used re-engineered human
immunodeficiency virus to cure mice with sickle cell anemia, offering hope to
millions of people worldwide suffering from the painful blood disease and giving
a boost to the battered field of gene therapy.

   Researchers at Harvard Medical School and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology used the modified HIV to deliver a corrective gene into sickened test
mice, and said they were cured within 10 months. The results are reported today
in the journal Science.

      While scientists cautioned that human trials are at least two years away,
with widespread medical use even further off, they said the findings held great
promise.

   "This is a significant achievement that brings us closer to human gene
therapy for what is a very serious blood disorder," said Dr. Claude Lenfant,
director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute at the National
Institutes of Health.

   About 1,000 US babies are born every year with sickle cell anemia, and 70,000
Americans live with it. It causes lung tissue damage, intense pain, and stroke,
often forcing victims to become homebound to care for themselves. US minorities
are particularly at risk of the disease, with 1 in 500 blacks and 1 in 1,000 His
panics affected.

   Today's advance also marks a positive step for the field of gene therapy,
where scientists attempt to cure genetic diseases by injecting healthy genes
into patients - an elegant concept that has proven difficult to realize in
practice. The much-heralded technique came under fire two years ago after a
young test subject in Pennsylvania died following treatment and numerous other
human tests failed to demonstrate progess.

   Gene therapy thus far has shown potential in so-called "bubble children"
ailing from rare genetic flaws that ravage the immune system. But the new study
offers hints of its broader promise, said Dr. Philippe Leboulch, the lead author
and an assistant professor at both Harvard and MIT.

   "It's truly important. Sickle cell disease is a very common, worldwide
disease," he said in an interview from Paris, where he was attending a medical
conference.

   Sickle cell anemia has long been a favored target of gene therapy researchers
because it is caused by a single defective gene. The disease can be traced to a
mutation in a gene that helps design the structure of hemoglobin, a component of
blood that transports oxygen from the lungs to other organs. In victims,
hemoglobin becomes shaped like a sickle or crescent moon, crippling its ability
to travel through the bloodstream. The blood becomes sticky and sludge-like,
causing debilitating and potentially fatal damage to organs.

   The flawed blood cells are produced by bone marrow, so scientists devised a
way to fix the bone marrow by replacing its abnormal hemoglobin gene with a
healthy gene.

   The trick in gene therapy is to design a vector, or delivery device, that can
evade the immune system while introducing healing genes to a patient. The
delivery device in this case was modified HIV, in which the harmful aspects were
turned off and a healthy hemoglobin gene was inserted.

   In the study, Leboulch and his team removed samples of bone marrow from
diseased mice, then used radiation to kill their remaining bone marrow. Next,
the reengineered HIV was inserted into the bone marrow samples.

   The virus quickly infected the bone marrow in a test tube. The treated bone
marrow was injected back into the mice. There it proliferated, spreading the
healthy hemoglobin gene and correcting the error that produced the sickle-shaped
hemoglobin. Ten months later, the mice were dissected and no traces of disease
were found.

   The researchers behind the advance said human tests of the procedure would
likely occur in two years. At the moment, they are starting tests on monkeys at
labs in Seattle. In these tests, researchers will make sure the reengineered HIV
does not contain other harmful genetic errors, said Leboulch.

   Also, they will make sure the modified HIV works as well in humans as in
mice. Although the virus has been used for human gene therapy before, human
sickle cell victims have 1,000 times the number of marrow cells as mice - and
thus the virus needs to proliferate much more quickly before the immune system
detects the invader and begins attacking it. In a previous gene therapy test,
such an immune response killed the patient in Pennsylvania.

   Robert Pawliuk, a scientist at Cambridge-based Genetix Pharmaceuticals Inc.
who collaborated with Leboulch on the study, said the upcoming tests would begin
to answer those questions. "Safety is our first concern," he said.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2001


                             1483 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                     December 14, 2001 Friday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Research: Advance on sickle cell;
Use of AIDS virus succeeds in mice

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers using a gutted AIDS virus and a custom-made gene said yesterday
they had corrected sickle cell anemia in mice and that the approach holds
promise for people.

   If so, gene therapy could be used to treat one of the most common genetic
diseases. But the researchers, who published their findings in the journal
Science, said they are a long way from trying the approach in people.

   Sickle cell disorders are most common in people of African, Mediterranean,
Indian and Middle Eastern descent, and one in every 13 African-Americans carries
the gene.

   It is recessive, meaning a person has to get two copies of the gene to get
the disease, so about one in 450 African-Americans has sickle cell disease.

   "It is important to do something," Philippe Leboulch of Harvard Medical
School, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Genetix Pharmaceuticals, in Boston, who
led the study, said in a phone interview.

   Usually, oxygen is carried to red blood cells by hemoglobin. A protein called
beta globin helps.

   In sickle cell disease, cells make an abnormal version of hemaglobin, in
which the chains of beta globin develop sticky patches, stretching the red blood
cell into a characteristic sickle shape. Sickle-shaped cells get stuck in blood
vessels and block blood flow, leading to anemia, stroke and organ damage.

   Leboulch's team designed a new gene that makes normal beta globin, helping to
prevent the red blood cells from taking on the sickle shape.

   They used a gutted HIV virus to carry the new gene into mice, and the gene
produced the needed protein for as long as 10 months - a long time in gene
therapy terms.

   "Since we wrote the report we have kept mice that are over a year old and
they still express [the gene] at the same levels," Leboulch said. "We really
believe that it is permanent." *

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2001


                             1484 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    December 14, 2001 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: Metropolitan Area News in Brief

BODY:

   Man charged with shooting undercover officer

   A South Philadelphia man who, police say, fired the shot out his bathroom
window Wednesday night that struck an undercover narcotics officer on
surveillance in a nearby alley has been charged with attempted murder, police
said yesterday.

   Officer Gary Harrison, 36, a member of the police Narcotics Strike Force, was
working with another undercover officer backing up a third officer when Kevin
Carter, 39, of the 1400 block of South 19th Street, heard noises outside his
residence and fired the shot that hit Harrison, police said. The officer was
wounded in the left leg and taken to Thomas Jefferson University Hospital. He
was released yesterday following treatment.

   Carter apparently did not know Harrison was an officer, police said. Carter
also was charged with assault, recklessly endangering other persons, and
possession of an instrument of crime.

   Harrison, a 13-year-veteran of the force, had been shot once before in the
line of duty. In 1991, he was wounded in the face during a traffic stop, police
said.

   Participant in gene-therapy trial sues Penn

   A Bucks County woman who participated in the same gene-therapy trial that
caused the death of an Arizona teenager has filed a civil lawsuit against the
University of Pennsylvania.

   Dolores Aderman, 38, said Penn and three of its physicians breached her
"essential human dignity" by failing to adequately disclose the risks of the
experiment that killed Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in September 1999. The suit, filed
in the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas, seeks at least $50,000 in
compensatory and punitive damages.

   A Penn spokeswoman said the university believed the suit was without merit.

   Sting operation leads to 13 drug arrests in Logan

   Undercover city police narcotics officers posing as drug dealers arrested 13
people yesterday in a "reverse sting" operation in the 4700 block of North 11th
Street in Logan, police said.

   Twelve of the suspects were charged with drug possession and one with selling
drugs. Ten others received summary citations for obstructing the highway.

   Police set up shop on the block at 9 a.m. and ran the operation for four
hours, offering counterfeit drugs for sale. Backup teams then arrested the
suspects as they left the area.

   Center City firm tallies its donations for 2001

   The Lincoln Financial Group, a Center City financial-services firm, gave $2
million to 60 nonprofit groups in the Philadelphia region in 2001.

   The contributions, which included $350,000 to the Regional Performing Arts
Center, $200,000 to the Franklin Institute Science Museum, and $160,000 to
Project HOME, were a 33 percent increase from its giving in 2000. Lincoln said
it made its donations in three areas: arts and culture, education, and human
services.

   Pa. Turnpike to expand E-ZPass starting tomorrow

   The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission will expand its E-ZPass electronic
toll-collection program at 8 a.m. tomorrow to all toll plazas from Exit 1, on
the Ohio border, to Exit 30, on the New Jersey border, and to Exit 37 (Wyoming
Valley) on the Northeast Extension.

   According to Turnpike Commission officials, the E-ZPass program, which can be
used only by passenger vehicles, will be expanded next year to include
commercial vehicles and buses.

   Motorists can enroll in the E-ZPass program by visiting the Web site
www.paturnpike.com or by calling 877-736-6727.

   Drug suspect waives hearing in Lower Merion

   LOWER MERION - A Philadelphia man, already charged with supplying drugs to
student dealers at Lower Merion High School, waived a preliminary hearing
yesterday on new charges that he had intimidated witnesses.

   Police said Joel Meltzer, 31, of the 1600 block of Pennington Road in the
Overbrook Park section of West Philadelphia, had warned three students scheduled
to testify at his June 2001 hearing not to appear. The new charges also pertain
to three drug deals Meltzer made between August 2000 and May of this year,
including a $350 ounce of marijuana sold to a Lower Merion student, who sold it
on the first day of school, police said.

   Assistant District Attorney Reeve Swainston said that the three
witness-intimidation charges alone could carry a 21-year sentence. Swainston
said the District Attorney's Office would consolidate Meltzer's previous and new
charges for trial, which has not been scheduled. Meltzer, who declined to
comment, remains free after posting $100,000 bail.

   Outside jury to be assembled for shooting case

   A Lansdale man facing charges of voluntary manslaughter in the shooting death
of his neighbor will be tried by an out-of-county jury because of the publicity
his case has generated.

   Assistant District Attorney Wendy Demchick-Alloy said that she has agreed to
the defense motion to seek an imported jury in the case of Paul Bellina, 53, of
the 1200 block of Browning Court. Bellina was arrested Sept. 26, 2000, in the
shooting death of his neighbor, Craig Holtzman. Police said that Bellina shot
Holtzman eight times, three times in the back, after he mistakenly wandered,
naked, into Bellina's home early Sept. 13.

   Bellina pleaded guilty, then withdrew the plea Oct. 17, the date on which he
was scheduled to be sentenced. Demchick-Alloy said that Bellina's trial could
begin early next year. The state Supreme Court will decide where the jury will
be selected.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2001


                             1485 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    December 14, 2001 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS CURE SICKLE CELL IN MICE

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers have cured laboratory mice of sickle cell anemia, the inherited
blood disorder that affects more than 70,000 Americans, in an experiment using
stem cells, genes and a modified HIV virus.

    Although the treatment is years away from being tested on humans, experts
called the experiment a milestone.

    "It corrected the sickling problem throughout the bodies of these mice,"
said Philippe Leboulch, a Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology scientist who led the research team. "All of the mice were cured
permanently."

    Leboulch said additional study is needed before the technique can be tried
on humans and the first clinical trial could come in about two years. A report
on the study appears today in the journal Science.

    The disease causes intense pain. It damages the liver, lungs and kidneys and
can trigger stroke or infections. There is no cure in humans, and treatment
consists of combatting the symptoms with antibiotics, blood transfusions and
surgery. A drug, called hydroxyurea, helps control some symptoms in adults, but
it has not been approved for children.

    Sickle cell anemia is most common in people of African heritage, though it
can occur in any race.

    "Although much more research is needed before human application, this is a
significant achievement that brings us closer to human gene therapy for what is
a very serious genetic blood disorder," said Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, one of the National Institutes of
Health.

    In the new study, researchers used two types of mice that are bred to have a
blood disease closely resembling the sickle cell anemia disease in humans.

    They removed from the mice samples of the bone marrow, which makes blood,
and then irradiated the mice to kill the remaining abnormal bone marrow.

    The researchers mixed with the removed bone marrow a fragment of the HIV
virus that had been manipulated to contain a normal red blood cell gene. The
virus infected the bone marrow, carrying into the blood-making cells the normal
red blood cell gene. The bone marrow was then reinjected into the mice.

    Once in the animals, the genetically altered bone marrow cells produced
normal red blood cells and corrected the sickling disease.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2001


                             1486 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            December 14, 2001 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 59

LENGTH: 742 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may correct sickle cell anemia

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers have cured laboratory mice of sickle cell anemia, the inherited
blood disorder that affects more than 70,000 Americans, in an experiment using
stem cells, genes and a modified HIV virus.

   Although the treatment is years away from being tested on humans, experts
called the experiment a milestone.

   "It corrected the sickling problem throughout the bodies of these mice," said
Philippe Leboulch, a Harvard Medical School and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology scientist who led the research team. "All of the mice were cured
permanently."

   Leboulch said additional study is needed before the technique can be tried on
humans and the first clinical trial could come in about two years. A report on
the study appears today in the journal Science.

   The disease causes intense pain. It damages the liver, lungs and kidneys and
can trigger stroke or infections. There is no cure in humans, and treatment
consists of combating the symptoms with antibiotics, blood transfusions and
surgery. A drug, called hydroxyurea, helps control some symptoms in adults, but
it has not been approved for children.

    About 1.2 million Americans carry one sickle cell gene. They are said to
have the sickle cell trait and are not affected by the disease. A person must
inherit two sickle cell genes - one from each parent - to have the disease. A
child born to two parents with the sickle cell trait has one chance in four of
inheriting the disease.

   Sickle cell anemia is most common in people of African heritage. It also is
found in people of Greek, Indian and Italian origin and can occur in any race.

   "Although much more research is needed before human application, this is a
significant achievement that brings us closer to human gene therapy for what is
a very serious genetic blood disorder," said Claude Lenfant, director of the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, one of the National Institutes of
Health.

   "This is an exciting result," said Michel Sadelain of the Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. "It is an important milestone in gene
therapy."

   Sadelain earlier achieved a similar success in mice by correcting the genetic
flaw that causes thalassemia, a blood disorder related to sickle cell anemia.

   In the new study, researchers used two types of mice that are bred to have a
blood disease closely resembling the sickle cell anemia disease in humans.

   They removed from the mice samples of the bone marrow, which makes blood, and
then irradiated the mice to kill the remaining abnormal bone marrow.

   The researchers mixed with the removed bone marrow a fragment of the HIV
virus that had been manipulated to contain a normal red blood cell gene. The
virus infected the bone marrow, carrying into the blood- making cells the normal
red blood cell gene. The bone marrow was then reinjected into the mice.

   Once in the animals, the genetically altered bone marrow cells produced
normal red blood cells and corrected the sickling disease.

   After 10 months, the mice were killed and their organs and blood examined.

   Leboulch said there was no evidence of abnormal blood nor of the organ damage
that is common with sickle cell anemia.

   The gene therapy technique will not be tried in humans, said Leboulch, until
the researchers learn how to safely neutralize the abnormal blood-making gene in
patients. Radiation was used in the mouse experiment to kill the animal's bone
marrow, but this would not be appropriate for human sickle cell disease
patients, said Leboulch.

    Greg Evans of the NHLBI said that research is under way to find a safe way
to partially destroy the abnormal bone marrow in patients. The technique would
then make room for the genetically corrected bone marrow.

    Sadelain said that earlier studies showed that the genetically corrected
bone marrow is ineffective against the blood disorder unless most of the
abnormal bone marrow is neutralized.

   Both sickle cell anemia and thalassemia are caused by a failure of a gene
that helps to make hemoglobin, the protein in red blood cells that carries
oxygen.

   In thalassemia, the gene fails to make enough hemoglobin.

   In sickle cell disease, the gene makes an abnormal hemoglobin that is sticky
and stiff. Instead of the soft, doughnut-shaped, normal hemoglobin, the abnormal
protein often forms into a distinctive sickle shape with a sharp point. The
abnormal hemoglobin tends to clog small vessels, blocking the flow of blood.
This starves tissues of oxygen and can cause damage throughout the body.

GRAPHIC: INFO GRAPHIC: Fixing blood cells

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1487 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    December 11, 2001 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.E-1

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC COUNSELING NOW URGED FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: SHARI ROAN, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   A recommendation by influential physicians' groups that expectant parents
receive counseling about genetic testing for cystic fibrosis -- an incurable
disease that's often fatal by early adulthood -- brings the era of genetic
testing a step closer to many families.

    The new guidelines mean that more parents will learn early in a pregnancy
that a woman is at risk of bearing a child with cystic fibrosis. That knowledge
could lead to earlier and possibly more effective treatments for newborns with
the disease. But the genetic tests also raise difficult ethical issues for
doctors and expectant parents, who in some cases might decide to terminate a
high-risk pregnancy after receiving unfavorable test results.

    The recommendation was made last month by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American College of Medical Genetics
after years of debate and study. The guidelines state that doctors should advise
couples about a test, known as carrier screening, to determine if an individual
carries the gene that causes CF. This counseling could be offered at the time a
woman sees a doctor for pregnancy planning or during the first office visit
after pregnancy.

    If the prospective parents opted for testing, the woman would have a blood
or saliva test to identify the defective gene. If she were found to carry the
gene, the father could then also undergo testing to determine his carrier
status. Both parents must carry the gene for the baby to have cystic fibrosis,
and in such cases the child has a 25 percent chance of having the disease. Some
parents might decide to terminate the pregnancy if subsequent testing of the
fetus shows it will have cystic fibrosis.

    The couple's decision, however, could be complicated by several factors. The
tests, for example, cannot determine how serious the disease will be; there are
mild to severe forms of cystic fibrosis.

    And no test can predict how future medical advances may improve treatments
for the disease. Scientists hope better medications and the potential for gene
therapy treatments will improve life expectancies for cystic fibrosis patients.

    One reason for genetic testing would be to consider an abortion if a child
carried the gene, said Michael Watson, executive director of the American
College of Medical Genetics.

    "But there is some question about using the test for that reason. ... Kids
with CF used to die much younger than they do now." On the other hand, he said,
some couples may consider any form of the disease too severe to continue the
pregnancy.

    Cystic fibrosis is characterized by mucus buildups in the lungs that cause
chronic infections and by an inability to absorb fats and nutrients from food.
There is no cure, although treatment for its symptoms has improved dramatically
in the last decade. The average life expectancy for those with the disease is
about age 30. Most people with CF require close medical supervision and often
need daily treatments to clear mucus from their lungs.

    Doctors who helped draw up the new guidelines emphasized that they are not
recommending testing for parents but simply that potential parents be informed
that the test is available and why, said Dr. Michael T. Mennuti, a Philadelphia
obstetrician.

    "The decision is their decision," he said. "It's a complex and personal
choice."

    That sentiment was echoed by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, however, the
advocacy group was reluctant to comment on the recommendations themselves.

    "We believe testing is a very personal decision," says Suzanne Pattee, vice
president for public policy and patient affairs. "We don't believe our
organization should impose its views on anyone."

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common recessive genetic disorder in Caucasians,
affecting about one in every 3,300 babies born. It is less common in other
ethnic groups. Individuals with CF have a defect in the chloride transport
mechanism in the cells. This results in the thick mucus in the lungs and
pancreas that are the disease's major characteristics.

    The gene responsible for CF was identified in 1989, and carrier screening
tests were developed a short time later. The test, however, was usually
recommended only for people known to be at high risk for having children with
CF, such as people with relatives who have the disease.

    It is not uncommon for certain groups to be offered screening tests for a
specific gene defect. Ashkenazi Jews, for example, often choose to undergo
screening for the gene that causes Tay-Sachs disease in newborns. But the CF
carrier screening recommendation is the first to target a broad population,
Watson said.

    The recommendation comes four years after the National Institutes of Health,
the federal government's medical branch, urged that prospective parents be
offered genetic testing for cystic fibrosis. It has taken four years to
implement the program because of the complexities involved, Watson said.

    The screening program is complicated because the accuracy of the test varies
among different ethnic groups; it is not 100 percent accurate for any group.
Since the CF gene was first identified, more than 900 mutations, or variations,
of the gene have been identified. One variation, for example, accounts for 70
percent of all CF mutations in Caucasians but only 30 percent of those found in
Ashkenazi Jews.

    Geneticists were reluctant to act on the 1997 NIH recommendation for
screening until they could ensure that testing labs were, at a minimum,
screening for the most serious CF gene mutations.

    The test costs between $180 and $400 and may be covered by insurance only if
there is a family history of the disease.

    The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has published two
brochures to help patients understand the test. But some experts worry that
couples may not always be appropriately counseled about the implications of a
positive screening test.

    Couples who learn their child will have cystic fibrosis also should be
counseled about treatments for the disease that can begin shortly after birth.
Most people with CF are diagnosed within the first year of life, but only after
symptoms have emerged. Experts believe that children may fare better with
earlier treatment.

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: The Vindicator/Ed Yozwick: (Organ systems
affected by CF)

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2001


                             1488 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           December 09, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS MATTERS; Pg. BM20

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH CARE: Medical center outlines its health, its plans

BYLINE: THE BENTON COUNTY DAILY RECORD

BODY:

   *NW EDITION*
 Washington Regional Medical Center reports that its health is good.
WRMC recently presented its "2000 Report to the Community" to the Washington
County Quorum Court. The report included information about WRMC's $ 90 million
medical facility under construction at North Hills Medical Park in Fayetteville,
as well as the center's educational and outreach programs.
Stephen B. Lampkin, WRMC president and chief operating officer, presented the
annual report accompanied by several of the facility's top-ranking officers.
During the presentation, he stressed that WRMC is focusing on five strategic
areas: quality care, customer service, financial stewardship, system growth and
community health.
"We believe our community is best served by a charitable, not-for-profit
health-care delivery system," Lampkin said. "As the region's only
not-for-profit, community-owned and locally governed hospital, Washington
Regional can concentrate on serving the needs of our community."
Focusing on local needs will allow WRMC to invest all its income back into the
organization and into programs, services and equipment to ensure quality care
for Northwest Arkansas, Lampkin said.
WRMC continues to get high marks from patients. A detailed survey was sent to
discharged patients soliciting comments about the staff and services, Lampkin
said. Those surveys have listed WRMC among the top-scoring health-care providers
as reported by the Ganey Medical Data Co., a national ranker of medical centers.

Work on the 350,000-square-foot WRMC facility in Fayetteville's North Hills
Medical Park is on schedule to be completed by August 2002. Planning for the
move to the facility is being undertaken by WRMC's more than 300 employees.
Continued outreach and educational programming are key in improving the
community's health and wellness in the years ahead, Lampkin said.
 "During 2000, we provided $ 5.6 million in community benefits, including
charity care and other programs to offer basic health-care services for the
growing numbers of uninsured and under-insured in our community," he said.
The report shows that $ 4.8 million went to charity care for patients who were
unable to pay for services. More than $ 809,000 was used for programs to assist
low-income families.
Facilities receiving funds included the Northwest Arkansas Free Health and
Dental Clinic; the Community Clinic at St. Francis House; the Washington County
HIV Clinic; and the Washington County Prenatal Care Program.
One of the facility's most visible community service programs is Operation
KidCare, which encourages parents to have their children immunized against
childhood diseases. Another program in place in area schools, Kids For Health,
has received national awards for its educational programming.
Other 2000 service highlights include:
The addition of 33 new physicians to WRMC's medical staff;
Continued partnership with the Area Health Education Center of the University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences;
Opening a non-urgent care facility, decreasing patient waiting time and allowing
for emergency care to be more accessible;
Serving 44,895 emergency room patients;
Participation in 12 open clinical trials, focusing on cardiovascular medicine,
infectious disease and women's health;
The institution of cardiovascular gene therapy, injecting the first Arkansas
patient with a gene that may enable the patient to grow coronary arteries;
Establishing a relationship with Duke Clinical Research Institute to develop
core cardiovascular and primary care research.
WRMC has also developed a transport team to receive at-risk newborns from other
facilities at its Neonatal Intensive Care unit. An "Internet Nursery" allows
parents of newborns to post their baby's' picture and birth announcement on the
Web.
During 2000, more than 275 women enrolled in the Center for Health Education's
Stork Club prenatal education program, and more than 500 women came to the 11th
annual World's Largest Baby Shower, sponsored by WRMC in June.
Finally, WRMC employees participated in six blood drives and several health
fairs during 2000 and contributed more than $ 300,000 to the $ 5 million private
fund-raising campaign to augment WRMC's new construction, Lampkin said.
Information included in WRMC's "2000 Report to the Community" is available to
the public in a four-page brochure.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2001


                             1489 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                   December 9, 2001 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: In world where every germ can kill, family isolates itself;
Parents hope therapy can boost immune system of 10-month-old, who suffers from
'bubble boy' syndrome.

BYLINE: BY GINA BARTON GINA.BARTON@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   There is no welcome mat at the home of the Williams family on the
Southwestside.

   Instead, a sign on the front door lists several demands of visitors:

   1. You MUST wear mask upon entering. NO exceptions.

   2. Please take off your shoes on entry.

   3. You MUST wash hands immediately after entering.

   4. If you are sick, feeling sick, or have been exposed to someone who is ill,
please do not enter.

   Inside the house, Rachel and Joe Williams live in isolation with their
10-month-old fraternal twins, Mason and Peyton. The couple already have lost one
son to a rare disease of the immune system. They're determined not to lose
another.

   Gene therapy offers the most promise. This latest advance -- reported in the
current issue of the Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences -- demonstrates
that it may help certain cells in the lungs trap and destroy inhaled bacteria,
thus preventing illness.

   The gene therapy, pioneered at the Indiana University School of Medicine, has
been used only in mice so far. But the medical school is providing Mason with
this option: a possible transplant with umbilical cord blood. He's scheduled for
surgery in January.

   Mason was born with combined immunodeficiency disease, a genetic disorder
that renders children helpless to fight off the most minor of infections.
Although the disease -- commonly known as the "bubble boy" syndrome -- is rare,
its victims are the most extreme example of the dangers caused by a substandard
immune system. The disease affects about 1 in every 75,000 to 100,000 babies.

   Plastic bubbles no longer are used to protect victims.

   Mason and Peyton are happy babies, toddling around the living room and
crashing their walkers into each other like bumper cars. But each time one of
the boys puts a toy into his mouth, their mother washes it with bleach. There
are no play groups, no day care, no trips to the park for the two brothers.

   Tiny germs killed their older brother, Tyler.

   A specialist at Riley Hospital for Children diagnosed Tyler when he was 2.
Most children with the syndrome don't live a year without a bone marrow
transplant.

   "I knew he had a life-threatening illness, but I didn't think it was going to
be life-threatening for him," Rachel Williams said of Tyler. "I thought he was
going to make it."

   But after surgery, Tyler's weakened body was invaded by a fungus that spread
to his brain, killing him.

   Joe and Rachel Williams decided not to have any more children.

   "Part of me thought it would be betraying Tyler. Part of me worried they
would have this disease," Rachel Williams said.

   So she and her husband were shocked to find out she was pregnant. They were
even more shocked to find out they would have twins. Discovering that only Mason
is affected by the disease was little comfort.

   The cord transplant surgery being considered now for Mason has been performed
worldwide about 2,000 times since 1988.

   Patients require lower doses of radiation and chemotherapy than in bone
marrow transplants. The patient's immune system is suppressed only temporarily
so the new cells can take over. Cord blood transplants also are less likely to
result in an often-fatal complication in which the donated cells attack the
recipient's body.

   Cord blood transplants do not require donor and recipient to be genetically
"matched" as precisely as bone marrow transplants do. Therefore, patients can
find a suitable donor more quickly. The donated cells take root in the sick
patient and provide a stronger immune system.

   "The longer he waits, the better the odds that he comes down with some other
infection," said Mason's doctor, Robert Nelson. "He might come down with a fatal
infection if he waits too long."

   The work of another IU research team -- led by Drs. William J. Martin and Min
Wu -- may benefit future generations with immune disorders. The research team
used gene therapy to improve the lungs of mice that had the same immune disorder
as Mason. Because germs float around in the air, certain lung cells are the
body's first line of defense against many infections. But repairing damage to
those cells has proved difficult.

   The IU researchers took an innovative approach. Rather than creating a
protective gene and then inserting it into the body, they combined the new gene
with lung cells in a test tube. The mice inhaled the modified cells through a
respirator, and their lungs began to prevent infection.

   The therapy did not cure the underlying disease but greatly improved how the
immune system functioned. Martin predicts that if it works in patients with
bubble boy syndrome, it also will prove effective in helping people whose bodies
have been damaged by HIV, chemotherapy or steroids.

   In the meantime, affected families continue to take precautions. The
Williamses bought a newly constructed house -- which is less likely to harbor
dangerous mold -- and hung the sign on their front door. They never entertain;
eating and drinking would require guests to remove their masks. Sometimes, after
the kids are asleep, the Williamses put a baby monitor in the boys' bedroom,
take the other monitor out to the garage and play cards with a few friends. Only
the twins' grandmother baby-sits, and even she must wear a mask.

   The two boys are out of each other's sight only once a month, when Mason goes
to Riley for injections of antibodies. As soon as he returns, his twin runs
toward the door, ready for a wrestling match.

   Rachel Williams worries almost as much for her healthy son as she does for
her sick one.

   "I look at Peyton, and . . . They've already lost one brother they'll never
know, and if he were to lose the other one. . . I can't imagine them being
apart."

   Call Gina Barton at 1-317-444-6068.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             1490 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2001 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            December 9, 2001 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: In world where every germ can kill, family isolates itself

BYLINE: By, GINA BARTON GINA.BARTON@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   There is no welcome mat at the home of the Williams family on the
Southwestside.

   Instead, a sign on the front door lists several demands of visitors:

   1. You MUST wear mask upon entering. NO exceptions.

   2. Please take off your shoes on entry.

   3. You MUST wash hands immediately after entering.

   4. If you are sick, feeling sick, or have been exposed to someone who is ill,
please do not enter.

   Inside the house, Rachel and Joe Williams live in isolation with their
10-month-old fraternal twins, Mason and Peyton. The couple already have lost one
son to a rare disease of the immune system. They're determined not to lose
another.

   Gene therapy offers the most promise. This latest advance -- reported in the
current issue of the Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences -- demonstrates
that it may help certain cells in the lungs trap and destroy inhaled bacteria,
thus preventing illness.

   The gene therapy, pioneered at the Indiana University School of Medicine, has
been used only in mice so far. But the medical school is providing Mason with
this option: a possible transplant with umbilical cord blood. He's scheduled for
surgery in January.

   Mason was born with combined immunodeficiency disease, a genetic disorder
that renders children helpless to fight off the most minor of infections.
Although the disease -- commonly known as the "bubble boy" syndrome -- is rare,
its victims are the most extreme example of the dangers caused by a substandard
immune system. The disease affects about 1 in every 75,000 to 100,000 babies.

   Plastic bubbles no longer are used to protect victims.

   Mason and Peyton are happy babies, toddling around the living room and
crashing their walkers into each other like bumper cars. But each time one of
the boys puts a toy into his mouth, their mother washes it with bleach. There
are no play groups, no day care, no trips to the park for the two brothers.

   Tiny germs killed their older brother, Tyler.

   A specialist at Riley Hospital for Children diagnosed Tyler when he was 2.
Most children with the syndrome don't live a year without a bone marrow
transplant.

   "I knew he had a life-threatening illness, but I didn't think it was going to
be life-threatening for him," Rachel Williams said of Tyler. "I thought he was
going to make it."

   But after surgery, Tyler's weakened body was invaded by a fungus that spread
to his brain, killing him.

   Joe and Rachel Williams decided not to have any more children.

   "Part of me thought it would be betraying Tyler. Part of me worried they
would have this disease," Rachel Williams said.

   So she and her husband were shocked to find out she was pregnant. They were
even more shocked to find out they would have twins. Discovering that only Mason
is affected by the disease was little comfort.

   The cord transplant surgery being considered now for Mason has been performed
worldwide about 2,000 times since 1988.

   Patients require lower doses of radiation and chemotherapy than in bone
marrow transplants. The patient's immune system is suppressed only temporarily
so the new cells can take over. Cord blood transplants also are less likely to
result in an often-fatal complication in which the donated cells attack the
recipient's body.

   Cord blood transplants do not require donor and recipient to be genetically
"matched" as precisely as bone marrow transplants do. Therefore, patients can
find a suitable donor more quickly. The donated cells take root in the sick
patient and provide a stronger immune system.

   "The longer he waits, the better the odds that he comes down with some other
infection," said Mason's doctor, Robert Nelson. "He might come down with a fatal
infection if he waits too long."

   The work of another IU research team -- led by Drs. William J. Martin and Min
Wu -- may benefit future generations with immune disorders. The research team
used gene therapy to improve the lungs of mice that had the same immune disorder
as Mason. Because germs float around in the air, certain lung cells are the
body's first line of defense against many infections. But repairing damage to
those cells has proved difficult.

   The IU researchers took an innovative approach. Rather than creating a
protective gene and then inserting it into the body, they combined the new gene
with lung cells in a test tube. The mice inhaled the modified cells through a
respirator, and their lungs began to prevent infection.

   The therapy did not cure the underlying disease but greatly improved how the
immune system functioned. Martin predicts that if it works in patients with
bubble boy syndrome, it also will prove effective in helping people whose bodies
have been damaged by HIV, chemotherapy or steroids.

   In the meantime, affected families continue to take precautions. The
Williamses bought a newly constructed house -- which is less likely to harbor
dangerous mold -- and hung the sign on their front door. They never entertain;
eating and drinking would require guests to remove their masks. Sometimes, after
the kids are asleep, the Williamses put a baby monitor in the boys' bedroom,
take the other monitor out to the garage and play cards with a few friends. Only
the twins' grandmother baby-sits, and even she must wear a mask.

   The two boys are out of each other's sight only once a month, when Mason goes
to Riley for injections of antibodies. As soon as he returns, his twin runs
toward the door, ready for a wrestling match.

   Rachel Williams worries almost as much for her healthy son as she does for
her sick one.

   "I look at Peyton, and . . . They've already lost one brother they'll never
know, and if he were to lose the other one. . . I can't imagine them being
apart."

   Call Gina Barton at 1-317-444-6068.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2009


                             1491 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            December 9, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 56

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: THE YEAR IN IDEAS: A TO Z.;
Attaching Good Genes to Bad Viruses

BYLINE:  By Stephen Mihm

BODY:

   Anxious about anthrax? Scared about smallpox? Then consider this: a special
strain of virus, born in the laboratory, that's made up of equal parts Ebola and
H.I.V. It may sound like the diabolical creation of terrorists, but in fact it's
the product of research at the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human
Gene Therapy. If scientists working there get their way, human patients will one
day ingest these microbes as a way of curing genetic disorders.

        The reasoning behind this idea is not as loopy as it may initially seem.
What makes both Ebola and H.I.V. so lethal also happens to make them ideal
candidates for doing the dirty work of cutting-edge gene therapy.

    Say, for example, you suffer from a genetic disorder like cystic fibrosis --
meaning that you lack the ability to produce a certain crucial protein. It may
sound unimportant, but not having that one protein makes your lungs fill up with
mucus to the point where you may die of respiratory infections. Enter gene
therapy, which works by replacing flawed genes with fully functional genes. In
the case of cystic fibrosis, the gene that can't produce the protein is chopped
out of each cell, and a working gene is put in its place. The cells can now
produce the needed proteins. There's no more mucus, and the lung problems
disappear.

   Repairing millions of diseased cells is a lot of work, however, and so
scientists need an efficient corps of microscopic repairmen to cut and paste the
genetic material. Viruses, which have a noted propensity for invading our cells
and tinkering with our DNA, are perfect candidates for the job. Scientists can
snip out the portion of the virus that makes us sick and replace it with healthy
genetic code. In theory, this turns viruses -- even harmful ones -- into
efficient cellular mechanics.

   There's only one problem: most garden-variety viruses are not especially
aggressive, and the genetic material they introduce into cells rarely sticks.
H.I.V., however, is notoriously invasive -- and it has staying power inside the
body. In theory, provided the toxic parts of the H.I.V. virus were stripped out
and replaced with the healthy genes, the modified microbe could be injected into
patients, where it would hang around, perpetually delivering and replacing genes
to new generations of cells.

   How does Ebola fit in? Ebola, it turns out, is particularly expert at
invading the human respiratory system, where cystic fibrosis takes its toll. In
an experiment published earlier this year, institute scientists reported how
they extracted the lung-binding proteins from the Ebola virus, added a benign
"marker gene" -- the equivalent of a dress rehearsal for a therapeutic gene --
and then slipped the whole package inside a hollowed-out version of H.I.V. The
hybrid virus was then sprayed into the respiratory systems of mice, where it
successfully delivered the marker gene.

   A human version of this experiment would, obviously, be a little bit more
complicated, not to mention dangerous. Purposely introducing viruses into
patients, even viruses that have been neutered, is a risky proposition. Viruses
can mutate or prompt deadly immune responses. Yet there's something undeniably
appealing about the idea of taming two of the most feared diseases; it's a
swords-into-plowshares feat of genetic engineering. And for now, the institute's
approach to gene therapy may be one of the best bets for curing debilitating
genetic disorders like cystic fibrosis. Indeed, for someone whose lungs are
literally drowning in mucus, the gamble of ingesting a kinder, gentler version
of Ebola and H.I.V. may seem like a risk well worth taking.   Stephen Mihm

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing: The Ebola-H.I.V. Virus

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2001


                             1492 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 9, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: Titan deal for BTG helps both

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Titan Corp. has completed the acquisition of BTG Corp., and the deal "improves
Titan's presence in the surveillance, reconnaissance and intelligence market, an
area where the U.S. government has budgeted $30 billion in intelligence spending
alone," says Phua Young of Merrill Lynch.

   The synergies of the combination should allow Titan to improve BTG's
operating margin, now under 5 percent vs. margins of above 9 percent at Titan,
says the analyst.  The acquisition should add 5 cents to 6 cents a share to
Titan's earnings in the first 12 months, says Young.

   Titan's commercial business and emerging technologies should do very well as
the economy rebounds, says the analyst.  Young is raising the estimate of
Titan's 2002 earnings per share to 58 cents from the earlier prediction of 52
cents.  That would be a gain of 32 percent over estimated 2001 earnings per
share of 44 cents.

   Merrill Lynch has an intermediate-term accumulate rating and long-term buy on
Titan.

   Biotech

   Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities has a "buy/high risk" rating on
Collateral Therapeutics, with a 12-month share-price target of $15. The
company's developmental Generx is a nonsurgical gene therapy to promote the
growth of new blood vessels for the protection of the heart.

   "The U.S. trial of Generx is under way and the European trial should commence
in January 2002," says Drake.  The late stages of the European trial will
evaluate the safety and efficacy of Generx in patients who are not considered
candidates for angioplasty or bypasss surgery, says Drake.

   Callaway

   Callaway Golf has marginally lost some of its share of the golf club woods
market, according to Golf Datatech, as quoted by Hayley Kissel of Merrill Lynch.
The woods market advanced 1 percent in units in October, but Callaway's share
declined to 24.6 percent from 25.6 percent because its older products lost some
market share, says Kissel.  The Hawkeye VFT gained market share, "and we would
expect additional demand stimulation on the heels of a $40 price reduction,"
says Kissel.

   Unit sales were down 2 percent in the irons market, but Callaway's share
increased half a percentage point to 17.5 percent, says Kissel.  Callaway's
share of the golf ball market was stable at 5.4 percent.


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2001


                             1493 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            December 9, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-2

LENGTH: 371 words

HEADLINE: Titan deal for BTG helps both

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Titan Corp. has completed the acquisition of BTG Corp., and the deal
"improves Titan's presence in the surveillance, reconnaissance and intelligence
market, an area where the U.S. government has budgeted $30 billion in
intelligence spending alone," says Phua Young of Merrill Lynch. The synergies of
the combination should allow Titan to improve BTG's operating margin, now under
5 percent vs. margins of above 9 percent at Titan, says the analyst.

   The acquisition should add 5 cents to 6 cents a share to Titan's earnings in
the first 12 months, says Young. Titan's commercial business and emerging
technologies should do very well as the economy rebounds, says the analyst.

   Young is raising the estimate of Titan's 2002 earnings per share to 58 cents
from the earlier prediction of 52 cents.

   That would be a gain of 32 percent over estimated 2001 earnings per share of
44 cents. Merrill Lynch has an intermediate-term accumulate rating and long-term
buy on Titan. Biotech Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities has a "buy/high
risk" rating on Collateral Therapeutics, with a 12-month share-price target of
$15. The company's developmental Generx is a nonsurgical gene therapy to promote
the growth of new blood vessels for the protection of the heart. "The U.S. trial
of Generx is under way and the European trial should commence in January 2002,"
says Drake.

   The late stages of the European trial will evaluate the safety and efficacy
of Generx in patients who are not considered candidates for angioplasty or
bypasss surgery, says Drake. Callaway Callaway Golf has marginally lost some of
its share of the golf club woods market, according to Golf Datatech, as quoted
by Hayley Kissel of Merrill Lynch.

   The woods market advanced 1 percent in units in October, but Callaway's share
declined to 24.6 percent from 25.6 percent because its older products lost some
market share, says Kissel.

   The Hawkeye VFT gained market share, "and we would expect additional demand
stimulation on the heels of a $40 price reduction," says Kissel. Unit sales were
down 2 percent in the irons market, but Callaway's share increased half a
percentage point to 17.5 percent, says Kissel.

   Callaway's share of the golf ball market was stable at 5.4 percent.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1494 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           December 5, 2001 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Part 4; Sports Desk; Pg. 2

GRAPHIC:  1,000 WORDS' WORTH: Gene Therapy: Purdue Coach Gene Keady apparently
wasn't happy with a call during the Boilermaker Invitational championship game
Sunday, but the home team had little trouble against Oakland (Mich.), 89-71.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2001


                             1495 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            December 4, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; SECOND OPINION ABIGAIL TRAFFORD; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 894 words

HEADLINE: Cloning Hysteria

BODY:

   Here's something else to worry about: Great-aunt Lizzy wanted to clone
herself for Christmas. She leafed through the catalogue of an unknown,
tinker-toy company in Massachusetts, sent in some cells (she can't remember from
where -- skin, calf, mouth) and ordered up her own DNA-monogrammed embryo. She
planned to put the half-dozen cells in a thimble under the tree with a note:
"Now I can always be with you for Christmas dinner . . . ."

    President Bush immediately denounced Aunt Lizzy. "The use of embryos to
clone is wrong," he said. "It's morally wrong." Congress was outraged. "Ghoulish
work," said one representative. And so the momentum is building among certain
elves in Santa's special-interest workshop to ban all cloning research.

    Such is the sorry holiday tale of bad science and worse politics.

    For starters, Aunt Lizzy is delusional. She cannot have herself cloned. No
one can. The science is not even close.

    The announcement by a small Massachusetts company that it had created a
human embryo with cloning techniques was a great publicity event, but rather
misleading advertising. If anything, the experiment was a failure. Researchers
at Advanced Cell Technology in Worcester could only get their cloned cells to
divide to the six-cell stage. Then the cells died. It's not even clear whether
the cells had a working nucleus that expressed the genetic identity of the
original cell. That's why cloning a person is still fiction. As bioethicist
Karen Rothenberg said: "I think we as a society can make the distinction between
six cells and a human being."

    To be sure, company executives made it clear that they had no intention of
creating a human being. They were trying to develop a technology that would
trick cells into behaving like an embryo, in which cells rapidly multiply,
producing master stem cells. These stem cells hold great promise for designing
treatments for diseases ranging from diabetes to Alzheimer's.

    Nevertheless, the news that one small step had been made toward human
cloning provoked another outbreak of the Frankenstein syndrome. This is the fear
that mad scientists are tinkering in dark basements to create monsters that will
be unleashed on society. The syndrome surfaces every time an on-the-edge
scientific feat is achieved -- the first test tube baby, the first gene therapy
experiment.

    Unchecked, it leads to a predictable Canute response. Like the ancient king
who shouted at the waves to stop crashing on the shore as the tide came in,
politicians rail against the scientists and try to prohibit a whole tide of
research.

    But such a response ignores the dynamism of medical science -- its
complexity and possibility. A moral jihad against cloning dismisses the
difference between reproductive cloning -- making human beings -- and
therapeutic cloning -- creating a supply of stem cells that theoretically could
be coaxed into treatments for disease.

    At this point, reproductive cloning is abhorrent to the vast majority of
Americans. By all means, prohibit that. But banning all cloning research, as
recommended by the House of Representatives, would be as reckless as saying
anything goes.

    There is broad public support for developments in science and technology.
For example, more than 85 percent of Americans believe that scientific
developments have improved society, according to a recent nationwide survey
conducted by Virginia Commonwealth University. Yet nearly 75 percent in the same
poll agree that scientific research doesn't pay enough attention to the moral
values of society.

    When it comes to cloning, people seem to want it both ways: "no" to
reproductive cloning on moral grounds and "yes" to therapeutic cloning on
scientific grounds. In other words, you don't want Aunt Lizzy to clone herself,
but you'd like to help her control her diabetes.

    The best way to achieve these twin goals is to bring cloning research into
the mainstream of government-sponsored science. That way, the public can make
sure the technology won't be misused. Instead of shunning the whole field of
cloning as rogue science, make it a priority for the National Institutes of
Health. Fund programs at university medical centers. Create explicit ethical and
scientific guidelines for the research. Require that results be reviewed by peer
scientists and hold public conferences in which experiments are discussed.

    "If there were federal funding, the best scientists would flock to the
field," said Tom Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a nonpartisan
research institute on bioethics. "We'd have very strict rules to govern the
research and decide what kinds of experiments could go forward."

    "Using the tool of federal funding is the way to get at regulating science,"
agreed Rothenberg, professor and dean of the University of Maryland School of
Law. If the government were to ban all cloning research, or even make it a
crime, "it's still going to happen," said Rothenberg. "It's going to happen
underground."

    That's the real Frankenstein scenario.

   Abigail Trafford can be reached by e-mail at trafforda@washpost.com. Join her
Tuesday at 2 p.m. on www.washingtonpost.com for a Health Talk discussion on the
New Normal post-9/11, with a focus on concerns about the misuse of science. Her
guest, Tom Murray, president of the Hastings Center, will answer questions about
cloning and stem-cell research.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2001


                             1496 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            December 2, 2001 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: LOS ANGELES TIMES MAGAZINE; Times Magazine Desk; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 2089 words

HEADLINE: Laureate Roulette;
The World's Best Minds Can't--or Won't--Predict Who Might Win a Nobel Prize.
Still, It's Tempting to Spin the Wheel and Wonder.

BYLINE: PRESTON LERNER, Preston Lerner last wrote for the magazine about pro
tennis player, Cecil Mamiit

BODY:

   Want to see the Heisenberg uncertainty principle at work? try picking the
winners of the Nobel Prize in physics, chemistry and physiology/medicine.

   Sure, Werner Karl Heisenberg himself got one for his discoveries concerning
the hard-to-predict movement of atomic particles. So did Albert Einstein--16
years after E=mc2 (and not for his seminal theory of relativity). At least he
did better than fellow physicist Ernst Ruska, who had to wait 53 years for his
prize. Then again, Jonas Salk never rated a Nobel. Neither did Dmitri Mendeleev,
inventor of the periodic table. Freud came up empty-handed while obscure
Portuguese neurologist Antonio Egas Moniz was honored for inventing the
since-disgraced lobotomy.

   The Nobel committees have laid some eggs over the years, but with very few
exceptions the Nobel Prizes in the hard sciences have been richly merited. In
fact, the real problem is that there aren't enough prizes to go around. "For
everybody who gets a Nobel Prize," says 1996 physics laureate Douglas Osheroff,
chairman of the physics department at Stanford University, "there are probably a
dozen others who deserve it and who end up on their deathbeds as bitter old
men." Adds Nicholas Spitzer, chairman of the neurobiology department at UC San
Diego, "There's a certain random element to the Nobel Prize. Picking the winners
isn't a science. It's more like a casino game."

   Feel like gambling? There are several techniques to choose from. You can try
predicting who's going to produce one of science's holy grails--a cure for
cancer, for example. Yeah, good luck. Alternatively, you can put your money on
the top scientists in fields of emerging research that seem likely to generate
discoveries worthy of Nobels. Genomics is one. Nanotechnology is another.
Meanwhile, biochemists are working on cell regeneration and astrophysicists are
puzzling over time travel. But breakthroughs by nature come without warning, and
it's hard to predict who's going to make them.

   Some prognosticators bet on prominent scientists who have done admirable work
but who haven't, for one reason or another, been honored with a Nobel.
Unfortunately, this comes down to politics, and politics is always a crap-shoot.
A good way to improve your odds is to identify overlooked or underrated
candidates--scientists involved in important research that hasn't been
recognized by the gang back in Sweden.

   Another handicapping tip involves charting the performances of Nobel horses
in lesser-stakes races. Just as the Wood Memorial is regarded as a good
dress-rehearsal for the Kentucky Derby, so is the Lasker Award considered a
reliable indicator of future Nobel laureates in physiology/medicine.

   On that basis, Caltech biochemist Alexander Varshavsky has to be considered a
Nobel front-runner. Not only did he win the Lasker in 2000, but he's also picked
up the Wolf Prize, a prestigious Israeli arts and sciences award, and been
honored by the Gairdner Foundation, a Canadian organization that rewards
influential biomedical research. Varshavsky has done groundbreaking work in the
study of the ubiquitin system, which plays a role in the prevention of diseases
of the nervous system.

   Unfortunately, the Nobel selection process and deliberations are closely
guarded. Is this the year for experimental or theoretical physics? (There's
fierce infighting between scientific disciplines.) Which nominee has more
influential sponsors? (Hundreds of scientists are nominated each year.) Has the
discovery in question been generally accepted by the scientific community? (See
"Lobotomies and Other Blunders.") How large was the research team? (A prize can
be given to no more than three people. Four or more and some poor schmoe is out
of luck.)

   Scientists are wary of broadcasting their picks for fear of alienating their
colleagues. It's also considered a faux pas of intergalactic proportions to
suggest that you might be in the running yourself. (Francis Crick was furious
about former partner and fellow Nobel laureate James Watson's tell-all memoir,
"The Double Helix," which chronicled their discovery of the structure of DNA.)
Still, for a variety of highly pragmatic reasons, playing "Who Wants to Be a
Laureate?" remains a popular pastime in science departments around the world.

   During the past century, the Nobels have honored the great advances of modern
technology, from conquering infectious diseases to harnessing the power of the
atom to unlocking the mysteries of our genetic code. In the next century, we can
expect even more wondrous developments, which means there will be plenty of
Nobels won in increasingly specialized fields that didn't exist a generation
ago--bioinformatics, pharmacogenomics, glycobiology, proteomics and so on.

   To date, the face of Nobel laureates in the sciences has been remarkable
homogeneous. No, not nerdy, but white and male. Women have been making progress
in the sciences, especially medicine, but ethnic diversity remains an elusive
goal. The roster of Nobel leaureates in the hard sciences features a handful of
Chinese Americans, one Mexican American and not a single African American, and
with precious few scientists of color coming through the pipeline, nobody
expects these numbers to increase appreciably any time soon.

   If you're looking for fundamental change on the Nobel landscape, try physics.
In the beginning, physics was the king of the Nobel categories. In fact, it was
the between-the-world-wars triumphs of giants such as Max Planck, Einstein,
Niels Bohr, Heisenberg, Erwin Schrodinger, Enrico Fermi and Californian Edward
O. Lawrence that cemented the Nobel's reputation.

   But particle physics, for decades the big man on the Nobel campus, is a
mature science. "We've done all the easy experiments," says Christopher McKee,
chairman of the UC Berkeley physics department. "So all that's left are
extremely difficult experiments." Most of them involve gargantuan particle
accelerators and commensurately swollen teams of researchers. Although there are
still important discoveries to be made, the Nobel committee has been
uncomfortable with crowds.

   Smaller groups of theoretical physicists continue to work on what's
felicitously--and controversially--called a Theory of Everything, which seeks to
explain the behavior of all matter and reconcile the conflicts between quantum
mechanics and general relativity. Don't try this one at home, folks; even Nobel
laureates have a tough time understanding it. But if the theory is confirmed,
David Gross of UC Santa Barbara, one of its most tireless boosters, may garner
Nobel consideration.

   Experimental physicists, meanwhile, are busy playing Mr. Wizard with a new
generation of superconductors--materials through which an electrical current
flows without resistance. Eventually, superconductivity could be the source of
scads of gee-whiz gizmos. Levitating cars, anybody? At the moment, though,
superconductivity can be achieved only at extremely cold temperatures, which
limits its utility.

   With classical physics seemingly pausing for breath, astrophysics is poised
to get some respect from the Nobel committee. Steven Hawking, the British author
of "A Brief History of Time," is often tabbed as a potential laureate. A top
local rival is his friend Kip Thorne, once described by Caltech president (and
1975 physiology laureate) David Baltimore as "Caltech's Number One strange
scientist." Like Hawking, Thorne has investigated black holes, and he's achieved
some popular notoriety for his prognostications regarding time travel.

   Within astrophysics, the biggest growth area--literally--is cosmology, which
is the study of our expanding universe. This is a field populated by bizarre,
mind-boggling notions that make even the most speculative science fiction seem
positively prosaic. The latest thinking, for example, is that 95% of the
universe--or is that universes?--is made up of so-called dark matter and dark
energy, neither of which has ever been directly observed or measured.

   Among cosmologists, one potential California laureate is George Smoot, who
led a team at UC Berkeley that studied the cosmic microwave background--the
thermal radiation that fills the entire universe and is thought to be the
remnant of the Big Bang that marked the moment of creation. Other top California
cosmologists include Andrew Lange of Caltech and Paul Richards of UC Berkeley,
who believe the universe is flat, and Andrei Linde of Stanford and Saul
Perlmutter of UC Berkeley, who say the universe is expanding at an accelerating
rate. Then again, the Nobel committee may not have much time or use for
cosmological arcana. Last year's physics prize went to Jack Kilby for creating
the integrated circuit--a feat that seems perilously and, to classical
physicists, scandalously close to engineering. The surprise award suggests that
future physics Nobels may be more firmly rooted in real-world applications. As
John Benditt, editor-in-chief of Technology Review, puts it: "The 20th century
was the golden age of science. But these days, the most exciting developments
are in technology."

   If computer science ever lands a spot on the Nobel gravy train, there will be
plenty of prizes awarded to Californians. Some fascinating advances have been
made at IBM's Almaden Research Center by Stuart Parkin (miniaturizing disc
drives) and Hiroshi Ito (etching circuitry onto a chip). More speculative Nobel
possibilities are James Heath at UCLA and Stan Williams at Hewlett-Packard
Laboratories, who have been leaders in the drive to create a working
nanocomputer--a computer no bigger than a grain of sand.

   The larger--or rather smaller-- concept of nanotechnology, first articulated
by Caltech Nobelist Richard Feynman in 1959, is the perfect emblem for our brave
new century. Images of microscopic machines assembled atom by atom dance like
sugarplum fairies in the minds of leading futurists. How exactly can we do that?
Well, unfortunately, we can't. At least not yet. But hope--and hype--springs
eternal.

   As it is, the smaller-is-better philosophy is finding new converts throughout
the sciences. Biology, for example, used to be studied at the organ level and,
later, at the cellular level. Now molecular biology is the rage, and researchers
such as W.E. Moerner of Stanford and Carlos Bustamante of UC Berkeley are
examining proteins one molecule at a time. But potentially the most powerful
development of the 21st century--with the accent on potentially--is deciphering
our genetic code.  After Herculean labors, the Human Genome Project identified
more than 30,000 genes in human DNA and charted the sequences of the 3 billion
chemical pair bases composing our genetic material. Sequencing the human genome
will undoubtedly produce Nobels. But that's when the real work begins. "We're at
a turning point," says Dr. Daniel Masys, director of biomedical informatics at
UCSD. "We have the book of man in hand, if you will, but we don't have any idea
what it means."

   Some researchers are looking for structural solutions by striving to
determine the immensely complex three-dimensional folded structures of the
proteins produced by our DNA. Once the structure is known, drugs could be
designed, molecule by molecule, to treat specific genetic disorders. Much of
this work is being done at universities and start-ups in Southern California.
Whoever solves the protein-folding problem may become not only a Nobel laureate
but a gazillionaire.

   The flip side of structural genomics is functional genomics, which involves
trying to isolate the role played by specific genes in causing, say, obesity or
leukemia. The ultimate goal is to treat the defective gene or insert a healthy
gene to replace it. Dr. W. French Anderson, now at USC, pioneered this form of
gene therapy. But despite its obvious promise, gene therapy hasn't yet lived up
to expectations.

   The genome is so complicated that it has spawned a new field of
computer-intensive computational biology known as bioinformatics. This sort of
interdisciplinary approach is clearly the future of science. Already it's helped
generate huge strides in the neurosciences, where there's a cross-pollination of
scientists working with individual neurons and others working the macro end of
the spectrum with imaging technology such as nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and positron emission tomography scans.

   Are there any Nobels to be won here? One would think. Then again, even if, as
Einstein insisted, God doesn't play dice with the universe, He clearly has no
control over the Nobel committee.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (no caption) / MALCOLM TARLOFSKY

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2001


                             1497 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 2, 2001 Sunday FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY, Pg.E-6 OTHER DEATHS

LENGTH: 714 words

BODY:

   Irwin Weiner, 69, a sports agent who once represented Walt Frazier and Julius
Erving, Nov. 24 of complications of pneumonia in a nursing home in Rye Brook,
N.Y. One of New York's most prominent sports agents in the 1970s and 1980s, he
founded a sports agency in 1969 and soon negotiated the first big contract for
Frazier, then a star guard for the New York Knicks of the National Basketball
Association. Also on his client list was Erving, who went on to play for the
Philadelphia 76ers. Mr. Weiner also served as police commissioner in Westchester
County in the 1980s.


    * * *


    David Moody Hopkins, 79, an Arctic geologist and leading authority on the
land link that allowed ice age hunters to pursue their mammoth and mastodon prey
from Siberia to Alaska nearly 12,000 years ago, Nov. 2 of kidney failure at his
home in Menlo Park, Calif. His work centered on the Western Arctic during the
last ice age. When he began his field work on the Seward Peninsula in the early
1940s, the region's geology was mostly unknown to scientists. In the 1950s and
1960s, he joined with botanists, archaeologists and others to study the area in
its permafrozen entirety and to date its first inhabitants by the campsites and
hunting stations they left. He was among the first American scientists to work
cooperatively with counterparts in the Soviet Union, and he worked there as an
exchange fellow of the National Academy of Sciences in 1969.



    * * *


    Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, 53, a Boston cardiologist who pioneered the use of
gene therapy to treat people with heart disease, in Boston on Oct. 31 of a heart
attack. Working with patients who were too sick and whose arteries were too
clogged for bypass surgery or angioplasty, Dr. Isner's team at Boston's St.
Elizabeth Medical Center and Tufts University School of Medicine devised a
technique to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels to the heart, bypassing
the clogged vessels, easing pain and restoring some patients to full lives.


    * * *


    Felipe Santander, 68, Mexican playwright, of cancer Oct. 30 at his home in
Octopec, Mexico. In a career spanning more than 40 years, Mr. Santander was
named best national dramatist five times and best director twice by the
Association of Theater Journalists and the Mexican Association of Theater
Critics. In 1980, his play "El Extensionista" won the prestigious international
Casa de las Americas prize. His often-controversial work was fueled by his
left-wing politics. Though Mr. Santander came from a privileged background, his
sympathies lay with the common people of Mexico. The play tells of a plan by the
Mexican government to grow the plant as a crop. As a result, Mexican workers in
the United States return to their homeland to work in the pumpkin patches,
upsetting the U.S. economy. Americans are then forced to change the way they
think about migrant workers.


    * * *


    Kim Gardner, 53, a former member of the British rock group Ashton, Gardner &
Dyke and the owner of Cat & Fiddle Restaurant and Pub in Hollywood, of cancer
Oct. 24 at his home in Hollywood. A bassist, Mr. Gardner was a member of the
British groups the Birds and Creation before forming Ashton, Gardner & Dyke with
Tony Ashton and Roy Dyke in 1968. The trio, whose albums featured a light,
jazz-rock style, scored a top-three hit in Britain with "Resurrection Shuffle"
in 1971. Mr. Gardner also toured with Pacific Gas and Electric and other bands
in the 1970s, played bass with everyone from Eric Clapton to Bo Didley, and
worked on 27 albums. He was the proprietor and owner of the Cat & Fiddle on
Sunset Boulevard, Hollywood's best known and longest-established British pub.
Cat & Fiddle has been a favorite destination for British rockers such as Keith
Moon, Robert Plant and Rod Stewart (who would bring in his entire soccer team),
as well as Hollywood celebrities.


    * * *


    Jaakko Tuominen, 57, captain of the Finnish track team at the 1964 and 1968
Olympics, of a heart attack Oct. 27 in Astoria, Ore., where he settled with his
wife, Kati, in 1997. When his running career ended, Mr. Tuominen landed a job
with Nike, helping promote the then-fledgling shoe company's products in
Finland, and later working as an agent for Nike-sponsored runners around the
world.


LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2001


                             1498 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 30, 2001 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 043

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: So far, both sides winning in biotech duel

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Two Cambridge biotech rivals will seek a quick decision in a patent suit over
a treatment of Fabry's disease after a judge defined terms in the case, which
started last year.

   Genzyme Corp. charged Transkaryotic Therapies with violating its Fabrazyme
patent. At issue are the methods the two companies use to make their treatments
for the rare, life-shortening disease.

   Both sides claimed the judge's definitions favor their side.

   "There were a lot of good things in the ruling for us, and in some key
sections the ruling is broad enough that we can argue for a summary judgment in
our favor," said Genzyme spokesman Bo Piela.

   Dr. Richard Seldon, Transkaryotic CEO, said in a statement that, based on the
decision, he believes his company didn't violate the patent and should be
granted a motion for summary judgement.

   Analysts said the ruling appeared to be a split decision.

   The judge "defined some terms very broadly, and that could be good for
Genzyme," said Elise Wang, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney. "But he defined
one term very narrowly, and that could be good for TKT."

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2001


                             1499 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 30, 2001, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: RULING RAISES GENZYME, TKT HOPES

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   A judge's reading of a key phrase in a Genzyme Corp. patent appears to
diminish the Cambridge company's chances of winning a patent fight against its
cross-town neighbor, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.

   But the ruling in the pretrial motion didn't seem to dim Genzyme's hopes for
victory. Saying the reading remained open to interpretation, the company
announced plans to ask for a swift judgment against TKT.

      "It's apparent that both sides see something in the ruling to support
their position," said Genzyme spokesman Bo Piela. "Our position is that TKT's
technology does infringe on this particular claim."

   "Based on the court's decision, we continue to believe that TKT does not
infringe this patent," said TKT president and chief executive Richard Selden.

   The two firms are developing nearly identical drugs to treat a rare genetic
disorder, known as Fabry disease. They are racing to be the first, and perhaps
sole, provider in the United States of a breakthrough therapy.

   Both firms sought market exclusivity under the orphan drug act, aimed at
encouraging drug development for rare diseases.

   Some 2,000 to 4,000 people worldwide have Fabry. Such people lack an enzyme,
alpha galactosidase, involved in breaking down fats. The buildup of fat causes
pain, numbness, and cell damage, ultimately leaving patients at risk for kidney
damage, heart disease, and stroke. Many die by age 40.

   Both firms produce the missing enzyme by different methods. Genzyme inserts a
gene sequence into hamster cells that instructs them to make the enzyme while
TKT inserts a "promoter" to human cells that already contain the alpha
galactosidase gene, which instructs the cells to turn on the gene and make the
enzyme.

   Genzyme last year filed the lawsuit, however, alleging that TKT's processes
violated its US patent number 5,356,804. The crux of the case is the
interpretation of the phrase "chromosomally integrated" and whether it applies
to TKT's method, said Dennis Harp, an analyst with Alex. Brown Deutsche Banc.

   As defined by the judge, Harp said, the phrase doesn't describe any process
used in TKT's manufacturing method, raising the likelihood the case will be
dismissed before reaching trial in March.

   A dismissal would be a substantial victory for TKT because the Fabry drug
would be its first product to reach the United States. The loss would be less
significant to Genzyme, Harp said, because its future is tied to a different
drug.

   Shares in TKT rose $4.33 to $41.55; shares in Genzyme fell 17 cents to $54.18
on Nasdaq.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2001


                             1500 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 29, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: LAKEFRONT PICAYUNE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Loyola honors Landrieu

   Loyola University New Orleans presented Moon Landrieu, former 4th Circuit
Court of Appeals judge and mayor of New Orleans, with the university's most
prestigious award, the Integritas Vitae.

   Loyola bestows the Integritas Vitae to an individual who possesses a high
moral character in a lifetime of unselfish service without expectation of
material reward or public recognition.

   Landrieu is a graduate of Loyola University's College of Arts and Sciences
and the School of Law.

   As a city councilman in 1969, he led a successful push for a city ordinance
outlawing segregation based on race or religion in public accommodations.

   Later, as mayor, he opened city government to a large number of
African-Americans and focused on expanding the city's shrinking economy. Among
other efforts, he pushed to build the Superdome.

   Landrieu followed his term as mayor with an appointment by President Jimmy
Carter to the Department of Housing and Urban Development. During his tenure as
secretary of HUD, Landrieu secured the federal financing for what became the New
Orleans Convention Center.

   Landrieu's final post in public service was as 4th Circuit Court of Appeals
judge, which he held from 1991 to 2000.

Officers elected

   J. Paul Demarest was elected president of L'Union Francaise.

   Other elected officers are Dr. Clem Samson, first vice president; George
Benton, second vice president; Hilda Sapera, treasurer; Dr. John Kulas,
secretary; and Raymond N. Maumus, historian.

   Elected to the board of directors were Sal Alphonse, George Frosch, Patricia
Frosch, Hans Heinemann, Mary Honoree, Robert Honoree, Bette Marks, Annette
Rolfes and Lyle Sapera.

   Founded in 1872, L'Union Francaise is the oldest French society in New
Orleans dedicated to the promotion and preservation of the French language and
culture.

PRC gets donation

   The Allstate Foundation recently awarded Preservation Resource Center of New
Orleans a $10,000 grant in support of the Rebuilding Together with Christmas in
October and Operation Comeback programs. Besides the donation, New Orleans
Allstate claim employees spent a weekend painting a home in the Esplanade Ridge
neighborhood.

   The PRC plans to use this year's contribution to help elderly, disabled and
low-income families remain in their homes by completing much-needed home
repairs.

   "The Allstate Foundation looks for programs it feels have the best potential
for making a difference in the community," said Keith Dawson, Allstate Front
Line Performance Leader and PRC board member. "Preservation Resource Center is
one of those programs."

Grant awarded Tulane

   The National Institutes of Neurological Disorders and Stroke recently awarded
the Tulane Center for Gene Therapy $1,039,000 to research the therapeutic use of
adult stem cells from bone marrow to treat lysosomal storage diseases, inborn
errors of metabolism that cause central nervous system defects.

YMCA gets donation

   The Dryades YMCA has received a $100,000 donation from the Kimberly-Clark
Corp. to enhance its School of Commerce program.

   The school provides a variety of family programs, including computer skills
and certified nurse's aides training programs, early childhood development and
day-care services for working parents, and tutoring, behavioral and alternative
educational programs for at-risk youth.

GRAPHIC: Moon Landrieu

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2001


                             1501 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 27, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1211 words

HEADLINE: Human cloning draws criticism;
But experts say failure won't stop future tries

BYLINE: By Coleman Warner; Staff writer

BODY:

   This weekend's announcement that a small biotechnology firm in Massachusetts
had created human embryos through cloning fanned an ongoing ethical and moral
debate nationally and in Louisiana, where experts said they were unimpressed
with the results.

   Catholic leaders in New Orleans and at the Vatican denounced the creation of
such embryos, which would be used for medical research.

   "In the name of the sacredness of all life we must call for an end to all
such experimentation as well as a sound social moral policy which protects life
in all its forms," said a statement released by the Archdiocese of New Orleans.

   Advanced Cell Technology of Worcester, Mass., said the goal of the privately
financed research wasn't creating a human being but advancing therapeutic
cloning, which involves the creation of stem cells that could be used in
rebuilding diseased or damaged human tissues.

   President Bush issued a policy in August that restricts federally financed
stem cell research to existing stem cell lines, created by in vitro
fertilization. Embryonic stem cells created through cloning do not qualify under
the Bush policy, and the president was clear Monday in his condemnation of the
experiment, regardless of who financed it.

   "The use of embryos to clone is wrong," Bush said. "We should not, as a
society, grow life to destroy it, and that's exactly what is taking place."

   But the company said the embryos it created died quickly, before stem cells
developed, an admission that left local experts wondering why the research
warranted much attention.

   "This is just saying they're trying to do the experiments," said Darwin
Prockop, director of Tulane University's Center for Gene Therapy, which has
focused its research on the less controversial field of adult stem cells. "This
experiment did not work. (It) doesn't prove it won't work in the future, and it
truly demonstrates that they're trying, but contrary to quotes from people in
the company, this experiment failed."

Therapeutic goals

   The advancement of research on the medical uses of embryonic cells, even
without government support, was praised by Prockop and Richard Denniston, a
faculty member at Louisiana State University who has been involved in cloning
goats and cows.

   Though he saw little basis for claims of a breakthrough, Denniston said
debate of Sunday's announcement is healthy and inevitable.

   "Society has to decide how different technologies are utilized," he said. "My
understanding is that the objective of ACT (Advanced Cell Technology) is in the
area of what's generally termed therapeutic cloning. I don't think their
specific objective is to reproduce humans. I think a distinction between those
two needs to be made."

   The researchers at the Worcester biotechnology company say their goal was to
develop stem cells, which can grow into virtually any other cell, such as
muscle, nerves or skin, and serve as replacement tissue to treat a variety of
diseases.

   They say they created the embryos by starting with a donated unfertilized
egg. They removed its nucleus and replaced it with an adult cumulus cell,
complete with its genetic material. Cumulus cells normally help nurture eggs as
they develop.

   The researchers also created a more advanced embryo, known as a blastocyst,
in a process called parthenogenesis. They bathed an unfertilized egg cell with
chemicals that changed its concentration of charged particles, reprogramming it
to form an embryo.

   Dr. Richard Dickey, founder and medical director of the Fertility Institute
of New Orleans, said society must face the reality that researchers are steadily
testing the limits of how human cells can be used to treat disease, and that
judgments must be made about when a "cell mass" can be defined as a human life.
But Dickey said far too much was made of the Massachusetts firm's announcement.

   "This man has in fact not done a cloning. He has not made stem cells, which
is what one has to have in order to use it in therapeutic fashion," Dickey said.
"This is primarily a publicity stunt to get money for his company. Human cloning
probably will occur, but it will not come from this outfit."

Ethics and experiments

   But even if experts don't hold the research in high regard, the announcement
has sparked new discussion about the ethics of such experiments and the
appropriate reach of governmental controls.

   U.S. Rep. Billy Tauzin, R-Chackbay, said Monday that he was alarmed.

   "This is very dangerous stuff they're doing," he said. "It will open the door
to abuses and the prospect of reproductive cloning."

   Tauzin said researchers may find that a wide range of medical needs can be
met without dabbling in the controversial world of embryonic stem cells. He said
the Energy and Commerce Committee that he leads is looking into research on
so-called "spore-like cells," the building blocks to stem cells, which have been
used to regenerate spinal chords in rats.

   The House voted 265-162 to ban cloning in July, after attempts by some
lawmakers to exempt research. The issue was raised in the Senate this month, but
a showdown was avoided after leaders promised extensive hearings in the spring.
Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said the president is urging the Senate to pass the
House legislation "as a result of this first crossing of the line."

   A spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said the senator
has no plans to bring the issue up before adjournment.

   However, Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., held out the threat of delaying other
bills until the issue is addressed. "We don't know who else in the country is
working on the issue of human cloning," he said. "This needs to be stopped."

Allow research, some say

   Supporters of cloning for research urged the Senate not to act hastily. They
said it is possible to ban human cloning without limiting research.

   "It really is a horrendous thing to stop this research," said Rep. Jim
Greenwood, R-Pa., the author of an unsuccessful House bill that would have
permitted cloning for research. "These people are treating this issue the way
they treated Copernicus and Galileo."

   The Rev. William Maestri, a professor of moral philosophy at Notre Dame
Seminary, said Catholic teaching doesn't allow for the creation of an embryo
which would then be destroyed in order to provide stem cells for other uses,
even if they involved treatment of medical problems.

   "Catholic social teaching is clear and consistent on the particular area:
that human life in all of its forms is sacred, that human life begins at the
moment of conception, and that we are really not allowed to create human life in
order to destroy human life," he said.

   But Rabbi Robert Loewy of the Congregation Gates of Prayer in Metairie said
that while the use of cloning techniques to replace damaged human tissue raises
difficult questions, the field of inquiry has vast potential.

   "We've been created with the ability to create all sorts of sources of
healing," he said, "and cloning may be another tool in the human arsenal for
dealing with a wide range of illnesses and problems."

Staff writer Bill Walsh and The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Coleman Warner can be reached at cwarner@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3311.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2001


                             1502 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 27, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1211 words

HEADLINE: Human cloning draws criticism;
But experts say failure won't stop future tries

BYLINE: By Coleman Warner; Staff writer

BODY:

   This weekend's announcement that a small biotechnology firm in Massachusetts
had created human embryos through cloning fanned an ongoing ethical and moral
debate nationally and in Louisiana, where experts said they were unimpressed
with the results.

   Catholic leaders in New Orleans and at the Vatican denounced the creation of
such embryos, which would be used for medical research.

   "In the name of the sacredness of all life we must call for an end to all
such experimentation as well as a sound social moral policy which protects life
in all its forms," said a statement released by the Archdiocese of New Orleans.

   Advanced Cell Technology of Worcester, Mass., said the goal of the privately
financed research wasn't creating a human being but advancing therapeutic
cloning, which involves the creation of stem cells that could be used in
rebuilding diseased or damaged human tissues.

   President Bush issued a policy in August that restricts federally financed
stem cell research to existing stem cell lines, created by in vitro
fertilization. Embryonic stem cells created through cloning do not qualify under
the Bush policy, and the president was clear Monday in his condemnation of the
experiment, regardless of who financed it.

   "The use of embryos to clone is wrong," Bush said. "We should not, as a
society, grow life to destroy it, and that's exactly what is taking place."

   But the company said the embryos it created died quickly, before stem cells
developed, an admission that left local experts wondering why the research
warranted much attention.

   "This is just saying they're trying to do the experiments," said Darwin
Prockop, director of Tulane University's Center for Gene Therapy, which has
focused its research on the less controversial field of adult stem cells. "This
experiment did not work. (It) doesn't prove it won't work in the future, and it
truly demonstrates that they're trying, but contrary to quotes from people in
the company, this experiment failed."

Therapeutic goals

   The advancement of research on the medical uses of embryonic cells, even
without government support, was praised by Prockop and Richard Denniston, a
faculty member at Louisiana State University who has been involved in cloning
goats and cows.

   Though he saw little basis for claims of a breakthrough, Denniston said
debate of Sunday's announcement is healthy and inevitable.

   "Society has to decide how different technologies are utilized," he said. "My
understanding is that the objective of ACT (Advanced Cell Technology) is in the
area of what's generally termed therapeutic cloning. I don't think their
specific objective is to reproduce humans. I think a distinction between those
two needs to be made."

   The researchers at the Worcester biotechnology company say their goal was to
develop stem cells, which can grow into virtually any other cell, such as
muscle, nerves or skin, and serve as replacement tissue to treat a variety of
diseases.

   They say they created the embryos by starting with a donated unfertilized
egg. They removed its nucleus and replaced it with an adult cumulus cell,
complete with its genetic material. Cumulus cells normally help nurture eggs as
they develop.

   The researchers also created a more advanced embryo, known as a blastocyst,
in a process called parthenogenesis. They bathed an unfertilized egg cell with
chemicals that changed its concentration of charged particles, reprogramming it
to form an embryo.

   Dr. Richard Dickey, founder and medical director of the Fertility Institute
of New Orleans, said society must face the reality that researchers are steadily
testing the limits of how human cells can be used to treat disease, and that
judgments must be made about when a "cell mass" can be defined as a human life.
But Dickey said far too much was made of the Massachusetts firm's announcement.

   "This man has in fact not done a cloning. He has not made stem cells, which
is what one has to have in order to use it in therapeutic fashion," Dickey said.
"This is primarily a publicity stunt to get money for his company. Human cloning
probably will occur, but it will not come from this outfit."

Ethics and experiments

   But even if experts don't hold the research in high regard, the announcement
has sparked new discussion about the ethics of such experiments and the
appropriate reach of governmental controls.

   U.S. Rep. Billy Tauzin, R-Chackbay, said Monday that he was alarmed.

   "This is very dangerous stuff they're doing," he said. "It will open the door
to abuses and the prospect of reproductive cloning."

   Tauzin said researchers may find that a wide range of medical needs can be
met without dabbling in the controversial world of embryonic stem cells. He said
the Energy and Commerce Committee that he leads is looking into research on
so-called "spore-like cells," the building blocks to stem cells, which have been
used to regenerate spinal chords in rats.

   The House voted 265-162 to ban cloning in July, after attempts by some
lawmakers to exempt research. The issue was raised in the Senate this month, but
a showdown was avoided after leaders promised extensive hearings in the spring.
Bush spokesman Ari Fleischer said the president is urging the Senate to pass the
House legislation "as a result of this first crossing of the line."

   A spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., said the senator
has no plans to bring the issue up before adjournment.

   However, Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., held out the threat of delaying other
bills until the issue is addressed. "We don't know who else in the country is
working on the issue of human cloning," he said. "This needs to be stopped."

Allow research, some say

   Supporters of cloning for research urged the Senate not to act hastily. They
said it is possible to ban human cloning without limiting research.

   "It really is a horrendous thing to stop this research," said Rep. Jim
Greenwood, R-Pa., the author of an unsuccessful House bill that would have
permitted cloning for research. "These people are treating this issue the way
they treated Copernicus and Galileo."

   The Rev. William Maestri, a professor of moral philosophy at Notre Dame
Seminary, said Catholic teaching doesn't allow for the creation of an embryo
which would then be destroyed in order to provide stem cells for other uses,
even if they involved treatment of medical problems.

   "Catholic social teaching is clear and consistent on the particular area:
that human life in all of its forms is sacred, that human life begins at the
moment of conception, and that we are really not allowed to create human life in
order to destroy human life," he said.

   But Rabbi Robert Loewy of the Congregation Gates of Prayer in Metairie said
that while the use of cloning techniques to replace damaged human tissue raises
difficult questions, the field of inquiry has vast potential.

   "We've been created with the ability to create all sorts of sources of
healing," he said, "and cloning may be another tool in the human arsenal for
dealing with a wide range of illnesses and problems."

Staff writer Bill Walsh and The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Coleman Warner can be reached at cwarner@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3311.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2001


                             1503 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            November 26, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1489 words

HEADLINE: A First for Genetic Testing;
Obstetrics: New prenatal guidelines aim to detect cystic fibrosis. The change
offers hope for better treatment but also raises tough ethical issues.

BYLINE: SHARI ROAN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   A recommendation by influential physicians' groups that expectant parents
receive counseling about genetic testing for cystic fibrosis--an incurable
disease that's often fatal by early adulthood--brings the era of genetic testing
a step closer to many families.

   The new guidelines mean that more parents will learn early in a pregnancy
that a woman is at risk of bearing a child with cystic fibrosis. That knowledge
could lead to earlier and possibly more effective treatments for newborns with
the disease. But the genetic tests also raise difficult ethical issues for
doctors and expectant parents, who in some cases might decide to terminate a
high-risk pregnancy after receiving unfavorable test results, experts
acknowledge.

   The recommendation was made last month by two medical organizations, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American College of
Medical Genetics, after years of debate and study.

   The guidelines state that doctors should advise couples about a test, known
as carrier screening, to determine if an individual carries the gene that causes
CF. This counseling could be offered at the time a woman sees a doctor for
pregnancy planning or during the first office visit after pregnancy.

   If the prospective parents opted for testing, the woman would have a blood or
saliva test to identify the defective gene. If she were found to carry the gene,
the father could then also undergo testing to determine his carrier status. Both
parents must carry the gene for the baby to have cystic fibrosis, and in such
cases the child has a 25% chance of having the disease. Some parents might
decide to terminate the pregnancy if subsequent testing of the fetus shows it
will have cystic fibrosis.

   The couple's decision, however, could be complicated by several factors. The
tests, for example, cannot determine how serious the disease will be; there are
mild to severe forms of cystic fibrosis.

   And no test can predict how future medical advances may improve treatments
for the disease. Scientists are hopeful that better medications and the
potential for gene therapy treatments will improve life expectancies for cystic
fibrosis patients.

   One reason for genetic testing would be to consider an abortion if a child
carried the gene, said Michael Watson, executive director of the American
College of Medical Genetics. "But there is some question about using the test
for that reason. ... Kids with CF used to die much younger than they do now." On
the other hand, he said, some couples may consider any form of the disease too
severe to continue the pregnancy.

   There is no cure for cystic fibrosis, although treatment for its symptoms has
improved dramatically in the last decade. The average life expectancy for those
with the disease is about age 30. Most people with CF require close medical
supervision and often need daily treatments to clear mucus from their lungs.

   Doctors who helped draw up the new guidelines emphasized that they are not
recommending testing for parents but simply that potential parents be informed
that the test is available and why, said Dr. Michael T. Mennuti, a Philadelphia
obstetrician. "The decision is their decision," he said. "It's a complex and
personal choice."

   That sentiment was echoed by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the nation's
leading advocacy group for the disease. A foundation official was reluctant to
comment on the physician groups' recommendations. "We believe testing is a very
personal decision," says Suzanne Pattee, vice president for public policy and
patient affairs. "We don't believe our organization should impose its views on
anyone."

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common recessive genetic disorder in Caucasians,
affecting about one in every 3,300 babies born. It is less common in other
ethnic groups. Individuals with CF have a defect in the chloride transport
mechanism in the cells. This results in the thick mucus in the lungs and
pancreas that are the disease's major characteristics.

   The gene responsible for CF was identified in 1989, and carrier screening
tests were developed a short time later. The test, however, was usually
recommended only for people known to be at high risk for having children with
CF, such as people with relatives who have the disease.

   It is not uncommon for certain groups to be offered screening tests for a
specific gene defect. Ashkenazi Jews, for example, often choose to undergo
screening for the gene that causes Tay-Sachs disease in newborns. But the CF
carrier screening recommendation is the first to target a broad population,
Watson said.

   The recommendation comes four years after the National Institutes of Health,
the federal government's medical branch, urged that prospective parents be
offered genetic testing for cystic fibrosis. It has taken four years to
implement the program because of the complexities involved, Watson said.

   The screening program is complicated because the accuracy of the test varies
among different ethnic groups; it is not 100% accurate for any group. Since the
CF gene was first identified, more than 900 mutations, or variations, of the
gene have been identified. One variation, for example, accounts for 70% of all
CF mutations in Caucasians but only 30% of those found in Ashkenazi Jews.

   In the last several years, geneticists have worked to identify a
carrier-screening test that would identify a panel of gene mutations responsible
for the most severe forms of the disease. Even so, the current panel of CF gene
mutations is expected to pick up only 57% of mutations in Latinos. Even less is
known about the gene mutations responsible for cystic fibrosis in Asian
Americans.

   Geneticists were also reluctant to act on the 1997 NIH recommendation for
screening until they could ensure that testing labs were, at a minimum,
screening for the most serious CF gene mutations.

   The test costs between $180 and $400 and may be covered by insurance only if
there is a family history of the disease.

   The recommendation includes advice for labs conducting CF screening.
Moreover, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has published
two brochures to help patients understand the test. But some experts worry that
couples may not always be appropriately counseled about the implications of a
positive screening test.

   For example, if both prospective parents have a positive test, it is
imperative that they understand that the child has a 25% risk of having CF and
that they can undergo prenatal testing, using amniocentesis or chorionic villus
sampling, to determine with certainty if the fetus has the disease.

   Couples also should be counseled that carrier screening may turn up a
condition linked to the CF gene mutation that causes infertility in men.
However, males with this condition, called congenital bilateral absence of the
vas deferens, do not have cystic fibrosis and are otherwise healthy.

   "That was one was of the more difficult things we had to deal with in
developing the panel," said Watson. "There are variations in the gene that can
mean just infertility. Our goal is not to identify those persons in that panel.
But the people conducting the test may feel obligated to tell couples
everything."

   Couples who learn their child will have cystic fibrosis also should be
counseled about treatments for the disease that can begin shortly after birth.
Most people with CF are diagnosed within the first year of life, but only after
symptoms have emerged. Experts believe that children may fare better with
earlier treatment.

   Some states, including California, are considering adding cystic fibrosis to
the list of inherited conditions that infants are tested for shortly after
birth. Some couples may choose to bypass prenatal carrier screening if informed
that the disease could be picked up early in their child's life.

   "The argument for doing newborn screening is to improve their outcome,"
Watson said. "As cystic fibrosis therapies improve, I think we might see the
pendulum swing away from carrier testing to testing and treating the newborn."

   Testing for Cystic Fibrosis

   Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disorder that is more common in certain
ethnic groups. When both the father and mother carry the gene that causes cystic
fibrosis, there is a 25% chance their child will have the disease. Recently, two
major physicians' organizations recommended that pregnant couples, or those
planning a pregnancy, be offered the blood test that detects the presence of the
CF gene. The accuracy of the test, however, varies depending on the individual's
ethnicity.


Ethnic
group
Incidence
Accuracy
European
Caucasian
1 in
3,300
people
80%
Ashkenazi
Jew
1 in
3,300
97%
Latinos
1 in
8,464
57%
African
American
1 in
16,900
69%
Asian
American
1 in
32,400
*



   * Insufficient data available.

   Source: National Institutes of Health

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2001


                             1504 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 25, 2001, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. G14

LENGTH: 116 words

HEADLINE: WHO'S WHAT WHERE;
TKT APPOINTS VICE PRESIDENT OF MEDICAL AFFAIRS

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. has named Dr. John T. Flaherty as vice
president, medical affairs.

   Flaherty joins TKT from Sonus Pharmaceuticals Inc., where he was senior vice
president and chief medical officer. Prior to Sonus, he was senior clinical
scientist, outcomes research & management, at Merck & Co.

      Before that, Flaherty was Merck's executive director of clinical
development, and, earlier, he served on the faculty of Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, for 18 years.

   Cambridge-based TKT is a biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the
development and commercialization of products based on its three proprietary
development platforms.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2001


                             1505 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 20, 2001 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg.C-3 HEALTH FORUM

LENGTH: 1099 words

HEADLINE: GENERATIONS OF EXPECTATIONS;
 AN HEIRESS'S GENEROSITY FUNDED MANY ADVANCES IN DIABETES TREATMENT, BUT SOME 60
YEARS LATER, THE CURE REMAINS ELUSIVE.

BYLINE: MARILYN BATES

BODY:

   Shortly after I was diagnosed with diabetes at age 7, I contracted a
debilitating illness. I couldn't retain food or control my blood glucose levels.
Fever wracked my body. Nighttime was a horror -- I lay in the dark, waiting for
a cough that churned my stomach until I lost everything.

    The year was 1948, and doctors in my hometown of Steubenville, Ohio, could
offer no explanation. When my weight dropped to 47 pounds, my mother took me to
Children's Hospital in Pittsburgh. In a private room, I lay with my arm strapped
to a rigid board as IV fluids dripped in. My little radio was my only companion.
I listened to my favorite story, "The Green Hornet," and remember the
commercials for Ovaltine, with the sound of the chocolate-flavored drink
trickling into a cup.

    Days drifted by. Doctors came from every department to try and solve the
mystery of my illness. Letters arrived from my classmates. Sister Martina wrote
that they were storming heavens gate with prayers. One afternoon, my grandmother
visited, wearing a beautiful brown dress with a beaded top. When I told her I
would like the beads, she let me pull them off. I was too young to understand
that her actions were the acquiescence of a desperate woman.

    Just when I reached my weakest point, the antibiotics miraculously took hold
and I slowly recovered. In a few weeks I was eating regular meals with other
children and joking with Misses Merkle and Kruman, my two favorite nurses. When
I left the hospital six weeks later, my parents, who had few financial
resources, never received a bill.

    I owe my life to the free care I received in the Renziehausen Memorial Ward
at Children's. It was established in December 1937 after Miss Emilie
Renziehausen donated an historic $1 million for the study and treatment of
juvenile diabetes. The ward still treats diabetic children on the eighth floor
of the hospital.

    The donation by the heiress of the McKeesport family made headlines in all
the prominent newspapers at the time -- The Wall Street Journal, The New York
Times and the Chicago Tribune. Elliot P. Joslin, the prominent founder of the
renowned Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston in 1898 (of which The Western
Pennsylvania Hospital has an affiliate center), delivered the address at the
opening ceremony.

    Miss Emilie had cared for a brother with diabetes, Frederick, who died in
1930 at the miraculous age of 72. Although she had no children of her own, she
wanted to help children with the disease. Her donation not only provided care,
but set up a research arm that drew some of the top researchers to Children's to
develop some the most important advances in diabetes at the time.

    It also became part of the critical mass of funds that made it possible to
obtain additional grants. For the past several years, Children's Hospital has
ranked in the top 10 for funding from the National Institutes of Health, with
juvenile diabetes one of its strongest research areas.

    In 1944, Miss Emilie bequeathed the remainder of her estate -- $350,000 --
to Children's Hospital. She envisioned that her generosity would bring about a
cure and not be needed for care. What she could not conceive of then was the
complexity of the disease and the slow progress of research.

    What scientists learned

    Juvenile, or type 1, diabetes occurs when the pancreas stops producing
insulin, the hormone that enables people to get energy from food. Before the use
of insulin to control blood sugar was discovered by researchers at University of
Toronto in 1921, doctors prescribed the "starvation diet" to regulate sugars. It
involved the gradual withdrawal of carbohydrates until bodily excretions were
normal, and was followed by gradual restoration of sugars and starches.

    Before insulin, a child's life could only be prolonged an average 4.8 years
after diagnosis.

    With research advances -- many of them made at Children's through the work
of Drs. T.S. Danowski and Allan Drash -- people with juvenile diabetes now live
much longer. But the disease still shortens the average life span by 15 years.

    The disease also reduces quality of life. Despite my best attempts at tight
management, I have a damaged eye (after I picked up a heavy urn and developed a
hemorrhage that leaked into the gel-filled cavity of my eye), have developed
neuropathic changes that caused a deformity of my feet and have undergone open
heart surgery.

    It is difficult to preach tight blood glucose control to children whose
initial experience with diabetes is in grappling with the reality that they are
not like others, that it takes more than a shot of insulin to be OK, that
diabetes is a disease that kills you slowly.

    The psychological aspect of my condition was always more difficult than the
physical consequences. When I was a child, food was my succor and my seducer,
ironically opposed to the regimen of diet learned in the hospital. Not until I
was an adult did I accept that diabetes is ultimately a disease of restraint.

    Today, new therapies for monitoring blood glucose and delivering insulin
make diabetes easier to live with. But a cure remains elusive.

    Evolving technologies are promising, but it will be a long time before
widespread application of gene therapy offers a cure in the form of transplanted
islet cells that make insulin.

    Until now, most diabetes research has been conducted by universities and
research institutes, but I wonder if university-sponsored research is a
self-sustaining entity whose main product is publication, attribution and the
generation of government funding? And, do we diabetics who have endured the
disease for more than 50 years make a better study than a cure?

    Perhaps it's time for private industry to step in to speed our advances to a
cure. Companies like Celera Genomics sequenced the human genome years earlier
than expected primarily because they were funded by investors and not encumbered
by government. Its motto: "Speed matters -- discovery can't wait."

    In his speech at the opening of the Renziehausen Ward, Dr. Joslin referred
to the Scottish War Memorial in Edinburgh, noting "It is not the doctor or the
scientist alone who achieves, but the combination of all the beings associated
with him in his ward or his laboratory." One panel of the memorial is engraved
with camels, mules, canaries and mice with the inscription, "Remember also the
humble beast that served and died."

    Having endured 54 years of this disease, I ask myself, are we diabetics who
suffered over the years while science blazed on, the humble beasts that served
and died?


NOTES:
Marilyn Bates of Scott is a writer and teacher consultant at the Western
Pennsylvania Writing Project at the University of Pittsburgh. She hopes to find
other adults who were treated at the Renziehausen Ward. Her e-mail is
bbates+@pitt.edu

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Photos courtesy of Robert E. Beyer, Emilie's great nephew in
Pennington, N.J.: Emilie Renziehausen, far right, escorted diabetic patients
from Children's Hospital in 1938 to see the grand Christmas tree set up each
year in the lobby of the Union Trust Building, Downtown.
 PHOTO: Emilie Renziehausen

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2001


                             1506 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            November 19, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: Heart Research;
Successes of Gene Therapy

BYLINE: JANE E. ALLEN, TIMES HEALTH WRITER

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy used in critically ill heart patients has shown
significant potential for restoring blood flow in clogged cardiac vessels,
reducing chest pain and enhancing quality of life. These successes, which have
been demonstrated in a handful of small research studies so far, are drawing
attention to a technique that appears to stimulate growth of new blood vessels.
If the results are duplicated in larger studies, gene therapy may one day become
an important tool in the fight against coronary artery disease.

   Last week, researchers at a medical conference in Anaheim introduced two
patients with inoperable heart disease who described how gene therapy helped
them recover.

   Dick Hooper, a 61-year-old retired airline employee from Escondido, said he
"could not walk from here to the back of this room without using two to three
shots of nitroglycerin" before agreeing to the experimental procedure in 1999.

   *

   Hooper had undergone 17 separate angioplasties--procedures in which a balloon
is inflated inside a clogged coronary artery to clear blockages--between 1993
and early 1999. He called himself the "19-stent guy," referring to the 19 wire
mesh coils that had been inserted in his arteries during the various procedures.

   During the 1999 experimental procedure, doctors inserted into Hooper's heart
several copies of a gene that attached to the surface of his blood vessels and
instructed cells to produce VEGF-2, or vascular enthothelial growth factor,
which stimulates the sprouting of new blood vessels. This technique, which
scientists sometimes refer to casually as "growing your own bypass," gets its
name because it enables the body to create new pathways for blood to circumvent
blockages.

   Hooper hasn't needed nitroglycerin since the procedure, and he has even taken
up golf. "To me," he says, "this is nothing short of a miracle."

   A second patient, 72-year-old Jacque Braswell of La Mirada, said her heart
problems, including three heart attacks, began at age 28. By 1999, her arteries
were so diseased that she gasped for breath walking from her bedroom to the
kitchen: "I felt each night this might be it."

   Since receiving gene therapy in June 1999, she has reduced the number of
medications she takes, become pain-free and gone back to an active, independent
life.

   "I have all this energy. I feel like I'm 20," Braswell said. Hooper and
Braswell spoke at an American Heart Assn. news conference with their doctor,
Richard A. Schatz, a cardiologist at the Scripps Clinic in La Jolla.

   *

   Schatz said patients report feeling better within a few weeks following gene
therapy, as more blood pumps through their hearts and relieves their chest pain.
Schatz's patients were too sick to undergo additional bypass procedures, but he
said bypasses remain preferable because they allow patients to get off all their
heart medicines.

   Hooper and Braswell have shown improvement in several measures, he said. For
example, a common yardstick for assessing better heart function is a patient's
ability to exercise on a treadmill for an additional 60 seconds without
discomfort. Hooper and Braswell have added several minutes each to their
treadmill time, and their pain has disappeared.

   Eventually, Schatz believes that gene therapy could be performed during
angioplasty in patients whose blood vessels are too small for stents or who are
unlikely to benefit from angioplasty.

   Such therapy, said Schatz, also could be used in bypass patients when the
surgeon is unable to reach all the affected vessels.

   Until recently, researchers lacked a comparison group to demonstrate whether
patients such as Braswell might have improved without the intervention.
Ethically, doctors could not open up the chests of several patients for the
purpose of testing the gene therapy on just some of them, so there had been no
clinical trials.

   However, doctors at the Anaheim conference reported on the first
scientifically rigorous trials of gene therapy with VEGF-2 in cardiac patients.
In this case, some patients got the gene, others got a saltwater solution, and
neither the doctors nor the patients knew who was getting the dummy treatment
until after the trial was completed.

   *

   What enabled them to do this was a new way of getting the gene into the body.
Instead of subjecting patients to invasive surgery, they gave patients local
anesthesia and inserted the gene through a catheter snaked into the heart's left
pumping chamber. During a period of about an hour, they injected six small doses
of the gene material into the hearts of some patients; the control group got
only the saltwater solution.

   Among 19 patients with severe angina, 12 (including Hooper) got the actual
gene treatment. Eight of them had a significant drop in chest pain; one said the
procedure eliminated angina. None of the placebo patients did as well.

   The report came from Dr. Douglas W. Losordo, director of the Cardiac
Catheterization Laboratories at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston.

   Schatz reported that electromechanical mapping of study participants showed
heart muscle changes indicating more activity as well as shrinkage of the area
previously deprived of good blood flow.

   "This looks really promising," said Schatz, while cautioning that the
research is still in its early stages. Because the number of patients is still
small, he said, "we can't prove to you this is not the placebo effect," but he
hopes to have that proof when testing resumes.

GRAPHIC:  Dick Hooper of Escondido says his health improved after gene therapy.
PHOTOGRAPHER: CHRISTINE COTTER / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2001


                             1507 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 18, 2001 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 034

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; Wadman pulls up vice chair at Kessler Financial

BYLINE: By Anna McCart

BODY:

   David C. Wadman had been named vice chairman as Kessler Financial Services, a
Boston sales and marketing company.

   Middlesex Bank & Trust Company, of Newton, named Mary J. Warhurst as
executive vice president.

   DOVE, the South Shore's domestic violence program, named Valerie Vigoda as
executive director.

   American Superconductor Corp., of Westboro, named John R. (Jake) Ring Jr. as
general manager of its power electronics business unit.

   Dr. John T. Flaherty was named vice president of medical affairs at
Transkaryotic Therapies, Inc., a Cambridge biopharmaceutical company.

   BrandEquity International named Martin Andersen as vice president of
marketing at the Boston marketing firm.

   Tony Florence was named as vice president at Boston software company VFA.

   Ed King was named as vice president of NTRU, a Burlington security company.

   Quarry Technologies Inc., an Internet protocol company in Burlington, named
Steve Kohalmi as its chief technology officer.

   Pioneer Global Asset Management S.p.A., of Boston, named Daniel T. Geraci as
chief executive officer and president of its U.S. investment arm.

   Samuel Parks and Charles Ritch have been promoted to executive vice
presidents at Plymouth Savings Bank in Middleboro.

   Clark-Bardes Consulting, an executive benefits firm in Marlborough, named
Jack Dolmat-Connell as principal.

   Thomas J. Allain was named vice president of commerical services at Community
National Bank, of Hudson.

   Gilbane Building Co., based in  Needham, named Daniel P. McConaghy as
district manager of the construction management firm.

   Barbara A. Mason was named chief financial officer at DogWatch Inc., a pet
containment systems company in Natick.

   Ernst & Young, a professional services firm in Boston, named five principals:
Dean Rhodes, Gary Damesek, Rick Mayfield, Edward Smith and Carol Wardell.

   Gary W. Smith, attorney at Burns & Levinson LLP in Boston, was named to the
editorial board of the American Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly
Journal.

   Donald K. Stern was named as partner at Boston law firm Bingham Dana.

   National Boston, a film production company in Boston, named Christian Cundari
as editor and compositor.

   Sovereign Bank promoted Steve Issa to executive vice president and managing
director of Rhode Island and Southeastern Massachusetts commercial markets
group.

   Warren F. Fitzgerald was named vice president of the Massachusetts Bar
Association.

   State Street Research & Management Co. named William A. Irvine as vice
president of institutional sales at the investment firm's Boston office.

   Dr. Henry Hoppe was named vice president of therapeutic development at
ViaCell Inc., a cellular therapy company.

   Andersen, a professional services firm in Boston, named Anthony J.
Switajewski as principal. James E. Cavallo, Jeanine P. Clark, and L. Scott Egan
were named as partners.

   Needel, Welch & Stone, P.C., a Rockland certified public accounting firm,
promoted Brian Carey to senior accountant.

   Thomas Karnes was named the executive director of Allerton House at Harbor
Park, an assisted-living community in Hingham.

   John (Jack) Welsh was named general manager of the Boston transportation
division of P&O Cold Loigistics, a temperature-controlled transportation
company.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, Sunday Business People, attn. Anna
McCart, One Herald Square, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865. No
phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2001


                             1508 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            November 18, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Nuestro Pueblo; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: Medical association installs new board

BYLINE: By Ana Ester Gershanik

BODY:

   The Hispanic American Medical Association of Louisiana recently installed its
board of directors for 2001-03 at a banquet at the Intercontinental Hotel in New
Orleans.

   Founded in 1989, the organization has a membership of 140 physicians and
medical students who meet regularly to listen to lectures about advances in the
medical field. HAMAL also informs the Hispanic community about health issues,
provides medical aid to Latin American countries, awards scholarships in
Washington, D.C., to Hispanic students interested in careers related to health
care and participates in health fairs for the local Hispanic community.

   The evening started with a special memorial to the victims of the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks.

   Dr. Juan Jorge Gershanik, outgoing president, installed the new officers. Dr.
Manuel Lopez is the new president. Born in Colombia, Lopez is a professor of
medicine and clinical immunology at Tulane University Medical Center. Dr.
Eduardo Herrera is president-elect; Dr. Soffy Botero, vice president; Dr. Julio
Figueroa, treasurer; and Dr. Alfonso Vargas, secretary. Members at large are
Drs. Yves Lacassie, Christian Mayorga, Gabriel Uribe and Moises Yoselevitz.

   The keynote speaker was Dr. Ricardo Sorensen, professor and chairman of
pediatrics at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, who spoke on
"New Concepts in Primary Immunodeficiencies" and discussed recent developments
in gene therapy.

Noticias

The film series "Searching for Identity in Latin American Film" will show the
1999 film "La ley de Herodes," directed by Mexican Luis Estrada, on Monday at 7
p.m. in Room 204 of Jones Hall at Tulane University. Two contemporary Cuban
films are next on the agenda for the Monday series.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news for Nuestro Pueblo, write to Ana Ester Gershanik at The
Times-Picayune, Newsroom, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429 or send
e-mail to AnaGersh@aol.com.

GRAPHIC: Officers of the HAMAL board for 2001-03 are, from left: Dr. Juan
Gershanik, immediate past president Dr. Moises Yoselevitz, member at large Dr.
Soffy Botero, vice president Dr. Alfonso Vargas, secretary Dr. Maria Cortez,
past president Dr. Christian Mayorga, member at large, Dr. Julio Figueroa,
treasurer Dr. Gabriel Uribe, member at large and Dr. Manuel Lopez, president.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2001


                             1509 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 18, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. W08

LENGTH: 6714 words

HEADLINE: Fade To Black;
Rania Gill is racing against time to come to terms with a world she will no
longer see

BYLINE: Tamara Jones

BODY:

    The stars disappeared first. It happened one night when Rania Gill was
partying on the beach with friends, and someone said, Look, look how beautiful
the sky is! Rania gazed upward but saw only empty darkness. She shrugged it off,
assuming light pollution was to blame. She had worn hearing aids since
toddlerhood, but her vision had always been perfect. The moment was swiftly and
conveniently forgotten. "It's not like I went outside the next night to check
again," Rania says now. Life was too busy to worry about the stars. She had no
way of knowing then that they were gone for good.

   Rania was 18, headstrong and beautiful. It was her time for flirting and
playing hooky and drinking forbidden beers and sneaking home late, a time when
independence was finally within tantalizing grasp. She wanted to go to college
and become an elementary school teacher, or maybe parlay her artistic talents
into some creative career, like advertising. She wanted to marry and raise a big
family. She wanted to travel. She wanted to jump from an airplane and drift to
the ground beneath a billowing parachute.

   Since that night on the beach, seven years have passed, and so much more has
disappeared. Rania is a single mother now, as cautious as she once was wild, so
devoted to her small son that she calculates how much tuna he can safely eat
based on body weight and mercury levels. She prays for President Bush, bakes
elaborate cakes for special occasions, and revels in simple pleasures like the
deep, wood scent of the forest. Only recently has she begun to prepare for the
future that she has alternately denied and accepted, battled and despaired over:
life as a deaf-blind woman.

   At 26, a rare genetic disease that already robbed Rania of most of her
hearing is now erasing the world from the edges inward, as if she is looking
backward through binoculars. The remaining circle of sight -- still perfect --
has grown slowly ever smaller these past few years, and she waits for the
precious image to gradually blink out like the picture tube of an old TV. From
living color to a pinpoint to darkness. Today she sees an adult standing in
front of her only from mid-chin to mid-forehead, and if the light is dim,
nothing but the lips. No body. At the zoo with her 6-year-old son, Collin, she
sees the eyes and ears of an elephant but not the trunk, the stripes of what
must be a zebra, the hump of a camel with no head or legs. In her purse is a
white fold-up cane that she hates.

   Rania mentally counts the 14 steps downstairs to the sunny two-bedroom
apartment where she and Collin live in the basement of her parents' spacious
Potomac home. She bustles about in perpetual motion, trying to keep pace with
the mental list of everything she means to do while she can still see, like
putting aside funny pictures of Collin to display on his wedding day. "There are
different seasons of our life," Rania observes on a reflective afternoon.
"Mourning -- that was a different season. Now I'm coming into a time of not
being in that cave. There are plans you have to make." She struggles to be
resolute as the world shrinks around her, gardens reduced to a flower, oceans to
a sunlit wave, thick forests to a cluster of leaves.

   First she must make her peace with the white cane.

   The lesson begins in the kitchen, where one of the most banal objects in the
world reveals one of nature's most mysterious gifts. Dona Sauerburger, the
orientation and mobility instructor sent by the Maryland Division of
Rehabilitation Services, asks Rania for a Pyrex bowl.

   "Close your eyes," Dona instructs Rania, who is clearly puzzled by this
introduction. She had called DORS asking to be taught the proper way to use a
cane. Now Dona is holding a glass bowl near the side of Rania's head, and Rania
must guess which ear it's closest to. She does it three times, perfectly. Dona
is testing for echolocation, the dolphin-like ability to orient yourself by
means of reflected sound waves.

   "We can hear walls," Dona explains. "We can hear locations. You heard the
bowl, so you have the potential of developing good echolocation. They used to
call this facial vision; they thought there were receptors in the skin."

   Rania's hearing loss is considered severe, but high-quality digital hearing
aids and her proficiency at lip-reading make her impairment virtually
undetectable. Speech therapy throughout grade school left her with a clear and
mellifluous speaking voice. Her eyes, dark and soulful, give no hint of her
blindness.

   "I don't consider myself part of the hearing world, but I don't belong in the
deaf world, either," Rania says. "I'm not part of the seeing world, but I'm not
part of the blind world yet, either.

   "I'm somewhere in between."

   Dona will spend several weeks teaching Rania how to navigate strip malls and
Metro stations, busy streets and unfamiliar buildings. What Rania must learn for
herself is how to surmount the emotional obstacles that block her path as well.
There is no painless way to master either skill.

   Dona drives Rania to the nearby University of Maryland campus in Shady Grove
for her first lesson in how to not see.

   "Are you comfortable being guided?" Dona wants to know.

   "I am, but people who guide me usually don't have a clue," Rania replies
cheerfully. "I've been guided into a swamp, into tree branches. But we always
have a good time, and it's okay." At 5-foot-10, Rania has to stay alert for the
dangers overhead as well as underfoot.

   Dona has been doing this for 32 years. She firmly places Rania's hand above
her own elbow and asks her to shut her eyes. "This is scary," Rania protests.
She longs to be in one of the classrooms, not groping through the deserted
hallway. She graduated from community college last spring, but is holding off
applying to the university until she completes this training.

   Guided by Dona, Rania is able to hear the walls, the way the silence changes
from leaden to clear as she passes a doorway or other opening. They explore the
building for more than an hour, and on the way home, Rania acknowledges that she
finds it hard to use the cane, hard to make the adjustment. "I want to keep
independent as long as I can."

   Dona glances over. "Is it the physical or -- "

   "Emotionally," Rania quickly answers. "It's what it says about who I am."

   "So your vision is your identity."

   "A big part of who I am is me being functional."

   "Vision and functional," Dona concludes, "are totally different."

   The diagnosis took years to sink in. Rania was 19 and in the process of
fleeing the abusive marriage she had rushed into when she found out she was
pregnant with Collin. During the pregnancy, she had developed a fizzy sort of
light at the edges of her vision. She was always bumping into things, but
thought she was just clumsy. "My mom started to notice that she would walk into
a room and I wouldn't see her," Rania recalls. She went to the eye doctor,
assuming she needed glasses.

   "He took one look in my eye -- it wasn't more than a minute -- and he left
the room," Rania recounts. When he returned five minutes later, the doctor told
Rania she had a condition called Usher syndrome, the major cause of
deaf-blindness in the world. A genetic degeneration of receptor cells in the
inner ear and the retina, Usher often blinds its victims slowly, sometimes over
the course of decades, and there was no way to predict when Rania would lose her
vision entirely. Her retina was losing its ability to capture light and transmit
an image to the brain. At that point, Rania still retained 110 degrees of the
normal 180-degree field of vision.

   Rania called her mother and calmly reported, "They just diagnosed me with
this disease and I'm going blind."

   They went to the library that afternoon to read everything they could find
about Usher syndrome. They found only a few paragraphs in medical texts.

   Referred to Johns Hopkins's famed eye institute, Rania was shuttled from
office to office, floor to floor, doctor to doctor. They put contacts with wires
sticking out of them in her eyes. They confirmed the diagnosis, but offered
little more. There was no cure.

   There was nothing Rania could do but wait, which was worse, in its own way,
than sudden darkness.

   "When you face something slow, you see it coming," she says. "There's more
time to think."

   Rania wanted to fill every seeing moment she could with her son.

   Her parents had been thinking of moving, anyway, with their four children
grown and out of the house. Now Pat and Paul Gill readjusted their retirement
plans to support their only daughter and young grandson. They would build their
new house in a neighborhood with good schools and plenty of playmates for
Collin, and Pat would give up her career in real estate so she could be on
constant call for Rania and Collin. Rania would be able to finish school, taking
a class or two each semester. In Paul Gill's native India, extended families
traditionally live together or in close proximity. The name he chose for his
daughter, Rania (pronounced Rah-nee-ah), means princess. Having Rania and Collin
in the house seemed like a bonus, not a burden.

   Eighteen months after Rania's diagnosis, she heard that the national
Foundation Fighting Blindness was having a conference on Usher syndrome in the
District. Rania and Pat both went to see what else they could learn. Some 20,000
Americans have one of the three types of Usher syndrome. Rania's is thought to
be Usher II, where a severe hearing loss detected in early childhood is followed
by gradual blindness beginning in young adulthood.

   "There were a lot of blind people at the conference but also a lot with
vision," Rania remembers. "I focused on the ones with vision." There were Usher
patients in their fifties who still didn't need a cane. Rania went home feeling
like she still had plenty of time.

   Pat Gill left with a sharply different perspective. Pat had attended a
support group for parents of adult children with Usher, "and when I went there,
the reality really hit me." The Gills had been assuming that Rania would be able
to drive at least another decade. But in the support group, Pat learned that
most lost their driver's licenses while in their twenties. She couldn't bear to
tell Rania.

   Rania was always popping Collin into his car seat and zipping off on
adventures -- picking berries at a farm, spending the day at the beach -- or
just going to the grocery store for her family. She loved to drive, not just the
idea of it, but the physical sensation of the road humming up through her feet,
her fingers curled around the steering wheel. Her sense of touch has always been
particularly keen -- the result, she suspects, of her early hearing loss.

   At first, Usher remained, like her vision loss, at the far corners of Rania's
world. She stopped driving at night or in the rain because there wasn't enough
light and contrast for her to see clearly. She learned to look down when her
toddler son was nearby so she wouldn't bowl him over. What she was losing did
not consciously register -- it wasn't as if the backyard willow tree she loved
was an expansive green parasol one day and just a swatch of brown trunk the
next. Her eyes and brain were automatically adjusting to the loss of peripheral
vision by constantly scanning. She wouldn't see the willow tree in one glance,
but she could see it in separate pieces and mentally reassemble the image. Then,
at church one Sunday two years ago, Rania noticed that the person she was
chatting with was a floating head. Everyone was a floating head! Like some
surreal comic strip. "It was so funny, I started laughing," Rania remembers. But
the illusion didn't go away.

   Rania went to a retinal specialist to have her vision tracked. She was
stunned to learn that her disease was progressing at an exceptionally rapid
rate. Over barely five years, the 110-degree field of vision had shriveled to
just 20 degrees -- legally blind. The doctor suggested that Rania stop driving,
but told her it was her choice -- he wouldn't report her. On the way home, Rania
says, "I stopped at Starbucks and the bank, and I thought: Is this the last
time? Driving, for me, was taking care of my son."

   She kept the disturbing news to herself for a day before telling her parents.
Her father told her she didn't have to inform the Motor Vehicle Administration;
she should do whatever she thought was right. Her mother wanted her to stop
right away. Rania wanted to have the MVA decide for her: She sent a letter and a
copy of her eye graph from the retinal specialist. The graph looked like a
spider's web; Rania's field of vision was a tiny circle at the very center. She
would voluntarily stop driving until she heard back from the MVA. Three months
later, there was still no response. When she called, no one could find her
records.

   "I was in a pit," she remembers. "The bus stop was a mile away and it only
runs in rush hour. I came to the decision that I would drive again until the MVA
got back to me. I woke up and was actually happy and got in the car and took my
son to preschool. I went shopping at the mall." She drove carefully and checked
her side-view mirrors often. There were no close calls. She felt giddy, in
control again. She could do this, she would triumph over this stupid disease.

   "The next day, I got a letter from the MVA saying they were taking my
driver's license away," she says. "I felt like I had climbed up out of my pit
and peeked over the edge, and someone hurled me back in."

   A woman she barely knew surprised Rania by organizing a pool of volunteer
drivers from the church. She presented Rania with a grid showing whom to contact
for rides each hour of the day. Rania was touched by their generosity, but never
called. "I just wasn't ready," she says. "I needed to wallow awhile." All she
felt like doing was sleeping or crying. She began seeing a counselor for
depression.

   Seeing her once-rebellious daughter so benumbed, so resigned, made Pat Gill
anxious. She prodded Rania to find out about services for the blind, to actively
prepare for her future. Did she want Pat to make some calls? Rania said no, she
would do it, then didn't.

   Now when they run errands or go shopping, Pat constantly describes everything
in Rania's path, hovering and protecting her in a way that Rania recognizes as a
mother, but resents as a daughter. Pat knows this, but worries what will happen
if she stops.

   The turning point came at the bookstore one day, when Rania toppled a
1-year-old she couldn't see. The baby began screaming, and when Rania reached
the cash register, the clerk demanded to know what she had done. Children were
below Rania's field of vision, and if she didn't happen to be scanning downward
at precisely the right moment, she was likely to run into or over them. She knew
she couldn't put it off any longer. It was time to learn how to use a cane. She
called DORS and asked for help, which is how Dona Sauerburger showed up at her
door last summer in her pink jumper and dangly flower earrings, a cheerfully
determined tour guide to the sights Rania would no longer see.

   Before her second lesson, Rania has a small breakthrough: She begins using
her cane in public. She starts at the gym. "I felt dumb," she confides to Dona
now. "People jumped out of the way. They stared at me, like, 'Why would a blind
person work out? She can't see herself, what does she care?' "

   Now they are back at the college campus, and Dona consults a list. They're
going to practice stairs today. Dona is following a pace behind Rania, watching
her cane technique. The cane is the scout; its tip should be in front of the
foot about to step forward. "If you're out of step, tap twice on the same spot,"
Dona tells Rania.

   "Oh! Got it."

   They reach a lobby and with Rania's eyes closed, Dona scurries ahead and
plants a chair in her path. When Rania comes upon it, she admits, "I saw it with
my eyes. I'd rather use my eyesight when I have it."

   "Why did you look?"

   "I have to."

   Rania finds herself having to depend more and more on her family. She could
scream when someone blithely tells her something or other is "over there" or
"right here." "WHERE?" she demands. "It's three thousand places! Be more
specific!" If they point, she traces their arm with her hand to narrow her
search. Her older brothers really don't get it, Rania feels. When she bumps into
something, which happens at a rate she calculates to be two fresh bruises a day,
someone always chides her: "Watch out!" But how can she watch for what she
cannot see?

   She knows that her family doesn't fully understand what she's going through
because she won't let them. "I think I have to play that game, holding it
together." She has become too accomplished an actress, smiling at noisy dinner
conversations she can no longer follow, pretending that her disability is an
inconvenience, rather than a tragedy. She never lets on how the effort of
constantly piecing together a jigsaw world depletes her.

   When Dona shows up for the next lesson, she brings a pair of welder's
goggles. Using black construction paper, she cuts out circles to cover the
eyeholes, with a dime-size hole in the center to represent Rania's field of
vision. She leaves the goggles behind for Rania's family to try.

   Dona heads for the Kentlands town center. On the sidewalk, a man with a leaf
blower notices Rania approaching with her cane and moves to the side. Dona wants
Rania to walk to the corner with her eyes shut.

   "What if I run into him?"

   "It'll be funny."

   Rania wanders off the sidewalk and onto a small brick plaza, where she smacks
into an iron bench. Her eyes fly open in alarm.

   "I'm sorry! It scared me. I thought it was a car backing up."

   Dona scolds her: "If you can't keep your eyes shut, we're going to bring the
goggles next time, or a blindfold."

   Rania taps her cane down hard on the ground. "Oh, ho-ho, I'm frustrated
today!"

   Then she is off-course again, in someone's yard. Dona calls out to her.

   "Do you feel grass over there? Are you in the street?"

   Rania is confused. "Oh, I'm in the street?"

   "Does grass grow into the street?"

   "No, it doesn't. So I'm not in the street?"

   "No, you're not." Dona catches something in Rania's voice and hurries over
and rubs her arm gently. This is just practice, Dona says. It's okay.

   They continue the lesson. Rania masters how to line herself up at a corner to
safely cross an intersection. She knows this shopping center well. Her gym is
here, and she used to have a part-time job in its day-care center before it
closed. There is a toy store where she and Collin love to browse.

   Rania misses having a paycheck. She baby-sat a neighbor's little girl last
year, but then the girl entered preschool. Rania knows she would qualify for
disability checks, but cannot bring herself to make such a public admission of
dependency.

   She and Dona stop at Michaels, the sprawling crafts store where Rania often
stocks up on art supplies. Rania is always working on some project or other. She
and Collin made flags and banners to wave at the F-16 fighter jets flying
overhead after September 11, and Rania is itching to redecorate Collin's room
now, since he's outgrown the cloud mural she painted when he was a baby. The
part of her eyesight that remains -- central vision -- is designed to capture
detail, like the delicate flowers Rania paints on glass vases for Christmas
presents. Scrapbooks are her newest passion. "Memories are so important," she
says.

   In college, Rania wanted to take art but didn't, "because I thought what's
the point if I'm going blind? What's color if you can't see it? I love color.
Color is everything. Magenta. I love magenta. And sunsets. I'll see a sunset and
close my eyes and open them again to see if I remembered it right."

   She thinks she will try sculpting, but not until after she goes completely
blind. She doesn't want to know that pleasure with sight; she wants it to belong
entirely to her sense of touch, to be something she can discover instead of lose
or miss.

   They spend some time happily browsing in Michaels. When it's time to leave,
Dona wants Rania to close her eyes and find the way back to the car, parked on a
small side street three blocks away. Rania is dubious, but anxious to get home.
"I just had a thought," she says. "My mom is probably crying by now. She
would've put the goggle on and she's thinking, 'Oh, my Rani.' She's emotional
like that."

   Rania heads down the long aisle, tapping her cane around boxes leaning
haphazardly against a bin full of wood with sharp pieces poking out. She passes
shelves of ribbon, glass vases perched on the counter at the floral center. She
makes it to the door without a mishap. Outside, she takes a few steps and smacks
something waist-high and heavy.

   "What's that?"

   "Do you want to know, or just get around it?" Dona asks.

   "It's a trash can," Rania guesses.

   Rania feels the walkway sloping, and becomes disoriented. She approaches the
first of five brick steps leading down to the main sidewalk, and jumps back.

   "Beautiful," says Dona.

   "Oh, that scared me so bad. I feel like I'm going to drop off the edge." She
taps another trash can, keeps walking, and her cane finds a slender tree. "Am I
hitting someone?"

   The block in front of her is full of everyday danger she cannot see: bicycles
jutting from stands, cumbersome newspaper boxes, oversize flowerpots, benches,
light poles, a woman with a stroller. Rania is biting her lip. Dona urges her
on.

   "The slower you walk and the longer you meander, the harder it is," she
cautions.

   Rania overshoots the block where the car is parked and zigzags into the
middle of the narrow street. Two cars pass her slowly before Dona can dart out,
bring her back, reenact her missteps for her.

   "I'm going to have nightmares tonight." Rania shudders. "I'm sorry. I don't
mean to sound like a whiny baby." Dona strokes her arm. She wants her to do it
over again so she'll be left with a positive experience, but Rania is too
rattled.

   She folds up her cane and sighs deeply.

   "Let's go burn this thing."

   She wakes up often, in the middle of the night, panicked. Did the burglar
alarm go off? Is someone trying to break in? With her hearing aids out, she has
no way of knowing. There is no light in the room, no distinction for her eyes
between awake and asleep. She reaches over to the bed next to hers where Collin
sleeps. She cannot see him; she cannot hear him. Her hands trace his small form,
and she is comforted.

   Her diagnosis came when Collin was just an infant in her arms, and now he is
6, growing up but growing smaller. She can still see the whole of him, from a
distance, but where she needs him is here. Close. At an age when his playmates
are starting to push away from their mothers and stake their tiny claims on
independence, Collin clings affectionately to Rania, always tugging on her,
climbing on her, hugging her. Rania is not sure whether it's his neediness or
hers. They are virtually inseparable, their symbiosis honed by Rania's loss of
sight and sound.

   Bright and curious, Collin knows his mother's physical limitations, but she
is not sure how deeply he comprehends her condition. He uses her cane as a sword
in imaginary duels, and has learned to keep his toys out of his mother's main
pathways. He knows he needs to look directly at her when he wants to be clearly
understood, so she can read his lips. He likes to wear the goggles Dona left
behind, and waves them at a playmate: "Hey! Want to see like my mommy sees?"

   When Rania's sister-in-law Debra was visiting, she took Rania and Collin to
see "The Emperor's New Groove." Debra went to get popcorn while they found
seats. Suddenly it dawned on her that Rania wouldn't be able to see in the dim
theater, and she hurried back to find them. The theater was a chaotic swarm of
noisy kids.

   "Rania was standing where I left her, frozen, totally unable to move, holding
onto the wall," she remembers. "And Collin was running back and forth, calling
out, 'Mommy, here's three seats!' I watched them for a minute. They have this
amazing way of working together."

   Even in everyday circumstances, Collin is alert. When he plugs his music
keyboard into the wall behind the kitchen table, he reminds himself out loud: "I
have to watch this cord so no one trips." When Rania comes outside to look for
him and he is playing on the ground a few feet away, he calls out, "Mommy, I'm
here!" before she says his name. At the school bus stop, he yanks her back to
the curb when she starts to cross the street without the safety patrol.

   Rania herself still has a childlike sense of fun and wonder that leaves her
as excited as Collin when the caterpillars they sent away for hatch into vivid
monarch butterflies. She has reenacted "Toy Story" with her son so often that
they both have committed the script to memory. When Dona comes to pick her up
one summer morning, she is tired and grumpy because she and Collin stayed up so
late playing with the electric train set they both love.

   "For me, the parent-child relationship is doing things for him," she says.
Losing that, she feels, would be the cruelest part of going blind. "Will he
still love me?" she wonders. "Will he be embarrassed of me, ashamed for people
to see me? People may look at Collin and think, Oh, poor little boy."

   She has never taken her cane into Collin's school. What if the other kids
teased him? When orientation day arrives, Rania puts the cane in her purse; she
knows it will be bedlam, with small children running wild and parents crowding
into classrooms to meet the new teachers. Inside, she clutches Collin's shoulder
and he charges ahead. They wend down the dimly lit halls and through the clots
of talking parents and excited children until they find Collin's first-grade
classroom. They stop by the cafeteria and the computer center. The cane never
leaves Rania's purse.

   "I guess Collin was my substitute cane," she later acknowledges.

   By the last week of summer, Collin is getting restless despite all her
attention, and Rania's patience is wearing thin. One afternoon when Collin melts
down, Rania gathers him close. "Self-control, self-control," she chides. "No
fits of rage."

   The next time Rania goes out with Dona, she throws her own small tantrum, and
adamantly refuses to close her eyes anymore. It scares her too much.

   The eye is a camera, and the retina its film. Degenerative diseases of the
retina affect some 6 million Americans, and another 15 million are thought to be
pre-symptomatic but at risk of someday losing their vision.

   Most of the processing that we call vision actually takes place in the brain,
and within our lifetime -- even within the next decade -- researchers hope to
cure many forms of blindness through gene therapy, or obviate the need for a
human eyeball altogether through technology. The blind would be able to see
again using glasses with some form of camera transmitting radio waves back to a
computer chip planted beneath the skull.

   "We can treat or cure most of these diseases in a rat," says Gerald Chader,
chief scientific officer for the Foundation Fighting Blindness. "When are we
going to ratchet it up to human? The answer is more money and time. We have
turned the corner from simple basic research to clinical trials."

   In Usher syndrome, a genetic mutation slowly kills off the crucial cells that
capture light and convert it into electrical impulses sent to the optic nerve,
which in turn carries the signal to the brain, where "seeing" actually occurs.

   Transplanting an entire eye is beyond the capability of current medical
technology. The retina itself is too thin and delicate to remove. Surgeons would
also have to sever and individually reconnect the millions of nerves leading
from the eye to the brain.

   While sophisticated devices can augment Rania's hearing, there is nothing
right now that can preserve or restore her vision. But losing that last bit of
sight will also sabotage her ability to communicate as well as she does now. "If
I want to hear someone, I have to maintain eye contact," she says. Lip-reading
distinguishes "Pete Rose" from "beef roast."

   The Division of Rehabilitation Services wants Rania to see its low-vision
specialist. Suleiman Alibhai's job is to determine whether any devices or
technology can help her maintain independence. Some people with Usher syndrome
find specially shaded glasses useful, for example, but Rania's ability to detect
contrast is still good.

   "I think what's most dramatic is the way your visual field has changed,"
Alibhai begins gently. "Is your sense that changes are still going on, or is it
relatively stable?"

   At first, Rania is uncertain. "I don't really remember what it's like to have
all that vision because I lost it so quickly," she says. But then she adds, "I
feel like it's getting worse."

   Relieved that this visit won't involve stinging drops or contacts with
electric probes, Rania tries to get comfortable in the big black examining
chair. The strain of looking down for so many years has caused chronic pain; her
shoulders always ache. Alibhai invites her to ask questions.

   "Well, I would love to play tennis again, and I don't know if there's
anything out there that would allow me to do that, but I suspect not," she
blurts out. "I'm asking you because if I didn't, I'd always wonder."

   Alibhai shakes his head no. He gives her a card and asks her to read aloud.
Her reading vision, he concludes, "is better than 20/20." The irony of Usher:
She is going blind, but she still doesn't need glasses.

   "I see swirling lights around my eyes constantly," Rania complains,
"sometimes so much that it blocks what I can see. Have you any idea what that
could be?"

   It's a common phenomenon for retinal patients, Alibhai answers. "Anything
mechanical in the retina, you see visually, like cells breaking down." She is
literally watching herself go blind.

   Rania quickly moves to her next question.

   "I wanted to ask you about diet. I saw something on the Internet."

   "Good question," the doctor responds. "If anyone says your vision is going to
be restored, you've got to be very wary." Forget the supplement hawkers.

   There are really no devices he can give her, no glasses that will help. He
holds out a bit of hope, though: "It's possible in your lifetime, you will see a
genetic fix for this." The news seems not to have registered on Rania. The
doctor allows more excitement to creep into his voice and tries again.

   "I really believe in your life you will see some sort of cure for this. I
know you're thinking, How soon?"

   Rania smiles at him, as if he is the one who needs reassuring.

   "I'm also okay with this," she says. "I have peace. I figure God won't give
me more than I can handle, so I'm handling it."

   Her lessons with Dona Sauerburger are drawing to a close, though Dona is
certain Rania will need a refresher when she loses the last of her vision. Like
cancer, Usher can go into remission, then suddenly reemerge with a vengeance.
The flashes of light she mentioned to Alibhai suggest that Rania's illness is
progressing.

   On a bright afternoon, Dona takes Rania to a Metro stop. She shows her the
raised bumps at the edge of the platform and teaches her how to find them with
both her feet and her cane. There is a small space beneath the ledge of the
platform, Dona says matter-of-factly, and if Rania should ever fall onto the
tracks, she should roll under this ledge as close as she can until help arrives.
If a train is coming and she can't roll fast enough, she should lie between the
center tracks and stretch her arms out straight in front of her. The train will
pass safely over her head.

   Rania accepts this vital information with an equanimity that privately amazes
Dona. Most of her students have to sit down to absorb this lesson; many have cut
her off mid-sentence, too horrified to listen. But Rania keeps the raw fear
below the surface, carefully hidden from those who know her best and love her
most.

   Everyone in her family ended up trying the goggles, to see how Rania sees.
Her brothers don't seem so gruff anymore. When her mother has them on one day
and Rania hears her collide with a kitchen chair and cry "Ouch!" Rania allows
herself a mean little satisfaction. Good! she thinks. Someone's always leaving
those chairs out!

   When Rania first learned that she was going blind, she felt a strange peace
envelop her. "I know this sounds crazy," she admits, "but I feel honored that
God would choose me as someone who could handle it, allow me to have this, that
He trusted me enough to have so much grace for me to deal with it."

   This is not an affliction, but a blessing.

   She quotes from the Bible, a verse from Isaiah 42: "I will lead the blind by
ways they have not known; along unfamiliar paths I will guide them: I will turn
the darkness into light before them and make the rough places smooth. These are
the things I will do; I will not forsake them."

   Each Tuesday morning, a small cluster of women gather from Covenant Life, the
church Rania attends in Rockville. The friends share their problems and pray for
one another. Three of the other women in Rania's care group are single mothers
like herself, and the talk often revolves around troublesome exes and
child-rearing challenges. Rania has been part of this group for eight months,
but it is only after this summer of reckoning that she brings up the subject of
her eyesight.

   "I guess I want you guys to pray for me," she self-consciously begins. The
women are sitting upstairs in Pat Gill's living room, eating the zucchini bread
Nancy Caggiano baked. Theresa Wheeler reaches for Rania's hand to give it a
squeeze.

   "What I've realized lately is that I just have a really angry heart," Rania
confesses. "I'm really angry right now. Since school started again, I'm seeing
all these moms who can drive and it just hits me in the face. It's such a little
thing, but . . ."

   "It's not a little thing," interjects Patricia Campagnoli.

   "I can't take my son to the doctor. I can't take my son to the store," Rania
goes on. "I volunteer in his classroom two days a week, but I have to have my
mom take me and drop me off at the pickup patio . . . I just see myself holding
this hourglass with sand trickling out. I'm an emotional mess."

   Theresa asks for some tissues and Rania says she's not going to cry but
Theresa says she might. "It's not just what God is giving you," Josie
Schellhardt reminds Rania, "but what God is giving through you. It's not just
God bringing us into your life for your good, but bringing you into our life for
our good. You are our grace."

   At one point, Nancy has to ask, "What will happen, with your vision?"

   "Blindness."

   "Are you afraid there'll be no warning, that you'll just wake up one day to
darkness?" Nancy wonders.

   "I don't think of the actual day," Rania says. "I'll get through that day.
I'll still be a person. I'll still matter, I'll still exist." She talks about
the things she already misses, like being able to run pell-mell across a field.
She has to move slowly, keep looking down. She has become a hesitant stranger to
herself. Worse, to her, is becoming a stranger to God, questioning, as she does
now, the very faith that has sustained her.

   With Collin back in school, Rania has taken a part-time job as a bookkeeper
in a friend's small office, but she is eager to resume her education. She wants
to pursue a master's in social work, and counsel people who have suffered
traumatic loss. "Can a blind person do that?" she wonders. "I want to find out
what things I could do."

   She makes an appointment with the Columbia Lighthouse for the Blind to get
career counseling. When she arrives at the Lighthouse's offices, a staffer who
never introduces herself takes Rania into a barren room and hands her an
aptitude test, which, she explains, will help them determine whether college is
a feasible goal for Rania. "I have two degrees already," Rania protests.
Associate degrees in general studies and American Sign Language. An hour into
the test, she is still sputtering to herself. "I graduated with honors." She
puts down her pencil halfway through. This isn't what she came for.

   She is more hopeful about the next exercise. The staffer produces 84 cards,
each with an occupation written on it. Rania must separate them into piles:
Would Not Choose, Might Choose, In Question.

   "I'd love to be a meteorologist. That'd be fun," she muses over one of the
cards. But impossible, she decides, without vision. What's "bus driver" doing in
here anyway? Most cards end up in her questionable pile, either because she's
not sure or because she wonders if good vision is a requirement. What about
anthropologist? She ends up with nine choices, mostly in social services.

   Rania wonders why they don't discuss the occupations In Question. "I don't
think we use those," the staffer says. "Let me go get the alphabetical
occupation finder."

   The few hours she has spent here are a disappointment. On her way out, Rania
stops to chat up the still-nameless staffer. "Will we talk more next time?"
Rania asks. "I just feel like I keep putting myself in a box and I need help
getting out."

   "We'll get you out of that box!" the woman promises.

   Rania later decides that she'll just register for college this spring and
forge ahead. She learned a little Braille while studying sign language; maybe
the Lighthouse will help her become proficient. And what about a guide dog? Can
she qualify for one given that her hearing is impaired as well as her vision?
She keeps feeling like there's some detailed set of instructions somewhere on
how to be blind, a missing diagram on how to build a life minus two key senses.

   "Sometimes," Rania says, "I think, 'Just get blind and be done with it.' "

   It's been a bad week. There is a lump on Rania's forehead, hidden by her dark
bangs. Her father was waiting to drive her to the store. She didn't see a
doorjamb and smacked into it, hard. Tears sprang to her eyes. In the car, she
averted her face, hoping her father wouldn't see. "Honey, what's wrong?" he had
asked. "I'm tired of losing vision, I'm tired of running into things, I'm tired
of being the stupid blind girl," she had wailed. There was nothing he could do
to comfort her.

   Dona offered to put Rania in touch with others like her, with Usher II, but
Rania demurred. She doesn't have the energy to pursue new friendships, and
transportation would be a hassle. Dating isn't a priority, though she would love
to remarry someday and longs to have more children, wants them so badly that she
declares that suffering a miscarriage would be worse than what she endures.
Could she take care of a baby she could not see, whose cries she might not hear?
Is that in the missing instruction sheet? Not that it matters, she thinks: Who
would want me, anyway, like this?

   Not long ago, Rania was at the mall, hating the glimpses of a tall young
woman with a white cane reflected in the store windows. Then she spotted a man
with a sign on his wheelchair. "Piss on Pity," it said. Rania had to laugh,
surprised to find herself in solidarity with this stranger who had given such
rude voice to her own unutterable fury.

   The care group from church has decided to go camping, but Patricia, who is
Rania's ride, can't stay the whole night, so Rania won't, either.

   Hiking down the path to the campsite, Rania keeps her cane folded in her
purse, letting her friends guide her. It's easier to heed their warnings than
her mother's, which always seem like nagging, no matter how tender. But as dusk
begins to fall, Rania, even in this cozy circle of friends, begins to feel
alone. It's difficult to make out Collin, playing with the other kids in the
woods, and she grows anxious, imagining lurking strangers waiting to grab him.
Conversation becomes a jumbled soundtrack from invisible lips. When everyone
wants to play Red Rover, Rania hesitates, but is cajoled into joining. They call
her name. "I can't see anything!" she shouts back, but runs forward anyway,
trusting they will catch her.

   The hour grows later, and someone suggests they go down to the lake to look
at the stars. As she sits on the sandy beach, the black night consumes Rania.
When it's time for everyone to leave, she takes the white cane from her purse,
confident that she can find her own way back up the hill through the silent
darkness.

   Tamara Jones is a staff writer for the Magazine.</body>

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2001


                             1510 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            November 16, 2001 Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Bond sale may top $300 million;
State plans to push for a higher rating

BYLINE: By Ed Anderson; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- The state plans to sell more than $300 million in bonds early
next year, possibly in February, Gov. Foster's chief financial adviser told the
State Bond Commission on Thursday.

   Commissioner of Administration Mark Drennen said his office is still looking
at the size of the issue and when to go into the bond market with them based on
interest rates and costs of issuing them.

   The state's last bond sale for new construction projects was in November,
2000, when it sold more than $347 million in bonds. Drennen said he hopes to
talk with the bond-rating agencies in the next few months in an attempt to
persuade them to improve the state's bond rating, making it cheaper to sell the
securities.

   "I have spoken to Moody's (bond-rating service), and I am going to press them
very hard for an upgrade," he said. Drennen said he will also talk to the other
major bond-rating agencies, Standard and Poor's and Fitch's Investment Services,
about an upgrade based on the state's more businesslike approach to finances.
The state is rated in the low end of the high range of ratings.

   The commission Thursday approved about $107 million in cash lines of credit
for construction projects that may or may not be included in the bond sale early
next year. A line of credit is a promise by the state to pay for all or part of
a project and allows construction to begin or plans to be drawn without having
cash on hand or bonds issued. Drennen said the $107 million in lines of credit
approved Thursday brings to $237 million the total cash lines of credit
approved. The limit is $240 million a year, and the other $3 million in projects
will be brought to the commission for approval next month, Drennen said.

   The panel also approved $195.6 million in noncash lines of credit for
projects that have been approved but will not break ground this year. Some of
the area projects approved for the lines of credit include:
   -- $3.2 million for land acquisition and construction of a Tournament Players
Golf Course near Westwego

   -- $4.2 million for equipment purchases for the National Center for Advanced
Manufacturing in New Orleans, a high-tech agency

   -- $6.9 million for planning and renovations to Fontainebleau State Park near
Mandeville

   -- $10.6 million for the relocation of Hickory Avenue in Jefferson Parish

   -- $4.1 million for the second phase of bridge approaches near Gramercy for
the Mississippi River Bridge in St. John the Baptist Parish

   -- $2 million for renovations and improvements to the Metropolitan
Development Center in Belle Chasse

   -- $2 million for the Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center's
Gene Therapy Research facilities in New Orleans and St. Tammany

   -- $1.9 million for improvements to the terminal at the Port of St. Bernard

   -- $12 million for the fourth stage of the Ernest Morial Convention Center in
New Orleans

   -- $300,000 for planning and reconstruction of the Dryades Street YMCA in New
Orleans

   -- $2.5 million for the planning and construction of a performing arts center
on the LaSalle tract in East Jefferson.

   The panel also rescinded $4.4 million for the construction of the new state
Supreme Court building at 400 Royal St. after court officials said the project
is running about six months behind schedule.

   Court Clerk John Oliver said the $4.4 million will be re-appropriated in the
July 1 fiscal year.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2001


                             1511 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 15, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1043 words

HEADLINE: Hopkins cancer center gets gift of $150 million;
 Kimmel donation largest ever made to the university;
 Kimmel gives $150 million to Hopkins

BYLINE: Tom Pelton

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A New York clothing industry billionaire has donated $150 million to the
Johns Hopkins University's cancer center, the largest single gift ever to the
university.

   The gift by Sidney Kimmel, 73, who owns a fashion empire that produces brands
including Polo Jeans, Ralph Lauren and Nine West, will enable what is already
one of the world's best cancer centers to expand its research, recruit talented
young scientists and build lodging for the families of cancer patients, hospital
officials said at a news conference yesterday.

   "We seek nothing less than the eradication of cancer in our lifetime, and
this gift brings us closer to that goal," Dr. Edward D. Miller, dean of the
medical school, told an audience at what is now called the Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins.

   The son of a Philadelphia cabbie, Kimmel owns restaurants, a hotel, a movie
production firm and part of the Miami Heat basketball team. He was inspired to
start a career as a philanthropist when a family friend died of cancer in the
early 1990s.

   Kimmel's nonprofit foundation during the past eight years has handed out
millions of dollars and endowed three other cancer centers named after him in
Philadelphia, San Diego and New York. He has also bankrolled a performing arts
center in Philadelphia and a special exhibit gallery at the Holocaust Memorial
Museum in Washington.

   "He wants to give away all his money to help find a cure for cancer," said
Dr. Curt I. Civin, a Hopkins oncology professor, at yesterday's news conference.
"That is going to be his lasting contribution to the world. ... Sidney Kimmel,
you are a mensch - a tremendously good man."

   No personal tie to city

   Kimmel has never been treated for cancer and has no personal connection to
Baltimore.

   But he was apparently impressed on his visit to the cancer center two years
ago, university officials said.

   During a long meeting in the medical school dean's board room, Kimmel
listened to presentations from a dozen cancer researchers who explained why
their cutting-edge experiments could go further with more money. Although he has
no formal medical education, Kimmel fired back with pointed questions, Hopkins
administrators said.

   After two years of deliberations with his own panel of scientific
consultants, Kimmel decided that his largest gift should go to Hopkins.

   Kimmel seemed especially impressed by how Hopkins has worked with the state
to use money from the settlement of Maryland's lawsuit against the tobacco
industry to fight cancer, university officials said.

   'I am blessed'

   The businessman-philanthropist did not appear at Hopkins yesterday and was
not available for comment.

   But in a written statement, Kimmel said, "I am blessed. To be able to support
one of the leading institutions in the world and build on its momentum gives so
much meaning to what we have all done thus far to defeat cancer."

   About a third of Kimmel's gift was received by the university this month,
with the rest to be transferred by his estate after his death.

   Part of the money will be used to build comfortable, home-like accommodations
for the families of cancer patients, said Ronald R. Peterson, president of the
Johns Hopkins Hospital and Health System. The location of the residential
facility has not been decided.

   The East Baltimore center has two nearby homes to accommodate families. But
each has about 10 rooms, too few to meet demand, said Dr. Martin Abeloff,
director of the cancer center.

   Clearing way for expansion

   The 28-year-old cancer center is one of the nation's largest, treating more
than 6,000 new patients a year. Doctors there conduct research into vaccines,
gene therapy and the molecular genetics of cancer, and offer treatments
including bone marrow transplantation and innovative surgery.

   Kimmel's donation will enable the center to expand its staff of 400
physicians and scientists and recruit the best young researchers, Abeloff said.
Kimmel has given the center the freedom to decide exactly which areas of
research would be best served by additional funding.

   The center expanded in January last year from cramped quarters into a $125
million clinical facility called the Harry and Jeanette Weinberg Building and
the $59 million Bunting Blaustein Center Research Building.

   Those buildings will continue to keep those names, which identify previous
donors. But the umbrella name for the cancer center will become the Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins.

   Kimmel's donation dwarfs the $7 million - worth about $100 million in today's
dollars - that the banker named Johns Hopkins gave in 1873 to create a
university and hospital in his name.

   Tops Bloomberg donation

   Before Kimmel's gift, the largest donation to the university was $100 million
by media mogul Michael R. Bloomberg, a 1964 graduate who is chair of the
university's board of trustees. He is also the mayor-elect of New York City.

   "On the day after my election," Bloomberg said in a written statement, "I
took time out to call and thank Sidney. He's probably the nation's leading
individual donor to cancer research, and that deserves recognition not only from
the Hopkins community but all of us."

   The gift was among the largest ever in the United States for cancer research,
matching the $151 million that chemical company magnate Jon Huntsman gave in
1999 to create the Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University of Utah.

   Intel founder has record

   The contribution is not the largest ever to a university. Intel computer
company co-founder Gordon Moore and his wife, Betty, donated $600 million to the
California Institute of Technology in Pasadena this fall.

   William C. Baker, a member of the Johns Hopkins Medicine Board of Visitors,
said the impact of the Kimmel donation will be felt in hospitals around the
globe.

   "The importance of this contribution from the Kimmel family is immeasurable,"
he said. "It's an enormous contribution, the granddaddy of them all.

   "Not only will the Hopkins institutions benefit from this, but people who
care about health care all around the world," said Baker, president of the
Chesapeake Bay Foundation.

   Sun staff writer Michael Scarcella contributed to this article.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Gift: Cancer center director Martin Abeloff (left) speaks at,
a news conference on the donation. Medical school dean Edward Miller, listens.,
ALGERINA PERNA : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2001


                             1512 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 15, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: H-P profits beat analyst estimates

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Hewlett-Packard Co. shares rose 9 percent yesterday after the high-tech giant's
fourth-quarter earnings beat analyst estimates, possibly strengthening the
company's hand as it tries to win support for the $23.7 billion acquisition of
Compaq Computer Corp.

   In the three months ended Oct. 31, H-P earned $97 million, or 5 cents per
share, down 89 percent from its profit of $922 million, or 47 cents per share,
in the same period last year.

   Revenue fell to $10.9 billion in the quarter from $13.3 billion a year ago,
but that was up from the third quarter's $10.3 billion.

   Excluding one-time gains and losses, H-P reported earnings of $361 million,
or 19 cents per share.  Analysts had predicted earnings excluding one-time
events of 8 cents per share, on revenue of $9.9 billion.

   Several analysts said the results were excellent, considering the bad
economy.  Jay P. Stevens of the Buckingham Research Group said the report gives
the company momentum in its bid to attract support for the Compaq deal.

   The results were announced before the stock market opened.  H-P shares were
up $1.85 to close at $22.08 on the New York Stock Exchange.  The stock, which
closed at $23.21 on Aug. 31, the last day of trading before the Compaq deal was
announced, has fallen as low as $12.50 since then.

   Compaq shares were up 13.6 percent, or $1.20 a share, at $10 on the NYSE.

   Local earnings

   Factory 2-U Stores Inc. reported a third-quarter net loss of $324,000, or 3
cents a share, compared with net income of $5.8 million, or 46 cents a share, a
year earlier.

   Sales at the San Diego-based company's 273 off-price stores climbed in the
quarter from $136.8 million to $145.5 million.

   However, same-store sales dipped in the quarter by 10.5 percent.

   Despite aggressive advertising "and promotional markdown investment in the
third quarter, we experienced a decline in transaction counts, indicating that
our core customer has been hard hit by the economic downturn," said Mike
Searles, Factory 2-U's president and chief executive officer.

   The amount of holiday promotional activity required to drive traffic in the
fourth quarter will necessitate higher markdowns, Searles said.

   Moreover, the company said it has slowed new store growth, and will complete
new store development this month with the opening of six stores.  The company
expects to end the year with 279 stores in 15 states.

   Shares of Factory 2-U closed yesterday at $14.80, down 19 cents.

   Collateral Therapeutics reported a third-quarter loss of $1 million, compared
with a loss of $3.5 million in the same period a year ago.  Revenue rose 700
percent to $4 million.

   The San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing a gene therapy to
treat angina, said increased revenue was the result of a milestone payment made
by development partner Schering AG.

   Collateral had $15.3 million in cash and short-term investments at the end of
September.

   Immune Response Corp. reported income of $1.4 million in the third quarter,
compared with a loss of $5.2 million a year earlier.  Revenue rose to $7.8
million from $1.1 million.

   The Carlsbad biotechnology company said the third quarter income results from
the recognition of deferred revenue associated with the termination of a
development agreement with Agouron Pharmaceuticals, a unit of Pfizer.

   Immune Response had $6 million in cash and short-term investments at the end
of September.  Subsequently, the company raised $2 million from a private
investor.

   Bakbone Software reported a $4.1 million net loss, or 9 cents a share, for
its second quarter, compared with a $6.1 million net loss, or 17 cents a share,
for the same period a year ago.

   The San Diego company, which develops storage management software, said
revenue rose to $2.3 million from $1.2 million.

   Lightspan reported a $17.1 million net loss, or 37 cents a share, for its
third quarter, compared with a $16.1 million net loss, or 35 cents a share, for
the same period last year.  Analysts had expected the company's loss to be 40
cents a share for the quarter.

   Revenues for the San Diego company, which focuses on educational software,
rose to $13.4 million from $11.1 million.


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2001


                             1513 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 15, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: H-P profits beat analyst estimates

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Hewlett-Packard Co. shares rose 9 percent yesterday after the high-tech
giant's fourth-quarter earnings beat analyst estimates, possibly strengthening
the company's hand as it tries to win support for the $23.7 billion acquisition
of Compaq Computer Corp. In the three months ended Oct. 31, H-P earned $97
million, or 5 cents per share, down 89 percent from its profit of $922 million,
or 47 cents per share, in the same period last year. Revenue fell to $10.9
billion in the quarter from $13.3 billion a year ago, but that was up from the
third quarter's $10.3 billion. Excluding one-time gains and losses, H-P reported
earnings of $361 million, or 19 cents per share.

   Analysts had predicted earnings excluding one-time events of 8 cents per
share, on revenue of $9.9 billion. Several analysts said the results were
excellent, considering the bad economy.

   Jay P. Stevens of the Buckingham Research Group said the report gives the
company momentum in its bid to attract support for the Compaq deal. The results
were announced before the stock market opened.

   H-P shares were up $1.85 to close at $22.08 on the New York Stock Exchange.

   The stock, which closed at $23.21 on Aug. 31, the last day of trading before
the Compaq deal was announced, has fallen as low as $12.50 since then. Compaq
shares were up 13.6 percent, or $1.20 a share, at $10 on the NYSE. Local
earnings Factory 2-U Stores Inc. reported a third-quarter net loss of $324,000,
or 3 cents a share, compared with net income of $5.8 million, or 46 cents a
share, a year earlier. Sales at the San Diego-based company's 273 off-price
stores climbed in the quarter from $136.8 million to $145.5 million. However,
same-store sales dipped in the quarter by 10.5 percent. Despite aggressive
advertising "and promotional markdown investment in the third quarter, we
experienced a decline in transaction counts, indicating that our core customer
has been hard hit by the economic downturn," said Mike Searles, Factory 2-U's
president and chief executive officer. The amount of holiday promotional
activity required to drive traffic in the fourth quarter will necessitate higher
markdowns, Searles said. Moreover, the company said it has slowed new store
growth, and will complete new store development this month with the opening of
six stores. The company expects to end the year with 279 stores in 15 states.
Shares of Factory 2-U closed yesterday at $14.80, down 19 cents. Collateral
Therapeutics reported a third-quarter loss of $1 million, compared with a loss
of $3.5 million in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue rose 700 percent to $4 million. The San Diego biotechnology company,
which is developing a gene therapy to treat angina, said increased revenue was
the result of a milestone payment made by development partner Schering AG.
Collateral had $15.3 million in cash and short-term investments at the end of
September. Immune Response Corp. reported income of $1.4 million in the third
quarter, compared with a loss of $5.2 million a year earlier.

   Revenue rose to $7.8 million from $1.1 million. The Carlsbad biotechnology
company said the third quarter income results from the recognition of deferred
revenue associated with the termination of a development agreement with Agouron
Pharmaceuticals, a unit of Pfizer. Immune Response had $6 million in cash and
short-term investments at the end of September.

   Subsequently, the company raised $2 million from a private investor. Bakbone
Software reported a $4.1 million net loss, or 9 cents a share, for its second
quarter, compared with a $6.1 million net loss, or 17 cents a share, for the
same period a year ago. The San Diego company, which develops storage management
software, said revenue rose to $2.3 million from $1.2 million. Lightspan
reported a $17.1 million net loss, or 37 cents a share, for its third quarter,
compared with a $16.1 million net loss, or 35 cents a share, for the same period
last year.

   Analysts had expected the company's loss to be 40 cents a share for the
quarter. Revenues for the San Diego company, which focuses on educational
software, rose to $13.4 million from $11.1 million.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1514 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 15, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Nuestro Pueblo; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 484 words

HEADLINE: Medical association installs new board

BYLINE: By Ana Ester Gershanik

BODY:

   The Hispanic American Medical Association of Louisiana recently installed its
board of directors for 2001-03 at a banquet at the Intercontinental Hotel in New
Orleans.

   Founded in 1989, the organization has a membership of 140 physicians and
medical students who meet regularly to listen to lectures about advances in the
medical field. HAMAL also informs the Hispanic community about health issues,
provides medical aid to Latin American countries, awards scholarships in
Washington, D.C., to Hispanic students interested in careers related to health
care and participates in health fairs for the local Hispanic community.

   The evening started with a special memorial to the victims of the Sept. 11
terrorist attacks.

   Dr. Juan Jorge Gershanik, outgoing president, installed the new officers. Dr.
Manuel Lopez is the new president. Born in Colombia, Lopez is a professor of
medicine and clinical immunology at Tulane University Medical Center. Dr.
Eduardo Herrera is president-elect; Dr. Soffy Botero, vice president; Dr. Julio
Figueroa, treasurer; and Dr. Alfonso Vargas, secretary. Members at large are
Drs. Yves Lacassie, Christian Mayorga, Gabriel Uribe and Moises Yoselevitz.

   The keynote speaker was Dr. Ricardo Sorensen, professor and chairman of
pediatrics at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, who spoke on
"New Concepts in Primary Immunodeficiencies" and discussed recent developments
in gene therapy.

Noticias

The Loyola Ballet, under the direction of Laura Zambrano, will present its fall
concert Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. at the Louis J. Roussel Performance Hall
in Loyola University's Communications/Music Complex. The ballet will present Act
II of "Swan Lake," a patriotic salute titled "The Union" and a guest performance
by the Komenka Dance Ensemble.

   General admission is $10. Cost is $5 for students and Loyola faculty and
staff. For information, call 865-3492.

   . . . . . . .

   The film series "Searching for Identity in Latin American Film" will show the
1999 film "La ley de Herodes," directed by Mexican Luis Estrada, on Monday at 7
p.m. in Room 204 of Jones Hall at Tulane University. Two contemporary Cuban
films are next on the agenda for the Monday series.

   . . . . . . .

   The 18th annual Mobile International Festival will take place Saturday at the
Arthur Outlaw Convention Center on the scenic waterfront of Mobile, Ala.

   The festival brings together the cultures of more than 60 countries and
ethnic groups, sharing its diversity with its Gulf Coast neighbors. The New
Orleans group Fredy Omar con Su Banda will lead the Latin dance party at the
festival from 5 to 6 p.m. For information, call Estela Dorn at (251) 470-7730.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news for Nuestro Pueblo, write to Ana Ester Gershanik at The
Times-Picayune, Newsroom, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429 or send
e-mail to AnaGersh@aol.com.

GRAPHIC: Officers of the HAMAL board for 2001-03 are, from left: Dr. Juan
Gershanik, immediate past president Dr. Moises Yoselevitz, member at large Dr.
Soffy Botero, vice president Dr. Alfonso Vargas, secretary Dr. Maria Cortez,
past president Dr. Christian Mayorga, member at large, Dr. Julio Figueroa,
treasurer Dr. Gabriel Uribe, member at large and Dr. Manuel Lopez, president.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2001


                             1515 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                   November 14, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07A

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy likely aids angina patients;
Pilot study finds drop in chest pain severity, increase in activity

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Introducing a gene into the hearts of severe angina patients dramatically
reduced their chest pain and improved their quality of life, according to the
results of a pilot study released here Tuesday.

   In the experimental treatment, 19 angina patients who were not candidates for
any additional therapy received either a placebo or the gene responsible for the
naturally existing protein known as vascular endothelial growth factor-2
(VEGF-2).

   VEGF-2 can stimulate the growth of new blood vessels, a process known as
angiogenesis.

   The patients received VEGF-2 through a catheter that was inserted in a leg
vein and threaded up to their heart.

   Of the 12 who actually received VEGF-2, eight experienced a substantial drop
in their angina symptoms, compared with little or no improvement in those who
got the placebo solution.

   Angina pectoris is pain or tightness in the chest caused by the fact that the
heart muscle isn't getting enough blood.

   One of the patients, Jacque Braswell, 72, a Los Angeles-area resident, said
that before the treatment she had a difficult time just walking from one room to
another in her home.

   Now she gets around easily and no longer has to take nitroglycerin for her
chest pain.

   "I can do anything," she said. "I've been to Ireland climbing mountains. I
even dance. I have no angina at all."

   In addition to an improvement in their symptoms, those who got the gene
therapy also could walk substantially longer on a treadmill. Imaging studies of
their hearts also showed improved blood flow.

   "This is a very important sign that angiogenesis can work" in treating
angina, said David Faxon, president of the American Heart Association and
cardiology section chief at the University of Chicago.

   The study now needs to be repeated in larger studies, said co-author Douglas
Losordo, an associate professor of medicine at Tufts University School of
Medicine.

   Losordo said Food and Drug Administration approval now is being sought to do
a study next year with 300 to 400 patients.

   -- John Fauber

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2001


                             1516 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    November 12, 2001 Monday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-8

LENGTH: 958 words

HEADLINE: UNDER YOUR SKIN;
 PITT SCIENTISTS DISCOVER A 'PRECURSOR' CELL THAT POINTS THE WAY TO MANIPULATING
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   A cell that doctors might someday use to manipulate the body's
disease-fighting immune system is, like beauty, only skin deep.

    The cell, which researchers at the University of Pittsburgh have found
lurking in the skin's lower layer, is thought to play a key role in the process
by which the immune system is alerted to the presence of foreign invaders and
signalled whether those invaders should be attacked.

    Other cells play a similar role in other parts of the body. But this cell,
because of its location in the skin, is easily accessible to doctors and thus
might be used for a variety of treatments, said Dr. Louis Falo Jr., chairman of
dermatology at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine.

    By performing a simple skin biopsy, for instance, doctors could obtain a
quantity of the cells from a patient that could be grown and altered in the
laboratory. The cells could then be administered back to the patient to prevent
transplant organ rejection, treat asthma and other autoimmune diseases, or mount
an attack on cancers.

    In burn patients, the cells might be used to seed artificial skin grafts so
that the grafts not only cover open wounds, but also fight infections in a way
similar to natural skin.

    A report on Pitt's identification of the cells, called Langerhans cell
precursors, will be published next month in the journal Nature Immunology and is
being posted today on the journal's Web site, www.nature.com/ni/.

    "I think it's a significant finding, if true," said Dr. Gregory Glenn of the
membrane biochemistry department at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research in
Silver Spring, Md. Langerhans cells have been a very hot research topic for the
past six or seven years, noted Glenn, who is developing a vaccine patch that
targets them. "I think there will be a lot of interest in the paper."

    "We suspect there's a lot of immune regulation going on in the skin," said
Falo, the study's senior investigator. The discovery of the new cell in the
dermis fills what has been a long-sought missing link in the immune-response
process, he added.

    Throughout the body, a class of cells called dendritic cells play the role
of training the immune system. They are called antigen-presenting cells because
they identify antigens -- an enzyme, protein or toxin that the immune system can
target -- and tell the myriad other cells in the immune system whether that
antigen is foreign and whether it should be destroyed.

    The subset of dendritic cells found in the skin's outer layer, the
epidermis, are called Langerhans cells. They are named for Paul Langerhans, the
German physician who, as a medical student in 1868, described the structures in
the skin that later were found to contain these dendritic cells. (In 1869, he
described the insulin-producing structures of the pancreas that are known as the
islets of Langerhans).

    For 100 years, nobody knew what Langerhans cells did, Glenn said. But now it
is known that they normally sit in the epidermis like sentries. When they
encounter a foreign invader, the cells are activated and crawl to a nearby lymph
node, where other immune cells pick up the information and mount an attack.

    An excess of Langerhans cells causes such skin disorders as psoriasis and
eczema.

    Until activated, Langerhans cells are not fully developed. But for
physicians who are trying to manipulate the immune system, Falo said, an even
less-developed version of the cell might be more suitable.

    So researchers have been looking for the precursor cell from which the
Langerhans cell develops. These cells presumably could be altered in ways that
might retrain the immune system, such as turning off the autoimmune reaction
that causes rheumatoid arthritis.

    They knew where to look: beneath the epidermis, in the dermis. Falo said the
cells, coming from the blood stream below, would have to pass through the dermis
to reach the epidermis. But that didn't narrow the search too much, because the
dermis is a virtual soup of immature cells.

    "No one knows why [the many types of cells] are there or what they're doing
there," Falo said.

    So for the study leaders, Drs. Adriana Larregina and Adrian Morelli,
researchers in Pitt's dermatology and surgery departments, respectively, the
feat was to identify which of these would develop into Langerhans cells. They
cultured the immature cells in the lab and used natural growth factors to coax
them into developing, identifying which ones became what appeared to be
Langerhans cells. They were then able to demonstrate that these cells could be
activated by an antigen and stimulate an immune response.

    Now that the precursor cells have been identified and described, researchers
might be able to remove these cells from patients, grow them in culture and then
engineer them to accomplish set goals. Angus Thomson of Pitt's Starzl
Transplantation Institute, for instance, is working to use dendritic cells to
teach the immune system to recognize the tissue of a transplanted organ as self,
not as foreign, and thus train the body not to reject the transplant graft.

    This approach might also be used to treat autoimmune diseases, in which the
body's immune system attacks parts of the body as if it is foreign.

    Just as the presence of the precursor cells in the skin makes them easy to
remove, it also makes it convenient to program the cells without removing them.
For instance, Falo has experimented with a pressurized-gas "gene gun" to fire
beneficial genes into dendritic cells in the skin; the genes are intended to
direct the cells to launch an attack on cancer.

    It now may be possible to find other ways to deliver this form of gene
therapy specifically to the Langerhans percursors in the skin, he added.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Simon Watkins/UPMC: The Langerhans cell precursor.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2001


                             1517 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            November 11, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Individuals honored

   Tulane University's School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine recently
honored several people for their commitment to global public health.

   The Dean's Medal was presented to businessman Robert M. Frehse, who has made
it possible for minorities to enter the public health work force through Tulane
scholarships.

   Maurice Leonard Lagarde III was recognized as the alumnus of the year for his
contributions and leadership in the board of governors at Tulane University
Health Sciences Center.

   Roseanna Rabalais, receptionist in the International Health and Development
Department, was given the Esprit de Corps Award for outstanding work ethic.

   Champion of Public Health awards were presented to Leighton Steward, author
and founder of the Sugar Busters! diet; Elizabeth Fontham, professor and head of
the department of public health and preventive medicine at Louisiana State
University; Jane Bertrand, an expert in family planning, HIV/AIDS and other
reproductive health issues; Charles N. Kahn III, president of the Federation of
American Hospitals; Dale Little, professor emeritus of tropical medicine; Roy
Rando, industrial hygienist and professor of environmental health; Dr. Gene
Usdin, a member of the psychiatric community who has worked to improve mental
health research; and Judith Watts, president of Agenda for Children.

Nursing professor elected

   Chi Eta Phi Sorority elected Carolyn W. Mosley as its 17th supreme basileus
at the group's recent annual meeting in Miami.

   Mosley is a professor at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
School of Nursing. She heads the Department of Mental Health and Community
Health Nursing.

   Chi Eta Phi Sorority has a membership of more than 5,000 registered
professional nurses and student nurses.

Grants awarded

   A team of Tulane's environmental health researchers, led by professor Henry
Glindmeyer, received a grant of about $550,000 from the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health to explore industrial exposures that may lead to
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

   Tulane pathologist Sanda Clejan received a Fulbright grant to teach in
Bucharest, Romania, at the Carol Davila School of Medicine.

   Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy recently received two grants, including
$371,250 to continue research into the genetic causes and possible therapies for
osteogenesis imperfecta, a rare congenital genetic disorder that afflicts people
with bones so brittle they break with the slightest bump. Another award to
continue the same research is in the amount of $1.8 million for five years. Dr.
Darwin Prockop is director of the Center for Gene Therapy.

   Tulane's Human Genetics Program received a yearlong grant for $75,000 to
educate patients and physicians about a set of rare genetic diseases. The
Cambridge-based company Transkeriotic Therapies is funding the Tulane program.
Dr. Jess Thoene is director of the human genetics program.

   Tulane researcher Dr. Jiang He, an associate professor of epidemiology and
medicine, and his colleagues received a research grant from the National
Institute of Health to participate in a national study of chronic kidney
disease.

Judges to be honored

The Greater New Orleans Chapter of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women
will hold its fifth annual Torchbearers Awards and silent auction Saturday from
6:30 to 10:30 p.m. at Lakewood Country Club, 4801 Gen. de Gaulle Drive.

   The theme for the event will be African-American women in the judiciary. The
group will honorJustice Bernette Johnson of the Louisiana Supreme Court, Judge
Yada Magee of Civil District Court andJudge Ernestine Gray of Juvenile Court.

   Proceeds from the silent auction will benefit the chapter's scholarship and
community service programs.

   Tickets are $40 each and are available by calling event chairwoman Yvonne
Mitchell-Grubb at 697-3553 or auction chairwoman Rhoda Timpton at 245-3664.
Tickets also may be bought at the door.

Activists to get awards

   LAGPAC will celebrate its 6th annual Community First awards gala on Saturday
from 7 to 10 p.m. at a private home.

   The event will honor political and community activists Edward Domingue,
Deyette Danford, and Laurie Reed. A special guest of honor will be civil rights
activist Rabbi Edward Cohn of Temple Sinai Reform Congregation.

   Tickets are $100. Individual, couple, and corporate sponsorships also are
available and range from $250 to $1,500.

   Proceeds will benefit the operations of LAGPAC, which works in Louisiana for
equal rights for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender residents.

   For tickets and sponsorships, and for information about location, call LAGPAC
executive director Melinda Shelton at 488-8322 or (225) 413-9981.

Retired archbishop to be cited

   Girls and Boys Town, the original Father Flanagan's Boys' Home, will honor
retired Archbishop Philip M. Hannan with its highest national award, the Father
Flanagan Award for Service to Youth, on Nov. 15 from 6:30 to 9:30 p.m. at the
D-Day Museum, 945 Magazine St.

   Hannan will be honored for his service to children and families, especially
for promoting education, care and housing for the needy.

   For ticket information, call 949-9248.

Efforts recognized

   Kyshun Webster, a graduate student at the University of New Orleans and a
full-time instructor at Xavier University, was among eight Louisianians honored
for their work on behalf of children at the seventh annual Angel Award gala held
recently in Baton Rouge.

   The Angel Award, a statewide civic recognition program sponsored by Blue
Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana, honors outstanding efforts on behalf of
children in Louisiana.

   Webster organized and implemented the first free tutorial program for
children of New Orleans' Lower 9th Ward when he was only 13 years old. The
program operated out of his garage. Webster continued his mission of helping
children during high school and as a student at Xavier University. In 1999, he
opened "A Home for Homework," a student-run youth community center.

   Webster has expanded his program to include parental involvement, cultural
enrichment and a summer arts camp.

Xavier awarded grant

   The Xavier University of Louisiana Center for the Advancement of Teaching has
received a two-year $350,000 grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

   Dr. Todd Stanislav, associate professor of biology, is the center's director.


Tulane staffers to serve

   Dr. James J. Corrigan, a professor of pediatrics at Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, has been elected president of the Irish and American Pediatric
Society.

   Tulane public health researcher Mark James has been asked to join the
editorial board of Public Health Reports, the official journal of the U.S.
Public Health Service.

Hospital gets gift

   The Starlight Foundation, a national organization dedicated to lighting up
the lives of seriously ill children, donated a $5,000 "fun center" to the Tulane
Hospital for Children.

   The center is equipped with a Nintendo player, games, videocassette recorder,
TV monitor and speakers on a cart that can go to each patient's bedside.

   The Deep South Chapter of the Professional Picture Framers Association raised
the money for the fun center. It was presented to the hospital by Charles
Saucier, president, and other officers of the association.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the next Thursday's editions.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2001


                             1518 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 11, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C05

LENGTH: 1377 words

HEADLINE: Obituaries

BODY:

    Edward P. Boland, 90, a Massachusetts Democrat who served in the House of
Representatives from 1953 until retiring in 1989, died of a heart ailment Nov. 4
in his home district of Springfield, Mass.

    Mr. Boland, a close ally of former House Speaker Thomas P. "Tip" O'Neill
(D-Mass.), rose to become the No. 2 Democrat on the Appropriations Committee
and, from 1977 to 1985, chaired the Select Committee on Intelligence.

    Giovanni Leone, 93 a former prime minister and president of Italy who
resigned as chief of state after allegations involving a payoff scandal, died
Nov. 9 in his home near Rome. The cause of death was not reported.

    President Leone, a prominent member of the Christian Democratic Party,
became president in 1971. He resigned six months before the end of his
seven-year term amid allegations of links to a major payoff scandal involving
the U.S. aircraft manufacturer Lockheed. The charges were never proved.

    H. Gabriel Murphy, 98, an insurance executive who as the largest minority
owner of the original Washington Senators baseball team waged a losing battle to
keep the team in the nation's capital, died of a heart ailment Nov. 1 at his
home in Washington.

    He was a 40 percent owner of the Senators when majority owner Calvin
Griffith moved the team to Minnesota in 1960. In 1984, he sold his stake in what
had become the Minnesota Twins to Carl Pohlad.

    Fred J. Maroon, 77, whose images of the city and of President Richard M.
Nixon's White House helped make him a leading Washington photographer, died of
multiple myeloma Nov. 5 in his home in Washington.

    His work appeared in books and leading magazines and was exhibited in such
galleries as the Museum of Modern Art, the National Gallery of Art and the
Metropolitan Museum of Art.

    Anthony Shaffer, 75, a British playwright who won a 1971 Tony Award for the
mystery "Sleuth" and wrote screenplays for Alfred Hitchcock's "Frenzy" and three
Agatha Christie stories, died Nov. 6 at his home in London after a heart attack.

    "Sleuth" ran for more than 2,300 performances on Broadway and in London's
West End and has become a perennial favorite of professional and amateur theater
groups. Joseph L. Mankiewicz directed the 1972 film version starring Laurence
Olivier and Michael Caine.

    Theodore M. Alexander Sr., 92, an insurance company founder and civil rights
activist who has been credited with keeping the historic 1955-56 Montgomery bus
boycott alive, died Nov. 1 in Atlanta. The cause of death was not reported.

    After white Montgomery residents canceled auto insurance policies for cars
used to drive black people to work when they boycotted segregated buses, he
obtained Lloyd's of London insurance for the vehicles.

    Patricia Locke, 73, an American Indian of Hunkpapa Lakota and White Earth
Chippewa heritage and former MacArthur fellow who worked to preserve indigenous
languages and helped 17 American Indian tribes start colleges, died Oct. 20 in
Phoenix. The cause of death was not reported.

    She received a 1991 MacArthur fellowship for her work in preserving and
revitalizing Indian languages. She co-founded what became the International
Native Language Issues Institute and served as national coordinator for an
American Indian Religious Freedom Act amendment sponsored by the Association on
American Indian Affairs.

    Jeffrey M. Isner, 53, a Boston cardiologist who pioneered the use of gene
therapy to treat people with heart disease, died Oct. 31 at his home in Weston,
Mass., after a heart attack.

    Working with patients who were too sick and whose arteries were too clogged
for bypass surgery or angioplasty, Dr. Isner's team at St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center in Boston and Tufts University School of Medicine devised a technique to
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels to the heart, bypassing the clogged
vessels, easing pain and restoring some patients to full lives.

    Richard H. Best, 91, a retired Rand Corp. security manager who as a World
War II Navy bomber pilot scored hits on two of the four Japanese aircraft
carriers sunk in the Battle of Midway, died Oct. 26 in Santa Monica, Calif. The
cause of death was not reported.

    Mr. Best, a New Jersey native and a 1932 graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy
at Annapolis, served at Midway as a dive bomber pilot aboard the carrier
Enterprise. For his actions in the battle, he received the Navy Cross, the
Navy's highest award for valor except for the Medal of Honor, and the
Distinguished Flying Cross.

    George F. Solomon, 69, who was one of the first scientists to study the
connection between emotions and immunity, died Oct. 7 in Los Angeles after a
stroke.

    In the 1960s, he began conducting research on the effects of psychological
factors on diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. In 1974, he published a paper
linking stress to altered immunity, prompting a generation of scientists to
enter what is now a lively field of research.

    Kim Gardner, 53, a Los Angeles restaurant and pub owner who as a bassist had
played with several bands, including the British rock group Ashton, Gardner &
Dyke, died of cancer Oct. 24 at his home in Hollywood.

    The London native joined fellow teenage musicians Ron Wood, Ali McKenzie,
Tony Munroe and Pete McDaniels to form the Thunderbirds. His next group was
Ashton, Gardner & Dyke with Tony Ashton and Roy Dyke in 1968. He later toured
with Pacific Gas and Electric and other bands in the 1970s. He also played bass
with everyone from Eric Clapton to Bo Didley and worked on 27 albums.

    Menahem Mansoor, 90, who had taught Hebrew and Semitic studies at the
University of Wisconsin from 1955 until retiring as professor emeritus in 1982,
died of cancer Oct. 21 in Madison, Wis.

    Dr. Mansoor, who founded the university's Hebrew and Semitic studies
department, was the author of more than 80 books and technical articles,
including 15 textbooks. He had worked on the Dead Sea scrolls and had developed
early correspondence courses in Hebrew, Aramaic and Arabic.

    James Pinckney Miller, 81, who wrote the screenplay for the 1962 movie "Days
of Wine and Roses" -- in which Jack Lemmon played Joe Clay, who recalls at an
Alcoholics Anonymous meeting the events that led him and his wife into alcoholis
-- died of pneumonia Nov. 1 in Stockton, N.J.

    Mr. Miller got his start writing for television in the 1950s. His credits
include episodes of the series "The Philco Television Playhouse" (1948-55) and
"The Goodyear Television Playhouse" (1951-57). He also wrote the television
movies "The Lindbergh Kidnapping Case" (1976) and "I Know My First Name Is
Steven" (1989), a true story about a kidnapped boy.

    John Roberts, 56, a promoter of the 1969 Woodstock Music and Art Fair, died
of cancer Oct. 27 at a hospital in New York.

    He and his partners lost $ 2.3 million but recovered their loss with
royalties from film and album spinoffs and held onto the profitable name and
trademark symbol of a dove on the neck of a guitar.

    Sandy Lehmann-Haupt, 59, one of the 1960s Merry Pranksters and a principal
source for the best-selling book "The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test," died Oct. 29
in a hospital in Callicoon Center, N.Y., after a heart attack.

    At age 22, he rode aboard novelist Ken Kesey's psychedelic bus, which helped
define the hippie generation. He lived for a time in Kesey's home in Palo Alto,
Calif., and experimented with LSD, then legal, with a group of Kesey's
companions who became known as the Merry Pranksters as they made an LSD-fueled
trip across America.

    Ernst Gombrich, 92, the scholar whose "The Story of Art" became one of the
most famous and popular books on art ever published, died Nov. 3 in London. The
cause of death was not reported.

    "The Story of Art," published in 1950, was originally conceived as a
children's book. Written entirely from memory, it has sold 6 million copies in
32 languages. His other works include "Art and Illusion," "The Sense of Order"
and "Meditations on a Hobby Horse."

    Epifanio "Fano" Irizarry Jusino, 86, an impressionist painter well-known in
his native Puerto Rico, died of respiratory failure Nov. 2 at his home in Ponce,
Puerto Rico.

    His watercolors and acrylic paintings -- many depicting local landscapes and
traditions -- are widely collected and exhibited on the Spanish-speaking
Caribbean island.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2001


                             1519 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 10, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1476 words

HEADLINE: Neuroscience flourishes in San Diego; Six-day event puts vast field of
brain study in spotlight

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Researchers at the Neurosciences Institute in La Jolla want to know why fruit
flies need sleep, so they have engineered a tiny contraption that measures
electrical charges in its brain.

   A mile away at the Salk Institute, Fred Gage probes how brain cells die, and
how they regenerate.  Now in rodents.  Maybe someday in humans.

   Across Interstate 5 at UCSD's Thornton Hospital, the first gene therapy for
human dementia was attempted on an Alzheimer's patient in April.

   When it comes to brain research, Dr. Leon Thal, head of Alzheimer's research
at the University of California San Diego sometimes jokes "there are more
neuroscientists per square foot here than anywhere else in the world."

   Starting today, as many as 25,000 researchers from all over the world will
begin filling the San Diego Convention Center with its first giant gathering
since the center doubled its space.

   Titled "Unraveling the Mysteries, Delivering the Cures," the event is San
Diego's largest ever on a medical or science topic, twice the size of June's
Bio2001, according to the San Diego Convention and Visitors Bureau.

   The six-day program of the Society for Neuroscience includes nearly 100
satellite seminars in a dozen local hotels, looking at such topics as head
trauma, autism and how the drug Ecstasy affects the brain.

   Many researchers are exploring the nature of consciousness itself, asking
whether animals have a true sense of awareness.  In that quest, they ponder what
regions of a mouse brain govern whisker sensation, or the brain-wave patterns of
sleeping cats.

   For patients looking for a cure for neurological disorders and disease, the
neurosciences meeting promises little in the way of immediate help.  The goal of
these scientists is a basic understanding of how the brain system functions, a
key to developing treatments.

   That approach can be incredibly frustrating for someone who is sick, said Ron
McKay of the National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke.

   "But there's no doubt that there's a real revolution going on in
neuroscience, and we're getting right into the heart of what the brain is,"
McKay said.

   A heady group

   To neuroscientists, the human brain is a multidimensional web of fine Belgian
lace with 100 billion knotted cellular mysteries to explore.  They build careers
trying to understand one specific type of signaling pathway or one class of
neurons.

   They wonder how the brain repairs itself, draws conclusions and ranks values.
How do three dozen regions of the brain governing vision work together to "see"?
And does the brain have a "soul"?

   There are efforts to see inside a bird's brain as it hears another bird's
song or a human's as it experiences music.

   In general, neuroscientists are a heady group.  In their world, a "slice"
refers to a thin layer of brain cells spread on a glass slide, not pizza.

   Rather than specializing in treating patients or performing surgery, these
researchers delve into the basic mechanisms of perception, sensation and
thought.  How does a person know, they might ask, that he is seeing a red
Ferrari in motion.  How does the phenomenon of "recognition" work?

   For them, memory is not just a mental scrapbook but an enormous Rubik's cube.
It is a system that uses one set of tools to recite a phone number, another to
ride a bicycle and still another to recognize a face.  In all there will be
about 15,000 written presentations at the convention and hundreds of talks.

   "It's an enormous field, not just the human brain and spinal cord, but
peripheral nerves and the entire nervous systems of every species, with
comparative neurobiology even in insects," said Gage, the society's
president-elect.

   Center of neuroscience

   Locally, the work is centered at UCSD, and Scripps Research, Burnham, Salk
and Neurosciences institutes, which collectively receive at least $100 million a
year in grants, mostly from the federal government but some from philanthropic
foundations.  Lately, multimillion-dollar grants are announced almost weekly.

   In the past two months:

   [] Scripps Research Institute received $35 million to study the genes
involved in alcoholism.

   [] UCSD installed a $13.5 million magnetic resonance imaging center to record
the neurochemical process of human thought and emotion.

   [] UCSD's Thal was named to lead a $54 million international Alzheimer's
disease research effort.

   [] UCSD's supercomputer and neuroimaging experts received $20 million for a
high-speed, cross-country network to see and study brain disease that will link
the efforts of many research centers.

   "La Jolla is now arguably the best neuroscientist research center in the
world," said Dr. Stuart Lipton, wooed two years ago to head the Burnham's center
for neuroscience and aging.

   Lipton came from Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, where he was chief
of neurosurgical research.

   "It has a certain conglomerate of expertise in molecular and cellular
research, neuronal cell death, imaging and even behavior," he said.

   McKay credits the state of California for spending money to develop academic
programs in these areas at its universities.  McKay said the expertise in
molecular biology of UCSD and Salk researchers paved the way for neuroscience
excellence.

   "Draw a curve and look at the rates of investment," he said.  "Certainly UC
Berkeley and UCLA don't compare, but UCSD has come out from sort of nowhere."

   Breakthroughs

   In the "Who's Who" of San Diego neuroscience, there have been researchers
such as the late Dr. George Glenner of UCSD, who isolated the beta amyloid
peptide believed to cause Alzheimer's disease.

   The Salk's Steve Heinemann cloned the first receptor for a key
neurotransmitter, glutamate.

   There is Gage's discovery that in mice exercise stimulates neuronal growth
and that even an aging brain can create new neuronal connections, an exciting
find about the brain's potential to repair injury and perhaps suppress
forgetfulness of aging.

   Dr. Floyd Bloom, neuropharmacology chairman for Scripps Research Institute,
came to the Salk Institute from the National Institute of Mental Health in
Washington, D.C., in 1975 with an interest in mapping the brain.  These days, he
superimposes images not just of specific structures but of neurotransmitters and
their receptors, a mind-boggling multidimensional brain atlas.

   A major UCSD effort to study the effect of the AIDS virus on the brain began
more than 10 years ago.  A new project to study marijuana's medicinal use got
under way last year.

   'Sense of newness'

   San Diego is home to three Nobel Prize winners working in neuroscience,
including Francis Crick and Dr. Roger Guillemin of the Salk Institute, and
Neurosciences Institute director Dr. Gerald Edelman.

   Edelman's institute is the newest here and arguably the most rarefied.

   "A monastery," Edelman calls it, whose 37 researchers are "strongly urged" to
lunch together each day in the institute dining room and talk about their
various interests -- conversations that may take their work in unexpected
directions.

   San Diego's emergence as a brain research center is credited to "a critical
mass" of luck, climate and talent.

   "A lot of people are here simply because a lot of other people are here,"
said Charles Stevens, a Salk researcher.

   Stevens specializes in the neurobiology of drug addiction and is working on a
vaccine to block the effect of cocaine.

   Terry Sejnowski, a UCSD and Salk Institute computational neuroscientist,
arrived a decade ago from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.  Sejnowski
credits the drawing power of the region's "sense of newness, that the best years
in La Jolla are yet to come."

   Sejnowski said that is as opposed "to a lot of good places, like Hopkins and
Harvard, where in some respects their good years are behind them, and you get
the feeling that things are static and fixed."

   Researchers such as Gage, Lipton and Edelman see La Jolla's neurosciences
environment as less political, less bureaucratic and less competitive than the
East Coast, with smaller labs and more collegiality.

   The tie-less climate and a game of tennis can inspire as much collaboration
as a faculty seminar.

   One of George Koob's favorite recollections is of Crick, who won a Nobel
Prize for identifying the structure of DNA, "coming down to have lunch with a
bunch of us on the patio of the Salk Institute."

   "Back then, he was asking fairly naive questions about brain structure, and
now he can run circles around the rest of us in discussing the nature of visual
perception," Koob says.

   Koob specializes at Scripps in the neurobiology of drug addiction and
alcohol.

   "In California there's an intellectual social style that promotes new
thinking.  I'm tempted to use words like freedom," McKay said.  "And outstanding
science comes from that -- to think for yourself."



GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1,2. Don Kohlbauer / Union-Tribune; 1. Neuroscientist Bruno Van
Swinderen, working with lights off, studied brain activity in a fruit fly. 2.
Dr. Gerald Edelman directs the city's newest research group. (A-14)

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2001


                             1520 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 10, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1454 words

HEADLINE: Neuroscience flourishes in San Diego;
Six-day event puts vast field of brain study in spotlight

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Researchers at the Neurosciences Institute in La Jolla want to know why fruit
flies need sleep, so they have engineered a tiny contraption that measures
electrical charges in its brain. A mile away at the Salk Institute, Fred Gage
probes how brain cells die, and how they regenerate.

   Now in rodents.

   Maybe someday in humans. Across Interstate 5 at UCSD's Thornton Hospital, the
first gene therapy for human dementia was attempted on an Alzheimer's patient in
April. When it comes to brain research, Dr. Leon Thal, head of Alzheimer's
research at the University of California San Diego sometimes jokes "there are
more neuroscientists per square foot here than anywhere else in the world."
Starting today, as many as 25,000 researchers from all over the world will begin
filling the San Diego Convention Center with its first giant gathering since the
center doubled its space. Titled "Unraveling the Mysteries, Delivering the
Cures," the event is San Diego's largest ever on a medical or science topic,
twice the size of June's Bio2001, according to the San Diego Convention and
Visitors Bureau. The six-day program of the Society for Neuroscience includes
nearly 100 satellite seminars in a dozen local hotels, looking at such topics as
head trauma, autism and how the drug Ecstasy affects the brain. Many researchers
are exploring the nature of consciousness itself, asking whether animals have a
true sense of awareness.

   In that quest, they ponder what regions of a mouse brain govern whisker
sensation, or the brain-wave patterns of sleeping cats. For patients looking for
a cure for neurological disorders and disease, the neurosciences meeting
promises little in the way of immediate help.

   The goal of these scientists is a basic understanding of how the brain system
functions, a key to developing treatments. That approach can be incredibly
frustrating for someone who is sick, said Ron McKay of the National Institute
for Neurological Disorders and Stroke. "But there's no doubt that there's a real
revolution going on in neuroscience, and we're getting right into the heart of
what the brain is," McKay said. A heady group To neuroscientists, the human
brain is a multidimensional web of fine Belgian lace with 100 billion knotted
cellular mysteries to explore.

   They build careers trying to understand one specific type of signaling
pathway or one class of neurons. They wonder how the brain repairs itself, draws
conclusions and ranks values.

   How do three dozen regions of the brain governing vision work together to
"see"? And does the brain have a "soul"? There are efforts to see inside a
bird's brain as it hears another bird's song or a human's as it experiences
music. In general, neuroscientists are a heady group.

   In their world, a "slice" refers to a thin layer of brain cells spread on a
glass slide, not pizza. Rather than specializing in treating patients or
performing surgery, these researchers delve into the basic mechanisms of
perception, sensation and thought.

   How does a person know, they might ask, that he is seeing a red Ferrari in
motion.

   How does the phenomenon of "recognition" work? For them, memory is not just a
mental scrapbook but an enormous Rubik's cube.

   It is a system that uses one set of tools to recite a phone number, another
to ride a bicycle and still another to recognize a face.

   In all there will be about 15,000 written presentations at the convention and
hundreds of talks. "It's an enormous field, not just the human brain and spinal
cord, but peripheral nerves and the entire nervous systems of every species,
with comparative neurobiology even in insects," said Gage, the society's
president-elect. Center of neuroscience Locally, the work is centered at UCSD,
and Scripps Research, Burnham, Salk and Neurosciences institutes, which
collectively receive at least $100 million a year in grants, mostly from the
federal government but some from philanthropic foundations.

   Lately, multimillion-dollar grants are announced almost weekly. In the past
two months: [] Scripps Research Institute received $35 million to study the
genes involved in alcoholism. [] UCSD installed a $13.5 million magnetic
resonance imaging center to record the neurochemical process of human thought
and emotion. [] UCSD's Thal was named to lead a $54 million international
Alzheimer's disease research effort. [] UCSD's supercomputer and neuroimaging
experts received $20 million for a high-speed, cross-country network to see and
study brain disease that will link the efforts of many research centers. "La
Jolla is now arguably the best neuroscientist research center in the world,"
said Dr. Stuart Lipton, wooed two years ago to head the Burnham's center for
neuroscience and aging. Lipton came from Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston,
where he was chief of neurosurgical research. "It has a certain conglomerate of
expertise in molecular and cellular research, neuronal cell death, imaging and
even behavior," he said. McKay credits the state of California for spending
money to develop academic programs in these areas at its universities.

   McKay said the expertise in molecular biology of UCSD and Salk researchers
paved the way for neuroscience excellence. "Draw a curve and look at the rates
of investment," he said.

   "Certainly UC Berkeley and UCLA don't compare, but UCSD has come out from
sort of nowhere." Breakthroughs In the "Who's Who" of San Diego neuroscience,
there have been researchers such as the late Dr. George Glenner of UCSD, who
isolated the beta amyloid peptide believed to cause Alzheimer's disease. The
Salk's Steve Heinemann cloned the first receptor for a key neurotransmitter,
glutamate. There is Gage's discovery that in mice exercise stimulates neuronal
growth and that even an aging brain can create new neuronal connections, an
exciting find about the brain's potential to repair injury and perhaps suppress
forgetfulness of aging. Dr. Floyd Bloom, neuropharmacology chairman for Scripps
Research Institute, came to the Salk Institute from the National Institute of
Mental Health in Washington, D.C., in 1975 with an interest in mapping the
brain.

   These days, he superimposes images not just of specific structures but of
neurotransmitters and their receptors, a mind-boggling multidimensional brain
atlas. A major UCSD effort to study the effect of the AIDS virus on the brain
began more than 10 years ago.

   A new project to study marijuana's medicinal use got under way last year.
`Sense of newness' San Diego is home to three Nobel Prize winners working in
neuroscience, including Francis Crick and Dr. Roger Guillemin of the Salk
Institute, and Neurosciences Institute director Dr. Gerald Edelman. Edelman's
institute is the newest here and arguably the most rarefied. "A monastery,"
Edelman calls it, whose 37 researchers are "strongly urged" to lunch together
each day in the institute dining room and talk about their various interests --
conversations that may take their work in unexpected directions. San Diego's
emergence as a brain research center is credited to "a critical mass" of luck,
climate and talent. "A lot of people are here simply because a lot of other
people are here," said Charles Stevens, a Salk researcher. Stevens specializes
in the neurobiology of drug addiction and is working on a vaccine to block the
effect of cocaine. Terry Sejnowski, a UCSD and Salk Institute computational
neuroscientist, arrived a decade ago from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

   Sejnowski credits the drawing power of the region's "sense of newness, that
the best years in La Jolla are yet to come." Sejnowski said that is as opposed
"to a lot of good places, like Hopkins and Harvard, where in some respects their
good years are behind them, and you get the feeling that things are static and
fixed." Researchers such as Gage, Lipton and Edelman see La Jolla's
neurosciences environment as less political, less bureaucratic and less
competitive than the East Coast, with smaller labs and more collegiality. The
tie-less climate and a game of tennis can inspire as much collaboration as a
faculty seminar. One of George Koob's favorite recollections is of Crick, who
won a Nobel Prize for identifying the structure of DNA, "coming down to have
lunch with a bunch of us on the patio of the Salk Institute." "Back then, he was
asking fairly naive questions about brain structure, and now he can run circles
around the rest of us in discussing the nature of visual perception," Koob says.
Koob specializes at Scripps in the neurobiology of drug addiction and alcohol.
"In California there's an intellectual social style that promotes new thinking.

   I'm tempted to use words like freedom," McKay said.

   "And outstanding science comes from that -- to think for yourself."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Neuroscientist Bruno Van Swinderen, working with
lights off, studied brain activity in a fruit fly. 2. Dr. Gerald Edelman directs
the city's newest research group. (A-14); PHOTOBY: 1,2. Don Kohlbauer /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1521 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 8, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: UPTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Individuals honored

   Tulane University's School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine recently
honored several people for their commitment to global public health.

   The Dean's Medal was presented to businessman Robert M. Frehse, who has made
it possible for minorities to enter the public health work force through Tulane
scholarships.

   Maurice Leonard Lagarde III was recognized as the alumnus of the year for his
contributions and leadership in the board of governors at Tulane University
Health Sciences Center.

   Roseanna Rabalais, receptionist in the International Health and Development
Department, was given the Esprit de Corps Award for outstanding work ethic.

   Champion of Public Health awards were presented to Leighton Steward, author
and founder of the Sugar Busters! diet; Elizabeth Fontham, professor and head of
the department of public health and preventive medicine at Louisiana State
University; Jane Bertrand, an expert in family planning, HIV/AIDS and other
reproductive health issues; Charles N. Kahn III, president of the Federation of
American Hospitals; Dale Little, professor emeritus of tropical medicine; Roy
Rando, industrial hygienist and professor of environmental health; Dr. Gene
Usdin, a member of the psychiatric community who has worked to improve mental
health research; and Judith Watts, president of Agenda for Children.

Nursing professor elected

   Chi Eta Phi Sorority elected Carolyn W. Mosley as its 17th supreme basileus
at the group's recent annual meeting in Miami.

   Mosley is a professor at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
School of Nursing. She heads the Department of Mental Health and Community
Health Nursing.

   Chi Eta Phi Sorority has a membership of more than 5,000 registered
professional nurses and student nurses.

Grants awarded

   A team of Tulane's environmental health researchers, led by professor Henry
Glindmeyer, received a grant of about $550,000 from the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health to explore industrial exposures that may lead to
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

   Tulane pathologist Sanda Clejan received a Fulbright grant to teach in
Bucharest, Romania, at the Carol Davila School of Medicine.

   Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy recently received two grants, including
$371,250 to continue research into the genetic causes and possible therapies for
osteogenesis imperfecta, a rare congenital genetic disorder that afflicts people
with bones so brittle they break with the slightest bump. Another award to
continue the same research is in the amount of $1.8 million for five years. Dr.
Darwin Prockop is director of the Center for Gene Therapy.

   Tulane's Human Genetics Program received a yearlong grant for $75,000 to
educate patients and physicians about a set of rare genetic diseases. The
Cambridge-based company Transkeriotic Therapies is funding the Tulane program.
Dr. Jess Thoene is director of the human genetics program.

   Tulane researcher Dr. Jiang He, an associate professor of epidemiology and
medicine, and his colleagues received a research grant from the National
Institute of Health to participate in a national study of chronic kidney
disease.

Judges to be honored

The Greater New Orleans Chapter of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women
will hold its fifth annual Torchbearers Awards and silent auction Saturday from
6:30 to 10:30 p.m. at Lakewood Country Club, 4801 Gen. de Gaulle Drive.

   The theme for the event will be African-American women in the judiciary. The
group will honorJustice Bernette Johnson of the Louisiana Supreme Court, Judge
Yada Magee of Civil District Court andJudge Ernestine Gray of Juvenile Court.

   Proceeds from the silent auction will benefit the chapter's scholarship and
community service programs.

   Tickets are $40 each and are available by calling event chairwoman Yvonne
Mitchell-Grubb at 697-3553 or auction chairwoman Rhoda Timpton at 245-3664.
Tickets also may be bought at the door.

Activists to get awards

   LAGPAC will celebrate its 6th annual Community First awards gala on Saturday
from 7 to 10 p.m. at a private home.

   The event will honor political and community activists Edward Domingue,
Deyette Danford, and Laurie Reed. A special guest of honor will be civil rights
activist Rabbi Edward Cohn of Temple Sinai Reform Congregation.

   Tickets are $100. Individual, couple, and corporate sponsorships also are
available and range from $250 to $1,500.

   Proceeds will benefit the operations of LAGPAC, which works in Louisiana for
equal rights for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender residents.

   For tickets and sponsorships, and for information about location, call LAGPAC
executive director Melinda Shelton at 488-8322 or (225) 413-9981.

Retired archbishop to be cited

   Girls and Boys Town, the original Father Flanagan's Boys' Home, will honor
retired Archbishop Philip M. Hannan with its highest national award, the Father
Flanagan Award for Service to Youth, on Nov. 15 from 6:30 to 9:30 p.m. at the
D-Day Museum, 945 Magazine St.

   Hannan will be honored for his service to children and families, especially
for promoting education, care and housing for the needy.

   For ticket information, call 949-9248.

Efforts recognized

   Kyshun Webster, a graduate student at the University of New Orleans and a
full-time instructor at Xavier University, was among eight Louisianians honored
for their work on behalf of children at the seventh annual Angel Award gala held
recently in Baton Rouge.

   The Angel Award, a statewide civic recognition program sponsored by Blue
Cross and Blue Shield of Louisiana, honors outstanding efforts on behalf of
children in Louisiana.

   Webster organized and implemented the first free tutorial program for
children of New Orleans' Lower 9th Ward when he was only 13 years old. The
program operated out of his garage. Webster continued his mission of helping
children during high school and as a student at Xavier University. In 1999, he
opened "A Home for Homework," a student-run youth community center.

   Webster has expanded his program to include parental involvement, cultural
enrichment and a summer arts camp.

Xavier awarded grant

   The Xavier University of Louisiana Center for the Advancement of Teaching has
received a two-year $350,000 grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

   Dr. Todd Stanislav, associate professor of biology, is the center's director.


Tulane staffers to serve

   Dr. James J. Corrigan, a professor of pediatrics at Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, has been elected president of the Irish and American Pediatric
Society.

   Tulane public health researcher Mark James has been asked to join the
editorial board of Public Health Reports, the official journal of the U.S.
Public Health Service.

Hospital gets gift

   The Starlight Foundation, a national organization dedicated to lighting up
the lives of seriously ill children, donated a $5,000 "fun center" to the Tulane
Hospital for Children.

   The center is equipped with a Nintendo player, games, videocassette recorder,
TV monitor and speakers on a cart that can go to each patient's bedside.

   The Deep South Chapter of the Professional Picture Framers Association raised
the money for the fun center. It was presented to the hospital by Charles
Saucier, president, and other officers of the association.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the next Thursday's editions.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2001


                             1522 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    November 7, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 450 words

HEADLINE: GenVec drug shows early promise;
 After radiation therapy, tumors shrink in 7 of 7 cancer patients

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A GenVec Inc. drug designed to enhance the effects of radiation therapy in
cancer patients showed promise in an early-stage clinical trial, according to
results presented yesterday at a scientific conference in San Francisco.

   Tumors injected before radiation with the gene-therapy drug TNFerade shrank
in all seven patients in the trial, with tumors treated in two patients
disappearing entirely, the company said.

   Meanwhile, "control" tumors did not shrink when treated with the same doses
of radiation alone in some of the same patients.

   The test results, however, do not mean the patients, all of whom were not
helped by other therapies and were extremely sick by the time they enrolled in
the Phase I trial, were cured, the company cautioned.

   The drug did not appear to cause any serious side effects.

   Executives of Gaithersburg-based GenVec said yesterday that they are excited
about the results, and Chief Executive Officer Paul Fischer said the company is
laying plans for a series of more definitive human tests next year. One of the
diseases the company is exploring: pancreatic cancer, a disease that kills
28,000 Americans a year and has no truly effective treatment.

   "GenVec expects to do several Phase II trials," Fischer said. "We'll start
one in the middle of the year, one in the fourth quarter and one" in 2003.

   TNFerade contains a gene that directs the production of the anti-cancer
protein TNF-alpha. Once inside the tumor, TNFerade is designed to begin
production of TNF-alpha when hit by radiation.

   Eight patients have been treated in the trial, with one dropping out before
completing it. The trial called for patients to get TNFerade injections directly
into accessible tumors one to two times a week for up to six weeks while getting
their standard doses of radiation therapy.

   Results presented yesterday at the American Society of Therapeutic Radiology
and Oncology meeting in San Francisco were for the two lowest dose levels.

   The trial is continuing, with up to five dose levels planned. Three to six
patients are enrolled at each dose.

   At the two lowest dose levels, two out of seven patients completing the trial
had a complete response, meaning the tumors treated shrank 100 percent. Two
showed a partial response, meaning tumors treated with TNFerade shrank more than
50 percent after radiation. Three patients demonstrated stable disease, meaning
that - while their tumors shrank - they did not shrink by more than 25 percent.

   "An objective tumor response rate of four of seven patients at the lowest
dose levels is highly unusual in a Phase I cancer trial," said Dr. Henrik
Rasmussen, GenVec's vice president for clinical and regulatory affairs.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2001


                             1523 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 7, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: SCOT LEHIGH;
A POLITICAL DODGE BY KENNEDY

BYLINE: BY SCOT LEHIGH

BODY:

   IT WAS A BLATANT abuse of power, one that shocked Massachusetts and brought a
chorus of condemnation from the Bay State's elected officials.

   The year was 1997. President Clinton had nominated Governor Bill Weld as
ambassador to Mexico. Enter conservative Republican Senator Jesse Helms, stage
right.

      Helms, then chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, refused to
grant Weld a committee hearing, thereby killing his nomination. Among outraged
Democrats, no one decried Helms's action more forcefully than Senator Edward M.
Kennedy.

   "Denying him a hearing was a gross abuse of power by the Republican majority
in the Senate," Kennedy said. "Governor Weld's treatment . . was unfair,
undemocratic, and symbolic of everything people on Main Street dislike about
Washington." He added: "Jesse Helms has given a black eye to the United States
Senate and a black eye to the Republican Party."

   Fast forward four years. President George W. Bush had wanted Michael J.
Astrue, senior vice president and general counsel at the Cambridge biotech firm
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., to be the next commissioner of the Food and Drug
Administration. Respected across the political spectrum, Astrue, who is also
chairman of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council and a graduate of Yale and
Harvard Law School, served honorably in a number of public-sector posts during
the Reagan-Bush years, including legal counsel for the Department of Health and
Human Services.

   Enter Ted Kennedy, stage left. As the Globe has reported, Kennedy, now
chairman of the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, told the
White House he wouldn't hold a hearing on Astrue if the biotech executive were
nominated. As a result, Astrue last week withdrew from the selection process.

   "When it became clear that I couldn't even have a hearing, it seemed to me
counterproductive to keep pursuing it," Astrue said. "The agency really needs a
commissioner, and it needs one soon."

   Kennedy, queried about the controversy, doesn't deny he told the White House
Astrue wouldn't get a hearing, saying he doesn't favor anyone for the FDA post
who has ties to the industries the agency regulates.

   "I think the FDA needs someone who has strong scientific capabilities and is
also an outstanding administrator and someone that's not associated with the
industry," he said. "There are too many decisions that are being made at that
position that would put an individual who had strong ties with the industry in
either real or apparent conflict."

   A broad and sweeping exclusion, that, but certainly if Kennedy feels that
anyone who has worked in a regulated industry is anathema, he should vote that
way. (Historical footnote: Kennedy family patriarch and financial tycoon Joseph
Kennedy had strong ties with the regulated industry when FDR picked him to be
chairman of the new Securities and Exchange Commission in 1934.   But by
refusing to hold a hearing, Kennedy is substituting his own will for that of the
entire Senate. Now, Kennedy is a formidable asset for Massachusetts, worth his
considerable weight in federal dollars to the state. Still, intellectual honesty
compels this question: If it was an outrageous abuse of power back when Helms
refused to hold a hearing for Weld, why isn't it an outrageous abuse of power
when Kennedy refuses to hold a hearing for Astrue? Reminded that he had
denounced Helms for his obstruction, Kennedy dodged the issue of the double
standard. "The fact is we know the criteria and the administration understands
this," he replied.

   Here's the unavoidable interpretation: Kennedy's comments back in 1997
reflected partisan rhetoric, not principle. Now that the Democrats control the
Senate, Kennedy holds power - and he intends to have his own way, the process be
damned.

   Which, come to think of it, isn't so very different from what a defiant Helms
said back then. Ted Kennedy, meet Jesse Helms. You two old Senate barons may not
find much common ground on the issues. But here's one similarity: When it comes
to pleas for fair play, you've both lost your sense of hearing.

   Scot Lehigh's e-mail address is lehigh@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2001


                             1524 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 7, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 1069 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
DROPPING THE BALL ON BIOTECH? FAILURE TO APPOINT BIOETHICS COUNCIL WORRIES MANY
HEALTH OFFICIALS

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Four people have died of anthrax, and the nation has no fast-acting vaccine
for the deadly illness. Public health groups worry that the widespread use of
antibiotics by citizens seeking to protect themselves will strengthen the
bacteria's resistence to treatment. Hundreds of volunteers started receiving
smallpox vaccinations this week to test whether the US could stretch its stock
of vaccine, which is inadequate to protect the entire population.

   With issues of biotechnology at the top of the national agenda, the lack of a
forum to air the problems and propose solutions troubles many observers.

       Since the Nixon administration, presidents have appointed councils of
prominent scientists, doctors, ethicists, lawyers, and theologians to grapple
with concerns ranging from cloning to gene therapy.

   Yet since President Bush's Aug. 9 announcement limiting federal funding of
stem-cell research, at which he also said he would create a new bioethics
council, little has happened. Dr. Leon Kass of the University of Chicago, whom
Bush appointed to chair the new council, has kept a low profile. There have been
no appointees, and the council's charter, which would define its role and
powers, remains unwritten.

   But many say the terror attacks of Sept. 11 and the subsequent war have
increased the urgency of the president's task. Doctors, academics, and patient
advocates say the country needs a group to steer national policy on the new
medical threats and their inevitable ethical fallout.

   "We need this council in place before some irreversible damage is done," said
Vera Sharav, president of the Alliance for Human Research Protection, a New York
nonprofit group that seeks to protect human subjects of medical research. "Sept.
11 is something that shook the world. We need the best and most thoughtful minds
representing the public. We need the wisdom that is out there, not just
bureaucrats."

   Eric Meslin, who ran President Clinton's National Bioethics Advisory
Commission and is now head of Indiana University's Center for Bioethics, said
the new threats demand attention. "I can think of few issues as important as the
nation's response to a public health threat," he said. "We've effectively been
without a national bioethics commission since June and there are many pressing
bioethical issues."

   Kass didn't return a call seeking comment. His secretary said he was not
responding to media inquiries.

   White House spokesman Ken Lisaius said the council will be "diverse" and will
include scientists, doctors, ethicists, lawyers, and theologians, but he could
not report specific progress since the August announcement. The council, he
said, will study issues related to embryonic research, assisted reproduction,
cloning, genetic screening, gene therapy, euthanasia, psychoactive drugs, and
brain implants - essentially the same list recited when Kass was appointed.

   In many ways, this is nothing new. The six bioethics commissions created
since the first one was established by President Nixon in 1974 have largely been
ad hoc affairs, responding to the immediate concerns of the day.

   Clinton's commission was formed by an executive order in October 1995. Its
charge was to provide guidance on "bioethical issues arising from research on
human biology and behavior," with its first priority being the creation of
principles to guide medical researchers.

   The commission's charter was extended twice, and it wound up providing
prescient reports on a variety of medical topics at the leading edge of
biotechnology. In September 1999, long before most Americans knew what a stem
cell was, the commission issued a report on stem cell research.

   Bush, at his stem-cell announcement, made it clear that he wanted his own
group in place. The old commission had planned to meet one last time on Sept.
19. "We had anticipated spending the day discussing topics we thought the new
commission might consider spending time with," said R. Alta Charo, professor at
the University of Wisconsin Law School and one of 18 commissioners. "That never
did happen," because of the Sept. 11 terror attacks.

   Officially, the commission was dissolved, without fanfare, Oct. 3. Still,
there was an effort to pass the torch. Commission chairman Harold T. Shapiro,
the former president of Princeton University, met with Kass about 10 days after
the attacks. "I passed on to him experience I had with the commission and told
him what our unfinished agenda was composed of, and gave him unsolicited advice
on how to operate," said Shapiro. He doesn't fault the president or Kass for the
lack of progress.

   "My casual observation is it's one of the casualties of Sept. 11," said
Shapiro about the apparent inactivity. "Dr. Kass is working very hard to get
this mobilized. It takes a long time to do that under these circumstances." Some
in the industry share Shapiro's patience.

   "Is it important to create a new bioethics council?" said Carl Feldbaum,
president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, which represents 1,000
firms. "We've urged the president to do so. We've even suggested a couple of
people who would represent the industry very well on the council. I'd like to
see a charter and appointments made, but I don't think that comes before the
ongoing hot war and bioterrorism."

   Jeff Trewhitt, a spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers
of America, said the trade group wants its views carefully considered, and may
seek to nominate candidates for the council. As far as the makeup of the council
and its specific mission, he said, "there's plenty of time to iron those details
out."

   Still, some bioethicists say they want to know what's going on.

   "There's no public discussion of process as far as I can see, and that is
disturbing," said professor Norman Daniels of the Tufts University Department of
Philosophy. "Is this a commission that's set up to air arguments in an
effective, fair, and deliberate way? It remains to be seen whether the process
for selecting people to serve on it meets that criteria."

   "We're seeing more discussion about the public health system, and the issues
around the testing of new vaccines, access to antibiotics, and quarantines if we
are attacked with an infectious bioterrorist agent," said Charo, the former
commissioner. "No one has taken the lead in the discussion."

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached by e-mail at krasner@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. Leon Kass of the University of Chicago, whom President Bush
appointed to chair the new bioethics council, has kept a low profile. / AP FILE
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2001


                             1525 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                           November 7, 2001 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: GenVec Tests Shrink Tumors;
Results of Gene-Therapy Cancer Treatment Called 'Exciting'

BYLINE: Justin Gillis, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    GenVec Inc. of Gaithersburg said last night it had seen positive results in
early tests of an unusual cancer treatment that combines gene therapy and
radiation to kill tumor cells.

    The results, presented at a scientific conference in San Francisco,
suggested that a treatment strategy devised by GenVec shrank tumors that were
not responding to other treatment, including a pancreatic tumor, one of the
toughest of all cancers to treat.

    "This is very exciting," said Paul Fischer, GenVec's chief executive. "We
have an interesting therapy that looks like it might cross a large number of . .
. different types of cancer."

    The test was formally designed to analyze only the safety of the treatment,
but GenVec scientists saw enough positive signs that they have decided to move
forward with rigorous trials of the drug's effectiveness. They are still
deciding which cancers to tackle first, but pancreatic cancer is likely to be
one, Fischer said.

    The GenVec treatment involves injecting tumors with a modified virus
containing new genes. In such tumors, radiation prompts the genes to trigger
production of a substance called tumor necrosis factor, or TNF. The two-pronged
attack by radiation and TNF appeared, in the preliminary tests, to work better
against tumor cells than radiation alone.

    In seven patients who received the treatment, tumors disappeared in two and
shrank in all seven -- an unusual finding in a preliminary cancer test. Even if
further tests go well, though, the treatment is almost certainly years from
approval by the Food and Drug Administration.

    GenVec is a biotechnology company that uses genetic information to develop
treatments for heart disease, cancer and other ailments. It presented the new
data yesterday after markets closed. GenVec shares closed at $ 2.95 on the
Nasdaq Stock Market.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2001


                             1526 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 4, 2001, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BOSTON WORKS; Pg. G15

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: WHO'S WHAT, WHERE;
TKT APPOINTS VICE PRESIDENT

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. has appointed Mary S. Consalvi as vice president
and chief intellectual property counsel. Consalvi will oversee litigation and
manage TKT's intellectual property portfolios and prosecute trademark
applications.

   Prior to joining TKT, Consalvi was a partner at the firm of Howrey Simon
Arnold & White, where she specialized in patent, trademark, and trade secret
litigation. From 1987 to 1999, she represented various health care and
pharmaceutical clients at Lyon & Lyon, where she became partner in 1994.

      While at Lyon & Lyon, Consalvi also served as an adjunct professor of
patent law at the University of Southern California. Previously, she was an
associate in the Intellectual Property Group at Baker & McKenzie.

   Cambridge-based TKT is a biopharmaceutical company.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2001


                             1527 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            November 4, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C06

LENGTH: 937 words

HEADLINE: Obituaries

BODY:

    Patricia Locke, 73, an American Indian of Hunkpapa Lakota and White Earth
Chippewa heritage and former MacArthur fellow who worked to preserve indigenous
languages and helped 17 American Indian tribes start colleges, died Oct. 20 in
Phoenix. The cause of death was not reported.

    She received a 1991 MacArthur fellowship for her work in preserving and
revitalizing Indian languages. She co-founded the Native American Language
Issues Institute, which became the International Native Languages Institute;
taught; wrote for a tribal newspaper; and served as co-chairman of the Interior
Department's task force on Indian education policy.

    Ms. Locke served as national coordinator for an American Indian Religious
Freedom Act amendment sponsored by the Association on American Indian Affairs.
In 1993, she became the first Indian woman elected to the national governing
body of the Baha'i faith.

    Jeffrey M. Isner, 53, a Boston cardiologist who pioneered the use of gene
therapy to treat people with heart disease, died Oct. 31 at his home in Weston,
Mass., after a heart attack.

    Working with patients who were too sick and whose arteries were too clogged
for bypass surgery or angioplasty, Dr. Isner's team at St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center in Boston and Tufts University School of Medicine devised a technique to
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels to the heart, bypassing the clogged
vessels, easing pain and restoring some patients to full lives.

    The team injected the gene for a protein called vascular endothelial growth
factor into the heart. The goal was that it would be taken up by heart cells,
leading to the production of the growth factor, which stimulates the growth of
new blood vessels.

    Richard H. Best, 91, a retired Rand Corp. security manager who as a World
War II Navy bomber pilot scored hits on two of the four Japanese aircraft
carriers sunk in the Battle of Midway, died Oct. 26 in Santa Monica, Calif. The
cause of death was not reported.

    Mr. Best, a New Jersey native and a 1932 graduate of the U.S. Naval Academy
at Annapolis, served at Midway as a dive bomber pilot aboard the carrier
Enterprise. For his actions in the battle, he received the Navy Cross, the
Navy's second-highest award for valor, and the Distinguished Flying Cross.

    He retired from the Navy with tuberculosis in 1944. After the war, he worked
for Douglas Aircraft before joining Rand in 1947.

    George F. Solomon, 69, who was one of the first scientists to study the
connection between emotions and immunity, died Oct. 7 in Los Angeles after a
stroke.

    In the 1960s, he began conducting research on the effects of psychological
factors on diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. In 1974, he published a paper
linking stress to altered immunity, prompting a generation of scientists to
enter what is now a lively field of research.

    Over the years, Dr. Solomon held professorships at Stanford University,
where he had received his medical degree, and the University of California at
San Francisco, where he was vice chairman of the psychiatry department from 1978
to 1983. He became professor emeritus at the University of California at Los
Angeles in 1995.

    Kim Gardner, 53, a Los Angeles restaurant and pub owner who as a bassist had
played with several bands, including the British rock group Ashton, Gardner &
Dyke, died of cancer Oct. 24 at his home in Hollywood.

    The London native joined fellow teenage musicians Ron Wood, Ali McKenzie,
Tony Munroe and Pete McDaniels to form the Thunderbirds. Shortening their name
to the Birds, the band released four singles, including "Leaving Here" and "No
Good Without You Baby," both in 1965.

    Mr. Gardner's next group was Ashton, Gardner & Dyke with Tony Ashton and Roy
Dyke in 1968. The trio, whose albums featured a light, jazz-rock style, scored a
top-three hit in Britain with "Resurrection Shuffle" in 1971. The group broke up
a year later. He later toured with Pacific Gas and Electric and other bands in
the 1970s and played bass with everyone from Eric Clapton to Bo Diddley, and
worked on 27 albums.

    Menahem Mansoor, 90, who had taught Hebrew and Semitic studies at the
University of Wisconsin from 1955 until retiring as professor emeritus in 1982,
died of cancer Oct. 21 in Madison, Wis.

    Dr. Mansoor, who founded the university's Hebrew and Semitic studies
department, was born in Port Said, Egypt, attended high school in what is now
Tel Aviv and graduated from the University of London. He received his doctorate
in Biblical studies and Semitic languages from Trinity College, Dublin.

    He was the author of more than 80 books and technical articles, including 15
textbooks. He had worked on the Dead Sea scrolls and had developed early
correspondence courses in Hebrew, Aramaic and Arabic.

    James Pinckney Miller, 81, who wrote the screenplay for the 1962 movie "Days
of Wine and Roses," which starred Jack Lemmon as an alcoholic, died of pneumonia
Nov. 1 in Stockton, N.J.

    Mr. Miller got his start writing for television in the 1950s. His credits
include episodes of the series "The Philco Television Playhouse" (1948-1955) and
"The Goodyear Television Playhouse" (1951-1957). He also wrote the television
movies "The Lindbergh Kidnapping Case" (1976) and "I Know My First Name Is
Steven" (1989), a true story about a kidnapped boy.

    John Roberts, 56, a promoter of the 1969 Woodstock Music and Art Fair, died
of cancer Oct. 27 at a hospital in New York.

    He and his partners lost $ 2.3 million but recovered their loss with
royalties from film and album spinoffs and held onto the profitable name and
trademark symbol of a dove on the neck of a guitar.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2001


                             1528 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   November 03, 2001, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: Deaths elsewhere

BODY:

   Bob Woodruff, former Baylor football coach, Nov. 1, in Knoxville, Tenn. He
was 85. See story, Page 18B.

   Jeffrey M. Isner, a Boston cardiologist who pioneered the use of gene therapy
to treat people with heart disease, Oct. 31, of a heart attack, in Boston. He
was 53.

   John P. Roberts, promoter of the Woodstock Music and Art Fair in 1969, Oct.
27, of cancer, in Manhattan. He was 56.

   Rabbi Eliezer Shach, political kingmaker and a religious icon who declared a
cultural war on Israel's majority secular Jews, Nov. 2, in Tel Aviv. He was 107.

   Eileen Shanahan, economics reporter who blazed a trail for women at the New
York Times and served as a spokeswoman in the Carter administration, Nov. 2,
after a lengthy illness, in Washington. She was 77.

   Tom Cheney, Washington Senators pitcher who set the major league record with
21 strikeouts in a 16-inning game, Nov. 1, in Rome, Ga. He was 67.

   Charles R. Ebersol, former chairman of the board of the American Cancer
Society, Oct. 31, in Litchfield, Conn. He was 85.

   Kent Heitholt, veteran sports editor, Nov. 1, after being beaten by unknown
assailants, in Columbia, Mo. He was 48.



LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2001


                             1529 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     November 3, 2001 Saturday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 811 words

HEADLINE: John P. Roberts, promoter of Woodstock Music Fair

BYLINE: From wire reports

DATELINE: New York

BODY:

   DEATHS ELSEWHERE

   John P. Roberts, a promoter of the Woodstock Music and Art Fair in 1969 and a
partner in its revivals in the 1990s, died Oct. 27 at Mount Sinai Hospital in
Manhattan. He was 56 and lived in Manhattan.

   The cause was cancer, said his wife, Rona Roberts.

   Roberts, a businessman who nevertheless pursued fun before profit, and whose
taste in music favored Gershwin over the Grateful Dead, was one of the young
entrepreneurs who had no experience in the music business when they produced
Woodstock, a rock concert that helped define its generation. He was 24 at the
time and had recently graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.

   Taking as their model the Monterey Pop Festival, which drew 28,000 people,
the promoters planned for 50,000 fans. The concert, on Aug. 15-17, 1969, drew
more than half a million people, not all paying customers, to the site in
Bethel, N.Y.

   The concert cost $3.1 million to produce and brought in $1.8 million, a
deficit that caught Roberts and his partners unprepared. But they recovered
their loss with royalties from film and album spinoffs, and held on to the
profitable name and trademark symbol of a dove on the neck of a guitar.

   Jeffrey Isner, created heart disease treatment

   Weston, Mass. - Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, who wedded gene therapy and
cardiovascular medicine to create promising treatments for heart and circulatory
disease, died on Wednesday at his home in Weston, Mass., near Boston. He was 53.

   The cause was a heart attack, according to St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston, where he had worked for two decades.

   Isner, who also taught at Tufts University, was an interventional
cardiologist, a member of a relatively new medical field whose practitioners try
to remove arterial obstructions to restore the flow of blood to the heart.

   Interventional cardiologists are accustomed to thinking small. They typically
do their work through angioplasty, a procedure in which a miniature balloon is
threaded into a coronary or other artery and then inflated to clear a blockage.

   But a decade or so ago, Isner began thinking much smaller still. That was
when other researchers discovered a protein they called vascular endothelial
growth factor, or VEGF (pronounced VEJ-eff), which signals the body that it is
time to grow new blood vessels. Could the substance, he wondered, be used to
induce patients to grow new vessels that would bypass a blockage?

   In 1994, Isner put the idea to the test, becoming the first to use genes to
treat people with vascular disease. The procedure came to be called
angiogenesis, and while it remains experimental, preliminary studies have been
promising, indicating that it may indeed help people who have vascular disease
of the leg or who are suffering from angina, chest pain that results from
coronary blockage.

   Eliezer Shach, declared war on secular Jews

   Jerusalem - Rabbi Eliezer Shach, a political kingmaker and a religious icon
who declared a cultural war on Israel's majority secular Jews, died early
yesterday in a Tel Aviv hospital, doctors and family members said. He was 107.

   Spiritual leader of a powerful branch of Israel's ultra-Orthodox Jews, Shach
parlayed the votes of his followers into political power far beyond their
numbers.

   Though he did not oppose Israeli concessions for peace with the Palestinians,
he usually instructed his representatives in parliament to team up with hawkish
governments, friendlier to the religious desires of his camp.

   For Shach, Israel was clearly divided into two camps - those who follow
Jewish law according to its most stringent interpretation, and those who do not.

   His most famous outburst came in a speech in 1990, when he poured scorn on
residents of the kibbutzim, the communal villages, which played a major role in
the founding and defense of Israel.

   He told a rally of supporters that the kibbutz dwellers were ignorant of
Jewish holy days and bred animals such as rabbits and pigs, whose meat is
forbidden under Jewish dietary laws.

   The speech drew battle lines between the black-suited ultra-Orthodox Jews,
who make up about 10 percent of Israel's population, and the majority
nonobservant Jews.

   Shach was born into a poor family in 1894, in a village near the Lithuanian
capital of Vilnius - then a world center of rabbinical scholarship. He studied
scripture under the leading Jewish scholars and teachers of the age.

   He left Lithuania shortly before the outbreak of World War II, when 6 million
Jews were killed by the Nazis of Germany and their collaborators.

   Later he became head of the prestigious Ponevezh rabbinical seminary in the
town of Bnei Brak, next to Tel Aviv.

   By the 1980s he was the most influential figure in Israel's ultra-Orthodox
community, and he broke away from the established ultra-Orthodox Agudat Israel
party to found the rival Degel Hatorah.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2001


                             1530 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            November 2, 2001 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Part 2; Metro Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Obituaries;
Jeffrey Isner, 53; Pioneered Gene Therapy for Bad Hearts

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, a Boston cardiologist who pioneered the use of gene
therapy to treat people with heart disease, died unexpectedly early Wednesday
morning of a heart attack. He was 53.

   Working with patients who were too sick and whose arteries were too clogged
for bypass surgery or angioplasty, Isner's team at St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center in Boston and Tufts University School of Medicine devised a technique to
stimulate the growth of new blood vessels to the heart, bypassing the clogged
vessels, easing pain and restoring some patients to full lives.

   The team injected the gene for a protein called vascular endothelial growth
factor into the heart. The goal was that it would be taken up by heart cells,
leading to the production of the growth factor, which stimulates the growth of
new blood vessels.

   The treatment appeared to work. In a published report last fall, Isner's team
said that nine of the first 13 heart patients they treated showed evidence of
increased heart function after the procedure.

   One patient, Floyd Stokes, bought a peanut farm after the treatment to
replace the farm he had sold when he was refused another bypass operation and
thought he was going to die.

   In earlier studies, Isner's team used the same procedure to restore
circulation in legs damaged by artery blockages.

   "Dr. Isner led the way in our understanding of new revascularization
strategies, especially in the area of genetic tools," said Dr. Sidney Smith,
chief science officer of the American Heart Assn. "This is a great personal and
professional loss."

   Isner's program fell under scrutiny from the Food and Drug Administration
following the 1999 death of a University of Pennsylvania patient in a gene
therapy trial.

   In the ensuing FDA investigation of all gene therapy centers, his clinical
trials were shut down in February 2000. FDA officials said that he had failed to
report the death of one patient to the hospital's safety review board and had
endangered the lives of other patients by improperly enrolling them in the
trials.

   Two other severely ill patients he treated died of cardiac arrest within a
day after their procedures. Isner said they died of their underlying illnesses,
and the FDA has not disputed that claim.

   Isner was allowed to resume his clinical trials earlier this year. The team
is now treating patients and planning new trials. St. Elizabeth's has invested
more than $10 million in Isner's research and joined with him to form a company
to exploit the findings. He also recently received a $10-million grant from the
National Institutes of Health to further the research.

   The death represents a blow to St. Elizabeth's, which built a first-class
cardiology department around him. "I know they will continue his legacy," said
Dr. John Harrington, dean at Tufts.

   Isner is survived by his wife and three children, all under age 15.

GRAPHIC:  DR. JEFFREY M. ISNER: Cardiologist developed a way to stimulate growth
of blood vessels to the heart. PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2001


                             1531 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 2, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Jeffrey Isner, 53, Creator Of Cardiovascular Procedure

BYLINE:  By ERIC NAGOURNEY

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, who wedded gene therapy and cardiovascular medicine to
create promising treatments for heart and circulatory disease, died on Wednesday
at his home in Weston, Mass., near Boston. He was 53.

        The cause was a heart attack, said St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in
Boston, where he had worked for two decades.

    Dr. Isner, who also taught at Tufts University, was an interventional
cardiologist, a member of a relatively new medical field whose practitioners try
to remove arterial obstructions to restore the flow of blood to the heart. He
also treated patients who had blocked blood vessels in the legs, a painful,
disabling and potentially fatal condition that can require amputation.

   Interventional cardiologists are accustomed to thinking small. They typically
do their work through angioplasty, a procedure in which a miniature balloon is
threaded into a coronary or other artery and then inflated to clear away a
blockage. Often the procedure entails inserting a tiny metal tube, called a
stent, into the artery after inflation in an effort to prevent the blockage's
recurrence.

   But a decade or so ago, Dr. Isner began thinking much smaller still. That was
when other researchers discovered a protein they called vascular endothelial
growth factor, or VEGF (pronounced VEJ-eff), which signals the body that it is
time to grow new blood vessels. Could the substance, he wondered, be used to
induce patients to grow new vessels that would bypass a blockage?

   In 1994, Dr. Isner put the idea to the test, becoming the first to use genes
to treat people with vascular disease. In the very first case, to treat a leg
blockage, his team of surgeons coated an angioplasty balloon with trillions of
genes that produce VEGF and then threaded it several times to a site near the
patient's blockage.

   The procedure came to be called angiogenesis, and while it remains
experimental, preliminary studies have been promising, indicating that it may
indeed help people who have vascular disease of the leg or who are suffering
from angina, chest pain that results from coronary blockage.

   Still, experts say, many questions remain before gene therapy can become
standard treatment for vascular disease.

   "The results were promising," said Dr. Valentin Fuster, director of
cardiovascular medicine at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, who was a
friend of Dr. Isner. "The thing that he was trying to answer was for how long
this increased flow would last. He didn't have the answer for that."

   Jeffrey Michael Isner was born on Dec. 11, 1947, in Uhrichsville, Ohio, the
son of Justin and Lilli Isner. He earned his bachelor's degree at the University
of Maryland and his medical degree at Tufts.

   In a 1997 interview, he attributed some of his early successes to simple good
fortune.

   "When we began our study," he said, "we had no idea what dose of gene therapy
was going to work, or if the way we were injecting the genes was appropriate, of
if the sites we were injecting were really appropriate."

   Those successes also placed him in the middle of the debate over whether the
increased blurring of industry and medical research raised ethical questions for
doctors. Like a growing number of physicians, Dr. Isner was involved not only in
medicine but also in business, as founder of Vascular Genetics and a major
stockholder in the company, which is based in North Carolina.

   Some critics have raised questions about whether such relationships can
affect a doctor's medical judgment, but Dr. Isner rejected those suggestions.

   "I'm not trying to dismiss this out of hand," he once said, "but I'm not
going to be a wimp and roll over because someone is projecting a concern. I
understand what the arguments are, but frankly I don't agree with most of them."

   Last year the Food and Drug Administration temporarily suspended research by
Dr. Isner, Vascular Genetics and St. Elizabeth's, criticizing the researchers on
grounds that they had failed to report properly the death of two patients
participating in a study and might have endangered the health of another. That
suspension followed the much-publicized death of an 18-year-old man in an
unrelated University of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment.

   Dr. Isner said the two patients had died of their underlying cardiovascular
condition, not the treatment. But his company acknowledged administrative
problems with the research and promised to correct them. Last spring he was
permitted to resume his studies, and he recently received a $10 million grant
from federal health officials.

   He is survived by his wife, Linda Hajjar Isner, and three children: Joshua,
Jessica and Matthew, all of Weston.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner (Associated Press)

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2001


                             1532 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 2, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 3; Classified; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 83 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths;
ISNER, JEFFREY MICHAEL, M.D.

BODY:

        ISNER-Jeffrey Michael, M.D. The staff of the Zena and Michael A. Wiener
Cardiovascular Institute of the Mount Sinai Medical Center mourn the passing of
our friend and colleague, Jeffrey Michael Isner, M.D., Professor of Medicine,
Tufts Medical School. Dr.

   Isner was an outstanding clinician and pioneer in cardiovascular gene therapy
research. Our profound condolences to his wife Linda and children. Valentin
Fuster, M.D., Ph.D. Director Cardiovascular Institute Mount Sinai School of
Medicine

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2001


                             1533 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 1, 2001 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. S01

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: SENIORS; Never say quit; Graying workforce reflects desire to stay on
the job; Staying on the job works for some people

BYLINE: By CARA NISSMAN

BODY:

   Judith Deltano doesn't understand why her friends want to retire.

   The 64-year-old registered nurse has been working at Cooperative Elder
Services Inc., an adult day health center in Concord, for 15 years, and has no
plans to put down her blood pressure gauge because of her age.

   "It sends a chill up my spine when I hear someone say they can hardly wait
for retirement, then they develop cancer soon after (they stop working)," she
said. "It really bothers me. It's like they're wishing their life away."

   Deltano, who has worked on and off since she was 21, is not the only senior
still earning a paycheck. More than 32 million of the 76 million Americans age
50 and older are in the workforce, and the number is rising, according to
"Beyond Fifty," a recent report by the American Association of Retired People.
Eighty percent of the baby boomers AARP surveyed reported they expect to work at
least part-time past retirement age.

   There's a wide range of reasons for the increase, said Deborah Russell,
AARP's senior program coordinator for economic security and work issues.

   "Some people have to continue working because they didn't have a pension
plan," she said. "A lot of people are not saving at a rate their parents did, so
they may not have enough money to retire."

   "Others do it for the sheer enjoyment of working, to contribute to the
workplace," she said.

   Joanne Remy, 67, an estate planning and probate attorney, who got her law
degree the same day her daughter Pamela graduated from the University of
Massachusetts, said she continues to practice law because she makes a difference
in people's lives.

   "Estate planning is not a gouging type of law. I'm truly helping people,"
said the Canton native. "I enjoy what I do and have no intentions of retiring in
the near future. I intend to do this as long as I'm able."

   Health used to be a major deciding factor for people planning to retire, said
Russell.

   But "people are living longer lives and are healthier as they get close to
retirement age," she said. "Leaving the workplace at such a young age is not so
attractive to them."

   Deltano said her job as a nurse for mostly Alzheimer's patients keeps her
healthy.

   "I don't have time to think about myself," she said, "which I think is a
secret to aging gracefully. To be involved in other people's lives and to be
stimulated. I would feel like my life didn't really count for anything if I
didn't keep working."

   Seniors also go back to work after retiring, said Bill Albright, director of
quality of work life and benefits at Bedford-based The MITRE Corp., whose
Reserves at the Ready program enables older workers to sign on as "part-time, on
call" staff to work as needed by the company, and at the retirees' convenience.

   A person returning to the workforce "could've lost a loved one," he said.
"Life can throw curves at you. People want to fill some voids."

   Yet most working seniors still find time for recreation.

   In the Reserves at the Ready program, which was recently recognized by AARP
for its exemplary practices toward older workers, retirees ranging in age from
55 to their late 70s work annually from four to 500 hours.

   "It allows seniors to keep abreast of the technology and to utilize their
talents," he said. "And they can balance and enjoy their retirement at the same
time. If somebody's not available because he's sailing around the world, so be
it. If he's available for short-term support, then that's good as well."

   Deltano, who works two days a week, fits a lot of fun into her life.

   "My husband and I love to travel around New England," she said. "I love to
read and am in a book group. I'm going to enrichment courses at Rivier College
in Nashua, N.H., in opera appreciation, gene therapy, interior decorating."

   Remy also doesn't let her work rule her life.

   "I do all the things that people do for fun," she said. "I have a huge
garden. I take care of my granddaughter. She's 2, and she keeps me running. I do
a lot of reading. I like movies. I go to dinner with my friends and my clients."

   There can be disadvantages to working past retirement age.

   "Age discrimination still exists," said Russell. "People come from different
generations and different things like wars and changing technology have had an
impact on how people interact with each other."

   But many companies are trying to combat that by including age in their
diversity training, she said.

   "Companies are realizing that with young bosses and older subordinates, it's
important to train managers to deal with someone significantly older than they
are," said Russell.

   "The older workers tend to mentor some of the younger workers," said
Albright. Seniors "have a knowledge of the company and of the customers' needs,
(while younger workers) bring in the latest technology capabilities. Senior
employees have a great deal of knowledge and experience and vice versa. They can
learn from each other."

   Russell said seniors considering working past retirement age should ask
themselves if they'll continue to be challenged in the workplace.

   "Seniors should continue to keep up as technology continues to change," she
said. "Be aware of what the competition is, what are the latest jobs."

   But make sure you're fulfilled by your work, said Deltano.

   "I don't have to work," she said. "But I work because I need to be helpful to
someone. It's a spiritual need, I think. It's very satisfying to me."

   For more information, visit www.aarp.org-working-options.

LOAD-DATE: November 01, 2001


                             1534 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     November 1, 2001 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Jeffrey Isner of Weston, gene therapy pioneer, dies

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, a world-renowned cardiologist at St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center and a pioneer in gene therapy, died yesterday of a massive heart
attack.

   Dr. Isner, 53, also a professor at Tufts University School of Medicine, had
just received a huge federal grant to resume his experiments involving gene
therapy for heart disease, said St. Elizabeth's officials.

   "He was a brilliant man, absolutely a pioneer," said Dr. Allan Ropper, a
neurologist at St. Elizabeth's who had worked closely with Isner. "It's a big
loss for everybody. I'm absolutely stunned."

   A Weston resident, Dr. Isner was best known for his gene therapy experiments
that involved giving genetically engineered DNA - known as VEGF or vascular
endothelial growth factor - to cardiac patients to help them grow new blood
vessels to the heart, a process known as angiogenesis.

   Phil Pilla of Watertown was one who received the experimental therapy.

   "He helped so many people," Pilla said. "He definitely helped me. I'm doing
good. I just can't believe he's gone."

   In his most recently published study, in August, 2000, in the journal
Circulation, Dr. Isner showed the treatment was helpful in increasing blood flow
to patients' hearts.

   Pilla and many of Dr. Isner's gene therapy patients had gathered at St.
Elizabeth's over the summer for a reunion and to thank Dr. Isner and start a
petition drive to convince the FDA to allow the experiments to be resumed.

   About 82 patients had been enrolled in Dr. Isner's studies dating back to
1998. Two of the patients died.

   The studies were limited to those who had no other options.

   One of the studies was shut down in March, 2000, by the FDA, which said the
program violated protocols, accepting an ineligible patient, failing to notify
proper review boards of the death of a patient and other improprieties.

   Dr. Isner, married and the father of three, was a 1973 graduate of Tufts
Medical School and had won numerous awards for his research, including the
William Beaumont Award in Medicine, awarded by the American Medical Association
in 1996 for outstanding research achievements by an investigator under the age
of 50. He was chief of cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's.

   "Dr. Isner was a brilliant and talented professor, physician and researcher,"
said Dr. John Harrington, dean of Tufts Medical School.

   Ironically, Dr. Isner had just received word that the FDA had given him the
green light to resume his experiments and that he had won a multimillion dollar
grant from the National Institutes of Health to fund the work.

   The grant was to go to establish a Clinical Center of Excellence for Gene
Therapy at St. Elizabeth's. Though the future of that grant - and his
groundbreaking research - is in now in doubt, the president of St. Elizabeth's
said the hospital is committed to fulfilling the promise of Dr. Isner's research
as a tribute to him.

   Dr. Isner's funeral will be held tomorrow at 11 a.m. at the Congregation
Mishkan Tefila in Newton.

LOAD-DATE: November 01, 2001


                             1535 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 1, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1107 words

HEADLINE: NOTED GENE THERAPIST ISNER DIES LED CARDIOVASCULAR RESEARCH PROGRAM

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, and Anne Barnard, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey Isner was making a comeback.

   A year and a half after federal regulators shut down his pioneering heart
disease research citing safety concerns, the Boston cardiologist was back, armed
with a new $10 million grant to expand on his idea of using gene therapy to grow
new blood vessels for weak hearts.

      Yesterday morning, the 53-year-old Isner died suddenly of a heart attack,
sending shock waves through his hospital and the community of gene therapy
researchers who recognized him as one of the most creative minds in their
emerging field.

   "Jeffrey is an outstanding visionary scientist who . . . generated a lot of
excitement," said Dr. Savio L.C. Woo, past president of the American Society for
Gene Therapy. "If this field succeeds in the future, it will be his legacy."

   Indeed, Isner's return had been viewed by some researchers as a sign of
renewed confidence in gene therapy, in which scientists alter patients' genetic
makeup to treat diseases. The long-touted field was shaken by the 1999 death of
a healthy Arizona teenager, who volunteered for a University of Pennsylvania
gene therapy study.

   "This is definitely a big loss to the field of gene transfer," added Dr.
Sonia Skarlatos, director of the program at the National Heart Lung and Blood
Institute that awarded Isner a "center of excellence" award in September.

   Isner's death is also a loss for St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton,
where he created a nationally known cardiovascular research program, attracted
many talented doctors, and built a dedicated following of patients. The
president of Caritas Christi, the hospital's parent chain, last year called
Isner "the Pedro Martinez of our research staff."

   Yesterday, Caritas president, Michael Collins, said he was also mourning the
death of a friend. Collins committed the hospital "to honor Jeff's legacy and
fulfill the promise of the research he so brillantly pioneered."

   Isner, who had no history of heart disease himself, had been working for
years to coax blood vessels to grow in patients whose hearts were too sick for
bypass surgery and whose blood-starved limbs were threatened with amputation.

   He was inspired by Dr. Judah Folkman of Children's Hospital, whose
groundbreaking work discovered proteins, called vascular endothelial growth
factors, that promote the growth of blood vessels. Folkman's aim was to block
the growth factors in cancer patients, to starve tumors of their blood supply.
Isner thought of using them the opposite way for heart patients, to stimulate
growth of blood vessels.

   Folkman said yesterday that Isner's "accomplishments will have lasting
influence in the care of patients with cardiovascular disease and those with
cancer."

   St. Elizabeth's invested more than $10 million in Isner's work and joined him
and other investors in creating a private company in 1997 to develop and
eventually market his research.

   By the fall of 1999, several of Isner's heart patients were convinced they
had been given a second chance. Erling Linnerud, 72, was back on his feet
handing out Gideon Bibles, cutting way back on the 10 to 12 nitroglycerin pills
he had taken nightly. Floyd Stokes bought a new peanut farm, to replace the one
he sold when he was denied another bypass operation and was sure he was going to
die.

   Then disaster struck. The death of Jesse Gelsinger in a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999 brought new federal
scrutiny to the field of gene therapy.

   Within months, Isner, too, fell under scrutiny. In February 2000, the FDA
shut down his clinical trials, finding he had failed to report the death of a
patient to the hospital's safety review board and had endangered the lives of
other patients by improperly enrolling them in his studies.

   For Isner and his staff, it was a severe blow.

   "I didn't take any short cuts," he said in an interview a few weeks before
his death. "We put a lot of genuine sweat and blood into this at a time when no
one thought it would amount to a hill of beans. For people to insinuate that we
were sloppy or didn't care about patients - that was really hard to take."

   Isner also came in for criticism over the deaths of two patients he treated.
While the patients both suffered cardiac arrest within a day of the gene therapy
surgery, Isner insisted they succumbed to their underlying illnesses. Regulators
have not disagreed.

   The Tufts University professor also became a lightning rod for criticism of
gene researchers' financial conflicts of interest. Patients' families criticized
him for failing to tell them he had a financial stake in the experiments. And
the American Society for Gene Therapy adopted ethics standards saying its
members should not have equity in the companies that sponsored their
experiments. Isner and St. Elizabeth's agreed to disclose their interest to
patients, but did not divest.

   Through it all, Isner persevered.

   "He was a real entrepreneur in a positive sense and developed innovative
strategies for treating heart disease," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, a competitor in
gene therapy who works at New York Hospital/Cornell Medical Center and had also
come in for milder federal criticism of his studies.

   In August 2000, the journal Circulation printed Isner's report that nine of
13 patients with advanced heart disease showed evidence that inactive heart
muscle returned to normal function after his treatment. That November, Isner was
reinstated as an investigator for research by the biotechnology company Genzyme.
And in the past few months, he had gotten FDA approval to move ahead with his
research after agency officials were satisfied he had taken steps to ensure the
problems would not recur.

   In awarding the $10 million grant, NIH's first to Isner for gene therapy in
patients, Skarlatos said the agency was sure all rules to protect patients would
be followed. NIH planned to have a special safety board monitoring the work and
St. Elizabeth's had arranged for an independent organization to keep track of
patient records and research protocols.

   Isner said a few weeks ago that he didn't feel the need to apologize for
anything.  "I'll never spend one day of my life questioning whether we didn't do
everything we could to communicate with and take care of these patients," he
said.

   Over the summer, a group of patients who credit him with saving or enriching
their lives gathered at St. Elizabeth's to fete him. Andrew Guerini, 72, of
Milton was among them. Since his treatment last January, Guerini says he can
walk to the post office without getting angina. "I think he was on to
something," Guerini said.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Dr. Jeffrey Isner was hailed for pioneering work in gene
therapy. / GLOBE STAFF FILE PHOTO / DAVID L. RYAN

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1536 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 1, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY; Pg. C20

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: DR. JEFFREY ISNER, 53, NOTED GENE RESEARCHER, CARDIOLOGIST

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, a pioneering gene therapy researcher and chief of
cardiovascular research at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton, died of a
heart attack yesterday. He was 53.

   Dr. Isner, a cardiologist, was also a professor of medicine and pathology at
Tufts University School of Medicine and a founder of a company, Vascular
Genetics of Durham, N.C., that was pursuing gene therapy and other treatments.

      His work focused on stimulating the growth of new blood vessels in
patients suffering from heart disease or blocked arteries.

   "Dr. Isner's passing is a personal loss to the St. Elizabeth's community and
to the patients for whom he cared and for all those for whom this research held
such promise," said Dr. Robert M. Haddad, president of St. Elizabeth's.

   In 1996, Isner received the William Beaumont Award, given annually by the
American Medical Association to recognize a gifted scientist under age 50. He
had also received awards from the National Institutes of Health and the Society
of Cardiovascular Pathology.

   Prior to arriving at St. Elizabeth's in 1988, Isner was associate director of
the cardiac catheterization lab at New England Medical Center. He graduated phi
beta kappa from the University of Maryland and earned his medical degree at
Tufts. He was board certified in internal medicine and cardiology.

   He and his family had homes in Weston and New Seabury.

   Dr. Isner leaves his wife, Linda (Hajjar); two sons, Joshua and Matthew, both
of Weston; a daughter, Jessica of Weston; his mother, Lilli (Neuman) of
Rockville, Md.; and a sister, Betsy Robinson of Potomac, Md.

   A service will be held at 11 a.m. tomorrow at Congregation Mishkan Tefila in
Newton.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2001


                             1537 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 1, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: DOWNTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Benton honored

The Louisiana chapter of Prevent Child Abuse America has presented the
prestigious Administration on Children, Youth and Families Commissioner's Award
to Dr. Scott Benton, Children's Hospital forensic pediatrician.

   The Commissioner's Award honors one person from each state every two years
for their significant contributions toward the prevention and treatment of child
abuse and neglect.

   Among numerous professional and volunteer efforts, in 1995 Benton helped
expand The Children at Risk Evaluation (CARE) Center at Children's Hospital,
which specializes in diagnosis, treatment and legal services for children who
are abused or are suspected of being sexually abused or neglected. The initial
program, the Child Abuse Program, was established in 1985. Since the original
program's inception, The CARE Center has helped about 5,000 children suspected
of being maltreated.

Award presented

   Tulane Health Sciences Center gene therapy researcher Dr. Leena Ala-Kokko
recently received the Anders Jahre Prize for medical research done by younger
medical researchers in the Nordic countries.

   This award, named for a Norwegian entrepreneur philanthropist, recognizes
Ala-Kokko for her contributions to understanding the genetic factors
contributing to several diseases. The award was presented at a gala ceremony
Oct. 11 in Oslo, Norway.

   Ala-Kokko has studied musculoskeletal diseases and collagen-related diseases,
including osteoarthritis. Using these findings, she has developed several
diagnostic DNA tests, many of which are unique tools to aid clinicians.

   She is the first Tulane faculty member to receive this award, which
recognizes outstanding scientists in the five Nordic countries. It is the
highest honor next to the Nobel Prize that can be awarded to a Scandinavian
scientist.

   Ala-Kokko was born in Oulu, Finland, and received her medical degree and
Ph.D. from the University of Oulu. She joined the faculty at the Tulane Center
for Gene Therapy as an associate professor of medicine in 2000 and recently was
promoted to professor. She still maintains an active research and teaching
program at the University of Oulu. Ala-Kokko is a recipient of the Arthritis
Foundation's prestigious Osteoarthritis Biomarkers Biomedical Science Grant and
research grants from the National Institute of Health and the Marfan's
Association.

Irons honored

The Business and Professional Women of Jefferson Parish named state Sen.
Paulette Irons Woman of the Year during their celebration of National Business
Women's Week.

   The award recognizes local working women who have supported small business
development and family-friendly practices in the workplace. In 2001, Irons
championed a contraceptive equity bill, which would require employers to provide
prescriptive coverage of birth control pills through employee health plans.

   Irons also was responsible for Gov. Foster appointing the Women's Policy and
Research Commission, which successfully passed many workplace changes during the
2001 Legislative Session. For a full report, visit www.sisters2002.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1538 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 1, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: UPTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Individuals honored

   Tulane University's School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine recently
honored several people for their commitment to global public health.

   The Dean's Medal was presented to businessman Robert M. Frehse, who has made
it possible for minorities to enter the public health work force through Tulane
scholarships.

   Maurice Leonard Lagarde III was recognized as the alumnus of the year for his
contributions and leadership in the board of governors at Tulane University
Health Sciences Center.

   Roseanna Rabalais, receptionist in the International Health and Development
Department, was given the Esprit de Corps Award for outstanding work ethic.

   Champion of Public Health awards were presented to Leighton Steward, author
and founder of the Sugar Busters! diet; Elizabeth Fontham, professor and head of
the department of public health and preventive medicine at Louisiana State
University; Jane Bertrand, an expert in family planning, HIV/AIDS and other
reproductive health issues; Charles N. Kahn III, president of the Federation of
American Hospitals; Dale Little, professor emeritus of tropical medicine; Roy
Rando, industrial hygienist and professor of environmental health; Dr. Gene
Usdin, a member of the psychiatric community who has worked to improve mental
health research; and Judith Watts, president of Agenda for Children.

Nursing professor elected

   Chi Eta Phi Sorority elected Carolyn W. Mosley as its 17th supreme basileus
at the group's recent annual meeting in Miami.

   Mosley is a professor at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center
School of Nursing. She heads the Department of Mental Health and Community
Health Nursing.

   Chi Eta Phi Sorority has a membership of more than 5,000 registered
professional nurses and student nurses.

Grants awarded

   A team of Tulane's environmental health researchers, led by professor Henry
Glindmeyer, received a grant of about $550,000 from the National Institute of
Occupational Safety and Health to explore industrial exposures that may lead to
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

   Tulane pathologist Sanda Clejan received a Fulbright grant to teach in
Bucharest, Romania, at the Carol Davila School of Medicine.

   Tulane's Center for Gene Therapy recently received two grants, including
$371,250 to continue research into the genetic causes and possible therapies for
osteogenesis imperfecta, a rare congenital genetic disorder that afflicts people
with bones so brittle they break with the slightest bump. Another award to
continue the same research is in the amount of $1.8 million for five years. Dr.
Darwin Prockop is director of the Center for Gene Therapy.

   Tulane's Human Genetics Program received a yearlong grant for $75,000 to
educate patients and physicians about a set of rare genetic diseases. The
Cambridge-based company Transkeriotic Therapies is funding the Tulane program.
Dr. Jess Thoene is director of the human genetics program.

   Tulane researcher Dr. Jiang He, an associate professor of epidemiology and
medicine, and his colleagues received a research grant from the National
Institute of Health to participate in a national study of chronic kidney
disease.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the next Thursday's editions.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1539 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    October 31, 2001 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 031

LENGTH: 276 words

HEADLINE: Local FDA nominee from TKT bows out

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   The chairman of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council has formally
withdrawn his name as a candidate for the head of the Food and Drug
Administration after facing opposition from Sen. Edward M. Kennedy.

   Michael Astrue, senior vice president of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., said
in a letter yesterday that he no longer wanted to be considered for the top FDA
job.

   "It is clear that advancing further would be futile because of opposition in
the Senate to a candidate with experience in the biotechnology industry," Astrue
said in the letter. "I am hopeful that my withdrawal will encourage other
possible nominees to come forward."

   He declined to comment further.

   Sen. Kennedy, (D-Massachusetts), has said that he wouldn't support any
candidate from the pharmaceutical or biotechnology industry.

   "I think it's very unfortunate," said Janice Bourque, president of the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council. "I think he was an excellent candidate
given his breadth and depth in health care."

   Industry insiders are concerned because few candidates have surfaced and the
agency that approves all drugs has been without leadership for months.

   White House officials declined to comment yesterday on Astrue's letter.

   Analysts say approvals at the FDA have slowed in recent months and industry
insiders say the agency is falling into disarray.

   "It takes a while to find a qualified candidate that will have broad
support," Bourque said. "My concern is that the FDA has already been without a
leader for several months and there is a large pipeline of products that are
coming to the FDA. We're worried that without leadership, they won't be ready."

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1540 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 30, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 723 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Biotech's share price on rise

   Shares of Collateral Therapeutics were up more than 20 percent yesterday,
continuing a rise that began last week after the company provided a positive
outlook for its lead drug candidate.  The San Diego biotechnology company, which
is developing a gene therapy to treat heart disease, said it would soon begin
large, late-stage patient trials in Europe and had already commenced them in the
United States.  The company's stock rose $1.19, to close at $7.06.

   Previo posts $3.2 million loss

   Previo reported a $3.2 million net loss, or 46 cents per share, for its
fourth quarter, compared with a $360,000 net loss, or 5 cents a share, for the
same period last year.  The San Diego-based company, which develops personal
computer services, said revenue declined to $900,000 from $1.4 million.  The
company took a $900,000 restructuring charge in the quarter, related to a
decision to cut 40 full-time jobs, close offices in England and focus marketing
and sales efforts exclusively on North America.

   Neurocrine to receive payment

   Neurocrine Biosciences yesterday said it will receive a $15.5 million payment
from development partner GlaxoSmithKline.  The San Diego biotechnology company
said the payment marks the first research milestone achieved under the
collaboration.  The companies are attempting to discover new drugs to treat
psychiatric and gastrointestinal diseases.

   CalWest offers to buy Cabot

   CalWest Industrial Properties, a real estate investment company owned by the
California Public Employees Retirement System, has offered to buy all common
shares of Boston-based Cabot Industrial Trust for $2.1 billion.  Under the terms
of the offer, CalWest will pay $24 a share for all of Cabot's common shares.
The offer represents a 20 percent premium to Cabot's closing share price of
$19.95 on Friday.  CalPERS, the nation's largest public pension fund, has $12.4
billion in real estate holdings.

   EBay sees bright outlook

   EBay executives affirmed their aggressive long-term growth targets yesterday,
expressing optimism the company will remain strong despite the economic
downturn.  Chief executive Meg Whitman said the San Jose-based online auction
site is still on track to hit $3 billion in revenue by 2005. She expects the
company to see sales rise 50 percent in 2002. Whitman's projection of 50 percent
growth next year exceeds current Wall Street estimates.  Executives told
analysts they will concentrate on increasing auctions and fixed-price sales in
several key categories such as automobiles, computers and real estate.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Napster to return next year

   Song-sharing service Napster will not relaunch until some time early next
year, chief executive officer Konrad Hilbers said yesterday at a technology
conference in Los Angeles.  Napster has been offline since July in an effort to
comply with a federal judge's order that the free trading of music be halted.
Hilbers said Napster will replicate its popular file-sharing service in a secure
environment while pressing for licensing deals with major labels.

   Intel, AMD cut prices again

   Intel Corp. and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. yesterday cut the prices of some
of their microprocessors by as much as 29 percent as the two chip firms slug it
out for market share gains and seek to spur demand for personal computers in a
weak economy.

   MTV Networks plans layoffs

   Music video pioneer MTV Networks, owner of the popular cable networks MTV,
VH1, and Nickelodeon, said yesterday it would cut between 8 percent and 9
percent of its work force.  The company will outsource more of its animation
used for MTV programs and accelerate its plan to shift its work force toward the
local level and away from its central offices, according to a company memo.

   Japan's jobless rate hits record

   Japan's unemployment rate jumped to a record high of 5.3 percent in
September.  In July, Japan's jobless rate hit 5 percent -- then the highest
since the government began keeping track in the 1950s. The unemployment rate
stayed at 5 percent in August.  The figures, released by the government today,
show the severity of the economic problems facing Japan that had been bad for
years, but got worse after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.


LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1541 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 30, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Biotech's share price on rise Shares of Collateral
Therapeutics were up more than 20 percent yesterday, continuing a rise that
began last week after the company provided a positive outlook for its lead drug
candidate.

   The San Diego biotechnology company, which is developing a gene therapy to
treat heart disease, said it would soon begin large, late-stage patient trials
in Europe and had already commenced them in the United States.

   The company's stock rose $1.19, to close at $7.06. Previo posts $3.2 million
loss Previo reported a $3.2 million net loss, or 46 cents per share, for its
fourth quarter, compared with a $360,000 net loss, or 5 cents a share, for the
same period last year.

   The San Diego-based company, which develops personal computer services, said
revenue declined to $900,000 from $1.4 million.

   The company took a $900,000 restructuring charge in the quarter, related to a
decision to cut 40 full-time jobs, close offices in England and focus marketing
and sales efforts exclusively on North America. Neurocrine to receive payment
Neurocrine Biosciences yesterday said it will receive a $15.5 million payment
from development partner GlaxoSmithKline.

   The San Diego biotechnology company said the payment marks the first research
milestone achieved under the collaboration.

   The companies are attempting to discover new drugs to treat psychiatric and
gastrointestinal diseases. CalWest offers to buy Cabot CalWest Industrial
Properties, a real estate investment company owned by the California Public
Employees Retirement System, has offered to buy all common shares of
Boston-based Cabot Industrial Trust for $2.1 billion. Under the terms of the
offer, CalWest will pay $24 a share for all of Cabot's common shares.

   The offer represents a 20 percent premium to Cabot's closing share price of
$19.95 on Friday.

   CalPERS, the nation's largest public pension fund, has $12.4 billion in real
estate holdings. EBay sees bright outlook EBay executives affirmed their
aggressive long-term growth targets yesterday, expressing optimism the company
will remain strong despite the economic downturn.

   Chief executive Meg Whitman said the San Jose-based online auction site is
still on track to hit $3 billion in revenue by 2005. She expects the company to
see sales rise 50 percent in 2002. Whitman's projection of 50 percent growth
next year exceeds current Wall Street estimates.

   Executives told analysts they will concentrate on increasing auctions and
fixed-price sales in several key categories such as automobiles, computers and
real estate. WORLD AND NATION Napster to return next year Song-sharing service
Napster will not relaunch until some time early next year, chief executive
officer Konrad Hilbers said yesterday at a technology conference in Los Angeles.

   Napster has been offline since July in an effort to comply with a federal
judge's order that the free trading of music be halted.

   Hilbers said Napster will replicate its popular file-sharing service in a
secure environment while pressing for licensing deals with major labels. Intel,
AMD cut prices again Intel Corp. and Advanced Micro Devices Inc. yesterday cut
the prices of some of their microprocessors by as much as 29 percent as the two
chip firms slug it out for market share gains and seek to spur demand for
personal computers in a weak economy. MTV Networks plans layoffs Music video
pioneer MTV Networks, owner of the popular cable networks MTV, VH1, and
Nickelodeon, said yesterday it would cut between 8 percent and 9 percent of its
work force.

   The company will outsource more of its animation used for MTV programs and
accelerate its plan to shift its work force toward the local level and away from
its central offices, according to a company memo. Japan's jobless rate hits
record Japan's unemployment rate jumped to a record high of 5.3 percent in
September.

   In July, Japan's jobless rate hit 5 percent -- then the highest since the
government began keeping track in the 1950s. The unemployment rate stayed at 5
percent in August.

   The figures, released by the government today, show the severity of the
economic problems facing Japan that had been bad for years, but got worse after
the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1542 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 30, 2001, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1680 words

HEADLINE: Techies answer USA's call to arms

BYLINE: Edward Iwata

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:
SAN FRANCISCO -- A new breed of defense contractor -- high-tech and biotech --
is scrambling to take part in what could be the largest U.S. military buildup in
decades.

   Past wars called for heavy-duty arms and aircraft made by military and
aerospace giants, such as Boeing, Lockheed Martin and General Dynamics.

   But defense against terrorists in the 21st century demands super-fast
computers, security software and antibiotics better known in tech labs than in
Pentagon war rooms. "It's a call to arms for our industry," says CEO Allan
Griebenow of Axcess, a network-security firm in Dallas.

   It won't be easy, though, for newcomers to waltz into the world of defense
procurement. They'll compete against an old boys' network of 10 to 15 large
defense contractors and their favored subcontractors. They'll be baffled by the
government's complex legal, accounting and bidding rules. "A lot of technology
companies have never done business with the government," says analyst Bill
Keevan of Andersen. "I guarantee there will be problems."


   That isn't expected to stop anyone. After the attacks, Congress approved $ 40
billion in emergency funds to combat terrorism and aid recovery efforts.
Billions more are anticipated to defend airports, highways and power plants.
Defense-related tech research and contracts -- about one-third of last year's $
300 billion military budget -- are sure to grow. Analyst Paul Nisbet at JSA
Research thinks it could rival the defense spending of the Reagan years or the
Cold War buildup. Hundreds of tech-related firms are positioning to vie for a
piece of the spending.

   Salient Stills, a digital-imaging firm in Boston, is one such firm. Its
software is used by media firms to convert video from cable, satellites and
cameras into high-quality images. Founder Laura Teodosio launched the firm 5
years ago after designing the software as a student at MIT's Media Lab.

   Shocked by Sept. 11, Salient Stills donated its software to the FBI, which is
testing it. The software searches thousands of videos from security cameras at
airports, hotels and banks and sharpens fuzzy images.

   But it's a big leap to turn promising technology into a federal contract.
Salient Stills executives are cautiously scouting the new terrain. They're
meeting with government officials. They've hired a consultant well known in
Washington. They're aiming for partnerships with federal contractors. And they
may beef up corporate and advisory boards with military and intelligence
experts.

   "We're exploring the new market," CEO Steve Hill says. "You can't just call
the head of the Federal Aviation Administration and say, 'Hey, I've got some
great software. You want to buy it?' "

   Big players have edge

   Tech-related companies with defense-contract experience -- Compaq Computer,
EDS and KPMG Consulting, for instance -- will have a big edge. They've partnered
with major federal contractors for years.

   On Monday, SGI Federal, a subsidiary of high-end computer maker Silicon
Graphics, announced a research deal with the Air Force Space Warfare Center to
test and evaluate technologies.

   Other tech firms, such as software maker Cylink, already have strong federal
ties. Cylink CEO William Crowell is former deputy director of the National
Security Agency. Cylink sells encryption technology to the FBI, the Justice
Department and the Customs Service. About 20% of Cylink's $ 70 million in
revenue last year came from defense contracts.

   Oracle has sold billions of dollars of database software since 1985 to the
military, the FBI and other federal agencies. After Sept. 11, a brigade of
Oracle executives, including former military officials, staged late-night
meetings to mobilize Oracle's 1,000 employees who work on federal contracts and
to strategize how their software might help battle terrorism. Also, CEO Larry
Ellison met with Attorney General John Ashcroft to drum up support for a
voluntary national ID card that would be mandatory for immigrants. "Information
technology is the enemy of terrorists," says Oracle executive Kevin Fitzgerald.

   Axcess recently launched a marketing group to focus on defense contracts. It
also promoted Air Force veteran Jim Ferguson as director of the firm's "homeland
security initiative." Earlier this year, the Department of Defense started
testing Axcess' small radio-wave devices that track and identify weapons and
missiles. Several airports, including John F. Kennedy International, use the
devices to identify fuel trucks and their drivers. "We're ready at a moment's
notice to gear up," CEO Griebenow says.

   Meanwhile, drugmaker Barr Laboratories is lobbying the nation's top health
czar in hope of producing a generic version of Cipro, an antibiotic used against
anthrax. German drugmaker Bayer holds the patent on Cipro. In a letter to Health
and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson, Barr CEO Bruce Downey wrote: "Barr
stands ready, willing and able to manufacture Cipro."

   High-tech leaders also are backing legislation that could cut red tape in the
defense-contracting process. The snail-like pace of military procurement can
take months or years. Says CEO Bob McCashin of biometrics firm Identix, which
sells fingerprint-scanning devices: "If our industry has the right technology to
save lives, we need to utilize it -- and quickly."

    Poised for action

   Technology, of course, isn't new to federal agencies. The National Security
Agency uses sophisticated communications and surveillance gear. The Department
of Defense devised the Internet three decades ago for government use. Defense
contractors have toiled for years on complex technology.

   But, as Gartner analyst French Caldwell puts it, "Our national missile
defense won't help much against truck bombs." Firms that may gain in the digital
war against terrorists:

    * Abgenix vs. bioterrorism. Two years ago, the government launched a
bioterrorism offensive to stockpile vaccines and antibiotics that fight scourges
such as smallpox. But Sept. 11 and anthrax incidents have thrust
biopharmaceutical firms even more into the realm of national security.

   In a lab in Fremont, Calif., gene-therapy company Abgenix is waging a quiet
battle against terrorists. Since 1999, Abgenix has supplied Army researchers
with genetically engineered mice that produce antibodies to fight anthrax and
the deadly Ebola and Marburg viruses. Since Sept. 11, Abgenix has offered to
help the Army research and produce antibodies. Geoff Davis, chief technology
officer at the privately held company, declined to disclose how soon Abgenix and
the Army might roll out antidotes.

    * EnviroFoam Technologies. This tiny company in Huntsville, Ala., is
licensed to sell a powerful decontaminant made by Sandia National Laboratories.
Used as a foam, spray or liquid, the chemical neutralizes many biological and
biochemical agents, including nerve and mustard gases. Before Sept. 11, the
decontaminant was a hard sell. Now, the Army, the Environmental Protection
Agency and the National Guard are testing it, says EnviroFoam CEO Peter Beucher.
"It's not a miracle spray wash, but it'll kill anthrax very effectively."

    * High-tech heavyweights. "Even before Sept. 11, we knew the military had to
change to combat terrorism," says Compaq executive Ron Ross. "Now there's a
sense of urgency." Compaq, the world's No. 2 personal-computer maker, has won
big contracts recently to sell computers, laptops and handheld devices to the
Army, Navy, National Security Agency and Northrop Grumman.

   Ross says the firm will post $ 1.4 billion in revenue this year from military
and other government contracts. That will be 4% or 5% of Compaq's $ 30 billion
or more in 2001 sales. He declined to predict Compaq's future revenue growth in
defense contracts.

   KPMG hopes to scale a huge barrier: getting thousands of military and
law-enforcement databases worldwide to "talk" to each other and share
intelligence. KPMG worked with former Pennsylvania governor Tom Ridge, now head
of the new U.S. Office of Homeland Security, to blend the computer networks of
dozens of police agencies, courts and prison systems in the state. While the
logistics would be nightmarish, the same could be done nationwide.

   "It's a massive effort," says Dan Johnson of KPMG's Public Services Business,
"but we've had real good luck in catching a lot of bad guys using this system."

   Much of the war against terrorism will be fought in the cyber trenches. Enter
HNC Software. The San Diego-based firm makes software that hunts for
money-laundering trails and fraud in financial transactions.

   Since Sept. 11, HNC has teamed with PROS Revenue Management, an airline
consultant. HNC's software looks for suspicious travel patterns and buying
habits of passengers. The CIA already uses HNC's software to analyze terrorists'
activities in the Middle East, CEO John Mutch says. Over the next 3 to 5 years,
Mutch predicts military contracting could make up 10% or more of HNC's revenue.
"The federal government is looking to the tech community for solutions," Mutch
says. "We believe we can do some good work."



   Many defense-linked stocks see value rise

   Performance of defense-related stocks since Sept. 10:

   Technology companies

   Firm

   Description

   Monday close

   Percent change

   Cepheid DNA-testing products

   $ 6.08

   297%

   Cylink Network security

   $ 1.68

   342%

   HNC Software Fraud-detection software

   $ 17.70

   -15%

   Identix Biometrics security

   $ 7.41

   76%

   L-3 Communications Communications systems

   $ 87.52

   39%

   Military manufacturers

   Boeing Aerospace manufacturer

   $ 33.75

   -22%

   General Dynamics Military manufacturer

   $ 82.10

   8%

   Lockheed Martin Aerospace manufacturer

   $ 49.00

   28%

   Northrup Grumman Communications electronics

   $ 102.30

   25%

   Raytheon Aerospace and electronics

   $ 33.28

   34%

   Sources: USA TODAY, Yahoo Finance

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Peter DaSilva for USA TODAY; PHOTOS, B/W (2); On the bio
front: Abgenix and its chief technology officer, Geoff Davis, are hard at work
on genetically engineered mice that produce antibodies to fight anthrax and
Ebola. The goal: to develop antidotes to the often-fatal biological agents.
<>Before and after: At left, a before" image from an Italian bank robbery.
Technology developed by Salient Stills sharpens the image, right. After Sept.
11, Salient Stills donated its software to the FBI, which is testing it.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2001


                             1543 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 29, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 3028 words

HEADLINE: AT THE CENTER OF IT ALL;

Bay Area firms break ground in quest for progess and profits

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
The Foster City headquarters of Gilead Sciences are busier than usual these days
as the company gears up to launch Viread, an AIDS medicine that treats strains
of HIV that have mutated to become resistant to other drugs.

    For HIV patients, Viread offers a potent one-a-day pill. For Gilead
shareholders, its sales should drive the company toward sustained profitability.
Gilead's success also represents the Bay Area's next generation in biotechnology
and is another sign of the industry's maturity.

    A quarter century after the founding of Genentech began the industry, firms
like Gilead are building on the success of the pioneers.

    "There's a whole generation of biotech firms in Northern California that are
rounding the corner toward profitability and getting significant products on the
market," said Alex Zisson, senior biotech analyst with J.P. Morgan H&Q.

    Gilead exemplifies that next wave. Founded in 1987, the company went public
in 1992. Around that time, Gilead scientists began experimenting with what would
become Viread. They studied the drug in animals before starting human clinical
trials in 1996.

    By then, first-generation AIDS drugs had already helped patients get HIV
infections under control. But the disease wasn't licked.

    "It's a molecular battle between HIV and the pharmaceutical companies," said
Gilead Vice President John Milligan. "The virus sees what we throw at it and it
fights back."

    But Viread will throw HIV a new curve. The virus copies itself by grabbing
chemical building blocks out of infected cells and stringing these blocks
together. "Think about toy trains with a hitch in the front and a hitch in the
back," Milligan said.

    Viread resembles those chemicals. But it only has a hitch at one end. "The
virus gets fooled into thinking it's a building block when it's a dead end,"
Milligan said..

    LONG ROAD TO PROFIT

    But creating new medicines is only a part of the biotech battle. Achieving
profitability involves years of planning to create the sales force and
manufacturing operations needed to take the product from the lab to patients.

    Two years before government regulators approved the drug, Gilead was so sure
it had a winner that it acquired a Colorado biotech firm that had an
international sales force. Now Gilead won't have to surrender any profits to buy
promotional assistance from one of the drug companies, a trap that often befalls
young biotech firms.

    "We're unlike many of the first-generation companies in that we decided to
go into Europe early," Milligan said. "Genentech still doesn't do that and Amgen
is just beginning."

    Other Bay Area biotech companies are also demonstrating the scientific and
commercial acumen needed to succeed.

    Sunnyvale's Scios recently won approval for Natrecor, a new heart medicine
and its first drug in 20 years. While it took Scios far longer than usual to get
a drug on the market, the company was savvy enough to create its own sales force
to sell Natrecor, avoiding the revenue split that prevents shareholders from
realizing the full value of a new medicine.

    Behind Genentech and Chiron, which broke into the black years ago, a select
group of Bay Area biotech companies have survived the experimental stage and
evolved into profitability in recent years.

    South San Francisco's Cor Therapeutics broke the profit barrier thanks to
Integrilin, a treatment for cardiovascular disease. Foster City's Applied
Biosystems Group is another of the region's biotech profitmakers -- and industry
leaders. Applied makes the DNA sequencing machines that allowed scientists to
unravel the human genome years ahead of schedule.

    Palo Alto's Genencor is another money-making biotech firm. A Genentech
spin-off, it uses biotechnology to create the sort of industrial enzymes that
help detergents get out those greasy stains. Genencor competes with Novozymes
Biotech in Davis..

    THE NEXT STAGE

    Beyond these few profitable firms, a larger number of Bay Area biotech
companies are nearing the end of the long development cycles that make this
industry a marathon.

    "There's a whole tier of companies that could make it over the next two or
three years," said Jim McCamant, an analyst for San Francisco's Moors & Cabot
Technology Research. "These are companies with compounds in late stage clinical
trials or technology platforms that lead the industry."

    The Peninsula is the heartland of these late-stage biotech hopefuls. In San
Carlos, Inhale Therapeutics is trying to nail down the last nagging safety
issues so it can win U.S. Food & Drug Administration approval for an inhalable
version of insulin that would give diabetics an alternative to the needle.

    In a similar fashion, Mountain View's Aviron is trying to address FDA
concerns in hopes of getting approval soon to sell FluMist, a vaccine that can
be administered as a nasal spray.

    Switching to a different research track, Foster City's Cell Genesys is
testing medicines that involve gene therapy. Biotech scientists have been trying
for more than a decade to devise ways to take a gene, deliver it into a
patient's bod and activate it for some medical purpose.

    Progress has been slow and gene therapy remains an experimental field, but
McCamant said Cell Genesys is slowly amassing the efficacy and safety proof the
FDA requires to approve a new medicine. Last week, for instance, the company
reported encouraging results from a Phase II study of a gene therapy treatment
for prostate cancer.

    "They still have to go through Phase III studies, but good Phase II results
are where investors start to pay attention," McCamant said..

    FROM FUTURISTIC TO MAINSTAY

    One of the biggest medical and financial success in recent biotech history
has been the development of antibody medicines. Our immune systems rely on
naturally produced antibodies to fight disease. Biotech scientists spent more
than 20 years trying to design and produce antibodies that would target specific
diseases.

    Once again, Genentech was the pioneer that proved antibodies were safe and
effective when it won FDA approval in 1997 to sell Rituxan, a treatment for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. A year later, Genentech obtained FDA clearance for a
second antibody medicine, Herceptin, to treat one of the deadliest forms of
breast cancer.

    Five years after Genentech paved the way, antibodies have become one of the
biotech industry's mainstay products. Two Fremont firms, Abgenix and Protein
Design Labs, are in the forefront of antibody development by working with other
biotech firms to create antibodies for specific illnesses.

    Antibody therapy may also prove useful in countering bioterror. Abgenix is
working with the Department of Defense on possible antibody treatments for
smallpox, Ebola virus and other potential threats.

    BRANCHING OUT

    While some Bay Area biotech firms concentrate on creating medicines based on
proven approaches like antibodies, others aspire to blaze new therapeutic
trails. In Richmond, Onyx Pharmaceuticals is pursuing a Phase III, or end stage,
study of a novel anti-cancer treatment.

    Onyx has created a virus that only replicates inside tumor cells. Once
inside a tumor cell, however, the virus reproduces uncontrollably. In earlier
studies the Onyx virus kept on making copies of itself until it exploded the
tumor cells from the inside out. It's a promising approach, conceptually as
simple as overfilling a water balloon until it bursts. But until Onyx wins FDA
certification, it remains a speculative and experimental approach.

    One of the biggest currents to sweep biotechnology in recent years has been
the effort to map the human genome. Palo Alto's Incyte Genomics was one of the
earliest gene discovery firms. Most pharmaceutical companies subscribe to its
gene database, which they use to generate leads for new drugs.. However, Incyte
recently trimmed more than a third of its workforce in a bid to restore
profitability.

    Other Bay Area firms have carved out different gene discovery niches. South
San Francisco's Exelixis is a leader in comparative genomics. Humans have a high
opinion of themselves, but at a molecular level, they share many of the same
genes and proteins as fish and fruit flies. Exelixis exploits these comparisons
to come up with clues to the causes of human disease. If a particular, gene
abnormality affects, say, a fish's heart, there's a good chance that there is a
corresponding human gene that also plays a role in heart development or disease.

    Deltagen Inc. takes a different approach to comparative genomics. The
Redwood City company alters mice by adding or removing genes and observing
resulting physiological or behavioral changes. Mice are a favorite tool in drug
research; scientists use them to mimic human diseases or predict human reaction
to potential drugs. Deltagen is creating genetically altered mice on a large
scale to hunt for disease-causing genes..

    MIXED WITH SILICON

    Bay Area companies have also fused biotechnology with electronics technology
to create new tools to analyze and manipulate DNA, proteins and the other
molecules of life.

    Santa Clara's Affymetrix is a pioneer in making "gene chips," slivers of
glass or other materials embossed with fragments of known genes. Scientists use
the chips to figure out which genes are active in a tissue sample. They place a
drop of sample on the chip. The active genes in the sample are grabbed by
matching fragments on the chip. These matches are disclosed when the chip is
placed in an electronic detector.

    Two Mountain View firms, Aclara Biosciences and Caliper Technologies, are
rivals in the effort to perform experiments using a drop of liquid placed on a
single chip.

    Another Mountain View firm, Ciphergen Biosystems, is developing devices to
automate the identification of unknown proteins. Across the Bay in Hayward,
privately held Zyomyx is working on doing protein identification on a chip.

    And so it goes, with biotech companies around the Bay Area studying the
complex mechanisms of life, health and disease. Discoveries spawn startups. This
spring, Alameda's Genteric unveiled a patented technology for putting insulin
genes into a pill. Gene therapy experts were stunned. Conventional wisdom held
that our digestive juices broke down any DNA we swallowed. Is Genteric on track
to creating gene therapy pills? Check back in a decade..

    THE BIOTECH BREWERY

    The Bay Area biotech industry remains a paradox. On the one hand, it's
maturing, getting serious about products and profits. It has to -- shareholders
demand it. Yet, at the same time, curious scientists continue to find financial
backing to run risky experiments that can run for years, even decades.

    Larry Grill, vice president for research at Large Scale Biology in
Vacaville, is pursuing a hunch that could solve one of the biotech industry's
fundamental problems: how to grow biotech medicines quickly and economically.

    Today, the state of the art in biotech manufacturing is represented by the
Genentech facility in Vacaville, where medicines are brewed in giant stainless
steel vats in a process that looks a lot like beer fermentation -- only with
cleanliness standards of the highest order.

    The process is a modern marvel, but the facilities cost tens of millions of
dollars and can take years to build. Since the early '90s, Grill has been trying
to show that biotech medicines can be grown in plants.

    His concept sounds simple. It begins with a virus that infects tobacco
plants. Grill has engineered the virus to carry an extra gene -- a gene that
creates a desired medicinal protein. (For more on this, see story on Page X8.)

    In theory, by brushing a bit of the altered virus onto the plant, Grill can
turn the plant into a protein factory. The virus hijacks the plant's cells and
forces them to produce the desired protein. Large Scale Biology has shown that
it can use the virus to create plants that produce a harmless fluorescent
protein. But that's merely a parlor trick..

    CUSTOMIZED MEDICINES

    The acid test is under way now. Large Scale Biology is growing a medicinal
protein that Stanford professor Ron Levy has been producing in his lab to treat
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. What makes the treatment unusual is that Levy tailors
each batch of protein to each patient. Current techniques can't do custom
manufacturing economically.

    "It (now) takes up to a year to get enough protein to treat a patient,"
Grill said. He believes that 400 plants, brushed with the altered virus, could
grow enough sufficient protein for a treatment in about 10 days. This spring,
Large Scale Biology began a Phase I clinical trial.

    "We'll get some safety and some efficacy data in Spring 2002," Grill said.

    Only time will tell if Grill's experiment will prove to be a low-cost
technique for growing biotech medicines or just another of the many dead ends
that make this such a tough industry for those who work in it, invest in it or
await its products. This is an experimental field, and experiments often fail.

    But given the breadth, the quantity and quality of the Bay Area's biotech
innovators, the odds favor that the best is yet to come.

   ------------------------------------------------------------


   CHART:

   THE INDUSTRY'S EPICENTER

   The area around Genentech's South San Francisco headquarters remains the
world's strongest concentration of biotech firms. During the past 25 years,
industry pioneers like Genentech and Emeryville's Chiron Corp. have inspired
many new firms throughout Northern California. By most measures, the Bay Area
remains the world leader in biotech. But other regions are copying its success.

   .
-- -- --

-- Distribution of jobs
.
11.6% - Wholesale trade
15.3% - Academic research
31.5% - Biopharmaceuticals
39.2% - Medical devices, Instruments and diagnostics
 2.2% - Lab services
-- -- --

   Bay Area biotech profile (1998)
- Biomedical companies: 747
- Reported worldwide revenues: $8 billion
- Direct employment: 84,819
- Reported private investment in  research and development: $1.6 billion
- Exports: $1.4 billion-- Wages and salaries paid: $5.6 billion
- NIH grants awarded: $608 million

   -- -- --

   Spin-off companies from academia
.
Stanford                        64
UC Berkeley                     32
UC Davis                        11
UC San Francisco                56
UC Santa Cruz                    2
Lawrence Livermore Nat'l. Lab.   5
-- -- -- --

   Health care technology exports
      Total     Biopharma-       Surgical and          Lab
                ceuticals     medical equipment   instruments
'89    $477        $95                $135             $247
'93    $800       $131                $202             $467
'98    $1.4(x)    $393                $404             $568
'10    $2.3(x)    $883                $795             $631
(projected)
.
x=billions
--


   BAY AREA BIOTECH UNIVERSE (2001)
.
1. Stanford
2. UC Berkeley
3. UC Davis
4. UC San Francisco
5. UC Santa Cruz
6. Lawrence Livermore Nat'l. Lab.
.
SAMPLING OF                         Market capitalization
LOCAL COMPANIES                            as of 10/26/01
 7. Gilead Sciences, Foster City             $6.4 billion
 8. Large Scale Biology Corp., Vacaville       86 million
 9. Genentech, South San Francisco and
    Vacaville                                29.6 billion
10  Chiron Corp., Emeryville                   10 billion
11. Cor Therapeutics, South San Francisco    1.35 billion
12. Scios, Sunnyvale                         1.09 billion
13. Abgenix, Fremont                         2.71 billion
14. Protein Design Labs, Fremont             3.19 billion
15. Cell Genesys, Foster City                 637 million
16. Onyx Pharmaceuticals, Richmond             96 million
17. Genteric, Alameda                          not listed
18. Applied Biosystems, Foster City          6.41 billion
19. Affymetrix, Santa Clara                  1.83 billion
20. Incyte Genomics, Palo Alto               1.07 billion
21. Novozymes Biotech, Davis                   not listed
22. Genencor, Palo Alto                       692 million
23. Aclara, Mountain View                     182 million
24. Caliper Technologies, Mountain View       329 million
25. Ciphergen Biosystems, Fremont            98.4 million
26. Exelixis, South San Francisco             635 million
27. Deltagen, Redwood City                    276 million
28. Inhale Therapeutic System, San Carlos    1.06 billion
29. Aviron, Mountain View                    1.13 billion
30. Zyomyx, Hayward                            not listed
.

   .

   Sources: UC BioSTAR Project; UCSF web site; Stanford University Office of
Medical Development; Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; California
Healthcare Institute, Employment Development Dept., 1998; U.S. Department of
Commerce


    E-mail Tom Abate at tabate@ sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE END OF TEXT, Larry Grill of Large Scale
Biology Corp. in Vacaville wants to show that plants can produce biotech
medicines quickly and economically. / Mark Costantini/The Chronicle, GRAPHIC:
JOHN BLANCHARD/THE CHRONICLE

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2001


                             1544 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                 October 28, 2001 Sunday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03B

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Research! Louisville; Team seeks to reduce heart-attack damage;
Bolli trying to use drugs, gene therapy to 'precondition' heart

BYLINE: KAUKAS DICK

BODY:

   Dr. Roberto Bolli and his research team at the University of Louisville are
searching for ways to help human hearts resist the damage that results when they
are deprived of oxygen during a heart attack.

   Bolli's studies are based on a phenomenon called "preconditioning'' - when a
heart suffers a mild attack, it paradoxically becomes better able to survive a
second, serious attack with less damage.

   Studies have shown that if blood flow to the heart is interrupted for five
minutes and then restored, the heart becomes "preconditioned.'

   Then, during a subsequent serious attack, the preconditioned heart suffers
much less damage - less heart tissue dies - than a heart that has not been
preconditioned.

   "We're trying to precondition the heart with drugs or gene therapy,'' said
Bolli, who is chairman of the cardiology department at U of L.

   Eventually, Bolli hopes patients at risk of a heart attack will be able to
take medicine that keeps their heart in a "preconditioned'' state, and not only
withstand damage, but better resist an attack in the first place.

   The research team is also looking at gene therapy - using a specially
engineered cold virus - to deliver an enzyme to the heart that produces nitric
oxide.

   Bolli and his researchers have demonstrated that nitric oxide can "trigger''
the preconditioned response of the heart, protecting it without running the risk
of a prior mild attack.

   Bolli, who has been working at U of L since he was lured to the school in
part by a $2.3 million research grant from Jewish Hospital HealthCare Services
in 1994, has been widely recognized for his studies.

   Hank Wagner, president of Jewish Hospital HealthCare, has said that Bolli's
work holds out the promise of emerging quickly from the lab and starting to help
people in hospitals, perhaps within the next few years.

   At its annual meeting next month, the American Heart Association will present
Bolli with its "basic research prize,'' which honors "an individual who is
making an outstanding contribution'' to the advancement of cardiovascular
science.

   - Dick Kaukas

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1545 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                October 27, 2001 Saturday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03B

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Researh Louisville; Team seeks to reduce heart-attack damage;
Bolli trying to use drugs, gene therapy to 'precondition' heart

BYLINE: KAUKAS DICK

BODY:

   Dr. Roberto Bolli and his research team at the University of Louisville are
searching for ways to help human hearts resist the damage that results when they
are deprived of oxygen during a heart attack.

   Bolli's studies are based on a phenomenon called "preconditioning'' - when a
heart suffers a mild attack, it paradoxically becomes better able to survive a
second, serious attack with less damage.

   Studies have shown that if blood flow to the heart is interrupted for five
minutes and then restored, the heart becomes "preconditioned.'

   Then, during a subsequent serious attack, the preconditioned heart suffers
much less damage - less heart tissue dies - than a heart that has not been
preconditioned.

   "We're trying to precondition the heart with drugs or gene therapy,'' said
Bolli, who is chairman of the cardiology department at U of L.

   Eventually, Bolli hopes patients at risk of a heart attack will be able to
take medicine that keeps their heart in a "preconditioned'' state, and not only
withstand damage, but better resist an attack in the first place.

   The research team is also looking at gene therapy - using a specially
engineered cold virus - to deliver an enzyme to the heart that produces nitric
oxide.

   Bolli and his researchers have demonstrated that nitric oxide can "trigger''
the preconditioned response of the heart, protecting it without running the risk
of a prior mild attack.

   Bolli, who has been working at U of L since he was lured to the school in
part by a $2.3 million research grant from Jewish Hospital HealthCare Services
in 1994, has been widely recognized for his studies.

   Hank Wagner, president of Jewish Hospital HealthCare, has said that Bolli's
work holds out the promise of emerging quickly from the lab and starting to help
people in hospitals, perhaps within the next few years.

   At its annual meeting next month, the American Heart Association will present
Bolli with its "basic research prize,'' which honors "an individual who is
making an outstanding contribution'' to the advancement of cardiovascular
science.

   - Dick Kaukas

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1546 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                October 27, 2001 Saturday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03B

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: Research! Louisville; Team seeks to reduce heart-attack damage;
Bolli trying to use drugs, gene therapy to 'precondition' heart

BYLINE: KAUKAS DICK

BODY:

   Dr. Roberto Bolli and his research team at the University of Louisville are
searching for ways to help human hearts resist the damage that results when they
are deprived of oxygen during a heart attack.

   Bolli's studies are based on a phenomenon called "preconditioning'' - when a
heart suffers a mild attack, it paradoxically becomes better able to survive a
second, serious attack with less damage.

   Studies have shown that if blood flow to the heart is interrupted for five
minutes and then restored, the heart becomes "preconditioned.'

   Then, during a subsequent serious attack, the preconditioned heart suffers
much less damage - less heart tissue dies - than a heart that has not been
preconditioned.

   "We're trying to precondition the heart with drugs or gene therapy,'' said
Bolli, who is chairman of the cardiology department at U of L.

   Eventually, Bolli hopes patients at risk of a heart attack will be able to
take medicine that keeps their heart in a "preconditioned'' state, and not only
withstand damage, but better resist an attack in the first place.

   The research team is also looking at gene therapy - using a specially
engineered cold virus - to deliver an enzyme to the heart that produces nitric
oxide.

   Bolli and his researchers have demonstrated that nitric oxide can "trigger''
the preconditioned response of the heart, protecting it without running the risk
of a prior mild attack.

   Bolli, who has been working at U of L since he was lured to the school in
part by a $2.3 million research grant from Jewish Hospital HealthCare Services
in 1994, has been widely recognized for his studies.

   Hank Wagner, president of Jewish Hospital HealthCare, has said that Bolli's
work holds out the promise of emerging quickly from the lab and starting to help
people in hospitals, perhaps within the next few years.

   At its annual meeting next month, the American Heart Association will present
Bolli with its "basic research prize,'' which honors "an individual who is
making an outstanding contribution'' to the advancement of cardiovascular
science.

   - Dick Kaukas

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1547 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            October 26, 2001 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 230 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   Corvis lost $ 80.6 million (23 cents per share) during its third quarter,
compared with a loss of $ 66.4 million (29 cents) during the same period a year
earlier. The Columbia-based developer of optical networking equipment posted
revenue of $ 24.2 million, up from $ 22.9 million a year earlier.

   Corvis is looking to increase sales but also plans to cut costs as customers
delay purchases, president and CEO David Huber said. He said the company will
trim its 1,270-person workforce and expects to take a fourth-quarter
restructuring charge. Revenue in the quarter is estimated at between $ 15
million and $ 35 million, depending on the timing of Corvis's shipments to a
major customer, Qwest Communications.

   * Human Genome Sciences lost $ 24.9 million (19 cents per share) on $ 1.6
million in revenue for the third quarter ended Sept. 30. For the same period of
last year, the Rockville-based biotechnology firm lost $ 148.9 million ($ 1.35)
on $ 6.3 million in revenue.

   * GenVec, a Gaithersburg company that develops gene therapy treatments, lost
$ 5.7 million (31 cents per share) for the quarter ended Sept. 30, compared to a
loss of $ 2.5 million ($ 1.27) in the year-earlier quarter, when there were
fewer shares. Revenue for the third quarter plummeted to $ 249,000, from $ 2.8
million a year earlier, while operating expenses increased to $ 6.3 million from
$ 5.4 million.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2001


                             1548 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           October 25, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: UPTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Benton honored

The Louisiana chapter of Prevent Child Abuse America has presented the
prestigious Administration on Children, Youth and Families Commissioner's Award
to Dr. Scott Benton, Children's Hospital forensic pediatrician.

   The Commissioner's Award honors one person from each state every two years
for their significant contributions toward the prevention and treatment of child
abuse and neglect.

   Among numerous professional and volunteer efforts, in 1995 Benton helped
expand The Children at Risk Evaluation (CARE) Center at Children's Hospital,
which specializes in diagnosis, treatment and legal services for children who
are abused or are suspected of being sexually abused or neglected. The initial
program, the Child Abuse Program, was established in 1985. Since the original
program's inception, The CARE Center has helped about 5,000 children suspected
of being maltreated.

Award presented

   Tulane Health Sciences Center gene therapy researcher Dr. Leena Ala-Kokko
recently received the Anders Jahre Prize for medical research done by younger
medical researchers in the Nordic countries.

   This award, named for a Norwegian entrepreneur philanthropist, recognizes
Ala-Kokko for her contributions to understanding the genetic factors
contributing to several diseases. The award was presented at a gala ceremony
Oct. 11 in Oslo, Norway.

   Ala-Kokko has studied musculoskeletal diseases and collagen-related diseases,
including osteoarthritis. Using these findings, she has developed several
diagnostic DNA tests, many of which are unique tools to aid clinicians.

   She is the first Tulane faculty member to receive this award, which
recognizes outstanding scientists in the five Nordic countries. It is the
highest honor next to the Nobel Prize that can be awarded to a Scandinavian
scientist.

   Ala-Kokko was born in Oulu, Finland, and received her medical degree and
Ph.D. from the University of Oulu. She joined the faculty at the Tulane Center
for Gene Therapy as an associate professor of medicine in 2000 and recently was
promoted to professor. She still maintains an active research and teaching
program at the University of Oulu. Ala-Kokko is a recipient of the Arthritis
Foundation's prestigious Osteoarthritis Biomarkers Biomedical Science Grant and
research grants from the National Institute of Health and the Marfan's
Association.

Irons honored

The Business and Professional Women of Jefferson Parish named state Sen.
Paulette Irons Woman of the Year during their celebration of National Business
Women's Week.

   The award recognizes local working women who have supported small business
development and family-friendly practices in the workplace. In 2001, Irons
championed a contraceptive equity bill, which would require employers to provide
prescriptive coverage of birth control pills through employee health plans.

   Irons also was responsible for Gov. Foster appointing the Women's Policy and
Research Commission, which successfully passed many workplace changes during the
2001 Legislative Session. For a full report, visit www.sisters2002.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2001


                             1549 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 23, 2001 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 175 words

HEADLINE: FDA asks Genzyme for more drug info

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. has been asked for a second time to provide more information to
the Food and Drug Administration regarding its Fabrazyme drug, submitted for
approval last year.

   The request for more information about the drug used to treat Fabry disease,
won't require more testing, said officials of the Cambridge company.

   "We feel like we're making progress and that we've come a long way toward
providing the FDA the information they need to fully evaluate the application,"
said Genzyme spokesman Bo Piela.

   The request comes six months after the company submitted additional
information previously requested.

   The company's stock rose 4 percent yesterday, ending the day at $ 48.70.

   Fabrazyme has already been approved in Europe, and Genzyme is getting
reimbursement and pricing approval from individual countries.

   In August and September sales were $ 1.9 million.

   Genzyme faces competition from Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which is seeking
approval of its Fabry's treatment, Replagal. That drug has also been approved in
Europe.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2001


                             1550 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 23, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D5

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME SET BACK IN BID FOR FABRY DRUG APPROVAL FDA AGAIN SEEKS MORE
INFORMATION

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. said regulators won't approve its drug for Fabry disease until
the Cambridge company provides more information about the drug's ability to
treat the rare genetic disorder.

   The request from the Food and Drug Administration delays a decision on
approval in Genzyme's race against crosstown neighbor Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. to be the first, and perhaps sole, provider of a therapy for Fabry disease.

       The so-called orphan drug act requires that only one drug be approved to
treat a rare disease such as Fabry, which affects only a few thousand people
worldwide, putting pressure on the FDA to approve the better drug or to find a
loophole that allows approval of both.

   The two Cambridge firms both submitted their applications in June, and in
January, were both asked for additional information. Genzyme provided the
requested information in April.

   On Friday, spokesman Bo Piela said, the company received a second request
from the FDA for additional information. Piela declined to comment on the
specifics but said regulators did not raise any new or unexpected issues.

   "We are confident that we can compile the information and submit it in a
timely way," said Piela, adding that no additional studies were needed.

   Once the information is submitted, it is unclear how much time the FDA would
need to decide, although it could take six months.

   Meanwhile, TKT's chief financial officer, Daniel E. Geffken, said the company
has been working with the FDA to answer the agency's questions. He declined to
comment on when a decision might be expected.

   "It's an ongoing process," Geffken said. "The FDA talks to us about our
product, and only ours. Our expectation is that the first drug to be approved
will receive orphan-drug status, and we intend that drug to be ours."

   Genzyme's shares rose $1.92 yesterday to $48.70 on the Nasdaq Stock Market,
and TKT shares rose $1.87 to $32.87, also on the Nasdaq.

   Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at naoki@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1551 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 23, 2001, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: M.D. Anderson gains $ 23.1 million in grants;
Funds to supplement bladder research

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center has received two grants
totaling $ 23.1 million from the National Cancer Institute, officials announced
Monday.

   The five-year federal grants will fund bladder cancer research and research
into anti-angiogenesis, a therapy that aims to halt cancer growth by blocking a
tumor's blood supply.

   Money for bladder cancer research - $ 13.9 million - will be used to study
early detection and prevention, gene therapy, recurrence of cancer in current
and former smokers, and treatments for cancer that has spread beyond the
bladder. Preserving the bladder will be one goal of the research.

   The grant, known as a SPORE (Specialized Program of Research Excellence),
promotes interdisciplinary efforts and exchanges between the lab and the clinic
to get treatment to patients quickly.

   Bladder cancer is the fifth-most common cancer in the United States with more
than 53,000 new cases diagnosed in 2000, according to the American Cancer
Society.

   "This 'nuisance disease' . . .  has only recently been recognized (as one
that) will progress to more advanced disease. It's taken a while," said Dr.
Colin P.N. Dinney, principal investigator on the grant and an associate
professor in the departments of urology and cancer biology.

   The money for anti-angio-genesis research - $ 9.2 million - will boost lab
and clinical studies and the development of noninvasive imaging research.

   Tumors need a healthy supply of blood vessels to thrive. Identifying the
mechanisms that promote this process, known as angiogenesis, and developing
drugs that could choke off tumor blood vessels are two key areas of research for
the grant.

   One of these drugs, the highly publicized Endostatin, is being tested at M.D.
Anderson in six patients who receive the drug continuously through a pump.

   Endostatin appeared to cure cancer in mice, but studies in humans produced
less dramatic results. Early research at M.D. Anderson showed the drug was safe
and somewhat reduced blood flow to the patients' tumors.

   Dr. James Abbruzzese, professor and chairman of the Department of
Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology and principal investigator for the
anti-angiogenesis grant, said imaging methods that allow doctors to see whether
the drug is working will be critical to further research.

   "It's very difficult for patients to undergo repeated biopsies of tumors,"
Abbruzzese said. "(To) find out what's going on on the level of the cancer cell,
we're going to have to try to come up with noninvasive ways of doing that so
it's not painful or risky for patients."

   Some types of scans show whether blood flow to the tumor has been reduced. A
new imaging technique still being studied in animals shows whether certain
chemical reactions are taking place in the cells themselves.

   "In the next 10 years or so, it will revolutionize the way we practice
oncology," Abbruzzese said. "We'll be able to refine our decision-making that
much more."


LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1552 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 23, 2001, Tuesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: Cancer center receives two federal grants

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center has received two grants
totaling $ 23.1 million from the National Cancer Institute, officials announced
Monday.

   The five-year federal grants will fund bladder cancer research and research
into anti-angiogenesis, a therapy that aims to halt cancer growth by blocking a
tumor's blood supply.

   Money for bladder cancer research - $ 13.9 million - will be used to study
early detection and prevention, gene therapy, recurrence of cancer in current
and former smokers, and treatments for cancer that has spread beyond the
bladder.

   The grant, known as a SPORE (Specialized Program of Research Excellence),
promotes interdisciplinary efforts and exchanges between the lab and clinic to
get treatment to patients quickly.

   Bladder cancer is the fifth-most common cancer in the United States with more
than 53,000 new cases diagnosed in 2000, according to the American Cancer
Society.

   "This 'nuisance disease' . . .  has only recently been recognized (as one
that) will progress to more advanced disease. It's taken awhile," said Dr. Colin
P.N. Dinney, principal investigator on the grant.

   The money for anti-angiogenesis research - $ 9.2 million - will give a boost
to lab and clinical studies and for the development of noninvasive imaging
research.

   Tumors need a healthy supply of blood vessels to thrive. Identifying the
mechanisms that promote this process, known as angiogenesis, and developing
drugs that could choke off tumor blood vessels are two key areas of research for
the grant.


LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1553 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  OCTOBER 22, 2001 Monday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 9F

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: AWARDS

BODY:

   * Bill Hitchcock, global director of EDS'sdigital learning service line based
in Troy, was named the e-Learning Executive of the Year by SmartExecutive Inc.
The company organizes senior executive leadership conferences and publishes
SmartExecutive magazine.

   Hitchcock, who joined EDS in 1985, was selected from among 18 other nominees.
He has worked in account and technical management and sales and marketing. He
also helped develop a method of assessing individual performance and leadership
skills.

   * Robert Zane, director of investor relations forGMAC Financial Services in
Southfield, has received the American Financial Services Association's
Distinguished Service Award,one of the finance industry's highest awards. The
honor recognizes individuals for contributing significantly to the industry's
growth on a national level, advancing its objectives and quality, and raising
its image.

   * Dr. Jeanne Lusher, Wayne State University School of Medicine's Marion I.
Barnhart research professor, was honored by the American Hemophilia Foundation
for 45 years of research on blood disorders and compassionate patient care. Most
recently, Dr. Lusher has been involved in gene therapy trials for hemophilia.

   * Gino Rossetti, chairman ofRossetti Associates Inc., David Treadwell,
chairman of ASC Inc., Joseph Vig Jr., president of J.S. Vig, and Marilyn
Wilbarger, vice president at Grubb & Ellis Management Services Inc., receivedthe
Real Estate Excellence Award during the 15th Annual University of Michigan/Urban
Land Institute's Real Estate Forum.

   The four were chosen by Crain's Detroit Business and the Real Estate Forum
planning committee for their significant effect on commercial real estate in
Michigan.

   * Diana Mercer-Pryor,Chrysler Group director of North American Operations
Non-Production Procurement, received the 2001 Technology Corporate
Responsibility Award at the sixth annual Women of Color Technology Awards
Conference in Atlanta.

   Award guidelines

   The awards column includes news about Michigan residents receiving honors.
National awards will have priority. Send information to Roberta Moore at Detroit
Free Press, Business Department, 600 W. Fort St., Detroit, MI 48226 or
moore@freepress.com. We cannot take submissions by phone. Use the items printed
in this column as a model. Include the name of a contact person and a phone
number. We will not run photos. Items are due at least a week before
publication.

NOTES: MONEY REPORT

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2001


                             1554 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     October 20, 2001 Saturday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: Biotechs overtaking pharmaceuticals

BYLINE: MARY VANAC, PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   What's the difference between a pharmaceutical company and a biotechnology
company?

   One difference is that pharmaceutical companies mainly make chemistry-based
drugs that treat disease symptoms, said Eric Schmidt, a securities analyst for
SG Cowen Securities Corp. in New York. Biotech companies tend to be younger and
oriented toward research into biology-based drugs that treat disease causes.

   Another difference between the two lies in their potential return to
investors, Schmidt said while addressing a recent educational seminar sponsored
by the Cleveland Society of Security Analysts.

   For years, investors favored pharmaceuticals, Schmidt said. Companies such as
Merck & Co. and Pfizer Laboratories Inc. proved themselves year after year with
significant returns.

   But a handful of biotech marvels turned the investing tables in the last few
years, Schmidt said.

   An index of 100 biotech stocks maintained by SG Cowen rose 7,910 percent from
1990 through Oct. 1, Schmidt said. In the same time, the Standard & Poor's 500
index, which includes most of those successful pharmaceuticals, rose 201
percent.

   Among the top performers is Idec Pharmaceuticals in San Diego, which makes
targeted therapies for cancer and auto-immune and inflammatory diseases. Idec
shares have risen 5,554 percent to $55 since October 1993 (adjusted for splits).

   Stock in Amgen Inc. in Thousand Oaks, Calif., has risen 1,024 percent to $60
a share in that time, and Medimmune Inc. in Gaithersburg, Md., has risen 988
percent to $38.

   Return potential alone can pump up the stock price of even unprofitable
biotech companies, Schmidt said. The stocks of nine promising but unprofitable
biotech companies chosen by SG Cowen rose an average 108 percent from January
2000 to Oct. 1. Yet the NASDAQ Biotech index, which included the nine stocks,
lost 14 percent in that time.

   Keep in mind, only 20 out of 200 or so companies in the U.S. biotech universe
are profitable, Schmidt said. And nine out of every 10 biotech drugs fail.

   So, what's the best way to invest in biotechs?

   Look for credible, smart, hard-working and creative management, Schmidt said.
Look for a strong scientific base, sound business model and healthy cash
balance.

   Then look for as-yet unprofitable companies that are ready to launch
promising new drugs, he said.

   Some of SG Cowen's favorites in this category are Allos Therapeutics Inc.
(ticker ALTH) in Denver; Aviron (AVIR) in Mountain View, Calif.; Cephalon Inc.
(CEPH) in West Chester, Pa.; CV Therapeutics Inc. (CVTX) in Palo Alto, Calif.;
Icos Corp. (ICOS) in Bothell, Wash.; and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. (TKTX) in
Cambridge, Mass.

   Anti-terrorist squad

   The Securities and Exchange Commission wants you - to help stomp out
terrorism. That is, if you are a "senior level individual" at a brokerage,
investment company, transfer agent or other investment-related firm.

   For about a month, the SEC has been sending letters to investment firms,
asking them to designate a point person who will work with the commission to
identify the investment activities and relationships of suspected terrorists.

   The commission wants the designations by Friday.

   The point people will receive a "control list" that will name people and
organizations that have been identified, presumably as terrorists, by the FBI
and other law enforcement agencies, the SEC said in its letter. The letter is
posted at its Web site at www.sec.gov.

   The point people would review their firms' records for matches and report
them to the SEC.

   Gliatech falls 83.8%

   Shares in Beachwood biotech company Gliatech Inc. fell 83.8 percent to 53
cents a share this week after the company disclosed that a re-evaluation of its
anti-scarring gel appeared to show that patients using the product fared no
better than those who didn't.

   Robin Young, an analyst with Stephens Inc. of Little Rock., Ark., said he is
convinced that Gliatech's Adcon-L product does prevent scarring after back
surgery.

   Nonetheless, Young dropped his rating on the company's stock to "sell" from
"neutral."

   Contact Mary Vanac at:

   mvanac@plaind.com, 216-999-5302

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1555 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     October 19, 2001 Friday, NORTH EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg.C3

LENGTH: 373 words

HEADLINE: 11 ALUMNI TO GAIN SPOT ON WALL

BYLINE: NIKI CERVANTES; News Northtowns Bureau

BODY:

   Eleven alumni will get a spot on the Williamsville School District's Wall of
Fame this year, including author Joyce Carol Oates and actress Wendie Malick.

    The new inductees will be honored at a breakfast Nov. 9 in the University
Inn in Getzville.

    Rita Wolff, a district spokeswoman, said eight of the 11 alumni named to the
Wall of Fame will be at the breakfast. The three who won't be attending are
Oates, Malick and Marc Lacey, a former Buffalo News reporter now with the New
York Times.

    Oates, a 1956 graduate of Williamsville South, will send a representative
instead, Wolff said.

    Malick, who stars in the NBC comedy "Just Shoot Me," couldn't attend because
she is in the middle of taping the show, Wolff said. Her parents will be there,
however, Wolff said. Malick is a 1968 graduate of South High.

    Lacey, a 1983 graduate of South, can't leave his post as bureau chief in
Africa, Wolff said. His mother will attend.

    Also being inducted are:

    Stephen R. Lewis Jr., a 1956 graduate of South, who is now president of
Carlton College in Northfield, Minn., and a specialist in economic policy and
planning in developing countries.

    Linda Gail Kent, a 1964 graduate of South, who is a professional dancer and
attended the Juilliard School. She has taught master classes in dance at the
Bolshoi School in Moscow.

    Robert E. LaPorte, a 1967 graduate of South, who is a professor at the
University of Pittsburgh in the departments of pediatrics and epidemiology and
heads disease monitoring and telecommunication for a diabetes division of the
World Health Organization.

    Trey Measer, a 1968 graduate of South, who is president and publisher of Bee
Publications.

    Dr. Douglas R. Bacon, a 1977 graduate of East, who is an anesthesiologist at
the Mayo Clinic.

    Christopher A. Warlick, a 1987 graduate of East, who is involved in the
human gene therapy program at the University of Minnesota Medical School as a
National Institute of Health Minority Fellow.

    David J. Altman, a 1979 graduate of North, who is vice president of clinical
affairs and chief medical officer of Cognigen Corp. in Williamsville.

    The public is welcome to the induction breakfast. Tickets are $20.

    e-mail: ncervantes@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2001


                             1556 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          October 17, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1714 words

HEADLINE: DESPERATE MINDS; SCIENCE STRUGGLES TO SOLVE HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE, AND
SAVE ITS SUFFERERS

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Whenever she trips or drops a plate, Melissa panics.  Has the terrible process
started so soon?

   She glances at her sister, Sarah, nervously stumbling around the house, her
speech and memory so muddled.

   No, she reassures herself.  Not yet.

   Melissa and Sarah (at their request, their real names are not used) inherited
the gene for Huntington's, a disease that causes a gradual deterioration of the
brain -- confusion, uncoordination, dementia and, finally, a kind of madness.

   There is no cure.  Worse still, Huntington's is a dominant gene, which means
that carriers like Melissa and Sarah have a 50 percent chance of passing the
gene on to their children.

   After Sarah, 28, was diagnosed with Huntington's last year, Melissa, 30,
elected to remove all doubt about her own future.  From genetic testing, she
learned that she has been sentenced to the same fate.

   For the last decade, science has offered the tools to identify those doomed
to the disease, but only now is it promising something more.

   In the last two years, researchers have found a variety of molecular clues
that could lead to drugs or genetic therapies.  Others are getting a clearer
understanding of the disease process in the brain.

   UCSD School of Medicine recently became a larger player in these efforts.
This summer, it was named a Huntington's "Center of Excellence" by the
Huntington's Disease Society of America (HDSA), an advocacy and philanthropic
organization.  Neuroscientist Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the San Diego center's
director, is following about 90 Huntington's patients here.

   But along with the excitement, there is tremendous desperation.  The illness
lasts for years, gradually attacking every aspect of a person's life.  Usable
drugs are those that reduce depression, exaggerated movements and anxiety, but
not the underlying disease.

   "As a scientist, I'm tremendously excited by all this progress," said Dr.
Christopher Ross, a Baltimore Huntington's Disease Center neuroscientist and
HDSA founding investigator.

   "But it's depressing, because I always have to return to my patients and say
that 'Yes, we have all this great stuff coming out of the lab, but we don't yet
have any treatment.' "

   Venezuela answers

   Typically, carriers of the Huntington gene first show signs of the disease
between ages 30 and 65. They become easily confused, have trouble speaking, seem
irritable and increasingly anti-social.  Some appear drunk.

   Grotesque, uncoordinated movements, the so-called "Huntington's chorea" or
dance, may follow.  Depression and suicide attempts are not uncommon.  Death
comes early, usually about 10 to 20 years after symptoms begin.

   About 30,000 Americans have been diagnosed and an additional 150,000 are at
risk of developing Huntington's.

   The disease was named after George Huntington, the Long Island physician who
first described it in 1872. But the most important clue to a hereditary cause
came in the 1950s, when a young doctor discovered the largest cluster of
Huntington's families in the world in Venezuela.  In the small fishing village
of Maracaibo, a high number of residents stumbled around, arms and legs akimbo.

   By 1983, as molecular biology tools were rapidly advancing, Boston
researchers took skin and blood for DNA studies from hundreds of Maracaibo
residents.  From this work, they discovered a common genetic marker, and 10
years later, researchers isolated the actual Huntington gene.

   Protein clumping

   Genes are composed of a specific series of DNA subunits that are known as
nucleotides.  There are only four nucleotides -- C, A, T and G -- but they
repeat many times in a variety of sequences to form each gene on each of the 24
chromosomes, including X and Y. A single gene may have a few hundred or a few
thousand nucleotides.

   The sequence that determines Huntington's disease is found on the tip of
chromosome four.  In normal humans, three nucleotides -- C-A-G -- repeat between
six and 27 times.  But, people with the Huntington's gene have many more C-A-G
repeats, sometimes more than 100.

   The excessive number of repeats results in a flawed protein, called
Huntingtin.  In the brain, its cumbersome bulk and shape attract other proteins
that clump together, gradually causing shrinkage and death of various brain
regions, especially within the corpus striatum, a region controlling movement,
mood and cognition.

   Researchers are just beginning to understand the intricacies and variations
in the gene.  For instance, they now know that people with between 28 and 35 CAG
repeats are spared the disease, but their children who receive the gene are not.
Individuals with between 36 and 39 repeats may or may not get the disease.

   But everyone with 40 or more repeats will get Huntington's, and the higher
the number of repeats, the earlier the onset will be.

   Melissa has 43 repeats, a number that several Huntington's researchers say
virtually guarantees that she will experience symptoms before age 60. Sarah has
54, which may be why she became symptomatic at an earlier age.

   Of known Huntington's carriers, those with 44 repeats are the most common.

   To understand how the repeats cause genetic havoc, scientists have
genetically engineered six lines of mice to mimic Huntington's disease.  Bred
with parts or all of the human Huntington gene, these mice have between 48 and
89 CAG repeats.

   In recent years, a number of compounds have demonstrated some ability to
delay symptoms in those mice, said Richard Myers, a neurogeneticist specializing
in Huntington's at Boston University and a member of the team that discovered
the Huntington gene in 1993.

   "Most of the substances that have been tried have an effect, but so far it
hasn't been overwhelmingly dramatic -- delaying symptoms in these mice for only
a couple of weeks," Myers said.  "But from this we've obtained some important
clues to the pathologic mechanism.  And once we get our foot in the door, we
hope to start kicking it in."

   A few compounds, such as the nutritional supplement Coenzyme Q10 and a
derivative of Chinese moss called huperzine A, are now in clinical trials at
UCSD and many other parts of the country.  Although a recent report showed no
effect from Coenzyme Q10, some researchers think studies of higher doses may
hold more promise.

   The drugs are thought to increase levels of the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine in hope of improving memory and mental functioning.  Other drugs
now being tested for Alzheimer's disease are also candidates for Huntington's.
Other vitamins or compounds, such as creatine or Vitamin E, are also being
tested to see if they show protective properties in the brain.

   In another approach, physicians at Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine discovered how the Huntingtin protein acts in the cell nucleus.  They
found that it grabs hold of another protein (called CBP), preventing it from
doing its job.

   "Huntingtin protein, in effect, becomes a bully," said neuroscientist Ross.
By inserting a manufactured version of CBP into cells, researchers were able to
prevent Huntingtin from effectively grabbing the other protein.  The result,
said Ross, was "the cells stayed healthy." Studies are now under way to see if
the strategy works in mice.

   Early work

   Work is also continuing with patients, especially those at very early stages
of the disease.  The national Pilot Huntington At Risk Observational Study, or
PHAROS, which includes UCSD, is recruiting 1,000 volunteers.  The goal is to
trace the transition from health to Huntington's.

   At UCSD, the Huntington's Disease society is funding researcher Christine
Fennema-Notestine to use structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging
techniques to chronicle Huntington's destructive course.  Every few months, she
compares the brains of people with the gene who have few or no symptoms to those
of family members without the gene, as well as to people without any family
history of Huntington's.

   It's been known that the striatum and caudate nucleus in the brain
dramatically shrink in people with severe symptoms of Huntington's. And it's
known that loss of caudate volume is an early sign of Huntington's.

   But now scientists want to know how Huntington's damage evolves to alter
function, the subtle changes in activity in various parts of the brain.  UCSD
just received a grant from the Huntington's society to study this process.
"Within the year, we hope to have some answers," Fennema-Notestine said.

   "Our ultimate hope is that functional MRI can be used as a noninvasive tool
to detect changes related to the disease early enough to monitor candidate
drugs," she said.

   "Fennema-Notestine's work is very special," and one of the big reasons UCSD
won the Huntington society's designation, said Ross.  "She's one of the few
people in the world using functional MRI to detect functional changes in the
presymptomatic period.  And we hope we can use that as a marker for studying
drugs."

   And there are comparisons between people with Alzheimer's and Huntington's,
diseases that have clinical similarities.

   For example, Fennema-Notestine said, studies have shown that in patients with
severe Huntington's symptoms, major devastation not only in the caudate, but
also in the putamen and nucleus accumbens, regions of the brain involved in
motor function and coordination.  Changes also are found in the frontal cortex,
which directs planning and organization.

   Researchers are comparing this damage to that which occurs in Alzheimer's
Disease.  Early changes in this disease are more often seen in areas governing
memory, such as the hippocampus and temporal lobe.  The striatum is affected
much later.  Ross said that although the diseases are different, the destructive
process of brain cells may be the same, so that treatment for Huntington's may
eventually apply to patients with Alzheimer's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(Lou Gehrig's disease) and Parkinson's.

   Research is just beginning.  "I think we're going to show areas of the brain
in Huntington's that we never knew were affected before," UCSD's Corey-Bloom
said.

   "I believe research in subjects at risk to develop this disease will help us
answer questions regarding the earliest structural and functional changes in the
brains of patients with this devastating illness."


GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1,2. Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune | SOURCE: Christine
Fennema-Notestine 3. Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune; 1. NORMAL BRAIN 2.
HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE BRAIN 1,2. HOW IT WORKS -- MRI images show color-coded
slices of two brains. Compared with the normal brain, top row, the brain of a
Huntington's patient has reduced frontal cortex (green), putamen (orange),
caudate (red), nucleus accumbens (center area of light purple), and white matter
(gray) and increased cerebral spinal fluid (black). 3. Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom
hopes magnetic resonance images of healthy and diseased brains will point to
what goes wrong in Huntington's disease. (F-4)

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2001


                             1557 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 17, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1692 words

HEADLINE: DESPERATE MINDS;
SCIENCE STRUGGLES TO SOLVE HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE, AND SAVE ITS SUFFERERS

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Whenever she trips or drops a plate, Melissa panics.

   Has the terrible process started so soon? She glances at her sister, Sarah,
nervously stumbling around the house, her speech and memory so muddled. No, she
reassures herself.

   Not yet. Melissa and Sarah (at their request, their real names are not used)
inherited the gene for Huntington's, a disease that causes a gradual
deterioration of the brain -- confusion, uncoordination, dementia and, finally,
a kind of madness. There is no cure.

   Worse still, Huntington's is a dominant gene, which means that carriers like
Melissa and Sarah have a 50 percent chance of passing the gene on to their
children. After Sarah, 28, was diagnosed with Huntington's last year, Melissa,
30, elected to remove all doubt about her own future.

   From genetic testing, she learned that she has been sentenced to the same
fate. For the last decade, science has offered the tools to identify those
doomed to the disease, but only now is it promising something more. In the last
two years, researchers have found a variety of molecular clues that could lead
to drugs or genetic therapies.

   Others are getting a clearer understanding of the disease process in the
brain. UCSD School of Medicine recently became a larger player in these efforts.
This summer, it was named a Huntington's "Center of Excellence" by the
Huntington's Disease Society of America (HDSA), an advocacy and philanthropic
organization.

   Neuroscientist Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom, the San Diego center's director, is
following about 90 Huntington's patients here. But along with the excitement,
there is tremendous desperation.

   The illness lasts for years, gradually attacking every aspect of a person's
life. Usable drugs are those that reduce depression, exaggerated movements and
anxiety, but not the underlying disease. "As a scientist, I'm tremendously
excited by all this progress," said Dr. Christopher Ross, a Baltimore
Huntington's Disease Center neuroscientist and HDSA founding investigator. "But
it's depressing, because I always have to return to my patients and say that
`Yes, we have all this great stuff coming out of the lab, but we don't yet have
any treatment.' " Venezuela answers Typically, carriers of the Huntington gene
first show signs of the disease between ages 30 and 65. They become easily
confused, have trouble speaking, seem irritable and increasingly anti-social.

   Some appear drunk. Grotesque, uncoordinated movements, the so-called
"Huntington's chorea" or dance, may follow.

   Depression and suicide attempts are not uncommon.

   Death comes early, usually about 10 to 20 years after symptoms begin. About
30,000 Americans have been diagnosed and an additional 150,000 are at risk of
developing Huntington's. The disease was named after George Huntington, the Long
Island physician who first described it in 1872. But the most important clue to
a hereditary cause came in the 1950s, when a young doctor discovered the largest
cluster of Huntington's families in the world in Venezuela.

   In the small fishing village of Maracaibo, a high number of residents
stumbled around, arms and legs akimbo. By 1983, as molecular biology tools were
rapidly advancing, Boston researchers took skin and blood for DNA studies from
hundreds of Maracaibo residents.

   From this work, they discovered a common genetic marker, and 10 years later,
researchers isolated the actual Huntington gene. Protein clumping Genes are
composed of a specific series of DNA subunits that are known as nucleotides.

   There are only four nucleotides -- C, A, T and G -- but they repeat many
times in a variety of sequences to form each gene on each of the 24 chromosomes,
including X and Y. A single gene may have a few hundred or a few thousand
nucleotides. The sequence that determines Huntington's disease is found on the
tip of chromosome four.

   In normal humans, three nucleotides -- C-A-G -- repeat between six and 27
times.

   But, people with the Huntington's gene have many more C-A-G repeats,
sometimes more than 100. The excessive number of repeats results in a flawed
protein, called Huntingtin.

   In the brain, its cumbersome bulk and shape attract other proteins that clump
together, gradually causing shrinkage and death of various brain regions,
especially within the corpus striatum, a region controlling movement, mood and
cognition. Researchers are just beginning to understand the intricacies and
variations in the gene.

   For instance, they now know that people with between 28 and 35 CAG repeats
are spared the disease, but their children who receive the gene are not.

   Individuals with between 36 and 39 repeats may or may not get the disease.
But everyone with 40 or more repeats will get Huntington's, and the higher the
number of repeats, the earlier the onset will be. Melissa has 43 repeats, a
number that several Huntington's researchers say virtually guarantees that she
will experience symptoms before age 60. Sarah has 54, which may be why she
became symptomatic at an earlier age. Of known Huntington's carriers, those with
44 repeats are the most common. To understand how the repeats cause genetic
havoc, scientists have genetically engineered six lines of mice to mimic
Huntington's disease. Bred with parts or all of the human Huntington gene, these
mice have between 48 and 89 CAG repeats. In recent years, a number of compounds
have demonstrated some ability to delay symptoms in those mice, said Richard
Myers, a neurogeneticist specializing in Huntington's at Boston University and a
member of the team that discovered the Huntington gene in 1993. "Most of the
substances that have been tried have an effect, but so far it hasn't been
overwhelmingly dramatic -- delaying symptoms in these mice for only a couple of
weeks," Myers said.

   "But from this we've obtained some important clues to the pathologic
mechanism.

   And once we get our foot in the door, we hope to start kicking it in." A few
compounds, such as the nutritional supplement Coenzyme Q10 and a derivative of
Chinese moss called huperzine A, are now in clinical trials at UCSD and many
other parts of the country.

   Although a recent report showed no effect from Coenzyme Q10, some researchers
think studies of higher doses may hold more promise. The drugs are thought to
increase levels of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine in hope of improving
memory and mental functioning.

   Other drugs now being tested for Alzheimer's disease are also candidates for
Huntington's. Other vitamins or compounds, such as creatine or Vitamin E, are
also being tested to see if they show protective properties in the brain. In
another approach, physicians at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
discovered how the Huntingtin protein acts in the cell nucleus. They found that
it grabs hold of another protein (called CBP), preventing it from doing its job.
"Huntingtin protein, in effect, becomes a bully," said neuroscientist Ross. By
inserting a manufactured version of CBP into cells, researchers were able to
prevent Huntingtin from effectively grabbing the other protein.

   The result, said Ross, was "the cells stayed healthy."

   Studies are now under way to see if the strategy works in mice. Early work
Work is also continuing with patients, especially those at very early stages of
the disease.

   The national Pilot Huntington At Risk Observational Study, or PHAROS, which
includes UCSD, is recruiting 1,000 volunteers.

   The goal is to trace the transition from health to Huntington's. At UCSD, the
Huntington's Disease society is funding researcher Christine Fennema-Notestine
to use structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging techniques to
chronicle Huntington's destructive course.

   Every few months, she compares the brains of people with the gene who have
few or no symptoms to those of family members without the gene, as well as to
people without any family history of Huntington's. It's been known that the
striatum and caudate nucleus in the brain dramatically shrink in people with
severe symptoms of Huntington's. And it's known that loss of caudate volume is
an early sign of Huntington's. But now scientists want to know how Huntington's
damage evolves to alter function, the subtle changes in activity in various
parts of the brain. UCSD just received a grant from the Huntington's society to
study this process.

   "Within the year, we hope to have some answers," Fennema-Notestine said. "Our
ultimate hope is that functional MRI can be used as a noninvasive tool to detect
changes related to the disease early enough to monitor candidate drugs," she
said. "Fennema-Notestine's work is very special," and one of the big reasons
UCSD won the Huntington society's designation, said Ross.

   "She's one of the few people in the world using functional MRI to detect
functional changes in the presymptomatic period.

   And we hope we can use that as a marker for studying drugs." And there are
comparisons between people with Alzheimer's and Huntington's, diseases that have
clinical similarities. For example, Fennema-Notestine said, studies have shown
that in patients with severe Huntington's symptoms, major devastation not only
in the caudate, but also in the putamen and nucleus accumbens, regions of the
brain involved in motor function and coordination.

   Changes also are found in the frontal cortex, which directs planning and
organization. Researchers are comparing this damage to that which occurs in
Alzheimer's Disease.

   Early changes in this disease are more often seen in areas governing memory,
such as the hippocampus and temporal lobe.

   The striatum is affected much later.

   Ross said that although the diseases are different, the destructive process
of brain cells may be the same, so that treatment for Huntington's may
eventually apply to patients with Alzheimer's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(Lou Gehrig's disease) and Parkinson's. Research is just beginning.

   "I think we're going to show areas of the brain in Huntington's that we never
knew were affected before," UCSD's Corey-Bloom said. "I believe research in
subjects at risk to develop this disease will help us answer questions regarding
the earliest structural and functional changes in the brains of patients with
this devastating illness."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. NORMAL BRAIN 2. HUNTINGTON'S DISEASE BRAIN 1,2.
HOW IT WORKS -- MRI images show color-coded slices of two brains. Compared with
the normal brain, top row, the brain of a Huntington's patient has reduced
frontal cortex (green), putamen (orange), caudate (red), nucleus accumbens
(center area of light purple), and white matter (gray) and increased cerebral
spinal fluid (black). 3. Dr. Jody Corey-Bloom hopes magnetic resonance images of
healthy and diseased brains will point to what goes wrong in Huntington's
disease. (F-4); PHOTOBY: 1,2. Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune | SOURCE: Christine
Fennema-Notestine 3. Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1558 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                       October 15, 2001, Monday 3 EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg.

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: LEAVESLEY

BODY:

    JO ANN WERNER LEAVESLEY, 63, died October 13, 2001, following a valiant
battle with cancer. Jo Ann was born in Houston, Texas on November 24, 1937. Her
parents, George and Annie Werner and her sister, Billie Whitlock, preceded her
in death. Her husband of 43 years, John E. Leavesley, her daughter, Juli
Leavesley Wehman and husband Ross, and their children, Jack Ross and Jill Joanna
survive her. Jo Ann is also survived by her sister Shirley Poffinbarger and
husband John, her brother, George Werner, her brother-in-law and sister-in-law,
George and Katherine Leavesley and her brother-in-law James Leavesley. In
addition, she is survived by her nieces Georganna Leavesley, Sherry Monk, Denise
Pfenninger, Gay Weigelt and Suzanne Kramer and her nephews James Leavesley,
George and Mike Werner. In addition to the above family members, family friend,
Pete Miller, also survives her. Jo Ann was a dedicated wife and mother, a caring
soul that will be missed by all who knew her.  She was a lady of great character
and class who was never too busy to lend a helping hand. She was a loyal friend
who inspired those around her to be a little kinder to each other. She was a
35-year member of Beta Sigma Phi. She belonged to Clear Lake United Methodist
Church. The family would like to thank the caring staff of the Methodist
Hospital's Cell & Gene Therapy Unit, as well as Dr. Frank E. Smith and his
assistant, Glenda Williams. Friends are invited to a visitation with the family
October 16, 2001 from 6:00 p.m. until 8:00 P.M. at Forest Park East, 21620 Gulf
Freeway, Webster, TX. A memorial service celebrating Jo Ann's life will be held
at 3:00 p.m. on October 17, 2001 at Clear Lake United Methodist Church, 16335 El
Camino Real, Houston, Tx with Rev.  Morris Matthis officiating. In lieu of
flowers, memorial contributions should be made to the charity of your choice.

   <img
src="http://www.chron.com/content/interactive/classifieds/logos/SYSLOGO256.200.g
if" width="200" height="66" clear="all" vspace="4">

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2001


                             1559 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      October 14, 2001 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 032

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; Clarke Goward firm appoints Lawson president

BYLINE: By Anna McCart

BODY:

   Clarke Goward, a Boston marketing firm, named Chris Lawson as president.

   VCS Capital Partners LLC, an investment banking firm in Boston, named Paul
LaRose as managing director.

   Ernst A. Harberli was named as president, commercial operations
international, at The Gillette Company in Boston.

   ULVAC Technologies Inc., an industrial production systems supplier in
Methuen, promoted Wayne W. Anderson to chief operating officer.

   Lee R. Raker was named senior vice president of alternatives marketing at CDC
IXIS Asset Management Associates in Boston.

   Tofias PC, a Cambridge CPA firm, named Richard McIlveen, Lisa Thomson, Tom
French, Peter Gold and Bob Morse as principals of the firm.

   Michael B. Keating of Foley Hoag law firm was elected as president of the
Boston Bar Association.

   Ralph C. Martin II was named as partner at Boston's Bingham Dana LLP, an
international law firm.

   StockCross Inc., of Boston, named Andrew Streisfeld as chief executive
officer at the brokerage firm.

   Lynda Saltz was named managing editor of The Newbury Street and Back Bay
Guide, a free publication in Boston.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a biopharmaceutical company in Cambridge, named
Mary S. Consalvi as vice president and chief intellectual property counsel.

   Eastern Pulp & Paper Corp., a paper manufacturing company in Amherst, named
Cash A. Cappel as vice president of sales and marketing.

   Margaret Clark was named as associate at the Boston architectural firm,
Miller Dyer Spears Inc.

   John A. McCarthy Jr. was named as financial officer at EXACT Sciences Corp.,
a medical technology company in Maynard.

   State Street Research & Management Co. named Barbara McKenna as senior vice
president of the Boston firm's fixed income department.

   Macgregor, a trade systems company in Boston, named Robert Flatley as
executive vice president, sales and marketing; Martin Courage as senior vice
president, client management; and Thomas Chippas as vice president, sales.

   Dr. Paul D. Danielson was named director of pediatric surgical oncology at
UMass Memorial Children's Medical Center.

   Environmental Health & Engineering Inc., of Newton, named Harriet A. Burge,
Ph.D., as senior mycologist at the engineering and safety services company.

   Ken Hale was named chief financial officer of Wheelhouse Corp., a marketing
firm in Burlington.

   Lommis, Sayles & Company, L.P., a Boston investment firm, named Scott R.
Williams as a research analyst.

   A Boston cellular therapy company, ViaCell Inc., named Jan W. M. Visser,
Ph.D., as vice president of stem cell research.

   The New England Sports Network (NESN)named Jon Kontoleon as director of new
business development and Dave Power as Internet marketing manager.

   Kenneth Boger was named senior vice president and general counsel of Vertex
Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, a biotechnology company in Cambridge.

   Instron Corporation, of Boston, a materials testing equipment company, named
James O. Garrison as president and chief executive officer.

   Joseph F. Lafo was named associate vice president at Cannon Design, a Boston
architectural firm.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, Sunday Business People, attn. Anna
McCart, One Herald Square, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865. No
phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2001


                             1560 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   October 11, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: GLOBE WEST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: GLOBE WEST 4 / ST. JUDE HOSPITAL;
MORE THAN $37,000 RAISED FOR PEDIATRIC CANCER CENTER

BYLINE: By Peter Schworm, Globe Staff Correspondent

BODY:

   MILFORD - Given the hard economic times and the recent outpouring of
contributions to charities for victims of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks,
organizers of Monday's 16th annual telethon for St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital lowered their sights a notch.

   But although many residents told volunteers they couldn't give as much as
they had in the past, they gave what they could, raising more than $37,000 for
the Memphis hospital, which conducts biomedical research and provides free
medical treatment to pediatric cancer patients across the country.

      Although that amount fell short of last year's record $45,259, it marked
the third consecutive year that residents contributed more than $35,000. The
total delighted organizers, who had expected contributions to dip dramatically
with attention focused on the World Trade Center tragedy.

   "We understand that many people have already given generously to the Red
Cross and other charities, and rightfully so," said Joe Hyder, regional
fund-raising coordinator for the American Lebanese Syrian Associated Charities,
St. Jude's fund-raising arm. "Considering the times, we were delighted by the
support."

   "There's a lot of competition right now [among charities]," said Stanley
Jones Nalewajko, president of the Greater Milford ALSAC chapter. "We thought
this might hurt us, but the town rallied to help us, as it does every year.
People are really devoted to this cause."

   ALSAC chapters nationwide raise $250 million for the hospital, founded in
1962 by the late actor-comedian Danny Thomas. Contributions cover all costs of
nonreimbursable care and total costs when no insurance is available.

   In a taped interview with Hyder that aired during the telethon, Thomas's
daughter, actress Marlo Thomas, thanked Milford residents for their generosity.

   "I think that helped a good deal," Hyder said.

   St. Jude conducts clinical research in gene therapy, bone-marrow transplants,
chemotherapy, and the biochemistry of normal and cancerous cells, and is the
only pediatric research hospital supported by a National Cancer Institute cancer
center support grant, a hospital spokeswoman said.

   More than 100 volunteers helped with the six-hour event, which was televised
from Town Hall on cable access in Milford and Hopkinton. Hosts, including former
Milford Selectman John Pyne and former Bellingham Selectman Larry Cibley,
interspersed live interviews with taped performances by several local
entertainers.

   Longtime residents and local officials took pledges and even sought them,
calling friends and relatives around town to chip in.

   "Probably half the town gets involved in some way," Nalewajko said, laughing.

   Residents and businesses donated many items for auction, including
autographed baseballs by Boston Red Sox players Nomar Garciaparra, Brian
Daubach, and Bret Saberhagen; two tickets to a Boston Celtics game; and a
clambake for 25 people donated by Jean's Catering Service, which sold for $750.

   The telethon drew its largest donation from EMC Corp., the Hopkinton-based
data-storage firm, which gave $2,500. Last year the company gave $10,000, the
largest donation in the event's history.

   Most contributions ranged from $10 to $50, many from longtime supporters of
the event.

   "We do pretty well for a small chapter," Nalewajko said. "People have
supported us from the start."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2001


                             1561 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     October 8, 2001, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1562 words

HEADLINE: Risky gene therapy gets personal

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:
Byard Foraker, 62, is a pioneer. On Aug. 15, with thoughts of his 12-year-old
grandson foremost in mind, Foraker ventured into the misty frontier of gene
therapy.

   With no more fanfare than an apprehensive nod, his doctors at the Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia began infusing millions of special gene-carrying
particles into his liver.

   It was the first time that the particles, known as AAV2 vectors, had been
injected into the liver of a human.

   Pushing the boundaries of human experiments is always unnerving, but in this
case, more is riding on Foraker's safety than most people would imagine.


   Two years ago, a gene therapy volunteer named Jesse Gelsinger, who suffered
from a metabolic disorder, died from a toxic reaction to another type of vector
injected into his liver by a different team of doctors.

   The death prompted a federal investigation that found widespread disregard in
the gene therapy field for rules intended to protect patient safety. Many
scientists concluded that the ambition to be the first to cure a patient with
gene therapy, plus financial ties to companies that sponsor studies, underscored
the safety problems found during the investigation.

   This new trial is the highest-profile gene therapy study attempted since
Gelsinger's death on Sept. 17, 1999. Foraker has hemophilia, an inherited
bleeding disorder. Scientists believe Foraker's disease is ideally suited to the
gene therapy strategy of placing healthy genes in the body's cells to fix the
bad genes that cause disease.

   Foraker's doctors injected the treatment into his liver because liver cells
normally make the proteins that are missing in people with hemophilia.

   No one knows how dangerous liver injections of the AAV2 vector will be. But
the study's leaders, who plan to treat nine patients, say they have done
everything possible to balance patient safety with risk and the need to move
forward. If they are successful, the hemophilia trial may become the standard
for a new era of gene therapy.

   Foraker has shown no signs of toxic effects since he was treated two months
ago. Routine tests of his seminal fluid Friday revealed traces of DNA from the
AAV2 vector, prompting the trial to be put on hold temporarily until the vector
has cleared.

   The Food and Drug Administration is always concerned about the possibility of
gene therapy vectors or the genes themselves getting into sperm and affecting
the offspring of the patient in some way. Foraker's safety is not at risk, say
officials at Avigen Inc. of San Francisco, which sponsors the study. The
researchers hope to treat their second patient next month.

   "We realize there is a lot riding on this, and we realize that a lot of
people are looking at the study and our actions through a microscope," says Mark
Kay of Stanford Medical Center, co-leader of the study with Katherine High of
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. "This is one of the first liver trials for
a genetic disease after the catastrophic event of two years ago. If something
goes wrong, it will be devastating to the whole field, not just for us and our
patients."

   One of the main concerns about liver injections of AAV2 is that up to 80% of
hemophilia patients may have livers infected with the hepatitis C virus, which
can be fatal. Until just two years ago, patients with Foraker's form of the
disease were treated with blood transfusions, often contaminated with the
hepatitis C virus. The gene therapy study excludes people who have active
hepatitis C infections, but it allows people to be treated if the infection is
dormant.

   Scientists do not know whether gene therapy injections will activate a
dormant hepatitis C virus. If so, patients could develop fatal liver disease.

   Foraker says he is willing to take the risk, because he believes that
whatever the researchers learn about the liver infusions will help future
generations of hemophiliacs, whose treatment today consists of frequent
injections of a protein that prevents them from bleeding to death.

   "I have a grandson who takes injections every other day so he can be normal
without having problems when he gets bumped and bruised and run into at school,"
Foraker says. "If this gene therapy was to work, it would make his life and
other people's lives better and easier."

   Simple in concept, gene therapy has proved extremely hard to achieve. One of
the biggest challenges is finding a vector -- a delivery vehicle -- that can
evade the radar screens of the body's immune system, which will attack it as
surely as it attacks disease-causing viruses and bacteria. If the body destroys
the vectors before they can reach their cellular targets, the patient cannot be
cured. If the immune system produces too profound a reaction, the patient may go
into shock and organ systems will fail like falling dominoes, as they did in
Gelsinger two years ago. Not least of the challenges, the vector must deliver
its cargo gene to the right address, and the gene must turn on and do its job to
fix the genetic disorder.

   Having a safe and effective vector is as important to gene therapy
researchers as the space shuttle is to NASA. And like the space program,
developing and testing these gene delivery vehicles is technically very
difficult and dangerous. The Gelsinger death was no less devastating to the
field of gene therapy than the loss of a space shuttle to NASA.

   Kay and High say that AAV2 appears to be the safest and most effective
delivery vehicle for genes and that infusing AAV2 into the livers of people with
hemophilia offers the best chance today for a cure. The AAV2 vector is
engineered to deliver a healthy gene to instruct liver cells to make a protein
to clot the blood.

   Avigen, the study's sponsor, makes the AAV2 vector for carrying the gene and
covers most of the considerable costs of the trial. AAV2 stands for
adeno-associated virus type 2. It is a harmless human virus that ordinarily
behaves like a hitchhiker with the common cold virus. Scientists have been
developing the common cold virus, AV, and AAV2 into vectors for gene therapy
because as viruses they contain the biological machinery for inserting genes
into cells.

   AAV2 does not cause any known disease, and it has a long safety record in
animal studies. Most important, AAV2 does not appear to trigger reactions from
the immune system in the way AV did in Gelsinger and in another patient, though
non-fatally, as recently as July. GenStar Therapeutics, the sponsor of that
study, voluntarily put the research on hold when a patient showed signs of liver
toxicity because of an AV vector.

   The only safety concern to arise so far about AAV2 comes from an isolated
animal report. Last November, Mark Sands of Washington University in St. Louis
observed a small cluster of liver tumors in six mice that had been given AAV2 in
the liver. He reported the tumors to the FDA, which alerted gene therapy
researchers.

   The FDA concluded that the tumors are probably not related to AAV2, as no one
else has found them in any animal. But the finding has been incorporated into
the informed-consent procedure for patients in the hemophilia liver trial.

   Still, some researchers believe that it is too soon after Gelsinger's death
to proceed with human gene therapy studies that involve liver infusions.

   "I am much more on the cautious side of all these (human) studies. The major
thing to consider with the hemophilia trial is that the disease is treated very
well by injections of protein," says Randall Kaufman, a Howard Hughes Medical
Institute investigator at the University of Michigan. "To go into an
experimental therapy like this is a big risk, and I don't think the risk has
been carefully considered. There is a need for more studies in animals."

   High acknowledges the liver study entails risk, but she says no one could be
more prepared for the human study than the labs at Philadelphia, Stanford and
Avigen. "It would be much easier for me to stay in the lab and keep doing animal
studies for the next 20 years. But you come to a point where you have to fish or
cut bait," she says. "For there to be progress, there has to be discovery, and
there have to be volunteers willing to participate in clinical trials. We have
to strike a balance at some point between discovery and risk."

   Glenn Pierce, president-elect of the National Hemophilia Foundation, says
questions about the trial are legitimate, but he says it is simply part of the
scientific process. He believes the trial is being handled as well or better
than anyone could expect.

   "There aren't any black-and-white answers to the questions being raised,"
Pierce says. "With regard to hepatitis C, there are no animal models for chronic
liver disease. You have to answer these questions at a certain point in a human
being. So as long as there is appropriate informed consent, that is the very
nature of clinical research."

   Kay says scientists will not report their findings until December at a
meeting of the American Society of Hematology. Meanwhile, Foraker takes it all
in stride.

   "They are all concerned," he says. "They've been treating me like King Tut at
the hospital. But I decided years ago that if it was possible to make this
disease better, that I would. I'm glad I did what I did."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Frank Pompa, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research
(DIAGRAM); PHOTO, Color, Tom Nutter for USA TODAY; Future hope: Byard Foraker,
62, volunteers for tests, because it may help grandson Randall Eckton, 12.

LOAD-DATE: October 08, 2001


                             1562 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      October 7, 2001 Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 1Q

LENGTH: 2094 words

SERIES: ONE IN FIVE

HEADLINE: PROSTATE CANCER: Support groups invaluable at a tough time

BYLINE: PATRICIA GUTHRIE

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   When Louis Bacon learned he had prostate cancer 10 years ago, he went in
search of information. He came up empty-handed.  "All I found was an old
pamphlet at the Sandy Springs public library, and there were no brochures at all
at the American Cancer Society," recalls Bacon, an 81-year-old retired engineer.
"It was really bad."

   Now, men who hear the words "you have prostate cancer," face a problem of a
quite different sort --- a deluge of information, recommendations and treatment
options. But another new element is helping a growing number of men sort through
their options --- support groups specifically for men with prostate cancer.

   "You can tell the men have done lots of research when they come to the
meetings," says Jennifer Currin, coordinator of four different cancer and
caregiver support groups at St. Joseph's Hospital. About 35 to 40 men, some with
their wives, attend the prostate cancer group. "You would swear they were
physicians, they know so much."

   However, urologists and cancer specialists say they are often still met with
a blank look when delivering bad news about prostate cancer.  "Most men don't
even know they have a prostate and now they're being told they have prostate
cancer," comments Dr. Frank A. Critz, pioneer of a successful radiation seeding
therapy called ProstRcision, which he delivers at his Radiotherapy Clinics of
Georgia in Decatur.

   But support and advocacy groups have stepped up their efforts to educate men
about prostate cancer --- taking a page from the political playbook of those who
have raised breast cancer awareness.

   The prostate is a walnut-sized gland located between the bladder and the
rectum. Its function is to help produce semen. Its location --- near the urethra
and the nerves vital for sexual performance --- means any irregularity causes a
great deal of mental and physical consternation.

   Prostate cancer is typically treated in one of several ways: surgical removal
of the gland, called a radical prostatectomy; radiation therapy; hormonal
therapy; and cryotherapy --- a promising new technique of killing prostate
tumors by freezing them. Because prostate cancer is often slow-growing, many
older men may opt for what is called "watchful waiting" --- that is, doing
nothing until the cancer spreads beyond the gland or causes significant health
problems or until new treatments arise.

   When confronting the outcome of any treatment for prostate cancer, men
generally share common fears, doctors say.

   "They have two legitimate concerns --- erectile dysfunction and
incontinence," says Dr. Keith A. Levinson of Georgia Urology in Decatur. "The
emotional issues for men are very real. This is their manhood under attack."

   Because treatment options no longer are limited to surgery --- and even the
most successful ones carry some degree of risk --- what may be best for one
patient may not be the best course of action for another.

   This makes choosing a treatment option particularly difficult for many men
--- especially older men, who may be unaccustomed or uncomfortable talking
openly about their health.

   "I found out men have a real hang-up with talking about any health problem.
They're real secretive about it," observes J.C. Cameron, 58, of LaGrange, who
was diagnosed with prostate cancer last year. "Men, they don't want to know what
they got, and when they find out, they don't want anyone else to know."

   That's one reason prostate cancer support groups --- including many with
outposts on the Internet --- have sprouted like weeds in the past decade.
Cameron, for instance, turned to two men's support groups to help steer him
through his treatment options. From the connections he made, he decided to
undergo a prostatectomy at the Emory Clinic. Cameron's wife, Mary, also helped
him sort through the treatment information and eased him through the six weeks
of recuperation. Now, he is fully back in action --- at work as an industrial
electrician and out in the garden on the couple's farm near LaGrange. "He hasn't
missed a beat," Mary Cameron says.

   Men have good reason to follow Cameron's lead. Prostate cancer causes about
the same number of cases and deaths each year as breast cancer causes in women,
yet awareness still lags behind.

   Every October, millions of women gather for marches and events to promote
breast cancer research, awareness and advocacy, such as the Avon Breast Cancer
3-Day 60-mile walk that concludes today in Piedmont Park. No similar
large-scale, media-grabbing events are held for prostate cancer patients,
although local groups do their part with smaller gatherings.

   But every time a celebrity steps forward to detail his own personal struggle
--- former Sen. Bob Dole, Andrew Young, retired Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, New
York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, golfer Arnold Palmer --- doctors' offices note an
increase in calls for prostate exams.

   Every year, 198,100 Americans are diagnosed with prostate cancer; 31,500 die.
Annually, 192,200 women are diagnosed with breast cancer; 40,200 die. In
Georgia, 5,030 new cases of prostate cancer occur annually, compared with 4,650
cases of breast cancer.

   Since 80 percent of prostate cancer cases are among men 65 and older, it's
often regarded as a disease of old age. But younger men, especially
African-Americans and those with a family history of prostate cancer, need to
start thinking about prostate cancer at midlife, experts say.

   Unlike breast cancer, prostate cancer can be slow-growing and nonfatal.
Ninety percent of men diagnosed with prostate cancer at early stages survive at
least five years; 63 percent survive at least 10, according to the American
Cancer Society. But unchecked, prostate cancer can spread aggressively, to other
organs and into bones.

   Research shows that black men are at double the risk of white men of having
prostate cancer and are two to three times more likely to die from it.

   "We don't know why," says Dr. Carmen Rodriguez, an epidemiologist with the
American Cancer Society. "It could be a difference in diet. It's been
hypothesized black men eat more fats and meats than white men, but that's not
sufficient to explain that vast difference. Studies right now are starting to
explore whether there's a genetic predisposition combined with a risk factor
that accounts for this difference."

   Doctors typically check for the presence of the cancer through a blood test
known as the "prostate-specific antigen" or PSA test. Levels of PSA increase
when the prostate has cancerous cells. However, positive results do not
necessarily mean cancer. PSA levels can rise in men with inflammation of the
prostate or a benign condition called prostatic hyperplasia, in which the
prostate is enlarged. This is why doctors also perform digital rectal exams, to
check for abnormal bumps or problems and to rule out other causes.

   The PSA test was approved in 1985. As both its sensitivity and availability
increased, debate has escalated over when and how often men should be tested for
prostate cancer. That's because medical research has yet to definitely prove
whether early detection of prostate cancer through mass PSA screening saves
lives. Early evidence is starting to show that it does.

   At one point, there were more than two dozen different recommendations from
professional medical and lobbying groups over PSA screening.  Recently, the
American Cancer Society and the American Urological Association settled on this
advice: Men should get an annual PSA and digital rectal exam beginning at 50,
while men considered at high risk --- African-Americans and those with a family
history of prostate cancer --- should start annual exams at 40.

   Forty-five-year-old Cleve Clarke says he owes his future to a PSA test.  He
had asked his doctor to give him the blood test last year after having symptoms
of burning and frequent urination. But his doctor balked, saying Clarke's
symptoms were probably just a urinary infection and that he was too young to
worry about prostate cancer.

   Clarke insisted. The PSA results surprised his doctor, and Clarke eventually
underwent a radical prostatectomy. Now, he's speaking out, wanting to get the
word out that young African-Americans like him need to save themselves. "The
medical community let me down," Clarke told an audience of 200 gathered at the
Georgia Prostate Cancer Coalition's annual forum, held recently at the Fox
Theatre's Egyptian Ballroom. "General practitioners need to be more vigilant in
determining early-on the presence of prostate cancer in young African-American
males. Failure to do so is incomprehensible."

   While a consensus has emerged on PSA screening, there is no consensus on
treating prostate cancer. Once men learn their own bad news about prostate
cancer, they face the daunting task of deciding which treatment road they should
go down: a radical prostatectomy; radiation treatments; or the conservative
approach, watchful waiting. (Killing prostate tumors with cryotherapy is
beginning to show promising results; and hormone therapy is often used along
with other treatments.) Experts say patients need to evaluate the side effects
of each option and choose what's best for them. And that's where support groups
can offer significant help. "Making those decisions about what treatment to go
with, I found that to be the worst part," explains Gene Matthews, a prostate
cancer patient who joined the US TOO International Emory University chapter of
the Prostate Support Association.

   "You feel very lonely, very isolated and overwhelmed with having to make
decisions," says Matthews, a 56-year-old lawyer with the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. "Groups like this are so critical to give you balance
and assistance." While Matthews opted for surgery in May --- and was back in the
pool swimming laps six weeks later --- Gerald Driscoll chose the other popular
route, radiation therapy.

   "I worried about the risks of surgery such as incontinence and the effect on
my sex life," says 69-year-old Driscoll, who was diagnosed three years ago. His
therapy included a combination of seed implanting and external radiation
treatment. "Plus, I didn't want to be cut up. I know it sounds pretty petty, but
it's a consideration." Alan Granath of Dunwoody couldn't decide between the two
treatments.

   Initially, he had leaned toward radiation treatment because he also feared
going under the knife. "The nerves that give you an erection are right near the
prostate. The thought of hardly being able to get an erection the rest of my
life or having to use mechanical means to do it just floored me," admits
Granath, who openly discusses any and all aspects of his angst as president of
the Georgia Prostate Cancer Coalition. "Men are scared silly about their ability
to make love."

   But Granath's wife and son steered him toward a prostatectomy because they
thought it offered the best chances of survival, and at the time of his 1993
surgery, radiation treatments were not as successful as they are now. Also, new
nerve-sparing techniques had improved the surgery and lessened the chances of
erectile and urinary dysfunction.

   "I had to be the strong one and help him make the [treatment] decision
because he was dealing with his own mortality," says Alan's wife, Jacqueline
Granath. Son Brian, then 24, told his dad: "You have only one chance for a
knockout punch, and if you don't get the cancer, it will grow back. He used to
tell me, 'But I don't feel sick. I feel fine. Why should they cut into me? How
do I know it's true that I have cancer?' This was my father who had never even
had a cold."

   Health experts say that as more men speak up about prostate cancer, the
quality of care has also improved. And promising new treatments --- from the use
of gene therapy techniques to immune-system boosters --- may blossom in the
years ahead.

   "Even compared to three years ago, the options for prostate cancer are
stunning," Dr. Jonathan Simons, prostate cancer researcher and new director of
Emory University's Winship Cancer Institute, told a recent gathering of Emory's
prostate cancer support group. "We are seeing an enormous explosion of the
science that brings new treatment to prostate cancer. Something great is going
to happen with prostate cancer --- will it be a vaccine? Will it be gene therapy
? Will it come from clinical trials? I can't say.

   "But none of us has had our best idea yet or we'd be celebrating the cure for
prostate cancer." ME:Part of a special section on breast cancer and reproductive
cancers.

GRAPHIC: Photo:
Survivor Alan Granath is now president of the Georgia Prostate Cancer Coalition.
Photo:
J.C. Cameron, 58, turned to two support groups for help in steering through
treatment options. He's now back at work at his job as an industrial electrician
--- and attending to fall chores at his LaGrange farm./ JEAN SHIFRIN / Staff

LOAD-DATE: October 07, 2001


                             1563 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             October 7, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. H08

LENGTH: 2770 words

HEADLINE: Finding the Rare Bulls in a Bearish Market;
Tech's Been Hammered and Diversified Funds Have Declined, but There Are
Exceptions to Be Had

BYLINE: Eric J. Savitz, Special to The Washington Post

BODY:

   The third quarter of 2001 will go down as one of the worst three months for
investors ever. The average stock mutual fund lost more than 17 percent of its
value in the quarter; for the year's first nine months, the typical diversified
stock fund has tumbled more than 22 percent. Welcome to the bear market.

    Of course, even in a period as bad as this, some funds outperform and others
lag. Any fund with a tilt toward technology took an extra pounding: According to
Lipper, the typical tech fund lost about 38 percent in the third quarter alone.

    Alas, there weren't many places to hide: Gold funds eked out some small
gains, and some exotic day-trading-oriented bear funds that buy options rather
than stocks posted gains, but not many people own either of those.

    One of the few exceptions to the negative trend is Prudent Bear, a fund run
by the eternal pessimist David Tice. By selling lots of stocks short -- that is,
betting that they'll go down -- he's made good money and offered investors a
hedge for the rest of their fund portfolios. Also on a roll is Ira Unschuld's
remarkable Schroder Ultra, a fund that has produced such stunning returns in
both good times and bad that people are scheming for ways to buy shares even
though it is closed to new investors.

    On the other end of the performance scale is the Berkshire Focus fund, which
since last fall has seen its assets shrink from $ 450 million to $ 50 million,
almost entirely because of a series of highly unsuccessful bets on tech stocks.

    What happens now? Well, depends on whom you ask. Tice is still a bear,
natch. Malcolm R. Fobes III, manager of beleaguered Berkshire Focus, thinks a
turn in tech shares is just around the corner. Unschuld thinks the markets will
react to the political situation, that it's a good time to spread your risk
around and be a stock picker, and that there's really no way to know what will
happen. We're with him.

   * Manager: David Tice, since Dec. 28, 1995

    HQ: Dallas

    Phone: 888-778-2327

    Assets: $ 188 million

   PERFORMANCE

    1998: -34.1%

    1999: -23.4%

    2000: +30.5%

    YTD: +37.8%

    Q3 2001: 41.5%

    David Tice would prefer you not call him a short seller. Which is not to say
he isn't one. "We're out to preserve wealth," explained Tice, the founder and
portfolio manager of the Dallas-based Prudent Bear Fund, which outran almost all
other mutual funds in the third quarter with a return of 41.5 percent.

    The few funds that outperformed Prudent Bear in the latest quarter invest
not in stocks but in index options and futures with the specific goal of
generating big returns when the market is headed south.

    "Prudent Bear is a vehicle for the little guy to hedge his portfolio. It's
too bad that after the bin Laden situation, anyone who happens to go short is
considered un-American and a bad guy," Tice said.

    He's got a point. Yes, some people believe that in a post-Sept. 11 world, it
is downright unpatriotic to bet on a decline in the U.S. stock market by selling
stocks short, meaning that an investor borrows shares and then sells them,
betting they will go down and he'll be able to buy them back at a lower price.
The truth, however, is that Tice's investors have made good money this year -- a
gain of 37.8 percent for the first nine months -- in an environment in which the
vast majority of mutual funds have lost ground.

    Tice actually goes so far as to argue that Prudent Bear offers more than a
hedge on your other mutual funds. Prudent Bear, he says, can serve as a hedge
for the rest of your life. Anyone with a job and a mortgage, he contends, is
inherently "long" on the U.S. economy. Said Tice: "Our fund is an opportunity to
hedge the risk in the other part of your portfolio -- your life portfolio."

    That's putting a lot of faith in a mutual fund, particularly given that
Tice's fund lost money in the late-1990s bull market. Nonetheless, Tice has a
point: The average portfolio would be down less overall this year if it included
Prudent Bear or some other bearish fund as a hedge.

    And if you believe Tice, it's not too late to hedge. Even after the sharp
declines this year, Tice remains convinced that the market is vastly overpriced.
"We still think the Nasdaq is overvalued by about two-thirds. If you look at the
Nasdaq 100, they generate negative earnings," he said, referring to an index of
100 of the largest companies that trade on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

    "The 40 largest companies in the Nasdaq 100 by market capitalization sell at
an aggregate of seven times sales. That's a rich multiple. There is this belief
out there that because many companies are down a lot from their highs . . . they
represent good values. But in our opinion that's patently untrue."

    Tice says about 60 percent of Prudent Bear's assets are invested in short
sales -- meaning bets that the market will decline -- with about 20 percent in
long positions. The rest includes bearish bets on stock and index options, plus
some cash.

    On the short side, Tice continues to place big bets on further declines in
technology stocks. For instance, he has a short position in International
Business Machines Corp., noting that the computer giant is down only about 25
percent from its 52-week high. "So far, it really hasn't disappointed," he said.
"But they can't avoid it. Their service business will slow down, as will their
server and PC businesses."

    He's also short-selling some consumer stocks, as well as some financial
shares. One example: Providian Financial Corp., which provides loans to risky
borrowers. "Defaults," said Tice, "are likely to skyrocket."

    On the other side of the ledger, Tice is betting on a spike in prices of
precious metals. The fund is long on a variety of mining stocks, including
Goldcorp Inc., which has a large mine in Saskatchewan, and Harmony Gold Mining
Co. of South Africa.

    Weirdly enough, Tice also dabbles in beaten-down growth stocks. The fund
owns a handful of biotech companies, for instance, including Avigen Inc., which
is trying gene therapy to treat hemophilia, and NexMed Inc., which is developing
a competitor for Viagra.

    "There are some cheap stocks, some orphan stocks, that we think will do well
in a bear market," Tice explained. "But you can't just go out and buy Cisco
[Systems Inc.] because it went from 80 to 12."

    One of these days, Tice says, he'll turn bullish and Prudent Bear will go
net long. "We might even change our name to the Prudent Bull fund," he said. "I
can't wait to get bullish again." But alas, he says, that's a long way off.

   * Manager: Malcolm R. Fobes III, since July 1, 1997

    HQ: San Jose

    Phone: 877-526-0707

    Assets: $ 50 million

   PERFORMANCE

    1998: +104.0%

    1999: +142.9%

    2000: -16%

    YTD: -82.1%

    Q3 2001: -60.48%

    For two years, Malcolm R. Fobes III rode the Silicon Valley gravy train. In
1998, his Berkshire Focus fund scored a rare triple-digit return, beating most
funds that year with a 104 percent gain. Mutual Funds magazine named Berkshire
Focus the Rookie Fund of the Year. And there was no sophomore slump: In 1999,
the stock did even better, gaining 142.9 percent.

    Fobes (we know what you're thinking, by the way, and his name really is
Fobes, not Forbes) cranked out those stunning returns the old-fashioned way: He
bet the house on technology stocks. "The philosophy from Day One was to
concentrate the fund's investments in technology," Fobes said.

    And that is precisely what they did. With no little pride, Fobes notes the
fund never bothered with dicey Internet stocks. Rather, Berkshire Focus made big
money in mainstream technology stocks such as Cisco Systems, Microsoft Corp. and
Dell Computer Corp. The company earned a bundle betting on
telecommunications-related stocks such as Ciena Corp., Northern Telecom Inc.,
JDS Uniphase Corp., Juniper Networks Inc. and PMC-Sierra Inc., and data-storage
specialists such as Brocade Communications Systems Inc. and EMC Corp.

    Around Labor Day 2000, the San Jose-based fund hit its all-time high, about
$ 66 a share. For tech stocks -- and for Berkshire Focus -- it's been all
downhill from there. In the year's first nine months, the fund gave back more
than four-fifths of its value. In the third quarter alone, it fell more than 60
percent, worse than almost any other fund. The fund's recent price: about $ 6.50
a share.

    As technology stock prices steadily eroded, Fobes's strategy for Berkshire
Focus was to stick to his guns. Perhaps that wasn't the best plan.

    "We still own our core holdings, the ones we've always liked," he said. "We
own EMC, which is down 83 percent this year. Checkpoint, down 83 percent.
Brocade, down 85 percent. BEA [Systems Inc.], down 86 percent. Juniper, down 92
percent. Siebel [Systems Inc.], down 81 percent. These are some of the world's
greatest technology companies."

    Well, yes, but they've also been among the world's greatest wealth
destroyers. As Fobes notes, the assets of Berkshire Focus, which once stood at $
450 million, are down to $ 50 million, mostly through the collapse of those
storied tech shares.

    Fobes, a native Virginian who migrated west, attended San Jose State
University and worked at Adobe Systems Inc. and other tech companies, is
remarkably steadfast in his faith in Silicon Valley. Cisco and EMC remain the
fund's largest holdings. Before the Sept. 11 attacks, the fund invested heavily
in semiconductor and chip equipment stocks -- two groups that have been
especially battered in the past few weeks. Said Fobes: "We really believed the
recovery was happening."

    As it happens, Fobes still thinks there's a rebound coming. And he's eager
to buy. "Everywhere we look, we see companies with shares down so dramatically,
so inexpensive."

    But are investors willing to hand cash to a fund manager who got the market
so wrong? "Yes, the shareholders are concerned," he acknowledged. "But they know
that these are good companies that will be stronger than they were before.
There's a lot of positive things to look forward to: the Fed cutting rates
dramatically, stimulus from tax cuts and some sort of stimulus package from
Congress.

    "There are a lot of positives that lead us to believe we'll see a V-shaped
recovery. We've stuck to our guns, and our shareholders know that when tech
turns around, we'll bounce back very, very strong. It's not a matter of if the
turnaround will happen, it's a matter of when."

    For investors who stuck by Fobes this year, it will have to be a robust
recovery indeed to make up for stunning losses.

   * Manager: Ira Unschuld, since Oct. 15, 1997

    HQ: New York City

    Phone: 800-464-3108 (but fund is closed to new investors)

    Assets: $ 149 million

   PERFORMANCE

    1998: +63.0%

    1999: +94.9%

    2000: +147.7%

    YTD: +45.4%

    Q3 2001: +6.52%

    On the bulletin boards of the mutual fund Web site Morningstar.com,
investors have been scheming for many months about how to get into Schroder
Ultra. The fund has cranked out almost impossibly good returns for four years
running, but it's closed to new investors.

    Some Schroder Ultra fans, however, refuse to back down. Someone called
Musclez posted a note offering to pay 10 times the current price for a single
share of the fund. Another investor, Dewsdad84, is offering $ 1,000 for a share
of the fund, which otherwise would be worth about $ 43. And they have lots of
company: The theory is that once you own a single share, you automatically get
the right to buy as many as you want.

    It's not hard to see why there is such desperation to own this fund. Managed
by small-stock specialist Ira Unschuld, Schroder Ultra has been producing
stunning returns almost from the day it opened in late 1997.

    In 1998, Schroder Ultra returned 63 percent. The following year, at the
height of the tech bull-market frenzy, it gained nearly 95 percent. For an
encore, Schroder Ultra rose 147.7 percent in 2000. And this year, while most
funds suffered deep losses, this one has gained more than 45 percent.

    In other words, having produced spectacular returns in the bull market,
Unschuld turned around and did the same in the bear market. Few funds have been
nimble enough to make money in both periods, and no other has done so while
producing such outsize returns.

    All of which raises an obvious question: What the heck is this fund doing?

    The short answer is that Schroder Ultra is basically a hedge fund. Run by
the U.S. arm of London-based Schroder Asset Management Ltd., the fund can both
buy stocks and short them. It can play in the options market, take big positions
in individual shares or move heavily into cash.

    "The goal is to make people money in good times and bad," Unschuld, 36,
explained. "We hedge the portfolio pretty much all the time, although the amount
of the hedge will vary depending on my view of the market. A more traditional
fund would look to outperform their benchmark [for many funds, the S&P 500] by a
certain amount or to perform less poorly when the market goes down. But we want
to make money at any given time."

    Originally know as Schroder Microcap, Ultra layers the hedge-fund approach
over a focus on microcap stocks, companies with a market value of $ 500 million
or less. In picking these tiny stocks, Unschuld uses a strategy known as GARP,
or growth at a reasonable price.

    "We're looking for under-followed or misunderstood companies delivering
earnings growth not reflected in the stock price," he said. Unschuld also trades
in and out of stocks far more frequently than most portfolio managers: Turnover
has been running at about 700 percent a year, compared with about 100 percent
for the average stock fund.

    When the markets were on the rise, Unschuld made considerable money in
technology stocks. "In 1999 and early 2000, there was this enormous speculative
bubble," he said.

   "By the end of 1999, we had a relatively high weighting in technology, 30 to
35 percent. But by early 2000, there were so many companies coming public, with
shakier and shakier business plans, that we went net short [more bets on a
market decline] in the spring of 2000. That helped us as the market sold off."

    But Unschuld says that throughout 2001, the fund has been net long, betting
on some stocks he saw as bargains. "A lot of the very cheap stocks we were
investing in started to get recognized -- consumer stocks, health care and some
financials -- as interest rates started to come down. There's a broad array."

    Looking ahead, Unschuld is hesitant to commit too far in any direction. "The
market right now is caught between very low interest rates and a recessionary
economy," he said. "The key will be consumer confidence and the political
situation, which I don't know any more about than anyone else. So I'm not making
any big bets.

    "We're looking for stocks that are undervalued and oversold. We're being
very careful since earnings estimates may need to be cut further, but some
companies are barely trading above their cash levels right now."

    Since he trades the portfolio so aggressively and buys such small stocks,
Unschuld declines to talk about any of his specific positions. But the most
recent snapshot of the portfolio, from Aug. 31, provides a taste.

    Anticipating the creation of some bargains in September and October,
Unschuld had ratcheted up the cash position of the fund to almost 40 percent.
The largest stock position was D&K Healthcare Resources Inc., a distributor of
pharmaceutical and beauty aid products.

    Other big bets included Hollywood Entertainment Corp., the video retail
chain; Kindred Healthcare Inc., an operator of nursing homes and acute-care
hospitals; Bank of Bermuda; and Wilson Greatbatch Technologies Inc., which makes
components used in implantable medical devices. Whether the fund owns any of
those stocks now, Unschuld won't say.

    While Ultra is closed to new investors, Unschuld fans have another option:
Schroder US Smaller Companies, a more traditional small-cap fund, and a clone of
that fund called Wells Fargo Small Cap Opportunity.

    Having avoided making big bets on tech stocks, Smaller Companies has been a
steady performer: up 13.1 percent in 1999 and 31.2 percent last year; this year
it has lost 4.3 percent. Smaller Companies buys somewhat larger stocks than
Ultra and lacks the hedging features -- it stays nearly fully invested without
trying to time the market.

    As a result, Smaller Companies lacks the astonishing returns Ultra has
produced. But Smaller Companies at least has Unschuld at the helm -- as does the
Wells Fargo Small Cap -- and it's open to new investors. Which makes it a pretty
good option, even for Dewsdad84.

   Eric J. Savitz has been an editor at large for the Industry Standard and West
Coast editor for Barron's.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2001


                             1564 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 4, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1:1,7; B-2:2; B-4:6

LENGTH: 569 words

HEADLINE: Crime-prevention lesson is there, if he can read it

BYLINE: Diane Bell

BODY:
 A burglar picked the wrong car to break into in Rancho Bernardo the other day.
It belonged to Assistant District Attorney Greg Thompson.  The burglar was after
Thompson's briefcase, but undoubtedly got a surprise upon opening it.  There
were no valuables inside -- only 50 copies of the Crime Prevention Strategies
speech that Thompson was planning to hand out at his talk to Episcopal clerics
that day.  At least Thompson could tell the clerics, with confidence, that the
speech had been burglar-proofed.

   A magic moment

   Junior Seau made the reservation -- a nice table with a view at George's at
the Cove. But it wasn't for him.  It was for his new teammate from Texas, rookie
running back LaDainian Tomlinson and his date.  When the couple arrived Friday
evening, Tomlinson ordered a bottle of Dom Perignon, slipped the server a
diamond ring and asked that it be delivered in his champagne glass.  He drank
the champagne, then popped out the ring and the question.  His fiancee, LaTorsha
Oakley, 19, a Texas Christian U. student, spent most of the meal on a cell phone
sharing the good news with friends and family.  He went on to rush for 107 yards
and score three touchdowns Sunday against Cincinnati.

   People on the move

   After co-founding the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in 1990, then serving as
CEO for the next decade, Dr. Ivor Royston is thoroughly enjoying the latest
chapter in his life.  He is working full time at Forward Ventures, a biotech and
health-care fund he co-founded.  But he says his heart -- and his wallet -- are
still at Sidney Kimmel, where he left a parting gift of $1 million.  The new CEO
at the cancer center is Dr. Albert Deisseroth, former director of Yale's genetic
therapy program . . . Paul O'Sullivan, an aide to S.D. Councilman Byron Wear,
and his wife Adriana are heeding President Bush's call to fly commercial and
N.Y. Mayor Rudy Giuliani's plea for tourists.  They'll celebrate their fifth
anniversary later this month with a hastily arranged weekend trip to Manhattan.
The first visit for both to the Big Apple . . . SDSU alumnus (Class of '61) Bob
Chandler, the Padres game announcer, is the university's honorary Homecoming
chairman this weekend.  It's only fitting, considering he hasn't missed a
Homecoming game since 1956. Furthermore, he met his wife during an SDSU
fraternity panty raid, and their four daughters all went to SDSU.

   NYC out of ribbon?

   A shortage of red, white and blue ribbon in Manhattan fueled an urgent plea
to USOs around the country from their NYC affiliate.  Seems the USO Troupe,
accompanied by such stars as John Travolta, Olivia Newton-John, Nathan Lane and
Christie Brinkley, have daily greeted firefighters and police officers at the
Twin Towers and pinned patriotic ribbons to their uniforms.  In response to the
appeal, 10 local USO board members cut and stapled 2,000 ribbon pins last Sunday
. . . One bright note in the Aztecs defeat by the Air Force Academy last
weekend.  Air Force's punter was John Cortney, the son of local CPA Dave and
Karen Cortney and a 1998 grad of St. Augustine High School.  He kicked four
punts, averaging 44.7 yards.  Cortney, a senior who honed his love of flying
with local USAirways Capt. Joe Graham, is headed for pilot training.

   Diane Bell's column appears Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays.  Fax items to
(619) 293-2443; call (619) 293-1518; or e-mail to diane.bell@uniontrib.com.


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2001


                             1565 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 4, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,7; B-2:2; B-4:6

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Crime-prevention lesson is there, if he can read it

BYLINE: Diane Bell

BODY:

   A burglar picked the wrong car to break into in Rancho Bernardo the other
day.

   It belonged to Assistant District Attorney Greg Thompson.

   The burglar was after Thompson's briefcase, but undoubtedly got a surprise
upon opening it.

   There were no valuables inside -- only 50 copies of the Crime Prevention
Strategies speech that Thompson was planning to hand out at his talk to
Episcopal clerics that day.

   At least Thompson could tell the clerics, with confidence, that the speech
had been burglar-proofed. A magic moment Junior Seau made the reservation -- a
nice table with a view at George's at the Cove. But it wasn't for him.

   It was for his new teammate from Texas, rookie running back LaDainian
Tomlinson and his date.

   When the couple arrived Friday evening, Tomlinson ordered a bottle of Dom
Perignon, slipped the server a diamond ring and asked that it be delivered in
his champagne glass.

   He drank the champagne, then popped out the ring and the question. His
fiancee, LaTorsha Oakley, 19, a Texas Christian U. student, spent most of the
meal on a cell phone sharing the good news with friends and family. He went on
to rush for 107 yards and score three touchdowns Sunday against Cincinnati.
People on the move After co-founding the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in 1990,
then serving as CEO for the next decade, Dr. Ivor Royston is thoroughly enjoying
the latest chapter in his life.

   He is working full time at Forward Ventures, a biotech and health-care fund
he co-founded.

   But he says his heart -- and his wallet -- are still at Sidney Kimmel, where
he left a parting gift of $1 million. The new CEO at the cancer center is Dr.
Albert Deisseroth, former director of Yale's genetic therapy program . . . Paul
O'Sullivan, an aide to S.D. Councilman Byron Wear, and his wife Adriana are
heeding President Bush's call to fly commercial and N.Y. Mayor Rudy Giuliani's
plea for tourists. They'll celebrate their fifth anniversary later this month
with a hastily arranged weekend trip to Manhattan.

   The first visit for both to the Big Apple . . . SDSU alumnus (Class of '61)
Bob Chandler, the Padres game announcer, is the university's honorary Homecoming
chairman this weekend. It's only fitting, considering he hasn't missed a
Homecoming game since 1956. Furthermore, he met his wife during an SDSU
fraternity panty raid, and their four daughters all went to SDSU. NYC out of
ribbon? A shortage of red, white and blue ribbon in Manhattan fueled an urgent
plea to USOs around the country from their NYC affiliate.

   Seems the USO Troupe, accompanied by such stars as John Travolta, Olivia
Newton-John, Nathan Lane and Christie Brinkley, have daily greeted firefighters
and police officers at the Twin Towers and pinned patriotic ribbons to their
uniforms.

   In response to the appeal, 10 local USO board members cut and stapled 2,000
ribbon pins last Sunday . . . One bright note in the Aztecs defeat by the Air
Force Academy last weekend.

   Air Force's punter was John Cortney, the son of local CPA Dave and Karen
Cortney and a 1998 grad of St. Augustine High School.

   He kicked four punts, averaging 44.7 yards.

   Cortney, a senior who honed his love of flying with local USAirways Capt. Joe
Graham, is headed for pilot training. Diane Bell's column appears Tuesdays,
Thursdays, Saturdays.

   Fax items to (619) 293-2443; call (619) 293-1518; or e-mail to
diane.bell@uniontrib.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1566 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            October 4, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: COVINGTON PICAYUNE; Mandeville Moments; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: Walk making strides toward healthier kids

BYLINE: Kadee Krieger

BODY:

   The March of Dimes foundation began in 1950, when the parents of children
with polio knocked on the doors of neighbors, friends and strangers to raise
money to cure the disease.

   The solicitors asked for nickels, dimes, anything that could be spared.

   The plea worked, and the money raised from that campaign led to the cure for
polio.

   Since then, the organization has turned its attention to fighting birth
defects and helping premature and low birth-weight babies. Sadly, those
statistics are still staggering.

   The foundation reports that 450,000 babies each year are born too soon. Each
day, 411 are born with a birth defect that could kill or disable them.

   But participants in Saturday's WalkAmerica fund-raiser for the March of Dimes
will see precious proof of how their contribution helps those children.

   Leading the walk, which begins at 9 a.m. at the Mandeville trailhead, will be
8-year-old Zac Johnston and 3-year-old Preston Cross, who were born with spina
bifida.

   North shore WalkAmerica co-chairwoman Dorothy Guillot said without the March
of Dimes, these kids may not have lived to enjoy Mandeville's shaded streets and
shimmering lakefront on a cool October morning.

   "March of Dimes research money has made it possible for these young people to
have a healthy life. They are leading the walk because they are who we are
walking for," Guillot said. "We can reach out and touch them and see that we are
making a difference. They are two of thousands across the country that the walk
helps, but those dollars are going to someone that you can see smile."

   While about 50 area teams made up of corporations, school and civic groups
and individuals have been working for months to raise money before the walk,
Guillot said anyone is welcome.

   "Come Saturday morning and if you'd like to, put $5 in the kitty and be a
part of the event. This is a theme of families and one person helping another,"
she said.

   And don't think because you have a healthy child that you don't need the
March of Dimes, Guillot said. The foundation helps all babies and families from
their first cries.

   The March of Dimes was instrumental in financing and equipping neonatal
intensive care units, securing vaccines for rubella and Rh, promoting the use of
ultrasound to detect and treat heart defects, creating gene mapping and gene
therapy, requiring PKU screenings for newborns and treating respiratory stress
syndrome.

   "Every child has been touched by the March of Dimes, healthy and unhealthy,"
Guillot said. "Those of us who are lucky enough to have healthy babies need to
know how they have been affected and should be able to say 'thanks.' "

   After the four-mile walk, which winds down the Tammany Trace to old
Mandeville, the lakefront and back, walkers will be treated to food and music by
Big Daddy-O.

   For information about the walk, call Guillot at 892-2104.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2001


                             1567 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           October 3, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Health Secretary Promotes F.D.A. Choice

BYLINE:  By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 2

BODY:

   Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, is promoting a
food safety expert to be the next chief of the Food and Drug Administration, but
the White House has yet to approve him.

        Mr. Thompson's choice for the job is Dr. Lester Crawford, who directs an
education and research institute affiliated with Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, people familiar with the selection process said. They are
unwilling to talk openly about it until they know whether the White House
approves.

    Mr. Thompson has not publicly named Dr. Crawford, and Dr. Crawford declined
to comment. But in remarks last week to the National Association of
Manufacturers, Mr. Thompson said that he had recommended a scientist with "a
great reputation" for the F.D.A. job, and that the White House was vetting the
candidate.

   In recent months, the Bush administration and Congress have been unable to
agree on a candidate for commissioner of the food and drug agency, and Mr.
Thompson is taking pains to line up support for his candidate on Capitol Hill.
He told the manufacturers' group that the two ranking members of the Senate
Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions -- Senators Edward M.
Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire
-- were "enthusiastic and supportive" of his choice.

   "And so all we have to do," Mr. Thompson said, "is get the president to
announce it and have the F.B.I. do the background check. And we're confident
we'll get it done as quickly as we possibly can."

   Whether that will happen remains unclear; a White House spokeswoman today
declined comment on the selection process. Moreover, as Mr. Thompson noted in
his remarks last week, any announcement may take time because the Federal Bureau
of Investigation is investigating last month's terrorist attacks.

   Those attacks have heightened concern about bioterrorism, and the government
is now planning to augment production of vaccines to protect against possible
germ attacks. Because the food and drug agency would be intimately involved in
that effort, some say it has become especially important to fill the
commissioner's job.

   "In terms of future vaccine development, I think it would be most helpful to
have strong leadership at the F.D.A.," said Carl Feldbaum, president of BIO, the
biotechnology industry trade organization.

   In July, the administration suggested Michael Astrue, general counsel for
Transkaryotic Therapies, a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass., as a
possible F.D.A. chief. But seven Democratic senators, led by Mr. Kennedy,
objected. In a letter to the president, they said it would be "unprecedented for
the commissioner to be appointed from an agency regulated by the F.D.A."

   Dr. Crawford, 63, appears to escape that criticism, although consumer safety
advocates have complained that his institute, the Center for Food and Nutrition
Policy, receives too much support from industry. The institute, which is
financially independent, was affiliated with Georgetown University until last
month, when it moved to Virginia Tech.

   A veterinarian with a degree in pharmacology, Dr. Crawford ran the Food
Safety and Inspection Service for the Agriculture Department, and has also been
head of the Bureau of Veterinary Medicine at the F.D.A.

   Dr. Crawford has also been executive vice president of the National Food
Processors Association, an industry trade group, and has worked for American
Cyanamid, a pharmaceutical company.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2001


                             1568 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      October 2, 2001 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: Researchers locate gene to make mice anthrax-resistant

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Researchers at Harvard Medical School have identified a gene in mice that can
make the animals resistant to anthrax and say the finding may lead to better
treatments or even immunity to the disease in humans.

   Interest in anthrax research has been intensified in the weeks after the
terrorist attacks at the World Trade Center and Pentagon, as fears rise that
terrorists may seek to infect large numbers of the population through biological
or chemical warfare.

   HMS researcher William Dietrich warned that his findings are still years away
from being able to be used to protect against an anthrax attack.

   "But people can feel better knowing there are lots of basic science labs
trying to find out more about how anthrax works," he said.

   In the new finding, published in the October issue of Current Biology,
Dietrich and others reported finding a variant of a mouse gene that appears to
work by enhancing immune cells' response to the lethal toxin released by the
anthrax-causing bacterium.

   He said similar gene variants certainly exist in humans.

   "Because we know about it, we can think about how to intervene with it," he
said.

   Interventions could include treatments with drugs or even gene therapy to
confer immunity, although such an option is less likely and farther off.

   "I don't know what people would think about wholesale genome manipulations on
the human race," he said.

   An early benefit from the finding could be the identification of humans who
are immune to anthrax because of the gene. Such humans would not have to worry
in the face of an anthrax attack.

   "If you knew someone was resistant to anthrax, you might not worry so much
about them if they had been exposed," he said. "Or you might want to know who
among the soldiers in your army might be able to tolerate anthrax better."

   Anthrax is usually fatal as a result of toxic shock caused by an overwhelming
immune system response to the bacteria. While antibiotics can work, people
usually discover too late that they are infected.

   "We're beginning to understand how the toxin works," Dietrich said. "This is
the beginning of a road to getting a therapy."

   The gene variant that confers immunity may work to protect immune cells
called macrophages from the self-destructive effects of the lethal anthrax
toxins.

LOAD-DATE: October 02, 2001


                             1569 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 2, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 365 words

HEADLINE: Immusol to develop cancer fighters; Deal with Swiss drug giant valued
up to $150 million

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Immusol, a privately held San Diego biotechnology company, has signed a
multimillion-dollar deal with Swiss drug giant Novartis to develop new cancer
drugs.

   The five-year collaboration is valued at as much as $150 million for Immusol,
including an upfront equity investment by Novartis of "tens of millions of
dollars," said Niv Caviar, Immusol's vice president of business development.

   Financial details were not disclosed.

   Under terms of the agreement, Immusol will hunt for genes linked to cancer,
including genes that suppress tumor growth or inhibit cell death.  Once a gene
is identified, new medicines theoretically could be developed to enhance or
suppress the activities of the gene and the proteins it makes.

   The deal with Novartis, which is a leading developer of cancer drugs, helps
validate Immusol's "inverse genomics" technology for tracing a biological
activity back to its disease-related parent gene, according to company
officials.

   The company uses ribozymes, genetic material that acts as molecular scissors
to cut RNA, to inactivate a gene.  By studying the impact of blocking a gene in
a cell, researchers can determine if that gene played a role in producing cancer
when it was active, therefore making it a potential drug target.

   "This is the stamp of approval," said Caviar, whose company plans to deliver
50 gene targets to Novartis.  "A deal this size supports our transition from
being a small drug research and development company to a mid-sized
biopharmaceutical company."

   The deal underscores Immusol's transition from an unsuccessful gene therapy
company to a biotech focused broadly on new drug discovery and development.

   The company, which employs 70 people at its Sorrento Valley headquarters,
began in 1994 as a company devoted to developing therapies to treat HIV and
other infectious diseases.

   That focus shifted after a mid-stage gene therapy trial failed to achieve a
benefit in patients.  The company then reinvented itself, eventually
transforming technology it honed as a gene therapy company into a new drug
discovery tool.

   Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone
number is (619) 293-1237.


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2001


                             1570 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 2, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS ; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: Immusol to develop cancer fighters;
Deal with Swiss drug giant valued up to $150 million

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Immusol, a privately held San Diego biotechnology company, has signed a
multimillion-dollar deal with Swiss drug giant Novartis to develop new cancer
drugs. The five-year collaboration is valued at as much as $150 million for
Immusol, including an upfront equity investment by Novartis of "tens of millions
of dollars," said Niv Caviar, Immusol's vice president of business development.
Financial details were not disclosed. Under terms of the agreement, Immusol will
hunt for genes linked to cancer, including genes that suppress tumor growth or
inhibit cell death.

   Once a gene is identified, new medicines theoretically could be developed to
enhance or suppress the activities of the gene and the proteins it makes. The
deal with Novartis, which is a leading developer of cancer drugs, helps validate
Immusol's "inverse genomics" technology for tracing a biological activity back
to its disease-related parent gene, according to company officials. The company
uses ribozymes, genetic material that acts as molecular scissors to cut RNA, to
inactivate a gene.

   By studying the impact of blocking a gene in a cell, researchers can
determine if that gene played a role in producing cancer when it was active,
therefore making it a potential drug target. "This is the stamp of approval,"
said Caviar, whose company plans to deliver 50 gene targets to Novartis.

   "A deal this size supports our transition from being a small drug research
and development company to a mid-sized biopharmaceutical company." The deal
underscores Immusol's transition from an unsuccessful gene therapy company to a
biotech focused broadly on new drug discovery and development. The company,
which employs 70 people at its Sorrento Valley headquarters, began in 1994 as a
company devoted to developing therapies to treat HIV and other infectious
diseases. That focus shifted after a mid-stage gene therapy trial failed to
achieve a benefit in patients.

   The company then reinvented itself, eventually transforming technology it
honed as a gene therapy company into a new drug discovery tool. Penni Crabtree's
e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone number is (619)
293-1237.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1571 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           September 30, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: HARAHAN PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Cancer survivor ready for bike tour;
She'll ride tandem with her husband

BYLINE: By Hope Mazzeno; Contributing writer

BODY:

   Noticed more bike riders along the Mississippi River levee lately? If so,
that's because many are preparing for the annual Multiple Sclerosis Tour for
Cure ride the first weekend of October.

   One who will pedal on a tandem bike is Gayle Johnson, a cancer survivor who
had a Stage 4 tumor and now is preparing for her second Tour for Cure.

   On Dec. 23, 1998, Johnson's life would forever change when she was rushed to
East Jefferson General Hospital suffering a focal seizure. A CAT scan discovered
the Stage 4 brain tumor in the occipital lobe of her brain. That's why her
vision was affected.

   The tumor was classified as a GBM (glioblastoma multiforme), an aggressive
and fast-growing type that can double in two weeks.

   "Overnight, I went from a healthy, happy mother of three sons to a person
fighting for my life," Johnson said.

   Less than a week after the diagnosis, Johnson had surgery to remove the tumor
and began a series of radiation and chemotherapy treatments.

   She then drew up a battle plan with her husband, Pat, to learn more about
this type of tumor. They began the first of many trips to MD Anderson Hospital
in Houston and were also under the care of Dr. Jayne Gurtler, a local
oncologist.

   Then in September 1999, the tumor came back.

   "I knew that this was a crucial time and I did not have too many choices of
what to do next," she said.

   Dr. Raymond Sawaya, a neurologist at MD Anderson, mentioned an experimental
surgery using gene therapy. Johnson was to be among a clinical trial of 12
people.

   "With my faith in God and the support of my husband, I just told Dr. Sawaya,
'Let's go for it,' " Johnson said.

   Gene therapy is the transfer of normal or redesigned genes into a patient to
reduce or alleviate a disease state, such as a tumor. The gene that the surgeons
would inject into her tumor would one that prevents tumors from growing in
healthy people. In those who develop cancer, the P53 gene has become defective.
The idea of this gene therapy is to deliver the P53 gene, manufactured in a lab,
directly into the tumor, causing cancerous cells to self-destruct.

   In October 1999 the P53 gene cell was inserted in and around the tumor. Since
that time, MRIs, or magnetic resonance imaging, have shown no signs of the
cancer returning. The only effect of the surgery was vision problems: Johnson no
longer has peripheral vision, which means she can't drive a car.

   With her vision impaired, she also thought she would have to give up riding
bikes with her husband, a pastime the two had enjoyed. But, on Mother's Day last
year, her husband surprised her with a tandem bike, allowing her to continue the
sport with a partner.

   Johnson said she had learned about the "Tour For Cure" through Maryalice
Pendergast, a trainer she had used for three months after her surgery to regain
her strength and endurance. It was a goal to achieve.

   "When I told Pat about this, he was not too sure about biking 150 miles on
the Tour for Cure, but the more we rode, the more he became excited," Gayle
Johnson laughed.

   The couple entered the 2000 race and completed the 150-mile trek in
treacherous weather.

   This year, Johnson will be riding with a friend, Carolyn Lorio, and other
friends from St. Catherine of Siena Parish, where she is an active parishioner.

   Johnson knows she is fortunate to have survived the tumor. Of the 12 people
in the P53 gene therapy clinical trial, 10 have died and one has had a
recurrence.

   "And, there is me," Johnson said. "Was it a miracle or did the gene therapy
actually work for me? It was possibly a combination of the two."

    . . . . . . .

To give others with brain tumors hope and support, Johnson formed the Metairie
Brain Tumor Support Group, which meets the third Sunday of each month. For
details, call her at 835-5715.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY DONALD STOUT Gayle Johnson, working out at the Cureton
Health Club on Metairie Road, had a brain tumor removed in 1999. It came back
not long after that and the next course of treatment was gene therapy. Now there
is no sign of the cancer.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2001


                             1572 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 27, 2001 Thursday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: PICTURE CAPTION; Pg. D01

HEADLINE: VIROGENOMICS

SOURCE: MIKE LLOYD/The Oregonian

GRAPHIC: Color photo:; Virogenomics is pursuing disease-causing genes using
Oregon Health & Science University technology. Company researcher Cam Raggo
prepares samples to test at OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                             1573 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

              September 26, 2001 Wednesday Met and metro Editions

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03B

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: Hopes high for spinal research center;
Efforts gathered under one roof in renovated building

BYLINE: DARLA CARTER

BODY:

   Byline: DARLA CARTER, The Courier-Journal

   Just a few years ago, the idea of curing paralysis was as remote as the idea
of a man walking on the moon must have seemed before President John F. Kennedy's
administration, said state Sen. Tim Shaughnessy.

   But the Louisville Democrat and others believe a cure is within reach, thanks
in part to the opening of a downtown research center that he describes as the
"rocket'' that will catapult the world toward a cure.

   "WE HAVE a long way to go,'' said Dr. Scott Whittemore, scientific director
of the new Kentucky Spinal Cord Injury Research Center. But "this center will
make significant contributions and will be a major player in ultimately finding
a cure.''

   The center, a collaboration between the University of Louisville and Norton
Healthcare, formally opened yesterday in the MedicalDental Research Building on
South Floyd Street.

   It cost more than $1.6 million to renovate 10,000 square feet of the
38year-old building, said Kathy Keadle, a U of L spokeswoman. It will be used
for stem-cell research, gene therapy, spinal-cord transplantation, computer
simulation and other studies that may lead to a cure.

   UNTIL RESEARCHERS moved in about a month and a half ago, they were scattered
among several buildings. So "this brings everyone to one location to encourage
the collaborative efforts,'' Keadle said.

   The building needed an overhaul because "we were asking world-class
researchers to work in what was really substandard space,'' Shaughnessy said. He
fostered creation of the Kentucky Spinal Cord and Head Injury Research Trust to
benefit research at U of L and the University of Kentucky through a $12.50
surcharge that the state authorized on seat-belt violators and speeders.

   Experimentation at the center includes genetically modifying stem cells to
become certain kinds of cells, then transplanting them into the injured spinal
cord of rodents with the hope of restoring function, Whittemore said.

   "The citizens of Kentucky and the world will certainly benefit from all of
this activity,'' said Russell Prough, associate vice president for health
affairs and vice dean for research at the U of L School of Medicine.

   Prough was among those who spoke yesterday morning as U of L and Norton began
a series of events to celebrate the opening.

   THE CELEBRATION took place on the first anniversary of an announcement that U
of L had received an $8.5 million grant - the largest in the school's history -
from the National Institutes of Health to help launch the center.

   The research team has received more than $12 million in national funding,
said Dr. Christopher B. Shields, the center's clinical director and chairman of
the Department of Neurological Surgery at the U of L School of Medicine.

   Money for the research staff also has come from Norton and the state, with
four of six principal investigators at the center having received money from the
state's "Bucks for Brains'' and "Jump Start'' programs.

   WHITTEMORE, A nationally renowned researcher, was recruited from the
University of Miami in 1998 through Bucks for Brains, which matches private
donations with state money to encourage excellence at the state's public
universities.

   Shields said Whittemore's contacts may help hasten the center's access to
stem-cell lines recently approved by President Bush for publicly funded
research.

   Though Bush's decision was narrowly focused - authorizing research only with
existing stem-cell lines - "it certainly was much better than it might have
been,'' Shields said. "It's like getting half a glass instead of an empty glass.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1574 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 26, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE TAKES UP FIGHT AGAINST DISEASES

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Scientists at the new $14 million Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute
will study vaccines and processes of infection

   The new $14 million Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute in Hillsboro has put
Oregon Health & Science University scientists in the forefront of the fight
against some of the world's most serious diseases.

   The institute's experts in immunology and virology are working to understand
vaccines and the processes of infectious diseases, targeting such diseases as
HIV/AIDS, hepatitis C, tuberculosis and herpes viruses.

   The institute is one of only three major biotechnology centers in the country
solely dedicated to vaccine development and genomics, which is the study of the
set of hereditary factors of an organism, director Jay Nelson said. The others
are at Emory University in Atlanta and the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md.

   "Our goal is to bring immunologists together to work with virologists to
develop new approaches to vaccine development, using a variety of animal and
cell systems," Nelson said.

   The 44,000-square-foot institute, with a staff of 60, houses seven research
laboratories and four highly secure biosafety rooms for the study of infectious
diseases. The institute was to be dedicated Friday, but the event was canceled
because of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks and the possibility that scientists
from around the world would be unable to attend. The dedication has been
rescheduled for next fall.

   Nelson said the institute, which is near the Oregon Regional Primate Research
Center on OHSU's West Campus, will use primates as models for diseases that
cannot be studied by other research methods.

   The institute also houses the OHSU Gene Microarray Shared Resource Facility.
The $500,000 microarray can screen thousands of genes simultaneously by printing
vast amounts of genetic information on small glass chips. The technique allows
researchers to rapidly analyze genetic profiles for a variety of diseases and
guides them in their search for new therapies.

   The institute has not begun recruiting scientists for gene therapy work, but
plans call for expanding to include such research, Nelson said.

   In vaccine development, researchers look for ways to trigger an effective
immune response against a disease-causing agent. In gene therapy, the opposite
is true: The idea is to trick the immune system into ignoring a normal gene that
is designed to repair or replace a defective gene in a seriously ill patient.

   The challenge of gene therapy is to develop methods to deliver a normal gene
-- via a virus that has been made harmless in the laboratory, for example -- to
a specific cell responsible for a hereditary disease and then to ensure that the
cell acts on the normal gene's instructions.

   Although genes are identical in every cell of an organism, different cell
types can only "read" the instructions of certain genes. A muscle cell, for
example, works differently from a skin or liver cell.

   In the past two years, Nelson has recruited top scientists from renowned
private and public research centers, including the Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, the R. W. Johnson Pharmaceutical Research Institute, the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and the Scripps Research
Institute.

   You can reach Oz Hopkins Koglin at 503-221-8376 or by e-mail at
ozkoglin@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                             1575 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                         September 26, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Gateway to drop chip supplier

   San Diego-based Gateway said yesterday it will drop Advanced Micro Devices as
a chip supplier within two months and buy all of its microprocessors from Intel
Corp. The personal computer maker said it wants to lower costs by simplifying
its manufacturing process and is seeking to improve product reliability.
Gateway has cut jobs and pulled out of international markets amid a slowdown in
personal-computer sales.

   Court rejects Biosite request

   Biosite Inc. said yesterday that a U.S. District Court rejected its request
for a preliminary injunction to bar Berkeley-based Xoma from terminating
licensing agreements.  The San Diego biotechnology company said it will prepare
for a trial to resolve the licensing and patent dispute.  Xoma alleged in May
that Biosite had breached a licensing agreement.  Biosite countered in June with
an action against Xoma seeking to halt termination of the license agreements.

   Cubic gets 2nd Shanghai order

   San Diego-based Cubic Corp. said its transportation systems business received
a second order to provide transit fare ticketing gates to Shanghai Metro.  The
company said the transit authority in Shanghai has experienced increased
ridership since Cubic completed installation of the original automated fare
collection system last year.  The order increases Cubic sales to Shanghai Metro
to more than $31 million.

   GenStar gets go-ahead on tests

   GenStar Therapeutics said yesterday that federal regulators will allow the
company to resume testing of its experimental gene therapy in humans.  Clinical
testing of the San Diego gene-therapy company's hemophilia A treatment, called
MAX-AD, was halted in June after a patient suffered adverse reactions.  GenStar
said it has developed a new dosage regime that is lower than the original
patient study.

   Callaway exec gets added duties

   Callaway Golf Co. of Carlsbad expanded the responsibilities of Ian Rowden,
executive vice president of marketing, to include a newly created function of
product management as part of an expanded marketing focus at Callaway Golf.
Rowden will oversee four product categories: drivers and woods; irons, wedges,
and putters; licensing and accessories; and golf balls.  Geoff Goodman, Matt
Christiansen and John Melican also were appointed to new positions under Rowden.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Fed expected to cut rates

   Economists widely expect the Federal Reserve to reduce U.S. interest rates
for the ninth time this year when it meets in a week, but they disagree over how
deeply the Fed will cut to prop up the ailing economy.  Some analysts said
yesterday a half-percentage-point cut is needed to boost an economy that most
economists believe tipped into a recession following the attacks two weeks ago
in New York and Washington.  But others said a less aggressive reduction of a
quarter percentage point was more appropriate since the Fed has already cut
interest rates eight times this year, most recently on Sept. 17.

   Poverty rate driven down

   The U.S. poverty rate dipped last year to its lowest level in over a
quarter-century, driven down by a healthy economy that helped a broad range of
workers.  Incomes leveled off after years of increase.  Overall, many analysts
said the Census Bureau report released yesterday offered a positive picture of
the American economy -- at least before the financial unrest from the terrorist
attacks. 2000 could prove to be the high-water mark of the economic expansion
that began in the early 1990s, said Tim Smeeding, professor of economics and
public policy at Syracuse University.  "The economy continued to do good things
in 2000," Smeeding said.  Speaking of the poverty rate, he added,
"Unfortunately, I'm afraid that what goes down will come back up, particularly
after" the terror attacks.

   Nordstrom to cut jobs, hours

   Facing weaker sales made worse by the economic impact of the terrorist
attacks two weeks ago, Nordstrom said it will cut jobs across the company and
reduce hours for some sales employees at its clothing stores.


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2001


                             1576 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 26, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Gateway to drop chip supplier San Diego-based
Gateway said yesterday it will drop Advanced Micro Devices as a chip supplier
within two months and buy all of its microprocessors from Intel Corp. The
personal computer maker said it wants to lower costs by simplifying its
manufacturing process and is seeking to improve product reliability.

   Gateway has cut jobs and pulled out of international markets amid a slowdown
in personal-computer sales. Court rejects Biosite request Biosite Inc. said
yesterday that a U.S. District Court rejected its request for a preliminary
injunction to bar Berkeley-based Xoma from terminating licensing agreements.

   The San Diego biotechnology company said it will prepare for a trial to
resolve the licensing and patent dispute.

   Xoma alleged in May that Biosite had breached a licensing agreement.

   Biosite countered in June with an action against Xoma seeking to halt
termination of the license agreements. Cubic gets 2nd Shanghai order San
Diego-based Cubic Corp. said its transportation systems business received a
second order to provide transit fare ticketing gates to Shanghai Metro.

   The company said the transit authority in Shanghai has experienced increased
ridership since Cubic completed installation of the original automated fare
collection system last year.

   The order increases Cubic sales to Shanghai Metro to more than $31 million.
GenStar gets go-ahead on tests GenStar Therapeutics said yesterday that federal
regulators will allow the company to resume testing of its experimental gene
therapy in humans. Clinical testing of the San Diego gene-therapy company's
hemophilia A treatment, called MAX-AD, was halted in June after a patient
suffered adverse reactions.

   GenStar said it has developed a new dosage regime that is lower than the
original patient study. Callaway exec gets added duties Callaway Golf Co. of
Carlsbad expanded the responsibilities of Ian Rowden, executive vice president
of marketing, to include a newly created function of product management as part
of an expanded marketing focus at Callaway Golf. Rowden will oversee four
product categories: drivers and woods; irons, wedges, and putters; licensing and
accessories; and golf balls. Geoff Goodman, Matt Christiansen and John Melican
also were appointed to new positions under Rowden. WORLD AND NATION Fed expected
to cut rates Economists widely expect the Federal Reserve to reduce U.S.
interest rates for the ninth time this year when it meets in a week, but they
disagree over how deeply the Fed will cut to prop up the ailing economy.

   Some analysts said yesterday a half-percentage-point cut is needed to boost
an economy that most economists believe tipped into a recession following the
attacks two weeks ago in New York and Washington.

   But others said a less aggressive reduction of a quarter percentage point was
more appropriate since the Fed has already cut interest rates eight times this
year, most recently on Sept. 17. Poverty rate driven down The U.S. poverty rate
dipped last year to its lowest level in over a quarter-century, driven down by a
healthy economy that helped a broad range of workers.

   Incomes leveled off after years of increase.

   Overall, many analysts said the Census Bureau report released yesterday
offered a positive picture of the American economy -- at least before the
financial unrest from the terrorist attacks. 2000 could prove to be the
high-water mark of the economic expansion that began in the early 1990s, said
Tim Smeeding, professor of economics and public policy at Syracuse University.
"The economy continued to do good things in 2000," Smeeding said.

   Speaking of the poverty rate, he added, "Unfortunately, I'm afraid that what
goes down will come back up, particularly after" the terror attacks. Nordstrom
to cut jobs, hours Facing weaker sales made worse by the economic impact of the
terrorist attacks two weeks ago, Nordstrom said it will cut jobs across the
company and reduce hours for some sales employees at its clothing stores.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1577 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 25, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: 2nd Alzheimer's patient has gene surgery at UCSD

BYLINE: Diane Bell

BODY:
 A second patient has undergone gene-therapy surgery at UCSD to treat
Alzheimer's disease.  Neurologist Dr. Mark Tuszynski and neurosurgeon Dr. Hoi
Sang "Ben" U performed the delicate operation at Thornton Hospital earlier this
month, five months after the headline-making first surgery.  The procedure uses
a patient's own cells to generate a nerve-growth factor that is injected into
the brain.

   The new patient, who asked that her name not be made public, is a 70-year-old
San Diego woman who was diagnosed four years ago with Alzheimer's. She left the
hospital Sept. 8, two days after the operation.  Her husband reports that she is
doing well and hopes to go back to her work as an artist as soon as possible.

   Two more patients will undergo the treatment in December, and four more by
June. In this phase, the study is evaluating the procedure's safety.

   Tuszynski says there have been no major adverse events to date with the first
patient, an Oregon woman.  But beyond that, the surgeons aren't saying more as
they monitor the study's results.

   A new start

   A new bank quietly opened its doors in La Jolla last Monday.  Regents Bank, a
privately financed community bank, will cater to San Diego businesses and
individuals.  Several prominent local businessmen are among its organizing
directors, including William Nelson (a founder of the former Scripps Bank), Pat
Shea, Roger Joseph, Bill Roper Jr., Ron Spogli, board chairman Tom Young (of
Vancouver and San Diego) and Dan Yates.  Yates is the new bank's president and
CEO. It is located in the same complex at 875 Prospect St. that houses Roppongi
restaurant.

   San Diegans Ink

   Not many men get Miss America honors.  But at last week's pageant in Atlantic
City, San Diegan Bob Arnhym did.  He has worked with the event for 40 years and
has headed the Miss California contest for the past 16 years.  Arnhym was voted
by his peers to be the sixth inductee into the Miss America Academy of Honor . .
. Bill Wolf can usually be found managing La Jolla's Manhattan Restaurant.  This
morning, however, he and his wife, Norma, and her three daughters will be vying
for $20,000 on "Family Feud" airing between 10 and 11 a.m. on Channel 6 . . .
After accepting a peace award from the Institute of the Americas on Friday,
former Mexico president Ernesto Zedillo stayed in town to watch Saturday's
Padres game with his four sons.

   Tale of our jail

   Retired San Diego judges Jack Levitt and Earl J. Cantos will officiate over
tomorrow's dedication of an iron jail cell at the replica of the first San Diego
Courthouse in Old Town. It won't be the original 7,000-pound iron cage ordered
by the county Board of Supervisors in 1860 after "Judge" Roy Bean escaped by
digging his way to freedom from the courthouse's cobblestone jail.  Bean,
arrested for shooting a man, was not recaptured.  The courthouse's original
six-foot by nine-foot iron cell was moved to Coronado's Tent City in 1906, then
to the San Ysidro border in 1938 and now is the property of the Ramona
Historical Society.  The stand-in cell being dedicated tomorrow dates to the
1850s. The noon ceremony on San Diego Avenue will include the burial of a time
capsule highlighting S.D.'s law enforcement history.

   Diane Bell's column appears Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays.  Fax items to
(619) 293-2443; call (619) 293-1518; or e-mail to diane.bell@uniontrib.com.


LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2001


                             1578 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 25, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: 2nd Alzheimer's patient has gene surgery at UCSD

BYLINE: Diane Bell

BODY:

   A second patient has undergone gene-therapy surgery at UCSD to treat
Alzheimer's disease.

   Neurologist Dr. Mark Tuszynski and neurosurgeon Dr. Hoi Sang "Ben" U
performed the delicate operation at Thornton Hospital earlier this month, five
months after the headline-making first surgery. The procedure uses a patient's
own cells to generate a nerve-growth factor that is injected into the brain. The
new patient, who asked that her name not be made public, is a 70-year-old San
Diego woman who was diagnosed four years ago with Alzheimer's. She left the
hospital Sept. 8, two days after the operation. Her husband reports that she is
doing well and hopes to go back to her work as an artist as soon as possible.
Two more patients will undergo the treatment in December, and four more by June.
In this phase, the study is evaluating the procedure's safety. Tuszynski says
there have been no major adverse events to date with the first patient, an
Oregon woman.

   But beyond that, the surgeons aren't saying more as they monitor the study's
results. A new start A new bank quietly opened its doors in La Jolla last
Monday.

   Regents Bank, a privately financed community bank, will cater to San Diego
businesses and individuals.

   Several prominent local businessmen are among its organizing directors,
including William Nelson (a founder of the former Scripps Bank), Pat Shea, Roger
Joseph, Bill Roper Jr., Ron Spogli, board chairman Tom Young (of Vancouver and
San Diego) and Dan Yates.

   Yates is the new bank's president and CEO. It is located in the same complex
at 875 Prospect St. that houses Roppongi restaurant. San Diegans Ink Not many
men get Miss America honors.

   But at last week's pageant in Atlantic City, San Diegan Bob Arnhym did.

   He has worked with the event for 40 years and has headed the Miss California
contest for the past 16 years. Arnhym was voted by his peers to be the sixth
inductee into the Miss America Academy of Honor . . . Bill Wolf can usually be
found managing La Jolla's Manhattan Restaurant.

   This morning, however, he and his wife, Norma, and her three daughters will
be vying for $20,000 on "Family Feud" airing between 10 and 11 a.m. on Channel 6
. . . After accepting a peace award from the Institute of the Americas on
Friday, former Mexico president Ernesto Zedillo stayed in town to watch
Saturday's Padres game with his four sons. Tale of our jail Retired San Diego
judges Jack Levitt and Earl J. Cantos will officiate over tomorrow's dedication
of an iron jail cell at the replica of the first San Diego Courthouse in Old
Town. It won't be the original 7,000-pound iron cage ordered by the county Board
of Supervisors in 1860 after "Judge" Roy Bean escaped by digging his way to
freedom from the courthouse's cobblestone jail.

   Bean, arrested for shooting a man, was not recaptured. The courthouse's
original six-foot by nine-foot iron cell was moved to Coronado's Tent City in
1906, then to the San Ysidro border in 1938 and now is the property of the
Ramona Historical Society.

   The stand-in cell being dedicated tomorrow dates to the 1850s. The noon
ceremony on San Diego Avenue will include the burial of a time capsule
highlighting S.D.'s law enforcement history. Diane Bell's column appears
Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays.

   Fax items to (619) 293-2443; call (619) 293-1518; or e-mail to
diane.bell@uniontrib.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1579 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           September 24, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Metro Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 152 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
IN BRIEF;
Gene Therapy Shows Promise for Alcoholism

BODY:

   A lack of specific receptors in the brain for a chemical normally associated
with pleasure may leave people vulnerable to alcoholism, according to
researchers at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. Potentially, that lack could
be addressed by gene therapy, the team reported in the September Journal of
Neurochemistry.

   Dr. Panayotis K. Thanos and his colleagues studied a strain of rats that are
deficient in the D2 dopamine receptor in the brain, which, as part of the
brain's "reward system," plays a key role in mood and motivation. The rats were
found to be particularly susceptible to alcoholism, routinely choosing alcohol
over water. But when the researchers used gene therapy to produce additional
copies of the receptor in the animals' brains, the rats' drinking declined
significantly. "There was a remarkable drop in alcohol preference," Thanos said.

   *

   Compiled by Times medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2001


                             1580 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 19, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 994 words

HEADLINE: HELPING THE BRAIN STRIKE BACK AT A STROKE

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Summary: Oregon scientists are joining in research that could lead to drugs
supporting the brain's natural ways to block the effects of stroke

   Dr. Roger P. Simon's theories about the stroke-affected brain's ability to
fend for itself appear to be about to pay off.

   Simon, who heads the Robert S. Dow Neurobiology Laboratories at Legacy Health
System, reasoned that because strokes have afflicted humans for millions of
years, the brain may have evolved a strategy for dealing with this life-or-death
event.

   When he tested his theory, Simon discovered that the brain fights back by
making proteins that protect the brain. "The brain, when it gets itself in a
crunch situation, doesn't sit there like a bowl of jelly," he said. "It does
something."

   In studies on rats, Simon found that during a stroke the brain has few
options. "But what the brain can do," he said, "is go back and search through
its genome -- all of its genes -- and find in its memory what genes could be
turned on or off and which will be helpful in this particular situation."

   Genes are responsible for the production of proteins, the molecules that the
body uses to do its work. "So that is the way the brain gets its deck of cards,"
Simon said. "It looks through those cards and finds its 'ace' it wants to play
in this situation. The 'aces' are genes."

   But people continue to have strokes because the brain can't act fast enough
or generate enough neuro-protection to stop a stroke on its own.

   The long-term goal of Simon's research is to detect and understand the
neuro-protective proteins the brain turns on and off, and to use that
information to design drugs that block a stroke's harmful effects, he said. The
Legacy Health System research group has identified more than a dozen genes
active during a stroke.

   The group also was the first to demonstrate, in a laboratory experiment on
rats, that a brain deprived of adequate blood flow would later have a small
stroke. This phenomenon has been confirmed recently in humans. It is now known
that transient ischemic attacks, referred to as small strokes, can reduce the
severity of any future stroke. Simon said his work is evidence that the group's
experiments with rats or mice will be directly applicable to humans.

   Simon, 58, is an internationally recognized stroke researcher. Most recently
he has studied the cellular and molecular events responsible for the brain's
neuro-protective response against stroke. Simon moved to the Dow Neurobiology
Laboratories about two years ago from the University of Pittsburgh. In the past
five years, his work has been supported by $4 million from the National
Institutes of Health.

   He is continuing that work in collaboration with scientists at the Oregon
Health & Science University immunology department, at Oregon State University
and at the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute on the OHSU West Campus in
Hillsboro.

   "I think he is headed towards identification of new ways to deal with stroke
damage," said Katherine Woodbury-Harris, the National Institutes of Health
scientific review administrator.

   Strokes occur when blood flow to the brain is blocked. The lack of nutrients
quickly causes brain cells to begin to die. As a result, strokes can cause such
long-term disabilities as vision and sensory loss, problems with walking and
talking and difficulty thinking clearly.

   Stroke is the third-leading cause of death in the United States, behind heart
disease and cancer. The American Stroke Association estimates that 600,000
Americans will have strokes this year and that 160,000 stroke victims will die.

   Mary Stenzel-Poore, an OHSU immunologist who was new to stroke research,
joined forces with Simon because they were both interested in how the immune
system influences injury after a stroke. The collaboration is particularly
beneficial because Stenzel-Poore's laboratory had not worked on the
neuro-protective issues and Simon had not worked on immunology, she said.

   "From a basic research approach, he has really developed the model of ways to
look at neuro-protective mechanisms, and there really are just a couple of labs
internationally working from this angle," Stenzel-Poore said.

   Current clot buster limited

   The current emergency treatment for stroke is TPA, a drug that rapidly
dissolves blood clots in arteries or capillaries. Enthusiasm for the clot buster
has waned, however, because it must be administered within the first three hours
of a stroke, and many patients fail to seek care within that critical time. The
clot buster also might not be the answer if a blood clot dissolves before the
patient reaches the hospital, Simon said.

   Other drug therapies need to be developed, Simon said. "The point is, you
want to attack this problem at every avenue you've got. In truth, what will
happen eventually will be some cocktail approach where everything that works you
will throw at it, which is something the chemotherapy people have used in cancer
forever."

   A drug that mimics the brain's neuro-protective strategy also would benefit
patients who suffer any injury that impairs blood flow to the brain, he said.

   About 20 years ago, Simon and colleagues in London were the first to
demonstrate that a lack of blood to the brain initiates a biochemical cascade of
events, like falling dominoes, and that interrupting this chain of events stops
cell damage.

   Based on that work, the pharmaceutical industry designed several drugs to
stop the brain-damaging events, but none of the compounds has proved effective
in clinical trials, Simon said.

   Simon said there are two ways of approaching stroke therapy: Use a drug to
protect the brain, or pursue his neuro-protective strategy, by using the brain's
own protective mechanism to develop drugs to stop stroke damage.

   "I think that neuro-protection for the brain is now within reach," Simon
said.

   You can reach Oz Hopkins Koglin at 503-221-8376 or by e-mail at
ozkoglin@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Color photo by BRENT WOJAHN/The Oregonian; Sidebar/WARNING SIGNS;
SOURCE: American Stroke Association, a division of the American Heart
Association; U.S. Agency for Health Care Policy and Research.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2001


                             1581 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2001 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                           September 18, 2001 Tuesday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: METRO WEST; Pg. W1

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF WEST

BODY:

   Annual festival features 25 Hoosier marching bands

   Plainfield

   -- Plainfield High School's Red Pride Marching Band and Band Boosters will
play host Saturday to the 23rd annual Marching Band Festival.

   Twenty-five Hoosier bands are scheduled to perform from 2: 47 p.m. to 10: 01
p.m.

   Plainfield will give an exhibition performance at 8:56 p.m.

   Avon will compete at 8:30 p.m., Brownsburg at 7:38 p.m. and Tri-West at 3:52
p.m.

   Admission will be $4 per person at the football stadium, 709 Stafford Road.
The festival is the Booster Club's largest fund-raiser.

   For more information, call 1-317-839- 8160 .

   Proceeds from walk/run will go to disease research

   Camby

   -- A benefit walk/run will be Sept. 29 to benefit research into Late
Infantile Batten disease, a degenerative neurological disease for which there is
no cure.

   Nathan Milton, 7, and his brother P.J., 4, of Greenwood, have the disease.
Gene therapy is thought to be effective against Late Infantile Batten disease,
but clinical trials are needed. Research costs through Cornell University run
$100,000 per month.

   The four-mile run and walk are open to all ages and abilities. The course is
mostly flat to slightly rolling.

   Preregistration is due by Saturday. Entry fees are $20 with a T-shirt and $16
without.

   Numbers and shirts will not be mailed. They must be picked up before 8 a.m.
race day at the pavilion across from The Links at Heartland Crossing, 6701 S.
Heartland Boulevard, Camby.

   For more information, registration or to make a donation, visit the Web site:
www.nathansbattle.com/

   Donations also may be made by mail to: Nathan's Battle Foundation, 459 S.
Ind. 135, Greenwood, Ind. 46124.

   For more information, call 1-317-884- 4001 .

   Members of show choir will be in fashion show

   Plainfield

   -- Members of Plainfield High School's show choir, Belles et Beaux, will be
models in a fashion show Sept. 29.

   Tickets will be $7 for adults and $3 for students at the door at 2 p.m. at
the high school, 709 Stafford Road. Tickets are available by calling 1-317-839-
7711 .

   Choir members will model clothing from Fashion Bug. The event will include
hors d'oeuvres and door prizes.

   Proceeds will fund choir activities.

   Free library program offers tips on creating rOsumOs

   Brownsburg

   -- A free program on rOsumOs will be Sept. 25 at Brownsburg Public Library.

   Participants will create and enhance rOsumOs at 6:30 p.m. at the library, 450
S. Jefferson St.

   Preregistration is required. For more information, call 1-317-852-3167 Ext.
17 .

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2009


                             1582 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 16, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine Desk; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 4052 words

HEADLINE: Midnight's Children

BYLINE:  By Lawrence Osborne;  Lawrence Osborne, a frequent contributor to The
New York Times Magazine, last wrote about hyperstartle syndrome in Borneo.

BODY:

   Night has fallen at last. The moths have come out, the cicadas are starting
to hum -- and the air is filled with the jittery laughter of children. The kids
who have gathered here are febrile with anticipation: they have been waiting all
day for the sun to set, waiting for the moment when they can play together in
the dark. Twilight shadows cause these scattering figures to blur as they
assemble around a trampoline. A 9-year-old girl named Katie Mahar clambers onto
the taut fabric; dimly illuminated by crisscrossing shadows, she rises and falls
in the air, looking like an antic ghost. She wears a T-shirt with a curious
inscription: "I'm an X.P. star! We've got the sun on the run!" All around Katie,
beams of flashlights swivel and cross. "Look," she shouts at her companions,
"I'm going to do a double somersault with my eyes shut!"

        Beside the trampoline stands a slender girl named Parabhti Panthi. Older
than the others, she is swathed in what looks like a beekeeper's protective gear
-- a khaki baseball cap adorned with netting. Her skin is deeply mottled and
patched; her eyes are covered by sunglasses even though it is getting so dark
that you can barely see them. "Go higher!" she shouts to Katie.

    Katie goes higher, her arms flapping. "Can't see where I'm going," she
yells. "It's too dark."

   "Just go higher anyway," another child says.

   Other children join Katie on the trampoline; soon there are several figures
tumbling in and out of the flashlight beams, their eyes shining with a feline
glow. "Higher, higher," everyone yells. Nearby, a cluster of kids and stooped
adults are carefully blowing bubbles. The resulting orbs float almost invisibly
into the soft night air.

   This unlikely nocturnal spree is taking place in an equally unlikely place --
the grounds of West Point, in New York. Katie and her friends, it turns out, are
guests at Camp Sundown, a charitable organization based in nearby Poughkeepsie.
Run by Katie's parents, Dan and Caren Mahar, the summer camp brings together
dozens of kids who suffer from xeroderma pigmentosum, a rare genetic disorder
that renders sufferers unable to tolerate ultraviolet light. Tonight, Katie's
parents have taken their motley group of campers over to West Point to wander
around the deserted campus. It may seem strange to outsiders, but for kids like
Katie, wandering around in the dark is an everyday event.

   "I love it at night," she chirps. "I love the way it smells. Night is cool."

   X.P., as the disease is known, is the rarest and most severe form of
light-sensitivity disorder, affecting only one in a million people. (It is
apparently more common in Hollywood: witness the recent Nicole Kidman film "The
Others.") The disease is typically characterized by extraordinarily dry skin;
indeed, "xeroderma" is Latin for "dry skin," and "pigmentosum" refers to skin
colorations that often affect sufferers.

   The consequences of having X.P. can be both startling and lethal. Exposure to
even a few minutes of sunlight can cause agonizing blisters. Deadly skin cancers
develop with frightening ease: X.P. sufferers are 1,000 times as likely to
develop skin cancers as other people. Forced to shun the sun, these "children of
the moon" live topsy-turvy lives utterly quarantined from what others take for
granted: daylight.

   On average, a person can withstand about 60 years of sun exposure before skin
cancers develop. The very same tumors can appear in X.P. patients by the age of
10. Unless sufferers stay away from even the tiniest doses of ultraviolet light,
multiple skin cancers will erupt. Eyes are equally vulnerable; even small
amounts of ultraviolet light can damage their corneas. Many sufferers eventually
go blind.

   When the disorder is undiagnosed, sufferers rarely live beyond their teenage
years. X.P. patients who make it to their 30's typically have undergone 40 or
more operations to remove cancerous tumors. Fresh tumors have to be removed
every month or so -- often with a scalpel. Considering that squamous-cell
cancers appear most commonly on the face and neck, the results can be
cosmetically devastating.

   "Xeroderma patients simply cannot repair their skin cells when UV light
destroys them," explains Dr. Kenneth Kraemer, a research dermatologist at the
National Cancer Institute. "X.P. is a kind of accelerated version of everyone's
potential skin cancer." Although research into the complex mechanisms of DNA
repair is progressing, Kraemer says, scientists do not yet have a cure for X.P.

   Camp Sundown provides X.P. children with a different kind of relief. There,
they participate in everything from moonlight swims to midnight mushroom
hunting. More important, they get to experience the pleasure of everyday
socializing (and flirting) with peers. Kids come from around the world to attend
the Mahars' camp; Parabhti, for example, is from Nepal, where, she says, she
spends most of her time knitting.

   Twelve-year-old Collin Cassinat, a small, reedy boy with a rash of unusually
dark freckles down the sides of his face and neck, comes from a less far-flung
place: Arizona. Around 1 a.m., Collin and some other campers venture over to
West Point's military museum and begin wandering around its darkened halls.

   "Cool," he mutters at the sight of archived machine guns. "My brother's in
the Army, you know. But even he's never run around West Point in the middle of
the night!"

   A tiny Amish girl whose head is covered in a canvas bonnet flits by. She is
followed by another child with a pale red rash spread over his cheeks. The next
kid to wander over is Heather Harbaugh, a boisterous 16-year-old from
Pennsylvania who has been coming to Camp Sundown for three years. Remarkably,
her pale skin remains unblemished.

   "The worst thing about home is that there's nothing to do at night," she
says, pouting. "I mean, nothing." She pauses. "I want to be a homicide detective
in a big city when I'm older. I don't care if it's a violent city, as long as it
has a night life."

   At about 4 a.m., Heather and the other campers leave West Point and head over
to the local Best Western. No one is tired yet, however, so everyone hangs out
in the hotel's windowless basement ballroom. The ballroom is equipped with
low-wattage incandescent lights, which won't burn the children's skin or singe
their eyes.

   "I'm the only person with X.P. in North Carolina," explains a lively
14-year-old girl named Alixe Johnson. "Coming here is like returning to
normality. At home, I'm under constant surveillance because my mom is terrified
I'll do something silly . . . like go out into the daylight." Alixe hates being
an outsider; she refuses to wear the scarves and other coverup garments that the
younger kids wear. "The thing is, what am I going to do when I need to drive a
car?" she says. "You can't exist in North Carolina without a car."

   Although automobile windows can be tinted to screen out UV rays, how does an
X.P. sufferer safely get to and from a car? Even just a few minutes of exposure
can cause a third-degree burn. It's a vexing problem, one that most of us never
have to think about. Alixe shrugs gloomily. "I wonder if you can even drive in
this country if you have X.P.," she says. The thought seems to bother her more
than the excisions of the four precancerous lesions she has already endured.
(Overhearing this, Collin suddenly pipes up: "Four? I've had 30!")

   As some of the younger kids head upstairs to bed, the teenage campers stay
behind in the deserted ballroom to play guitars and sing Simon and Garfunkel
songs. Sitting together on the floor, boys nudge innocently against girls.
Meanwhile, first light begins to creep ominously into the hotel foyer upstairs.
Having spent the entire night running skittishly up and down stairs, huddling in
giggling groups and exchanging gossip, the X.P. kids appear exactly like any
others, except that they are underground and are counting the critical minutes
to daybreak. For them, the morning sun is something to dread.

   "You can't let dawn sneak up on you," one quips a little sadly.

   "You know, there's one thing that's a drag about having X.P.," Heather drawls
sleepily.

   "What's that?" I say.

   "I'd really love to know what it's like to have a tan."

   Katie Mahar lives with her family in a restored 19th-century Colonial
farmhouse set a quarter-mile from the Taconic State Parkway. At first sight, the
house, which rests atop a wooded slope, seems unremarkable. Only as you are
ringing the doorbell do you notice that the windows are tinted as darkly as
those of a Mafia sedan. Inside, you feel as if you are in a twilight world. The
beautiful 1860's interior seems to have never been touched by ordinary daylight.
Through windowpanes covered with a chemical coating that resembles Kodak film, a
visitor can see a dimmed outer world of trees and sky tinged with musty gray.
This is the outside world as Katie sees it. That is, on the rare occasions that
she is allowed to part the curtains and blinds at dusk, peeping out at the day's
last lethal moments of sunlight.

   Katie has two older brothers and an older sister, all of whom are healthy.
But because of the odd hours she must keep, she spends a lot of time playing by
herself. Camp Sundown, alas, takes place only a few weeks each year.
Fortunately, Katie is a self-sufficient child. When I visit her at home one
crisp evening, I find her zipping joyously around her backyard. She will often
stay outside like this for hours, her mother tells me later, long after the
other children in the neighborhood have gone to bed.

   As we tramp around the woods out back, Katie shows me the places she knows by
heart: a birdhouse, a gully, a constellation of trees. "Did you know that
turtles lay their eggs at night?" she asks excitedly. "Oh, yes. There's even a
butterfly that you can only see at night." It is clear that her parents have
taught her such facts in an effort to make her feel less isolated.

   Katie slithers around some trees and places a piece of fungus in my hand.
"Look," she says, holding it up close to me. "It isn't glowing right now, but it
will later."

   To help me find my way around in the dark, Katie gives me a toy key ring that
boasts a built-in laserlike green light. As I stumble behind her, I feel a
little like one of the blundering hysterics in "The Blair Witch Project,"
flashing my puny green beam over clumps of bark and grass, but Katie seems to
have preternatural night vision. It is, after all, her natural element. She is
as much at home in the dark as I am in daylight.

   "Do you miss seeing the sun?" I suddenly ask her. "Don't you ever want to go
outside in the morning?"

   "Nope. What for? I never saw the sun, so I don't miss it." She pauses. "I
only saw it on TV."

   "So you like it better at night?"

   "Oh, yeah," she says, looking up through the trees. "Night is much better
than the day. I like the moon. The moon rules."

   Katie eventually gets bored with the backyard, and we head inside the house,
where we are greeted by her parents.

   "Katie first began to burn when she was a baby," Caren Mahar says. "Since
then, we've had to keep her away from the sun." Katie has teardrop-shaped marks
on her face and forearms from eight third-degree burns she suffered in infancy;
these marks will all eventually develop into tumors, some of them malignant. She
is a pretty child with long ash-brown hair, though the glistening tone of her
skin has much to do with the 45 S.P.F. sunblock that is applied eight times a
day to protect her from indoor UV rays.

   "I remember when Katie got her first solar burn," Dan Mahar recalls. He is a
soft-spoken ex-postal worker who now renovates and sells antique clocks from
home. "She was about 6 weeks old, and we had put her to sleep in the shade of a
tree outside." It was a hot spring day, and the Mahars were painting the
shutters of their old house in Poughkeepsie. Suddenly, Katie began screaming
hysterically. "In less than two minutes, her arms broke out in ferocious
blisters, which we thought at first must be ant bites," Dan tells me. "Each burn
began as a pinprick, then swelled up to the size of a quarter and finally became
a raging blister. You could watch it happening right in front of your eyes, like
time-lapse photography. It was absolutely terrifying." He winces at the memory.

   At first, the Mahars' family doctor told them that it was probably a
reflection burn. "But deep down," Dan says, "I knew it wasn't." Only after being
tested for lupus, then porphyria, leukemia and other diseases did doctors
finally diagnose the disease properly. (Lying dormant in its unwitting carriers,
X.P. must be transmitted by the genes of both parents, which is why it is so
rare.)

   As Katie shows me around her dimly lighted home, she talks about a family
trip the Mahars once took to Paris.

   "Paris?" I say. It's hard to imagine how someone with X.P. could take a
burnless trip to the City of Light.

   "We only went out at night," she explains. "We arrived at the airport at
night, too. We took the Bateaux Mouches down the big river in Paris. It was at
night. We went up the Eiffel Tower at night. Then we walked around Paris all
night long. When it was 5 o'clock in the morning, we had this awesome hot
chocolate in a beautiful cafe. You can walk all around Paris at night because
it's so safe."

   When I think about it, Paris is indeed the perfect city to walk around at
night. I tell her that I used to do the same thing when I lived there.

   "Yes, it's very X.P.-friendly," she agrees. It's the first time I have heard
that epithet applied to the French capital.

   It turns out that Katie's trip to Paris involved more than pleasure. She went
there to be examined by some French researchers who are hoping to develop a gene
therapy for X.P. that will facilitate the repair of defective skin cells. They
are years away from success.

   Katie leads me into the kitchen, where her family has gathered to share some
popcorn. Dan and Caren sit down and chat about their unusual schedule. "From the
late fall until the early spring, Katie goes to a normal school, so she's on our
time, getting up at 7 a.m.," Dan says. Caren owns a device that allows her to
check light levels outside their home; in early September and late May, she
reports, it sometimes gets too bright for Katie to attend school.

   In the summer, Dan adds, "we let her stay up all night."

   Caren and Dan take turns staying up with her. "I don't want her to conform to
a world that wasn't made for her," Caren says.

   It is important for the Mahars that Katie get to know the open-air world,
even if it is the nocturnal version. "She still has to touch plants and flowers
and breathe fresh air," Dan says. "It's part of being human."

   Dan takes out a photo album chronicling past Camp Sundowns. He and Caren have
run the camp for six years. "Look, there's Merve," Dan whispers, pointing to a
teenage girl with a ravaged face. "I wanted to give her a new face. I was
determined to raise the money for it. You can't imagine what it means to a girl
of 13. But all I could get her in the end was that gold locket -- see it? She
was so pleased with it, she began grinning, and her face was so dry that it
cracked open and began to bleed."

   I look at a few pictures of a young boy from Mauritius named Christophe. Two
years ago, the Mahars say, the French government donated a NASA-style space suit
in which Christophe makes his way to the local beach, looking for all the world
like a member of the Space Family Robinson stranded in the Indian Ocean. The
Mahars are a little anxious about Christophe's beachgoing. "Personally, we don't
feel the space suit keeps out every drop of light," Dan says. "But in Mauritius,
it's basically impossible to avoid the sun." He understands, he says, why
Christophe wants to play with all the other kids on the beach. As X.P. children
become teenagers, a yearning not to be excluded becomes a troublesome
psychological burden. And in many cultures, a refusal to get out and participate
in the life of the village is misinterpreted and deeply resented, and X.P.
people become social outcasts. Many are unable to bear the strain.

   When Katie must venture outside in the daytime to shuttle between home and
school, she bundles up in long-sleeve clothes, gloves, a scarf, a hat and a
hooded jacket. Then, atop a pair of sunglasses, comes the piece de resistance --
a special visor designed by her parents. This plastic shield, to which the
Mahars have applied the same dark coating that covers their home's windows,
obscures Katie's entire face. Fortunately, she seems quite happy in her outfit,
which renders her unable to see anything more than fuzzy shapes. (At least she
looks less conspicuous than the silver-sheathed Christophe in his space helmet.)
Fortunately, the brand-new school Katie attends was built with UV-blocking
windows and shades, allowing her to roam relatively freely once she is inside.
Of course, an aide must reapply sunblock to Katie's skin every two hours.

   The Mahars' first efforts to protect Katie were more primitive. "I used to
cover all our windows with black garbage bags to keep out sunlight," Caren says.
"Dan was mortified. What would the neighbors think? Then it slowly dawned on us
that we were going to have to spend the rest of our lives in darkness. We
actually went into mourning for sunlight. Our normal social life came to an
end."

   "Yeah," Dan says, laughing. "You invite the neighbors around for drinks, and
all your windows are covered with Hefty bags. Great. You're the neighborhood
freaks."

   What is intriguing about Katie, however, is that she belongs to perhaps the
first X.P. generation that has a hope of living a normal life span because of
having the condition diagnosed early enough. (The damage suffered during a
sun-exposed childhood is what spells eventual doom for many X.P. sufferers'
fragile cells.)

   "I often wonder how she'll deal with this as she grows into a woman," Caren
says. "Because she was diagnosed early and because of all the technology that
protects her, she'll be less threatened than any X.P. child in history."

   Katie may well survive until adulthood, but what kind of life will it be? The
Mahars understandably worry that Katie will one day have to have multiple tumors
cut out of her face. But they must also wonder how Katie will cope with the
daily strain of living without natural light. Caren, who was a psychology major
in college, is aware of the danger of seasonal affective disorder, the
depression that takes hold of some people during the dark days of winter. "It's
basically just a term for the way people start feeling down as the days get
shorter," she says. "All of us already know exactly how it feels. You can go
into strange moods for a while."

   What's more, living with low-wattage artificial light can provoke odd
emotions. Fortunately, Katie seems resilient on this front. "When it's 3 in the
morning, I'm awake and all my friends are asleep," she says. "I think, Yippee!"

   Despite such proclamations, it is already clear that Katie sometimes becomes
frustrated with her limitations. At about 10 p.m., Dan drives the whole Mahar
family to a local pizzeria on the other side of the Taconic Parkway. Unlike most
restaurants in town, this restaurant has a place to sit -- the bar -- that is
far from fluorescent lighting. But much of the pizzeria is off limits,
particularly a corner with brightly lighted display cases for sodas and ice
cream. Whereas her siblings run freely around the restaurant, Katie remains
strictly confined to the bar, playing by herself with her Buzz Lightyear
spaceship toy.

   As we wait for the pizza to bake, Katie is clearly dying to venture over to
the ice-cream display case, where all the other kids are.

   "Can I go over there?" she asks plaintively.

   "Well," Dan says, "you do understand why you can't, don't you?"

   "Yeah," she says. "I know."

   "There's fluorescent light over there," Dan says patiently.

   Katie stares longingly across the restaurant. "All right, I'll stay here,"
she says a little sadly. Then, like a student who has proudly memorized her
times tables, she perks up. "That's fine. I don't like it so bright."

   What form of adulthood awaits an X.P. child? Caren's question is, for myriad
reasons, hard to answer. For one thing, there are only a few adult sufferers
around. A few hours from the Mahars' home, in Ayer, Mass., Cara van Zandt lives
with her husband, Don Christy, on a secluded road near the old Fort Devens
military base. It is where Cara grew up as a military child. Their house is a
bungalow sitting a few hundred yards from the base's main gate amid deep woods.
Across from their house, somewhat incongruously, stands a Korean restaurant.

   "It's our favorite place," says the 38-year-old Cara as we cross the road in
the middle of the night. "And, well, it's not far to go, is it?"

   Cara is one of the world's oldest people to have survived with X.P. Despite
having X.P. diagnosed when she was a small child, Cara has carved out a small
career as an actor and singer-songwriter. A glamorous woman, she has played
everything from Mary Queen of Scots to the Countess Montholon, and she looks the
part. Rings on her thumbs, willowy frame, hip-hugging leather pants: in the
80's, she even had her own rock band. On the other hand, with her delicately
pale skin and blond curls, she hardly looks like someone who has endured 30
tumor operations. Only in daylight, swathed in cloaks and wide-brimmed hats, her
face smeared with moisturizing cream, does she look a little witchy as she
sweeps around the streets of Ayer. "Oh, I'm a poster girl for the Taliban," she
quips. "They'd love me."

   Over kimchi and Korean barbecue, we discuss her extraordinarily difficult
life.

   "It's been hard," she admits. "At school, the kids tormented me. I hated the
sun because I knew it would kill me. I escaped into music." Constantly burned by
sunlight, Cara went underground, setting up her own radio station in the
basement of the family house. Later, she went into theater because it was one of
the few totally sunless professions. "You're always indoors, at night. It was
the ideal career."

   Although Cara has relatively mild X.P., she is all too easily burned. Last
year, she had yet another tumor removed at Massachusetts General Hospital. And
her eyes are damaged: she suffers from double vision. Cara receives good medical
support now, she says, but it wasn't always that way. "In the early days, the
disbelief factor was incredible," she says. "I was treated like a hypochondriac
all the time."

   Halfway through our meal, Cara begins nervously touching her face. She
squints at the tiny halogen lamps inside the one-room restaurant. "Oh, I'm
beginning to burn," she mutters, gathering up her scarf. "My face is beginning
to swell." It's time to leave. We quickly pay and go. "I actually never come in
here," she admits. "My husband gets takeout and brings it home."

   Back across the road, Cara's house is something of a surprise. Behind tinted
windows and permanently drawn curtains, there are baroque touches: a large
ornate piano, sculptures of gargoyles. But more than anything else there is an
abundance of ancient Egyptian replicas. Cara tries to explain what it is that
attracts her so deeply to the Egyptians: maybe it's that they appear not to have
feared death -- or darkness.

   "I have this notion -- perhaps it's wrong -- that they liked night as much as
I do," she says. "They liked tombs and dark places. They didn't think of them as
gloomy. That's rather like me. I love the night."

   Later, in her dim kitchen, Cara shows me a collection of brimmed hats and
hats soaked in sun protectant, all specially made for sun-sensitive people by a
company called Solumbra. There are even Solumbra shirts, she says, that come in
wild 60's psychedelic colors. ("To cheer us up?" she wonders sardonically.) Her
favorite item, however, is a lovely Indian parasol studded with sequins.

   "Dressed in this stuff, I look pretty kooky for a small town in
Massachusetts," she admits. "But every day, I feel like I'm proving something to
myself. I'm saying: 'Look, I'm still here. I didn't disappear!"'

   As we walk back out onto the pitch-dark drive, Cara asks if I like the trees
all around the house, which are completely invisible to my eyes. I say that I
can't see a thing.

   "What a shame," she says, suddenly sounding like a child. "Did you know
there's even a mushroom here that glows in the dark?"

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: They only come out at night: X.P. sufferers are largely
confined indoors until the sun goes down.; Let no light enter: Caren Mahar and
her daughter Katie, well covered for venturing outdoors during daytime.; Dark
shadows: Windows at the Mahars' home are covered with a filmlike coating to
protect Katie from sunlight. (Antonin Kratochvil)

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2001


                             1583 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                          September 13, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Lisa J. Raines

BODY:

    Lisa J. Raines, 42, told colleagues this week that she had to make a
grueling one-day trip to California. But she assured them she'd be back in
Washington in time for meetings this week on Capitol Hill. She died when her
plane to Los Angeles crashed into the Pentagon.

    Raines, of Great Falls, was senior vice president of government relations at
Genzyme Corp., a major Boston biotechnology company. She had worked in the
Washington area for many years and was respected on Capitol Hill for her
knowledge of health-care issues.

    Current and former Hill aides described her as a key figure in negotiating
legislative compromises in several drug and health-care disputes, including a
1997 bill that modernized the Food and Drug Administration. She championed "fast
track" legislation that permitted the FDA to grant speedier access to some new
drugs.

    For the last year, Raines had worked to get her industry to support the idea
of Medicare drug coverage for the elderly. When she died, she was on her way to
meet company sales representatives handling Renagel, a vital drug for many
kidney dialysis patients.

    Nick Littlefield, a former chief of staff for Sen. Edward M. Kennedy
(D-Mass.), recalled her role as a trusted broker between the biotechnology
industry and factions on Capitol Hill.

    "She would call me every night about how we could get this thing moved
around. Why couldn't I be more flexible, and if I could, she could get [the
industry] to be more flexible," Littlefield said.

    Raines was married to Steve Push, head of investor and media relations for
IGEN International Inc., of Gaithersburg.

    She seemed well aware of the uncertainties in the world. Testifying before
Congress last year in a controversy over gene therapy tests, she said, "I would
like to begin by noting that there is no such thing as absolute safety, either
in clinical trials or in life itself."

    -- Justin Gillis

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2001


                             1584 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              September 12, 2001 Wednesday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS PLEAD FOR MORE STEM CELL FUNDING;
 REPORT SAYS 64 COLONIES APPROVED BY BUSH ARE NOT SUFFICIENT

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Public funding of embryonic stem cell research is the best way to speed new
medical breakthroughs, but it will take work on more than just the 64 colonies
of cells that President George W. Bush is allowing, says a report released
Tuesday by one of the nation's most influential scientific groups.

   Also, researchers should aggressively pursue a related technique known as
therapeutic cloning, in which a person's genes might one day be used to grow his
or her own stem cells for customized therapy, says the report by the National
Academy of Sciences.

   But because embryonic stem cell research raises ethical questions, the
National Institutes of Health should form a special advisory group to oversee
it, much as an institutes committee oversees research into gene therapy, the
report says.

   The National Academy of Sciences is an independent organization chartered by
Congress to advise the government on scientific matters. Thus the report is
expected to generate new debate about Bush's policy on stem cells.

   "Given the promise of stem cell research for treating and perhaps curing a
variety of debilitating diseases, our committee felt strongly that research not
be limited," said Dr. Bert Vogelstein, the report's co-author and an oncology
professor at Johns Hopkins University.

   Stem cells are the basic building blocks of the body's parts. The most
flexible stem cells are derived from days-old embryos, but some stem cells also
can be found in adult tissue. Scientists are trying to learn how to coax the
cells to grow into healthy tissue that might, one day, allow them to repair
ailing hearts, livers, brains and other organs.

   Most existing colonies, or lines, of embryonic stem cells were culled from
embryos left over at infertility clinics that otherwise would have been thrown
away. Because culling the stem cells destroys the embryo, however, the science
has generated ethical questions.

   Last month, Bush ordered that federal money be used only for research on cell
lines that already exist, not on any new ones. Administration officials claim
that 64 lines around the world meet that definition, although many scientists
contend that not all 64 are developed fully enough to be sure even that they are
the kind of stem cells necessary for research.

   Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson contends that many of the
lines in earlier stages will develop over the next several months.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2001


                             1585 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 11, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1939 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Urge Bigger Supply Of Stem Cells

BYLINE:  By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 10

BODY:

   A panel of scientific experts has concluded that new colonies, or lines, of
human embryonic stem cells will be necessary if the science is to fulfill its
potential, a finding that is likely to inflame the political debate over
President Bush's decision to restrict federally financed research to the 64 stem
cell lines that are already known to exist.

        In a 59-page report that examines the state of human stem cell science,
the panel also endorsed cloning technology to create new stem cells that could
be used to treat patients. Mr. Bush strongly opposes human cloning for any
reason, and the House of Representatives voted in July to outlaw any type of
cloning, whether for reproduction or research.

    The report by the National Academy of Sciences, perhaps the nation's most
eminent organization of scientists, is scheduled to be made public on Tuesday
morning at a news conference in Washington. It does not address Mr. Bush's
policy directly, though it strongly supports federal financing for stem cell
research.

   "High quality, publicly funded research is the wellspring of medical
breakthroughs," said the report, a copy of which was provided to The New York
Times by Congressional supporters of stem cell research. It added that federal
financing, and the government oversight that comes with it, "offers the most
efficient and responsible means of fulfilling the promise of stem cells to meet
the need for regenerative medical therapies."

   Though the academy often issues its reports in response to requests from the
government, it embarked on this study on its own earlier this year. The study
was not an exhaustive review of the scientific literature in stem cells, but was
rather intended to examine the prospects for the research and to make policy
recommendations. The report was written and reviewed before Mr. Bush announced
his decision on Aug. 9, and was not revised in response to the president's
decision.

   Stem cells, the human body's master cells, have the ability to grow into any
one of the body's more than 200 cell types. Scientists hope to use them to
create replacement tissues or organs -- for instance, new insulin-producing
cells that could treat diabetes, or new brain cells to treat Parkinson's
disease.

   But Mr. Bush and many others have moral qualms about the research, because
the cells are extracted from human embryos that are destroyed in the process.
Mr. Bush limited public financing to work on existing cell lines where the
embryos had already been destroyed.

   "While there is much that can be learned by using existing stem cell lines if
they are made available for research," the report said, those cell lines might
change over time. It also noted that the lines had been grown in the presence of
animal cells, which could pose risks to human health if those stem cells were
transplanted into people.

   So the report called for new stem cell lines, which it said would be
"important to replace those that become inviable." But the panel did not address
whether the government, or the private sector, should pay for the creation of
those new lines.

   The report is being issued as Congress conducts a series of hearings intended
to explore whether Mr. Bush's plan for stem cell research is sufficient to
support the science. On Wednesday, the chairman of the academy's panel, Dr. Bert
Vogelstein, is to testify in the Senate. This afternoon, Dr. Vogelstein, a
professor of oncology and pathology at Johns Hopkins University, was on Capitol
Hill briefing Democratic and Republican aides.

   "The report clearly endorses strong federal support for stem cell research,"
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said. "The
administration's proposal may well be inadequate to develop the treatments and
cures urgently needed by millions of patients suffering from serious illnesses."

   But "that concern is hypothetical," countered Jay Lefkowitz, who as the
general counsel of the Office of Management and Budget helped Mr. Bush devise
his policy. "The president's policy permits a tremendous amount of basic
research, which is absolutely necessary before we will even know if stem cell
research can live up to its potential."

   Mr. Bush, who had spent months considering whether taxpayer dollars could be
used to pay for research on human embryonic stem cells, struck a compromise. In
the weeks since Mr. Bush's decision, scientists and patients' groups have raised
questions about the quality of the 64 stem cell lines. Last week, Tommy G.
Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, said only about two dozen
of the 64 lines had been fully developed and ready for research.

   While enough to get basic research started, scientists and patients' groups
said the lines would not be enough to turn stem cells into therapies. They said
that the lines were not genetically diverse enough, and might be unsuitable for
use in therapies because in growing the stem cells, scientists had nourished
them with cells from mice. This is a standard laboratory technique, but experts
fear mouse cells could transmit viruses when the stem cells are transplanted
into people. Most experts say it would be best to grow new stem cells that are
not mixed with animal cells.

   The academy's panel agreed. In addressing how stem cells might be used as
therapies, the seven-member panel, which included a neuroscientist, an
immunologist and an ethicist, said the problem of tissue rejection would be a
significant hurdle in the years to come. The panel called cloning an "attractive
option" for overcoming this hurdle.

   In this method, known as therapeutic cloning, scientists would take cells,
typically skin cells, from a patient and insert them into a fertilized egg whose
nucleus had been removed. The result would be an embryo that could, if implanted
into a woman's womb, grow into a baby that would be an exact genetic replica, or
clone, of the patient. But instead of implanting the embryo, scientists would
extract stem cells from it, and use those cells to grow tissue that would be a
perfect genetic match for the patient.

   Cloning, of course, is hugely controversial. Mr. Lefkowitz said Mr. Bush
opposed "any research that requires the creation of human embryos for the
express purpose of destroying them," which, he said, "raises serious ethical and
moral concerns."

   The panel's report said well over 100 million Americans, with conditions as
varied as cardiovascular disease, burns, spinal cord injuries and cancer, could
potentially be helped by research on human embryonic stem cells.

   Headed by Dr. Vogelstein, the panel also included Barry Bloom, a immunologist
and infectious disease specialist at the Harvard School of Public Health; Corey
Goodman, a neuroscientist at the University of California at Berkeley; Patricia
King, a medical ethicist at the Georgetown University Law Center; Guy McKhann, a
neurologist at Johns Hopkins University; and Myron Weisfeldt, a cardiologist who
is chairman of the department of medicine at the Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons.

   The academy is a federally chartered but independent group that studies
technical issues for the government. It established the panel, which began its
work in March, to assess what is known about stem cells, including how they
become different types of tissues, as well as the differences in potential uses
of cells obtained from embryos, fetal tissues or adult tissues.

   The panel convened an all-day workshop in Washington on June 22, and heard
from both proponents and opponents of the research.

   At that workshop, opponents, including some scientists, argued that studying
embryonic stem cells was not necessary because an alternative existed: so-called
adult stem cells, which are derived from blood, bone marrow, fat and other
tissues.

   But the academy report concluded -- as did a recent report by the National
Institutes of Health -- that research on both embryonic and adult stem cells
should be pursued.

   The panel also called for the creation of a national advisory committee of
researchers, ethicists and others to "evaluate the technical merit" of any
proposed human embryonic stem cell studies, and then approve or reject the work.
Mr. Bush has said he will create a committee to advise him, but that committee
would not have such oversight authority.

   Noting that the government created a similar oversight committee to review
gene therapy experiments, the panel said, "The use of embryonic stem cells is
not the first scientific advance to raise public concerns about ethical and
social issues in medical research."

   Scientists have studied embryonic stem cells in mice for 20 years, and the
report said that those studies have been important in demonstrating the
potential of human embryonic stem cells. But while research in mice is
necessary, the report said, it is not sufficient to make advances in treating
human diseases. "Studies with human stem cells are essential," it stated, "to
make progress in the development of treatments for human disease."

CLOSE-UP
The Panel's Recommendations

Following are the seven recommendations of the expert panel established by the
National Academy of Sciences to review stem cell research. The recommendations
are in the executive summary of the panel's report, and the italics are in the
original.

1. Studies with human stem cells are essential to make progress in the
development of treatments for human disease, and this research should continue.

2. Although stem cell research is on the cutting edge of biological science
today, it is still in its infancy. Studies of both embryonic and adult human
stem cells will be required to most efficiently advance the scientific and
therapeutic potential of regenerative medicine. Research on both adult and
embryonic human stem cells should be pursued.

3. While there is much that can be learned using existing stem cell lines if
they are made widely available for research, concerns about changing genetic and
biological properties of these stem cell lines necessitate continued monitoring
as well as the development of new stem cell lines in the future.

4. Human stem cell research that is publicly funded and conducted under
established standards of open scientific exchange, peer-review, and public
oversight offers the most efficient and responsible means to fulfill the promise
of stem cells to meet the need for regenerative medical therapies.

5. If the federal government chooses to fund human stem cell research, proposals
to work on human embryonic stem cells should be required to justify the decision
on scientific grounds and should be strictly scrutinized for compliance with
existing and future federally mandated ethical guidelines.

6. A national advisory group composed of exceptional researchers, ethicists, and
other stakeholders should be established at N.I.H.  the National Institutes of
Health to oversee research on human embryonic stem cells. The group should
include leading experts in the most current scientific knowledge relevant to
stem cell research who can evaluate the technical merit of any proposed research
on human embryonic stem cells. Other roles for the group could include
evaluation of potential risks to research subjects and ensuring compliance with
all legal requirements and ethical standards.

7. In conjunction with research on stem cell biology and the development of
potential stem cell therapies, research on approaches that prevent immune
rejection of stem cells and stem cell-derived tissues should be actively
pursued. These scientific efforts include the use of a number of techniques to
manipulate the genetic makeup of stem cells, including somatic cell nuclear
transfer cloning .

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2001


                             1586 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 6, 2001, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: Cancer questions cloud gene tests

SOURCE: Chronicle Staff Writer

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
An Alameda biotech firm halted, then resumed, a human gene therapy experiment at
Stanford University earlier this year, while government scientists reviewed a
potential link between the virus used in the experiment and liver cancer in
mice.

    The moratorium, which affected Avigen Inc.'s experimental treatment for
hemophilia, came to light after a scientist at Washington University in St.
Louis reported this week that six out of 59 mice in a gene therapy study
developed liver cancer after living to what -- for rodents -- would be well into
middle age.

    "None of us has ever seen an effect like this, nor has any other group in
the world for that matter," said Mark Sands, the Washington University
geneticist who reported the cancer link in the journal Gene Therapy.

    Gene therapy is an experimental treatment in which scientists put a gene
into a supposedly harmless virus. The virus acts like a delivery van, burrowing
into sick cells and offloading some gene the patient lacks. Avigen has been
trying to cure hemophilia by giving patients a gene to help blood clot.

    Both Washington University and Avigen used a microbe called adeno-associated
virus, or AAV as the delivery vehicle. Until now AAV has appeared completely
benign.

    Knowing AAV was being used in human trials, Sands reported his finding in
December to the U.S. Food & Drug Administration. The FDA, which controls human
clinical trials, asked researchers working with Avigen to halt their experiments
earlier this year, said Stanford Professor Mark Kay, who is helping run the
hemophilia study.

    Kay and Sands said leading gene therapy experts met in March to review
Sands' findings and determine whether they were faulty, a fluke or hinted at a
relationship between AAV and liver cancer.

    Kay said gene therapy experts -- and FDA authorities in charge of clinical
trials -- decided there was no evidence AAV caused the cancers.

    Avigen got FDA permission in August to give nine more human hemophiliacs a
dose of AAV containing a blood-clotting gene. Kay said one patient has already
received the new treatment, which is delivered directly to the liver. Eight
volunteers previously got the treatment, but in the rump. All patients are
healthy, he said.

    Sands said other scientists are already examining that which made his mice
unique -- they lived longer than any other mice that had ever received AAV gene
therapy. The question to be answered is whether long-term exposure to AAV
provoked cancer. But even if the answer were yes, Sands said that wouldn't make
AAV bad, because without his gene therapy, none of the mice in his experiment
would have lived to adulthood.

    "I would hate to see an article that damns AAV or completely vindicates AAV
because we just don't know," Sands said.

    Stock in Avigen fell 29 cents to $14.36 yesterday.

    Scientists have been experimenting with gene therapy for more than a decade,
so far without success. The field has been under a cloud since 1999, when a
young volunteer named Jesse Gelsinger died while being given gene therapy using
a delivery vehicle called adenovirus.

    Avigen's experiment with AAV -- a different vehicle -- has been seen as a
safer development. But now Sands' findings have raised questions about AAV's
long-term safety as well.E-mail Tom Abate at tabate@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                             1587 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     September 4, 2001 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 439 words

HEADLINE: DIARY

BYLINE: FROM STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS, THE PLAIN DEALER

BODY:

   PATENTS

   Copernicus patents its DNA compactor

   Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. in Cleveland has received Patent No. 6,281,005
from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office for a device that compacts DNA. "This
patent covers our scale-up and manufacture of compacted DNA and effectively
extends our patent protection for production of gene therapy clinical trial
reagents," said Copernicus President and Chief Executive Robert C. Moen.
Copernicus has developed technologies to create and use a synthetic virus that
delivers drugs, vaccines or DNA to cells. The company is preparing compacted DNA
for a trial in patients with cystic fibrosis in early 2002.

   ACCOUNTING

   Novogradac opens first Ohio office

   A University of Akron graduate has opened the first Ohio office of San
Francisco accounting firm Novogradac & Co. LLP. Daniel J. Smith, who earned his
accounting degree in Akron, has opened a Novogradac office in New Philadelphia.
Smith also launched the firm's Atlanta office, for which he will continue to be
responsible. Novogradac specializes in accounting services for businesses in the
affordable-housing industry.

   LAW FIRMS

   O'Keefe joins board of Hahn Loeser

   F. Ronald O'Keefe was named to the board of directors of the business law
firm Hahn Loeser & Parks. O'Keefe is one of eight board members at the 81-year
old firm, which has offices in Columbus and Cleveland. He joined Hahn Loeser 12
years ago, is a partner and currently the co-chairman of the firm's business
practice area. Before joining the firm, he was general counsel and corporate
secretary at Broadview Financial Corp.

   MANUFACTURING

   Box maker to close Columbus plant

   Citing millions of dollars in losses, SIG Combibloc Inc. will close its
manufacturing plant in Columbus at the end of the year. The Columbus supplier of
aseptic carton filling and packaging systems said the shutdown will affect 107
employees who currently work in the plant and offices at the company's
headquarters. The firm, which is part of SIG Holding Ltd. of Switzerland, will
emphasize sales and customer services and will keep its headquarters in
Columbus.

   AUTOS

   Lordstown workers OK contract

   Workers at a General Motors Corp. fabricating plant have approved new work
rules aimed at making the facility more attractive for a proposed new vehicle. A
total of 79 percent of skilled trades workers and 68 percent of production
workers who voted favored the four-year contract that would become effective
Sept. 14, 2003. If a new car model is awarded to the adjacent assembly plant,
GM's fabrication division has said it would invest $230 million in the
fabrication plant.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1588 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                   September 4, 2001, Tuesday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells made into blood cells;
The development by scientists at the University of Wisconsin could bolster the
positions of both sides of the hotly debated issue.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

   RSEC:             In a major step toward tapping the power of human stem
cells, scientists at the University of Wisconsin-Madison have coaxed cells
derived from embryos into producing the basic components of blood.

        The research, reported Monday in the Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, is the first published demonstration that these primitive master
cells can be programmed to play specialized roles in the body, said Dr. Dan
Kaufman, a hematology fellow at Wisconsin and   lead author of the report.

        The report comes at an important moment in the debate over the cells
that enable an embryo to form all of the tissues that make up the human body,
from toenails to the hair on our heads. The U.S. Senate is scheduled to open
hearings this week into restrictions that President Bush has placed on federal
funding for research on the cells.

        Under pressure from abortion foes and groups that oppose the destruction
of embryos to harvest the cells, Bush limited the funding to studies of 64 cell
lines that were extracted from embryos before Aug. 9, which include the
Wisconsin cells.

    Patient groups and some congressional members say Bush's plan is too
restrictive.

        The Wisconsin study could add steam to both arguments. On one hand, it
bolsters hopes that the cells can provide powerful new therapies not only for
treating blood disorders, but also for diseases such as diabetes, Parkinson's
and Alzheimer's. On the other hand, it demonstrates that scientists can progress
toward that goal within Bush's limits.

        Meanwhile, no stem cell studies have won approval for the federal
funding that is crucial to research at most universities. In Madison, the
scientists used off-campus facilities provided by a private foundation
affiliated with the university. And they received a $20,000 grant from the
University of Wisconsin Comprehensive Cancer Center, which supports a broad
range of research. That grant came through private gifts to the center; no
federal funds were involved, Kaufman said.

   Potential blood source

        The finding significantly advances efforts to develop new sources of
blood for transfusions and other therapies, said Dr. Philip McGlave, a prominent
blood and bone-marrow researcher at the University of Minnesota.

        The Wisconsin team coaxed the stem cells to act like specialized cells,
called hematopoietic precursors, that start the body's blood production. Next,
they prodded those starter cells to form colonies of white blood cells, red
blood cells and platelets, which play a role in blood clotting.

        If stem cells could perform such an act on a large and reliable scale,
"one could have what amounts to a blood factory in a laboratory," McGlave said.

        The quest for such a blood source has become the "holy grail" for
specialists in the field, he said, and University of Minnesota scientists have
sought it "for over a decade."

        The search isn't over, said Kaufman, who grew up in St. Louis Park.

        "This is an early step," he said. "While it has implications for
clinical medicine, we are years away from that."

        Other potential applications include transplants to treat cancers of the
blood and bone marrow, as well as gene therapy for treating inherited diseases,
he said. Hemophilia, for example, is caused by flaws in the genetic code for
blood clotting. Thus, people who inherit it bleed abnormally. The idea is to
introduce stem cells carrying the correct code and let them supplement the
flawed system, Kaufman said.

        Such an application would be "extraordinarily important," said Dr. John
Wagner, an expert in blood and bone-marrow transplants at the University of
Minnesota.

        The Wisconsin researchers called for caution, however, in developing new
therapies from embryonic stem cells.

        "Because these therapies will be entirely novel, serious concerns about
safety and efficacy will need to be addressed before human clinical trials can
be initiated," they said.

        In particular, they expressed concern about "the malignant
transformation of cells that have been cultured for extended periods." Other
scientists have expressed worries that these primitive cells could go wild in
the body, causing cancer or other problems. Before they could be considered
appropriate for use in humans, they would need to be fully "tamed."

        The team included James Thomson, who is credited with first isolating
the stem cells in 1998, using embryos donated by couples undergoing fertility
treatment.

   Next steps

        An important next step will be to show that the cells can take hold and
function in a body, not just in laboratory dishes, said Dr. Catherine
Verfaillie, who directs the University of Minnesota's stem cell research
institute.

        Scientists have similarly programmed embryonic stem cells from mice and
primates to function as sources of blood cells, she said. But it remains to be
seen whether the cells can work where it counts _ in a mouse, a monkey or
eventually a human.

        Another obstacle to be cleared is reliance on mouse cells that were used
in "feeder cultures" to help tease the human cells down the pathway toward
making blood.

        Such cultures have been the key to tapping the potential for an early
embryo to form any of the body's 220 different types of cells and tissues. The
trick is to immerse stem cells from the embryo in cultures that "turn on" the
appropriate genes for the desired function. Put them in a culture that treats
them like blood-forming cells, for example, and they light up genes that make
them start acting like blood-forming cells.

        Verfaillie and others have performed this culturing magic in stem cells
taken from adult bone marrow. But before the Wisconsin research, no one had
reported doing it successfully with embryonic cells. Scientists say that it will
be important to study both adult and embryonic cells in order to see which would
be more effective in actual treatment.

        Cultures developed so far usually have included mouse cells, which could
contain viruses or other microscopic critters that the human body wouldn't
welcome. But scientists are working to develop cultures more acceptable to the
human body, Kaufman said.

        Another goal is to learn exactly what happens inside a cell when it
starts down a specialized pathway or differentiates, he said. The Wisconsin
study is the latest example of scientists' increasing ability to manipulate
cells to get results that would have seemed unbelievable a decade ago. But the
truth is that they still don't know precisely how they trigger change inside a
cell.

       _ Sharon Schmickle is at sschmickle@startribune.com.


LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2001


                             1589 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     September 3, 2001 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 828 words

HEADLINE: Medical find brings healthy reward;
 UM student wins inventors prize for gene research

BYLINE: Michael Stroh

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Until this month, the only invention Dana Perkins could claim was a new
breakfast cereal she had once dreamed up. And all that inspired concoction -
Post Fruit & Fibre mixed with grits - earned her were snickers from colleagues
at the University of Maryland School of Medicine and a thanks-but-no-thanks note
from Post's lawyers.

   Her second stab at innovation, on the other hand, is looking a little more
promising.

   A doctoral student in pharmacology, Perkins has focused her research on a
protein that might hold a key to conquering Alzheimer's and other diseases that
ravage the brain.

   On Sept. 14, she'll be awarded $20,000 from the National Inventors Hall of
Fame in Akron, Ohio, for her work, as part of the organization's annual
competition for collegiate inventors.

   Sponsored by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office and companies including
Hewlett-Packard Co. and Corning Inc., the Collegiate Inventors Competition is
designed to stoke student interest in scientific problem-solving and to deepen
understanding of U.S. intellectual property laws.

   Perkins, 35, is one of seven students to win the prize this year.

   "To be honest, nobody believed I would win anything," she says. "I still
don't believe it."

   As is the case with many discoveries, Perkins stumbled upon hers in a
roundabout way.

   She had set out to help her adviser, university researcher Laure Aurelian,
find a vaccine for herpes, a disease Aurelian has been studying for more than 30
years.

   More than 10 million people in the United States are infected with the herpes
simplex virus, which causes itchy and sometimes painful sores on the face or
genitals, depending on which of the two types of the virus a person contracts.

   Less well-known is the virus' ability to lodge in the brain - and that's
where the trail leading to Perkins' discovery begins.

   In the brain, one type of the herpes virus allows neurons to die, while the
other type prevents it.

   "I said: 'Why is there such a difference between the two viruses? If one
causes such destruction, why is it the other one doesn't?'" Perkins recalls.

   She focused on a protein - known as ICP10PK - produced by the herpes virus.
Although the protein - and the gene that manufactures it - had been known to
researchers for more than two decades, nobody had thought to explore its role in
the brain. In animal experiments, Perkins discovered that the protein was the
substance that determined whether nerve cells infected with the herpes virus
lived or died. In follow-up work, she found that the protein seems to play a
role in learning and memory.

   "Not only will ICP10PK protect neurons from dying, but the ones that are
living can function better," says Perkins. "You get smarter people."

   Since the destruction of brain cells is the hallmark of memory-wasting
diseases such as Alzheimer's, it's possible the protein could lead to a gene
therapy treatment for the disease.

   "Everybody has known for years that (preventing cell death in the brain)
would be a desirable thing, but they didn't have a gene," says Aurelian.

   What makes the discovery more exciting is that Perkins might have solved one
of the other major hurdles in gene therapy: figuring out how to get the gene
only to the cells that need it.

   Again, Perkins turned to herpes for help. In animal experiments with a
nonvirulent form of the virus, she found that the virus readily deposited
ICP10PK in nerve cells.

   Perkins might be surprised she won the national award but her adviser isn't.

   "She has courage ... and perseverance," says Aurelian.

   Born in communist Romania, Perkins had to scrap her way to a master's degree
in biochemistry from the University of Bucharest, which until she graduated in
1989 was the only school in the country to offer the program. Her mother, who
worked as a nurse, urged her to become a doctor. Perkins had other plans. "Even
from that time I was always interested in discovering some new drug, to find
some cure for something," she says.

   After working a few years in Romania, she moved to the United States in 1995
and landed a job in the Baltimore branch of Cel-Sci Corp., a Virginia-based
biotech company that develops cancer and AIDS drugs. In 1998, she entered the
University of Maryland pharmacology program full time.

   And what will the budding scientist do with all that cash?

   "Pay off my credit card debt. Give some to my mom," she says. She's also had
no lack of suggestions from her boyfriend and younger brother in Montreal.

   "They send me lists," she says. "And I say, 'Why are you telling me this?'
Everybody has these big plans."

   For Perkins, who expects to become a U.S. citizen this fall and to finish her
doctorate next year, it's about more than the money.

   She has an uncle in Romania with Alzheimer's disease, and she knows firsthand
what the disease can do.

   "It's pretty painful," she says. "Finding a cure for Alzheimer's, that would
be an awesome achievement for anybody in this field."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Researcher: University of Maryland pharmacology student Dana,
Perkins says she "was always interested in discovering some new drug,, to find
some cure for something.", ANDRE F. CHUNG : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2001


                             1590 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      September 3, 2001 Monday ALL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 1815 words

HEADLINE: Puppy love;
Bills can climb to $50,000 or more, but to a growing number of pet owners, no
price is too high to give their animals top medical care, from MRI's to root
canals to kidney dialysis to radiation therapy

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY New York Times

BODY:

   Ithaca, N.Y. -- They get CAT scans and MRI's to detect the extent of cancer;
lithotripsy to dissolve kidney and bladder stones; dialysis and transplants for
kidney failure; surgery, chemotherapy and even radiation therapy to treat
cancer; laser surgery for glaucoma; pacemakers to correct abnormal heart
rhythms; ultrasonic surgery and lens implants for cataracts; root canal therapy
for broken teeth; chiropractic treatments for sore backs; spinal surgery for
ruptured disks; and arthroscopic surgery and cartilage cell transplants for
crippling knee problems.

   They are treated in intensive care units for respiratory, kidney or liver
failure; they run on treadmills to test heart function; and they take
Prozac-type drugs for separation anxiety, Anipryl for senility, Tagamet for
ulcers, insulin shots for diabetes, hormones for anemia, and steroids and
antibiotics for irritable bowel syndrome.

   "They" are the pets -- dogs, cats, horses, ferrets, birds, rabbits, snakes,
lizards, guinea pigs and even turtles and fish -- of people who love them enough
to spend sometimes thousands of dollars to keep them alive and enjoying a
reasonable quality of life. And because animals rarely outlive their owners,
veterinary clinics like the one here at Cornell University and the Animal
Medical Center in New York City offer bereavement counseling for people who have
lost beloved pets.

   Nearly every medical procedure now done on humans is being used or at least
studied at the nation's leading companion animal medical centers.

   "All the big milestones in human medicine have eventually been adopted by
veterinary medicine," Robert Gilbert said in an interview here. Gilbert is
associate dean for clinical programs at Cornell's Hospital for Animals, a
referral center where more than 13,000 pets are treated each year.

   Sometimes the process goes in reverse. Procedures like embryo transplants and
cartilage cell transplants were used in veterinary centers before moving into
human medicine.

   Here, for example, Alan Nixon, chief of large animal surgery, is now using
gene therapy to treat osteoarthritis in horses, while veterinary oncologists at
the Animal Medical Center are collaborating with cancer researchers at Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center to develop limb-saving treatments for pets and
people with osteosarcoma, the bone cancer that usually necessitates amputation
when it strikes an arm or leg. The work is supported by the National Cancer
Institute.

   Doting owners

   In these affluent times, a growing number of pet owners are willing to spend
thousands of dollars on their animals' health. For many owners, pets have
assumed an importance approaching and sometimes exceeding that of children.

   Eighty-four percent of owners refer to themselves as their pets' mommy or
daddy and/or call pets their babies, according to a 1999 survey by the American
Animal Hospital Associate. With some people now greeting their pets before their
spouses and spending up to $800 on dog beds, animals are not what they used to
be, the Cornell vets say.

   When he started practicing veterinary medicine in 1977, Gilbert said, "a pet
was a pet" and "there was a very clear boundary to what you'd do." Now he is
part of the trend, having spent thousands of dollars to have his 10-year-old
golden retriever, Buster, treated with advanced, expensive chemotherapy for
lymphoma, one of the two most common cancers in dogs.

   Since half of dogs and cats past the age of 10 will eventually get cancer,
this is a choice faced by millions of pet owners every year, very few of whom
have insurance to cover treatment whose rising costs rival human medical bills.

   Before families reach a treatment decision, veterinarians here and at the
Manhattan center fully evaluate the nature and extent of disease, estimate the
cost of treatment in dollars, difficulty for the owner and discomfort for the
animal and discuss thelikelihood of success. It is not unusual for pet owners to
decide to pay the price even if treatment has a chance of buying the animal only
a year of quality life.

   "In general, dogs handle chemotherapy better than people do," said Kenneth
Rassnick, a veterinary oncologist at Cornell. "Most don't lose their hair or
develop mouth sores, though they will experience diarrhea, nausea and sometimes
vomiting."

   Since it is impossible to explain to pets why they are suffering, owners are
often reluctant to pursue treatments with debilitating side effects.

   Treating cancer in dogs and cats is "a market-driven specialty that arose as
animals became such an integrated part of families," Rassnick said. "Now more
horses are being treated, particularly if their tumors are localized."

   Officials at the Cornell animal hospital say it is the only place in the
country that can perform CAT scans on horses.

   Boopie's ordeal

   What modern veterinary medicine can mean to a pet and its owners was clearly
demonstrated at the Animal Medical Center two years ago when a lethargic
15-year-old miniature poodle named Boopie was brought to Alexandra
van-der-Woerd, a veterinary ophthalmologist.

   Boopie, who had previously lost her hearing, had become blinded by cataracts.
Her owners said now that she could neither hear nor see, she could no longer
respond to their gestures, and she simply sat in a corner, dejected and
frightened.

   The obvious treatment was cataract surgery, but would a small old dog like
Boopie be able to withstand general anesthesia? With tests showing that Boopie
still had good heart, liver and kidney function, so that she was highly likely
to survive anesthesia, van-der-Woerdt went ahead. "If Boopie dies under
anesthesia," Boopie's owners told her, "that's OK because she has no life now."

   So under operating room conditions as sterile and advanced as in any modern
human hospital, an anesthesiologist put Boopie to sleep and while all her vital
signs were continually monitored, the skilled surgeon broke up the cataracts
with a fine ultrasound tip, flushed out the pieces and then inserted an
artificial lens in each eye. As soon as the anesthetic wore off, Boopie regained
her former joie de vivre. And she is still going strong.

   "Pets have definite health and psychological benefits for people," said Ann
Hohenhaus, a Cornell-trained veterinarian who directs clinical medicine at the
Manhattan center. "With extended families spread out all over the map, a pet can
be someone's only constant companion, something to come home to and cheer you
when you're down in the dumps."

   And the value of companion animals to their owners goes way beyond dogs and
cats. Hohenhaus said she was no longer surprised when people "spend thousands of
dollars on treatment for turtles, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, snakes,
lizards, birds and ferrets."

   "For people who can't afford the care their pets need, it's a real
heartbreak," said Susan P. Cohen, a social worker at the Manhattan center, who
counsels owners when pets become sick or die. "Pets are considered members of
the family, but they're not covered by the family's health insurance. People
become bonded to their pets and grieve when they die. There are even Hallmark
cards for people who've lost pets."

   Costly treatments

   Kidney dialysis can be needed for weeks or months for animals that drink the
sweet but highly toxic antifreeze that is released onto the street when people
drain car radiators, Hohenhaus said. A year of dialysis can cost pet owners
$50,000.

   Probably the most advanced medical procedure now being performed on pets is
kidney transplants, an operation that costs about $5,000 in cats, the main
recipients, and about $7,000 in dogs. About a dozen veterinary centers,
including those at the University of Pennsylvania and North Carolina State
University, now have active kidney transplant programs for cats, which do well
even without a related donor. All the programs require the recipient's owner to
adopt the donor cat.

   Clare Gregory, who pioneered transplant surgery at the Veterinary Medicine
Teaching Hospital at the University of California at Davis, said his longest
survivor to date was a cat that received a transplant as a kitten 11 years ago
after antifreeze destroyed her kidneys.

   If not for cages instead of beds, the intensive care units at large animal
medical centers might resemble those in human hospitals. They include cardiac
and respiratory monitors, breathing and feeding tubes, alarms that ring in
medical emergencies, and teams of caretakers on round-the-clock duty.

   Recently, at the Manhattan center, a 3-year-old Yorkie named Joujou was
recuperating after endoscopy of her stomach revealed an ulcer; an 11-year-old
miniature poodle named Cory was receiving oxygen, antibiotics and IV feedings
while recovering from aspiration pneumonia; and a 2-year-old pug named Zeerah,
after surgery to remove the pennies she had eaten, was receiving chelation
therapy to get rid of zinc from the pennies that had caused severe anemia.

   All were expected to recover fully and return to their owners able and more
than willing to bestow the unconditional love that only a pet can provide.

   CHOOSING A VETERINARIAN?

   Here are some steps to take, recommended by the American Kennel Club and the
Wisconsin Veterinary Medical Association:

   -- Ask your friends, relatives, neighbors and co-workers to tell you who
their vet is and why they chose that person.

   -- If you have a specific breed of dog, cat or bird, breed clubs can be a
good souce of information.

   -- Contact the Wisconsin Veterinary Medical Association, at www.wvma.org, or
(608) 257-3665. They have a data base that will direct you to vets in your area.

   -- Once you have compiled a list of the possible candidates, call their
offices and ask for basic information regarding office hours and fees for
routine procedures such as an annual checkup or vaccinations. Do they accept
credit cards or must payments be made in cash? What is the procedure if there is
an after-hours emergency? Does the vet have 24-hour coverage on-site, and if
not, how often are overnight patients checked?

   -- About what percentage of clients have your type of animal? Does the doctor
specialize in any areas (e.g. surgery, dental care, eye care, orthopedics,
allergies)? Does the doctor make house calls? What are the provisions in place
for veterinary care when your doctor is not available?

   -- Visit their offices and pay attention to how the receptionists (or
doctors) listen to and answer your questions. Are they pleasant and helpful, or
bored and rushed? How you are treated on the phone might be a good indication of
how you and your pet will be treated in person.

   -- After you've narrowed down your choices, schedule a routine visit for your
pet, it is better to learn about a vet before there is an emergency. Take note
of how the staff and vet relate to your pet.

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2001


                             1591 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       September 3, 2001, Monday , METRO

SECTION: BUSINESS; SCIENCE ; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 561 words

HEADLINE: Research explains secret of cancer-killing viruses

BYLINE: Rick Callahan


BODY: Scientists have wiped out tumors in mice using a common virus that
apparently tricks cancer cells into self-destructing.

    It is too early to know if the approach might work in humans. Many
treatments that look promising in mice prove disappointing when they are tested
on people.

    However, the research sheds light on something scientists have noticed for
years: Some viruses harm cancer cells but leave normal, healthy cells unscathed.



    The research involves a virus that is believed to be harmless to humans, and
a gene called p53 that normally suppresses tumors. In most cancer patients, the
p53 gene is defective. The virus apparently zeroes in on that flaw.

    Peter Beard, a professor of virology at the Swiss Institute for Experimental
Cancer Research in Epalinges, said his team found that the explanation involves
an unusual hairpin-like portion of the virus' DNA.

    When a cancer cell encounters the virus, it apparently interprets the
hairpin structure as damage to its own DNA. The cell tries to rid itself of the
damage and ends up self-destructing.

    As part of their research, the Swiss team injected human colon cancer cells
into a group of laboratory mice, followed by the virus two days later. Only two
of the 12 rodents formed tumors.

    Injections of the virus eliminated tumors in six of 10 mice.

    The findings were reported in Thursday's issue of the journal Nature.

    Beard said he hopes to pinpoint the feature on the hairpin structure that
sends cancer cells to their death. If that can be done, he said, it may be
possible to engineer the virus or develop a drug mimicking its effects.

    The virus tested is one of six known adeno-associated viruses, a group of
viruses that are among the smallest. Some of those viruses have been used many
times by scientists for gene therapy, in which a virus delivers a healthy copy
of a gene to a patient. Such experiments have had mixed results.

    Cancer researcher Arnold Levine, co-discoverer of the p53 gene in 1979 and
president of Rockefeller University in New York, said the Swiss team's approach
is a long way from being tried in humans.

    He said scientists pursuing therapies using viruses to target the p53
defect, including gene therapy, all face the same problem: how to deliver the
therapy to every cancer cell in the body.

    Adeno-associated viruses cannot reproduce without another virus.

    "What this paper does is actually explain for the first time why cancer
cells are preferentially knocked off by these viruses - because they mimic DNA
damage," Levine said. "The cell apparently doesn't have the proper safeguards in
place and it dies."

    The p53 gene mutation that the virus exploits is present in nearly 60
percent of human cancers. It is the same vulnerability that makes cancer cells
prone to chemotherapy and radiation treatment, Beard said.

    A scientist who helped develop an engineered virus, ONYX-015, that has shown
promise in human clinical trials in destroying tumor cells with the mutated p53
gene called the research "very inventive."

    "The biggest question now is: Can these viruses be grown in sufficient
quantity to make human clinical testing possible? That will be the next step,"
said Frank McCormick, professor of microbiology and immunology at the University
of California at San Francisco.

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2001


                             1592 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 2, 2001 Sunday TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg.A-1

LENGTH: 2866 words

HEADLINE: MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY IN BOY, 7, OUTRACES CURE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   This could be the last summer that Gregory Toia walks.

    The sturdy Belle Vernon 7-year-old steps like he's trying to avoid broken
glass and wobbles from the precarious perch of his toes. It's been this way
since he was small. His scarred calf muscles won't stretch enough to get his
heels to the ground.

    Lately, Gregory has been falling. He walks shorter distances before he tires
and topples. He's getting scared and growing mistrustful of his feet. He spent
last summer on his bike, but this year, he doesn't go out much.

    Instead, he lies on the living room floor or sprawls in an inflatable blue
chair that belonged to his 13-year-old half-brother, Josh Hutsenpiller, and he
needs help getting up.

    More and more frequently, Gregory is occupying another of Josh's
hand-me-downs: a manual wheelchair.

    Their mother, Susan Toia, has clung to a tiny hope that things would be
different for Gregory.

    "We've got quite a number of years. Something's got to come up," she told
herself when she learned that her unborn younger son, like his brother, had
Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

    "And here we are," a sad and weary Toia says now. "We're still in the same
place we were when he was born."


    Sapping the strength

    This is the 35th Labor Day weekend that the telethon hosted by Jerry Lewis
will bring muscular dystrophy, of which Duchenne is the most common type, into
millions of homes. Some viewers will sigh and wonder when the multiple hours of
programming will end.

    To the families who live with Duchenne dystrophy, the doctors who care for
the patients and the researchers who struggle to understand the disease, time is
perpetually running short. As days pass without a treatment, without a cure,
children are lost. Scientific progress tends to plod along cautiously, but the
knowledge that Duchenne patients rarely live beyond their early 20s is a brutal
motivation to hurry.

    Watching a happy, 6-year-old Josh walk and play, Toia couldn't imagine why
doctors tried to persuade her to terminate her 19-week pregnancy with Gregory.
She remembers them warning her of heartbreak to come.

    But she figured that scientists would find a way to treat her boys before
they needed wheelchairs, before the disease weakened their hearts and breathing
muscles.

    Her confidence was shaken as Josh's leg muscles stopped working. Walking,
climbing stairs and arising from a chair became hard for him. Doctors prescribed
a course of the steroid prednisone, which has enabled other Duchenne boys to
stay on their feet a bit longer.

    Josh spent a few glorious months toe-walking and biking, with the help of
the prednisone. But then his blood sugar levels began to fluctuate -- possibly
because of the drug -- and he developed Type I diabetes. Insulin injections are
now part of his daily routine.

    Once he stopped taking prednisone, Josh's leg strength vanished. By age 8,
he needed a wheelchair full time. He recently had surgery to cut the scar tissue
in his calf muscles and allow his feet to resume a more normal position.

    Now, the disease is sapping the strength from his upper body. He can raise
his arms only a few inches, like the Tin Man before his shoulders were oiled. He
bends down to his plate instead of lifting his fork to his mouth.

    Every morning, a strong adult picks him up from bed and helps him into the
wheelchair. One of his parents or his aide helps him brush his teeth, shower and
dress.

    "He can't do very much for himself," says his mother. "Some day he's
probably going to have to rely on us hand-feeding him like a baby.

    "Now Gregory is falling apart."

    The stress has plunged Toia into depression. She cries daily, often in the
shower so her boys won't know.

    Toia, 31, once thought that a cure for muscular dystrophy would be found in
Josh's lifetime; now she says maybe it will happen in hers.


    Prolonging the lives

    Researchers wonder, too, if a treatment will materialize during their
careers.

    In 1994, the year that Gregory was born, a muscle biologist named Johnny
Huard arrived at the University of Pittsburgh to study the herpes virus in case
it could be used in gene therapy of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

    He intended to return to his native Quebec after his two-year program was
over, but colleagues had other plans for the hard-working researcher. Without
his knowledge, they submitted his resume to the orthopedics department, which
needed an associate professor.

    Since taking the job, he has become a highly regarded expert in tissue
engineering and stem cells, the precursor cells that researchers hope can build
a variety of new tissues. Huard, 35, is the director of both the Center for Cell
Therapeutics and the Musculoskeletal Growth and Development Laboratory at
Children's Hospital, associate director of the Pittsburgh Tissue Engineering
Initiative and deputy director of cellular therapeutic research at the McGowan
Institute for Regenerative Medicine.

    But his primary interest has not changed.

    "Every tiny project, always somehow I try to find a way to apply it to
Duchenne," says Huard.

    In the past few years, he, scientist Zhuqing Qu and the team have conducted
extensive experiments on a small group of cells Qu cultivated from animal
muscle. They appear to be stem cells, which have never before been isolated from
muscle. Huard hopes to one day use the cells to rebuild muscle in Duchenne
patients.

    And the pioneering work of Dr. Yong Li, another scientist on his team, could
prevent the development of the inflexible bands of scar tissue that shorten
muscles and keep Duchenne children like Gregory on their toes.

    The stem cell and scar tissue projects look so promising that the National
Institutes of Health recently awarded Huard's lab two multiyear grants totaling
$2.7 million. And for the past six years, the families and friends who comprise
Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy and the Muscular Dystrophy Association have
supported his research.

    Huard's commitment to investigating the disease was born while he was a
graduate student at Laval University in Quebec, where he worked on a trial in
which healthy, immature muscle cells from donors were injected into the biceps
muscles of Duchenne patients.

    Huard came to know a 19-year-old participant who hung around the lab and
asked a lot of astute questions. The youth realized that the experimental
treatment would not save his life, and it didn't. But he hoped that one day it
would help his younger brother, who also had muscular dystrophy.

    "All of this really touched me," Huard says. "This is why we are doing
Duchenne. We have 30 people here [in the lab], and every time we get a grant
rejected, a paper rejected, I think about this guy."

    Huard says that prolonging the lives of Duchenne boys would be a huge
accomplishment. He would count it a big achievement if the stem cells just
alleviate muscle weakness and allow the patients to be more independent.

    He hopes he'll have an indication of whether the latter, at least, is
possible in about five years.


    Gene therapy, stem cells

    At Children's Hospital, a short walk down the street from the building that
houses Huard's lab, a bored Gregory Toia fidgets in his brother's wheelchair,
which his dad brought to ferry him to his August doctor's appointment.

    Staff members of the Muscular Dystrophy Association Clinic say "hello" and
ask the boy how he's doing. He shrugs.

    Clinic director Dr. Henry Wessel watches as Gregory pushes his torso against
the examining bed and levers himself onto it. The doctor checks the strength of
the boy's muscles, noting how weakly he lifts, squeezes together and spreads his
legs.

    The exam moves into the hallway and stairwell, where Gregory tiptoes
awkwardly and teeters down a few stairs. He tries to quickly stand up from lying
on the floor, but can manage only a kneeling position, despite pulling up on a
wall handrail.

    Back in the office, Wessel gives Gregory's father a status report.

    "There's no question that he's had significant decline in his abilities over
the last three months," the doctor says. "We're on the edge. We've been down
this road before [with Josh]."

    Greg Toia, who wasn't surprised by his son's struggles with the tests, asks
if there are clinical trials that the boy could enter. He and his wife believe
Gregory has nothing to lose by participating.

    Wessel explains that the clinic is part of a network called the Cooperative
International Neuromuscular Research Group, or CINRG, (pronounced "synergy"),
which tests treatments for Duchenne dystrophy and related disorders. Currently,
the network is testing glutamine and creatine, and in the future will be looking
at co-enzyme Q10, all of which have shown benefit in mouse models of the
disease.

    He explains to Toia that whenever a new study comes up, he reviews all his
patients' charts to see who might be a candidate.

    "We're plugged into the clinical trial system," the doctor says. "You don't
have to worry about us doing something without you finding out about it. If it
applies, we'll let you know."

    Toia then asks for information about gene therapy and stem cell techniques.

    Duchenne muscular dystrophy is caused by mutations in a gene that makes a
protein called dystrophin. The gene is part of the X, or female, chromosome.
Boys inherit one X chromosome from their mothers; if it's an abnormal dystrophin
gene, they develop the disease. Girls inherit two X chromosomes, so even if they
get one abnormal dystrophin gene, they have a second, normal gene that can make
the protein. They don't develop the disease, but become its carriers.

    Wessel reviews the nuts and bolts of gene therapy, which would use a virus
to carry a normal dystrophin-making gene into muscle cells, and stem cells,
which could generate large numbers of muscle cells if donated by a healthy
person or engineered to contain the normal dystrophin gene.

    Both approaches are being aggressively pursued by local researchers. They
and groups elsewhere follow each other's progress and discuss findings.

    "Here at the University of Pittsburgh, we're as close to the cutting edge as
anyone in the world," Wessel said.

    He adds that clinic doctors are in the talking stages with Pitt researchers
of developing a gene therapy human trial, and immediately stresses that nothing
is set.

    "Still not going to be for a while yet," echoes Gregory's stoic father, who
has been listening intently.

    Wessel put it this way in an earlier interview: "Every time there's a new
discovery there are those who stand in the forefront and say 'within three to
five years.' Well, I've seen a number of those 'three to five years' come and
go."

    He adds that recent advances and local expertise inspire some optimism: "We
are part of the neighborhood that is going to be making some contributions.
That's a very exciting thing for me."


    'I feel huge pressure'

    The gene therapy researcher whom Wessel mentioned has an office a couple of
blocks from Children's Hospital.

    Xiao Xiao, a molecular biologist at Pitt, cut down the Goliath that is the
dystrophin gene, the largest gene known. The streamlined versions are small
enough to be carried into muscle cells on the back of the tiny adeno-associated
virus, or AAV. Animal experiments indicate that the so-called minigenes produce
functional dystrophin.

    Xiao is hoping to take the gene therapy into early-phase human trials in a
year, but he knows many hurdles must be overcome, including manufacturing large
quantities of pure AAV.

    "I'm a basic scientist," he says. "For a clinical trial, it's very
different. It's a different arena and you have to deal with all these
regulations."

    Xiao tells those who ask that more money could expedite the work because
staff could be hired.

    But, he says, "no matter how much money you have, you still go through this
[research] process. We cannot do things overnight. We're trying our best."

    The Parent Project and the Muscular Dystrophy Association both have provided
him money. The price of even a single clinical trial, however, runs into
millions of dollars and requires digging into deeper pockets.

    Jerry Lewis and the MDA raised $55 million for neuromuscular diseases during
last year's telethon and received $136 million in direct public support for the
year ending March 31, 2000, according to MDA's annual report. The money is
divided up among research projects, hospital-affiliated clinics, education and
administrative costs.

    The association spent $29 million and the National Institutes of Health
spent $12.6 million on muscular dystrophy research in 2000.

    Muscular dystrophy organizations are hoping they will soon see a big boost
in federal funding.

    Advocates from Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy and MDA drafted the MD-Care
Act, which would direct $100 million annually for five years to muscular
dystrophy research and create several centers of excellence to concentrate
research and clinical efforts. Bills have been introduced in both the House and
Senate.

    At their annual conference at a Downtown hotel in June, Parent Project
officials spoke proudly of taking important steps toward dramatically increasing
federal aid.

    The conference was primarily an opportunity for parents to meet and ask
questions of researchers, who tried to present their work in nontechnical
language. About 400 people came from around the world to hear what the
scientists had to say.

    But the researchers were unable to answer their obvious question: When will
you have a cure?

    "Those things can kill you at the end of the day," says muscle biologist
Huard, who helped organize the conference.

    The cure question makes the scientists uncomfortable. Cautious either by
nature or by federal regulation, or both, they typically answer that time,
measured in years rather than months, is needed to test theories, conduct
experiments, ensure no harm is done to human subjects in clinical trials.

    Huard easily imagines the parents' rebuttal:

    Wow, you got a paper in a prestigious science journal about stem cells or
gene therapy or whatever. But my son is still dying. Do something now.

    The interaction pushes researchers to keep plugging away.

    Xiao, the gene therapy researcher, tells the conference audience of his
work, which has triggered a flood of e-mails and faxes from Duchenne families
across the country and overseas. A Christmas card from an Iranian boy is tacked
to his bulletin board.

    He is surprised that they closely follow basic research and seems more
bewildered than thrilled by the attention. He understands the urgency, but
doesn't want to create unrealistic expectations.

    "I feel huge pressure," he says.


    'It was us'

    Being in a wheelchair and needing help from people doesn't bother Josh too
much. He enjoys hanging out with his friend, Chris Gable, and aide, Gil Collie,
and playing games on his PlayStation. He deftly maneuvers his chair to
occasionally help Gregory, and, for now, his brother fetches drinks and other
things to assist him.

    Josh will appear in the Labor Day telethon this weekend from a WPXI set at
Monroeville Mall. When he was Gregory's age, the family went to California so
Josh could be in the national broadcast and meet Jerry Lewis.

    If a montage of children is shown during the telethon this weekend, look for
a red-headed toddler on a slide. That's Gregory.

    Josh is retiring next spring from appearing in fund-raisers.

    "I don't like to talk in front of people, a big crowd," he said. "I really
don't like talking about myself that much. My mom usually talks to them for me."

    His parents say Josh is not one to open up about his feelings.

    An acquaintance told him last summer that Duchenne muscular dystrophy would
kill him. The devastated boy asked his mother to confirm it.

    "It should have been my choice to tell him when I thought he was ready to
handle the situation," said Toia in a voice full of fury and pain. "[That
person] took something away from me that I can't go back and undo."

    She does not want to repeat that agonizing talk with Gregory.

    Toia fears that one day she will go into Josh's room to wake him and find
that she can't. She dreads the impact on Gregory, who asked her a couple of
months ago if he, too, would need a wheelchair like Josh. I don't know, she
responded, wanting to shelter him more than she did his brother.

    If something happens to Josh, will Gregory ask if he's next? Toia wonders.
If Josh dies, will Gregory miss him so much that he gives up on living?

    "Before we even knew about Josh, me and my mom used to sit there and watch
the telethon and cry at these stories," she said. "Then the following year,
there we were. It was us."

    Meanwhile, Greg Toia is keeping firm grip on the slippery hope that a
treatment will be developed in time to help his boys.

    "They come up with miracle cures every day, it seems like," he said. He
acknowledges that there have been times when daily life has been tough.

    Susan Toia has told those close to her that when she dies and goes to
heaven, she plans to "ask God about 50 million questions."

    And one question looms especially large.

    When?

NOTES:
THE BATTLE WITH DUCHENNE STRIVING TOWARD A BIG STEP

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Steve Mellon/Post-Gazette: Gregory struggles to get to his feet
during an examination at the Muscular Dystrophy Association Clinic at Children's
Hospital. He could get only to his knees.
 PHOTO: Josh gets help with his fishing pole from volunteer Jarret Seese during
MDA camp near Prospect. Josh needs help because he hasn't enough strength in his
arms.
 PHOTO: Steve Mellon/Post-Gazette photos: Josh Hutsenpiller, 13, left, and his
half-brother, Gregory Toia, 7, both have Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Gregory
stands on his toes because his scarred calf muscles won't stretch enough to
allow his heels to touch the ground. Soon, he'll be in a wheelchair, like Josh.
On many days, Gregory wobbles around his family's Belle Vernon home, sometimes
peering at his pet fish, while Josh plays video games from his motorized
wheelchair.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2001


                             1593 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            September 2, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: A Necessary Paradox;
Research Has Some Risks. But It Is Good for Us

BYLINE: Ellen Silbergeld

BODY:

   Just over two weeks ago, the Maryland Court of Appeals delivered a scathing
opinion of a 1990s medical study designed to investigate the efficacy of various
methods of preventing exposure to lead paint. The court accused researchers from
Baltimore's renowned Kennedy Krieger Institute of inadequately informing
participants about the risks of living in houses containing lead paint, and of
using their children -- like canaries in a coal mine -- to monitor the effects
of the contamination. The judges even likened the research to the notorious
Tuskegee experiments of the 1940s, in which treatment was withheld from black
men infected with syphilis in order to study the course of the disease. The
court ruled that two participants' lawsuits should go to trial.

    That was unwelcome news for the medical research community -- particularly
in light of an external scientific panel's critical review last week of a Johns
Hopkins University asthma study in which a healthy volunteer died, as well as
the lingering concerns raised by the death in 1999 of Jesse Gelsinger, a
volunteer in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy study.

    All three cases raise questions about the conduct of medical research, but
the lead study illustrates most clearly a paradox inherent in the use of human
subjects in research.

    It is the paradox of putting an individual at risk so that society can
benefit. The challenge that I -- and all medical researchers -- face is to
conduct meaningful and ethical research within this paradox. Although I am an
adjunct professor at the Bloomberg School of Public Health, part of Johns
Hopkins, with which the Kennedy Krieger Institute is affiliated, I have no
special knowledge of the lead study and like others must withhold judgment until
the full facts emerge in court. Nonetheless, it is important to understand the
tensions inherent in almost all such investigations.

    Medical research, like all research, draws generalizations from the study of
individuals. If the results of research cannot be extended beyond those who
participated in a study, then there is little value to the research.

    As in public health in general, then, researchers ask the public, one by
one, to make a sacrifice in order to protect the public good. When you agree to
be vaccinated, you may not yourself obtain any benefit since you may never have
become ill without vaccination. Yet by participating in the societal commitment
to vaccination, you protect the public at large. This understanding was
essential to the successful eradication of smallpox through a worldwide
vaccination program in the last century.

    Likewise, when you agree to participate in a clinical trial or other
intervention, such as testing different methods to prevent lead paint poisoning,
you may not benefit yourself, especially if you are assigned to the "control" or
"placebo" group, which by design does not receive the potential benefit of the
treatment being tested. Of course, sometimes in the course of a research
project, an individual can benefit, as I did when I volunteered for a study of
ovarian physiology and menopause and the researchers found I had an ovarian
cyst. But such benefits are a bonus of a well-conducted study, not the study's
goal. The true benefit you bring by participating will be to others, through
sorting out effective from ineffective methods of treatment and prevention.

    This paradox is particularly marked in studies aimed at determining safe
methods of preventing widespread public health problems, such as lead paint
poisoning, because we often do not know what will work. We have no standard
practice against which to test a new approach.

    Generations of children have been poisoned with lead in Baltimore,
Washington and other American cities since J. Lockhart Gibson in 1892 first made
the connection between lead-based paint and lead poisoning. Throughout the 25
years I've worked in this field, I have continually been angered by the
complacency with which politicians, as well as many members of the medical
profession and public health community, accept the reality that as many as 5
percent of all American children continue to be poisoned by lead-based paint in
their homes, resulting in lowered IQs and brain damage. It takes considerable
bravery by investigators to devise new methods of prevention -- and bravery by
families to try them out.

    How can we ask individuals to undertake risks without assurance of direct
benefits? We make this request within the context of informed consent, where the
individual's gift is understood and honored as an altruistic transaction. In
return, the individual has the right to expect honorable and honest conditions
of research, to assume that the research is well designed and conducted in such
a way that his or her participation has meaning and value, and to be assured
that all risks are minimized. It is the responsibility of institutional review
boards to ensure that this process works.

    However stringently they are enforced, though, these requirements can never
resolve the tension inherent in the fundamental paradox of medical research.
These tensions are best settled by greater openness between researchers and
subjects, between the medical community and the public.

    When I visited the biomedical laboratories in Japan's "science city" of
Tsukuba some years back, I found myself one day in a quiet little garden at the
end of a lunchtime walk. Amid glass buildings and parking lots, its beauty and
stillness were particularly striking. It was, I learned, a garden dedicated to
all the creatures that had been part of medical research. There are not gardens
or beauties enough to acknowledge the gifts of hundreds of thousands of
Americans who willingly participate in medical research projects each year. It
is their trust and their commitment to benefiting others that have made possible
the great successes of modern medicine.

   Ellen Silbergeld is a professor of epidemiology and toxicology at the
University of Maryland Medical School and an adjunct professor at the Bloomberg
School of Public Health at Johns Hopkins University.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2001


                             1594 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                  AUGUST 30, 2001 Thursday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 3B ZONE

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: U-M PENALIZES RESEARCHER 3-YEAR BAN ON TRIALS FOLLOWS INVESTIGATION OF
DOCTOR'S PROCEDURES

BYLINE: ERIK LORDS FREE PRESS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A top University of Michigan cancer surgeon has been banned from conducting
clinical research for three years after investigators found several infractions
in his human clinical trials, U-M announced Wednesday.

   U-M's internal investigation was initiated after a routine university audit
in March 2000 raised questions about the clinical procedures of surgery
professor Dr. Alfred Chang. The action means Chang, the principal investigator
in the trials, will not be allowed to conduct research with human volunteers.
The sanctions are retroactive to October of 2000, the date on which all of
Chang's studies were suspended by the U-M Medical School's Institutional Review
Board.

    The infractions included inadequate documentation of informed patient
consent and consent obtained after the study began; deviation from the protocol
steps that Chang had submitted to the board; and instances in which patients
were enrolled in a study after the enrollment period had ended.

   The U-M investigation found breaches in review-board rules across five
studies and involving 94 research volunteers. There is no evidence any patient
died from the treatments, according to Dr. Allen Lichter, dean of the U-M
Medical School.

   "I believe that once he has thoroughly educated himself about the rules and
regulations governing clinical trials, he will be able to return to his valuable
role as a senior researcher at our medical school," Lichter said Wednesday of
Chang, 50.

   Chang, who started work at the U-M Medical School in January 1988, could not
immediately be reached for comment.

   The five trials involved immunotherapy aimed at creating a cancer vaccine.
Tests were conducted to see how different treatments battled various forms of
cancer.

   This is the second large case involving improprieties at the U-M Medical
School in the last five years. The first involved Joseph Oesterling, the former
chief urologist at U-M, who pleaded no contest in 1997 to charges of expense
account padding. A U-M investigation found numerous research irregularities in
Oesterling's work involving prostate diseases and cancer.

   U-M's reprimand comes at a time when clinical research procedures have been
under national scrutiny.

   An 18-year-old, Jesse Gelsinger, died in September in a gene-therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania. In July, the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services stopped all federally financed medical studies on
human subjects at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine because a
healthy volunteer in an asthma study died.

   "There's a fundamental difference between this case and the others -- no one
died at Michigan," said Leonard Glantz, a professor of health law at Boston
University, and a national expert on human experiments. "The second thing is
that the university has taken its own action, and that's exactly what you want a
university to do. It seems like a very responsible act on the part of the
university."

   Even in the wake of the sanctions, Chang has drawn praise from U-M Medical
School administrators and from patients who participated in his research.

   "He's quite an incredible person -- soft spoken and really looks out for his
patients," said Livonia resident Nancy Gormley, 62, who received three
treatments from Chang in 1996 for cancer in both lungs and has been in remission
since 1997.

   "I was treated wonderfully," she said. "If I needed to go to him again, I
would do it again.

   Gormley said she has communicated with Chang since U-M took action against
him.

   "I'm sure he's upset. I would be if I were in his shoes," she said. "I'm
amazed and I will stand in defense of him, because I'm truly alive today because
of him."

   U-M has sent a detailed report of its findings to the federal office of Human
Research Protections, the Food and Drug Administration and the Office of
Biotechnology Activities at the National Institutes of Health. The final report
is based on more than 3,000 hours of work by a committee of physicians assigned
by Fawwaz T. Ulaby, U-M's vice president for research, who oversaw the
investigation.

   It is unclear what impact the reprimand will have on future federal funding,
U-M officials said.

   Over the past eight months, U-M has been involved in two other investigations
of its clinical research practices. The NIH has asked U-M to investigate an
unrelated complaint about a clinical trial involving railroad workers with
alleged neurological damage from exposure to chemicals.

   Also, U-M recently concluded another investigation into whether records
properly document a patient's experimental diagnostic treatment for Cushing's
syndrome, a hormonal disorder caused by prolonged exposure of the body's tissues
to high levels of the hormone cortisol. U-M found poor bookkeeping, filing and
clerical errors. NIH accepted U-M's action, and issued no other reprimand, U-M
officials said.

   Contact ERIK LORDS at 313-222-6513 or lords@freepress.com.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1595 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 30, 2001, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: Erasing cancer;
Scientists find virus tricks tumors into self-destructing in lab mice

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: RICK CALLAHAN

BODY:

   Scientists have wiped out tumors in mice using a common virus that apparently
tricks cancer cells into self-destructing.

   It is too early to know if the approach might work in humans. Many treatments
that look promising in mice prove disappointing when they are tested on people.

   However, the research sheds light on something scientists have noticed for
years: Some viruses harm cancer cells but leave normal, healthy cells unscathed.

   The research involves a virus that is believed to be harmless to humans, and
a gene called p53, which normally suppresses tumors.

   In most cancer patients, the p53 gene is defective. The virus apparently
zeroes in on that flaw.

   Peter Beard, a professor of virology at the Swiss Institute for Experimental
Cancer Research in Epalinges, said his team found that the explanation involves
an unusual hairpinlike portion of the virus' DNA.

   When a cancer cell encounters the virus, it apparently interprets the hairpin
structure as damage to its own DNA.

   The cell tries to rid itself of the damage and ends up self-destructing.

   As part of their research, the Swiss team injected human colon cancer cells
into a group of laboratory mice, followed by the virus two days later. Only two
of the 12 rodents formed tumors.

   In mice with existing colon cancer tumors, injections of the virus eliminated
tumors in six of the 10 rodents.

   The findings are reported in today's issue of the journal Nature.

   Beard said his team hopes to pinpoint the precise feature on the hairpin
structure that sends cancer cells to their death.

   If they can do that, he said, it may be possible to specially engineer the
virus or even develop a drug mimicking its effects.

   The virus tested is one of six known adeno-associated viruses, a group of
viruses that are among the smallest that exist.

   Some of those viruses have been used many times by scientists for gene
therapy, in which a virus delivers a healthy copy of a gene to a patient. Such
experiments have had mixed results.

   Cancer researcher Arnold J. Levine, co-discoverer of the p53 gene in 1979 and
president of Rockefeller University in New York, said the Swiss team's approach
is a long way from ever being tried in humans.

   He said scientists pursuing therapies using viruses to target the p53 defect,
including gene therapy, all face the same problem: how to efficiently deliver
the therapy to every cancer cell in the body.

   Adeno-associated viruses cannot reproduce without the help of another virus.





   Using a virus to kill cancer


   A virus has been shown to kill cancer cells in laboratory mice but not to
harm healthy cells. Swiss researchers injected a virus into cancer tumors in the
mice. The virus preyed upon cells that have a mutated version of the p53 gene,
which normally suppresses tumor growth by correcting genetic errors in cells. In
about 60 percent of human cancers, the p53 gene is mutated.


   1 Researchers introduced the virus to cancer tumors and to normal cells.


   2 A hairpin-shaped portion of the virus' DNA was sensed by the cell, which
was tricked into thinking its DNA was damaged.


   3 Normal cells with working copies of p53 were found to pause briefly,
presumably to fix the problem, then continue normal cell division.

   The cancer cells, which lack normal p53, were unable to fix the perceived
error. A chain reaction began, causing the cell to die.


GRAPHIC: Drawings: 1. Normal cell; 2. Cancer cell; 3. Nucleus / Virus, DNA; 4.
Nucleus / Virus, DNA; 5. Normal cells with working copies of p53; 6. Cancer
cells which lack normal p53; Graph: 7. Using a virus to kill cancer (TEXT); All
by Associated Press, Source: Nature

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2001


                             1596 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     August 30, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 15A

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: Virus found to make cancer cells destroy themselves

BYLINE: RICK CALLAHAN Associated Press

BODY:


   Scientists have wiped out tumors in mice using a common virus that apparently
tricks cancer cells into self-destructing.

   It is too early to know if the approach might work in humans. Many treatments
that look promising in mice prove disappointing when they are tested on people.

   However, the research sheds light on something scientists have noticed for
years: Some viruses harm cancer cells but leave normal, healthy cells unscathed.

   The research involves a virus that is believed to be harmless to humans, and
a gene called p53 that normally suppresses tumors. In most cancer patients, the
p53 gene is defective. The virus apparently zeros in on that flaw.

   Peter Beard, a professor of virology at the Swiss Institute for Experimental
Cancer Research in Epalinges, said his team found that the explanation involves
an unusual hairpin-like portion of the virus' DNA.

   When a cancer cell encounters the virus, it apparently interprets the hairpin
structure as damage to its own DNA. The cell tries to rid itself of the damage
and ends up self-destructing.

   As part of their research, the Swiss team injected human colon cancer cells
into a group of laboratory mice, followed by the virus two days later. Only two
of the 12 rodents later formed tumors.

   In mice with existing colon cancer tumors, injections of the virus eliminated
tumors in six of the 10 rodents.

   The findings were reported in today's issue of the journal Nature.

   Beard said his team hoped to pinpoint the precise feature on the hairpin
structure that sends cancer cells to their death. If they can do that, he said,
it may be possible to specially engineer the virus or even develop a drug
mimicking its effects.

   The virus tested is one of six known adeno-associated viruses, a group of
viruses that are among the smallest that exist. Some of those viruses have been
used many times by scientists for gene therapy, in which a virus delivers a
healthy copy of a gene to a patient. Such experiments have had mixed results.

   Cancer researcher Arnold J. Levine, co-discoverer of the p53 gene in 1979 and
president of Rockefeller University in New York, said the Swiss team's approach
is a long way off from ever being tried in humans.

   He said scientists pursuing therapies using viruses to target the p53 defect,
including gene therapy, all face the same problem: how to efficiently deliver
the therapy to every cancer cell in the body.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                             1597 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                    AUGUST 30, 2001 Thursday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: Research indicates virus may hold hope against cancer cells

BYLINE: Rick Callahan ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Scientists have wiped out tumors in mice using a common virus that apparently
tricks cancer cells into self-destructing.

   It is too early to know if the approach might work in humans. Many treatments
that look promising in mice prove disappointing when they are tested on people.

   Still, the research sheds light on something scientists have noticed for
years: Some viruses harm cancer cells but leave normal, healthy cells unscathed.

   The research involves a virus that is believed to be harmless to humans, and
a gene called p53 that normally suppresses tumors. In most cancer patients, the
p53 gene is defective. The virus apparently zeroes in on that flaw.

   Peter Beard, a professor of virology at the Swiss Institute for Experimental
Cancer Research in Epalinges, said his team had found the explanation involved
an unusual, hairpinlike portion of the virus' DNA.

   When a cancer cell encounters the virus, it apparently interprets the hairpin
structure as damage to its own DNA. The cell tries to rid itself of the damage
and ends up self-destructing.

   As part of the research, the Swiss team injected human colon-cancer cells
into a group of laboratory mice, followed by the virus two days later. Only two
of the 12 rodents later formed tumors.

   In mice with existing colon-cancer tumors, injections of the virus eliminated
tumors in six of the 10 rodents.

   The findings were reported in today's issue of the journal Nature.

   Beard said his team hoped to pinpoint the precise feature on the hairpin
structure that sends cancer cells to their death. If the team can do that, he
said, it might be possible to specially engineer the virus or even develop a
drug mimicking its effects.

   The virus tested is one of six known adeno-associated viruses, a group of
viruses that are among the smallest that exist. Some of those viruses have been
used many times by scientists for gene therapy, in which a virus delivers a
healthy copy of a gene to a patient. Such experiments have had mixed results.

   Cancer researcher Arnold J. Levine, codiscoverer of the p53 gene in 1979 and
now president of Rockefeller University in New York, said the Swiss team's
approach was a long way from being tried in humans.

   He said scientists pursuing therapies using viruses to target the p53 defect,
including gene therapy, all faced the same problem: how to efficiently deliver
the therapy to every cancer cell in the body.

   One problem with adeno-associated viruses is that they cannot reproduce
without the help of another virus.

   Levine said the research's main contribution was explaining why certain
viruses could damage cancer cells while sparing normal cells.

   "What this paper does is actually explain for the first time why cancer cells
are preferentially knocked off by these viruses - because they mimic DNA
damage," Levine said. "The cell apparently doesn't have the proper safeguards in
place, and it dies."

   The p53 gene mutation that the virus exploits is present in nearly 60 percent
of all human cancers. It is the same vulnerability that also makes cancer cells
prone to chemotherapy and radiation treatment, Beard said.

   A scientist who helped develop an engineered virus - ONYX-015 - that has
shown promise in human trials in destroying tumor cells with the mutated p53
gene called the new research "very inventive."

   "The biggest question now is, can these viruses be grown in sufficient
quantity to make human clinical testing possible?" said Frank McCormick, a
professor of microbiology and immunology at the University of California at San
Francisco. "That will be the next step."

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1598 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            August 30, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: Md. Venture Firm Gives Biotechs A Booster;
NEA Adds Partner To Focus on Field

BYLINE: Nicholas Johnston, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    In dozens of reports analyzing the nation's venture capital investments
issued last quarter, there was one consistent bright spot: biotechnology. The
studies agree that investment in the sector is increasing even as overall
technology investments decline, and attitudinal surveys of venture capitalists
show them solidly bullish on the industry.

    That trend hasn't been missed by one of the area's oldest and largest
venture capital investors, New Enterprise Associates. The Baltimore venture
firm, which raised its 10th fund last year, NEA X, totaling more than $ 2
billion, recently named M. James Barrett a general partner and said he will
focus exclusively on biotechnology investments.

    Barrett is no stranger to NEA. The firm has backed three Barrett-run
ventures, and he has worked with one of NEA's founders, Chuck Newhall, for more
than two decades. According to Newhall, Barrett's appointment to NEA seemed like
a natural fit for a venture firm looking to expand its biotechnology practice.

    "There's no one that's as good as the person that you've worked with for 25
years," Newhall said.

    Barrett, who has a PhD in biochemistry, has managed laboratories for large
drug companies, and he founded one NEA-backed start-up and served as an
executive at two others. His first start-up was funded by NEA I, the firm's
first fund, in 1982.

    Less than 15 percent of NEA X has been invested to date, according to Peter
Barris, the firm's managing general partner. Health sciences companies, which
include medical and biotechnology start-ups, have received about 30 percent of
the money, a share about twice as large as the biotechnology portion of its
previous fund, NEA IX.

    "The climate is better for health-care investing," Barris said.

    Barrett will be the firm's sixth health-sciences partner, joining four
others in the Baltimore office and one in Silicon Valley. According to Barris,
NEA had been looking to bolster its biotechnology practice for a long time
before settling on Barrett.  His addition is unrelated to the departure of
partner Art Marks, an information technology investor, earlier this summer.

    The addition of Barrett should help NEA solidify its health- and
medical-investing practice as the market for information-technology investments
remains cold.

    "They decided to reemphasize their health practices," Barrett said. "It's a
rebalancing of their portfolio."

    Barrett comes to NEA from Sensors for Medicine and Science Inc., a developer
of miniature biochemical sensors for medical applications that he founded in
1995. He will remain chairman of that firm and work out of its Germantown
offices, commuting to NEA's Baltimore headquarters about once a week.

    Sensors for Medicine is the third Barrett-run venture backed by NEA. The
first was in 1982, when NEA tapped him to help save a struggling portfolio
company, Bethesda Research Laboratories Inc.

    According to Newhall, Bethesda Research was hemorrhaging money when Barrett
was brought in as president and chief executive. The company was losing $ 2
million to $ 3 million each month and was making its payroll only by taking out
bank loans.

    "It's the closest I've ever come to bankruptcy in a company that later
turned out to be a great success," Newhall said.

    Six months after Barrett arrived, Bethesda Research was back in the black.

    Barrett, a native of Bridgeport, Conn., first saw the opportunity in
biochemistry at Boston College, where he worked in a campus laboratory to help
pay his tuition.

    "I had just enough chemistry to realize that the laboratory was really
primitive," he remembers. "I decided that it would be an interesting place to
make a contribution."

    He received an undergraduate degree in chemistry from Boston College and a
PhD in biochemistry from the University of Tennessee. Then, in 1969, he went to
work for SmithKline, now a division of pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline PLC.
In a move that should continue to prove useful in his new role as a venture
capitalist, Barrett received an MBA from Santa Clara University in 1975 while
still at SmithKline.

    "I was tired of getting snookered by the financial guys," he said.

    After working his way up at SmithKline from an entry-level technical job in
the firm's commercial medical labs to running all of the company's labs, a
co-worker recommended him to NEA for the Bethesda Research Laboratories job.

    After turning the struggling start-up around and merging it with Life
Technologies Inc. in 1983, he took the company public in 1986. The next year,
Barrett left to join a second NEA-backed company, Genetic Therapy Inc., as chief
executive. That also led to another public offering and the company's eventual
sale to a Swiss company for $ 300 million.

    So when Barrett founded Sensors for Medicine in 1995, he was able to count
on NEA for funding.

    "He's not like many entrepreneurs," Newhall said. Barrett is confident
without being arrogant, Newhall said, adding that he has always been impressed
with Barrett's honesty and leadership. Barrett also possesses a skill that is
rare among biotechnology scientists: He is adept at explaining complicated
science to bewildered investors.

    "There are not many scientists who can talk in English," Newhall said. "Jim
is one of them."

    Newhall first approached Barrett this summer about joining NEA and extending
their long working relationship. Newhall is on the board of directors for
Sensors for Medicine, and over the years Barrett has helped Newhall identify and
evaluate potential investments.

    What sold Barrett on crossing the line from entrepreneur to venture
capitalist -- going to the "dark side" as he called it -- was the opportunity to
work with a lot of new and diverse technologies, rather than with just what one
company is developing. And it's a chance to meet a lot of interesting people, he
said.

    It's also a change for Barrett to be working in an investing partnership,
instead of a hierarchical biotechnology start-up. NEA has 23 partners on both
coasts, all on their own quests for investment opportunities.

    "It's like herding calves," he said of starting at NEA. "Everyone is your
boss and no one is your boss."

    Barris, NEA's nominal leader -- what he calls "first among equals" --
expects a substantial portion of the firm's 10th fund to find its way to
biotechnology companies, many of which will probably be in the Washington area.

    Even with economic uncertainties and continued fallout in the
venture-investing community from bad technology investments, Barrett is still
upbeat about biotechnology, a sector many investors believe is counter-cyclical.
During downturns, it's very easy for companies to cut spending on new optical
networks or upgrading software programs. But economics don't dictate the use of
lifesaving medical treatments. Such advances will always find a market, Barrett
said.

    "It's something you can't do without," he said. "It's not a discretionary
expense."

   More stories in VENTURE CAPITAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                             1599 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   August 29, 2001, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: Research overload?;
Critics say medical institutions are trying to do too much, lack oversight

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: JOHN BIEMER

DATELINE: BALTIMORE

BODY:

   BALTIMORE - Johns Hopkins University, one of the world's top medical research
institutions, has come under fire over a deadly asthma experiment and a
lead-paint study on poor city children that has been likened to the infamous
Tuskegee syphilis experiment.

   The incidents have raised questions about whether medical institutions
undertake more research than they can safely monitor.

   "It's unfortunate that the premier medical research institute in the U.S. has
all of these problems conducting basic peer review and review of the ethical
component of the research it's conducting," said John H. Noble, a Catholic
University health policy professor and member of the Alliance for Human Research
Protection. "We need checks and balances, and that's the fundamental flaw in the
system."

   After healthy 24-year-old volunteer Ellen Roche died after inhaling a drug in
the asthma study in June, the federal Office for Human Research Protections
said, among other things, that Hopkins' review board was overworked.

   The government shut down most of Hopkins' 2,400 federally funded experiments
for five days, an action the university called unwarranted. Regulators are
allowing the studies to resume one at a time.

   Two weeks ago, the Maryland Court of Appeals condemned a study testing levels
of lead-paint exposure in poor children by the Kennedy Krieger Institute, a
Hopkins affiliate. The ruling permitted lawsuits filed on behalf of two children
who allegedly suffered brain damage to go forward.

   In the study, landlords were paid to recruit about 100 families with healthy
children to live in their homes during the early 1990s.

   Children - who can develop brain damage if they eat lead paint chips - were
to be tested periodically to see how well methods developed to reduce the levels
of lead-based paint were working.

   Judge Dale R. Cathell likened the research to experiments conducted on
prisoners at the Buchenwald concentration camp during World War II and to the
Tuskegee Syphilis Study, in which the disease was left untreated in poor black
men in Alabama.

   All U.S. research institutions are required to have review boards by the
federal government, which sets and oversees the guidelines.

   The review boards - which consist largely of university-affiliated doctors
and administrators - are there to weigh the potential risks and benefits of
various experiments and to make sure that subjects have been properly informed
and have given their consent.

   When an institution applies for a federal grant for the research, the federal
agency - the National Institutes of Health, for example - generally does not get
involved in oversight of risks. An exception is when an experimental drug is
tested on humans. The Food and Drug Administration then must approve the use.

   Tom Tomlinson, a Michigan State medical ethics professor, said more resources
need to be devoted to reviewing institutional research.

   "With the tremendous increase in the sheer number and complexity of research
going on, it's becoming harder and harder for these committees to find the time
they need to really look at these protocols carefully," he said.

   Noble said the review boards are not just stretched thin, but also suffer
conflicts of interest rooted in doing "business as subunits of the very
institution that gets them funded." The review boards may even rubber-stamp
approval if a researcher's reputation is well-established, he said.

   Alan Milstein, an attorney who sued the University of Pennsylvania on behalf
of the family of an 18-year-old man who died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment,
said centers such as Hopkins are "conducting more studies than they can possibly
monitor."

   "What I've been saying all along is where we're going to see the problems is
the top institutions," Milstein said. "That's where the money is, that's where
the arrogance is, and that's where the studies are."

   Johns Hopkins stands tall among medical research institutions. Its doctors
developed CPR and won the Nobel Prize for discovering enzymes that gave birth to
the genetic engineering industry.

   For the 11th consecutive year, U.S. News & World Report ranked it the top
American hospital. Its medical school ranked second to Harvard. Last year,
Hopkins got $ 301 million in grants from NIH - the most in the country.

   After the shutdown of Hopkins' studies, the university announced several
steps, including the creation of a fourth review board to oversee experiments. A
year ago, it had two.

   "If we can demonstrate, and I think we have demonstrated, we are doing
everything we need to do to ensure the safety of our patients, then they
certainly will continue to trust us," Hopkins spokeswoman Joann Rodgers said.

   Despite the university's problems, Dr. Jordan Cohen, president of the
Association of American Medical Colleges, said Hopkins' reputation - and federal
funding - are not threatened.

   "I think, in the aggregate, Johns Hopkins is such a spectacularly successful
research institution that it certainly deserves all the respect that it gets,"
he said. "There are always risks involved in any research, and bad things happen
from time to time."


GRAPHIC: Mug: After 24-year-old volunteer Ellen Roche died in an asthma study in
June, the federal government shut down most of Johns Hopkins University's 2,400
federally funded experiments for five days.

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                             1600 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 29, 2001 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 658 words

HEADLINE: JOHNS HOPKINS' ETHICS PROBLEMS A WINDOW TO RESEARCH CONFLICTS

BYLINE: JOHN BIEMER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BALTIMORE

BODY:

   Johns Hopkins University, one of the world's top medical research
institutions, has come under fire over a deadly asthma experiment and a
lead-paint study on poor city children that has been likened to the infamous
Tuskegee syphilis experiment.

    The incidents have raised questions about whether medical institutions
undertake more research than they can safely monitor.

    "It's unfortunate that the premier medical research institute in the U.S.
has all of these problems conducting basic peer review and review of the ethical
component of the research it's conducting," said John H. Noble, a Catholic
University health policy professor and member of the Alliance for Human Research
Protection. "We need checks and balances, and that's the fundamental flaw in the
system."

    After healthy 24-year-old volunteer Ellen Roche died after inhaling a drug
in the asthma study in June, the federal Office for Human Research Protections
said, among other things, that Hopkins' review board was overworked.

    The government shut down most of Hopkins' 2,400 federally funded experiments
for five days. Regulators are allowing the studies to resume one at a time.

    Two weeks ago, the Maryland Court of Appeals condemned a study testing
levels of lead-paint exposure in poor children by the Kennedy Krieger Institute,
a Hopkins affiliate. The ruling permitted lawsuits filed on behalf of two
children who allegedly suffered brain damage to go forward.

    In the study, landlords were paid to recruit about 100 families with healthy
children to live in their homes during the early 1990s. Children -- who can
develop brain damage if they eat lead paint chips -- were to be tested
periodically to see how well methods developed to reduce the levels of
lead-based paint were working.

    Judge Dale R. Cathell likened the research to experiments conducted on
prisoners at the Buchenwald concentration camp during World War II and to the
Tuskegee Syphilis Study, in which the disease was left untreated in poor black
men in Alabama.

    All U.S. research institutions are required by the federal government to
have review boards.

    The boards -- which consist largely of university-affiliated doctors and
administrators -- are there to weigh the potential risks and benefits of various
experiments and to make sure that subjects have been properly informed and have
given their consent.

    Tom Tomlinson, a Michigan State medical ethics professor, said more
resources need to be devoted to reviewing institutional research.

    "With the tremendous increase in the sheer number and complexity of research
going on, it's becoming harder and harder for these committees to find the time
they need to really look at these protocols carefully," he said.

    Noble said the review boards are not just stretched thin, but also suffer
conflicts rooted in doing "business as sub-units of the very institution that
gets them funded." They may even rubber-stamp approval if a researcher's
reputation is well-established, he said.

    Alan Milstein, an attorney who sued the University of Pennsylvania on behalf
of the family of an 18-year-old man who died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment,
said centers such as Hopkins are "conducting more studies than they can possibly
monitor."

    Johns Hopkins stands tall among medical research institutions. Its doctors
developed CPR and won the Nobel Prize for discovering enzymes that gave birth to
the genetic engineering industry.

    Last year, Hopkins got $301 million in grants from NIH -- the most in the
country.

    Following the shutdown of Hopkins' studies, the university announced several
steps, including the creation of a fourth review board to oversee experiments. A
year ago, it had two.

    "If we can demonstrate, and I think we have demonstrated, we are doing
everything we need to do to ensure the safety of our patients, then they
certainly will continue to trust us," Hopkins spokeswoman Joann Rodgers said.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2001
