
                             1601 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 29, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1435 words

HEADLINE: Use of expensive therapies for pets is on the rise

BYLINE: Jane E. Brody; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 ITHACA, N.Y. -- They get CAT scans and MRIs to detect the extent of cancer;
lithotripsy to dissolve kidney and bladder stones; dialysis and transplants for
kidney failure; laser surgery for glaucoma; pacemakers for abnormal heart
rhythms; lens implants for cataracts; root canals for broken teeth; chiropractic
treatments for sore backs; back operations for ruptured disks; and cartilage
cell transplants for knee problems.

   They take Prozac-type drugs for separation anxiety, Anipryl for senility,
Tagamet for ulcers, insulin shots for diabetes, hormones for anemia, and
steroids and antibiotics for irritable bowel syndrome.

   "They" are pets -- dogs, cats, horses, ferrets, birds, rabbits, snakes,
lizards, guinea pigs and even turtles and fish.  And their owners sometimes
spend thousands of dollars to keep them alive and able to enjoy a reasonable
quality of life.

   But because animals rarely outlive their owners, veterinary clinics like the
one here at Cornell University offer bereavement counseling, too, for people who
have lost beloved pets.

   Nearly every medical procedure now done on humans is being used or at least
studied at the nation's leading companion animal medical centers.

   "All the big milestones in human medicine have eventually been adopted by
veterinary medicine," said Robert Gilbert, associate dean for clinical programs
at Cornell's Hospital for Animals, a referral center where more than 13,000 pets
are treated each year.

   Sometimes the process goes in reverse.  Procedures like embryo transplants
and cartilage cell transplants were used successfully in veterinary centers
before moving into human medicine.

   For example, Alan Nixon, chief of large-animal surgery, is using gene therapy
to treat osteoarthritis in horses, while veterinary oncologists at the Animal
Medical Center in New York City are collaborating with cancer researchers at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center to develop limb-saving treatments for
pets and people with osteosarcoma, the bone cancer that usually necessitates
amputation when it strikes an arm or leg.  The work is supported by the National
Cancer Institute.

   In these affluent times, a growing number of pet owners are willing to spend
thousands of dollars on their animals' health.  For many owners, pets have
assumed an importance approaching and sometimes exceeding that of children.
Indeed, 84 percent of owners refer to themselves as their pets' mommy or daddy
and/or call pets their babies, according to a 1999 survey by the American Animal
Hospital Association.

   Pet projects

   When he started practicing veterinary medicine in 1977, Gilbert said, "a pet
was a pet" and "there was a very clear boundary to what you'd do." Now he is
part of the trend, having spent thousands of dollars to have his 10-year-old
golden retriever, Buster, treated with advanced, expensive chemotherapy for
lymphoma, one of the two most common cancers in dogs.

   And since fully half of dogs and cats past the age of 10 will eventually get
cancer, this is a choice now faced by millions of pet owners every year, very
few of whom have insurance to cover treatment whose rising costs rival human
medical bills.

   Before families reach a treatment decision, veterinarians here and at the
Manhattan center fully evaluate the nature and extent of disease, estimate the
cost of treatment in dollars, difficulty for the owner and discomfort for the
animal and discuss the likelihood of success.  It is not unusual for pet owners
to decide to pay the price even if treatment has a chance of buying the animal
only a year of quality life.

   "In general, dogs handle chemotherapy better than people do," said Dr.
Kenneth Rassnick, a veterinary oncologist at Cornell.  "Most don't lose their
hair or develop mouth sores, though they will experience diarrhea, nausea and
sometimes vomiting."

   Since it is impossible to explain to pets why they are suffering, owners are
often reluctant to pursue treatments with debilitating side effects.

   Treating cancer in dogs and cats is "a market-driven specialty that arose as
animals became such an integrated part of families," Rassnick said.  "Now more
horses are being treated, particularly if their tumors are localized." Officials
at the Cornell animal hospital say it is the only place in the country that can
perform CAT scans on horses.

   What modern veterinary medicine can mean to a pet and its owners was clearly
demonstrated at the Animal Medical Center two years ago when a lethargic
15-year-old miniature poodle named Boopie was brought to Alexandra
van-der-Woerdt, a veterinary ophthalmologist.  Boopie, who had previously lost
her hearing, had become blinded by cataracts.  Her owners explained that now
that she could neither hear nor see, she could no longer respond to their
gestures, and she simply sat in a corner, dejected and frightened.

   The obvious treatment was cataract surgery, but would a small old dog like
Boopie be able to withstand general anesthesia?  With tests showing that Boopie
still had good heart, liver and kidney function, so that she was highly likely
to survive anesthesia, van-der-Woerdt went ahead.  "If Boopie dies under
anesthesia," Boopie's owners told her, "that's OK because she has no life now."

   So under operating room conditions as sterile and advanced as in any modern
human hospital, an anesthesiologist put Boopie to sleep and while all her vital
signs were continually monitored, the skilled surgeon broke up the cataracts
with a fine ultrasound tip, flushed out the pieces and then inserted an
artificial lens in each eye.  As soon as the anesthetic wore off, Boopie
regained her former joie de vivre.  And she is still going strong.

   "Pets have definite health and psychological benefits for people," said Ann
Hohenhaus, a Cornell-trained veterinarian, who directs clinical medicine at the
Manhattan center.  "With extended families spread out all over the map, a pet
can be someone's only constant companion, something to come home to and cheer
you when you're down in the dumps."

   And the value of companion animals to their owners goes way beyond dogs and
cats.  Hohenhaus said she was no longer surprised when people "spend thousands
of dollars on treatment for turtles, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils, snakes,
lizards, birds and ferrets."

   "For people who can't afford the care their pets need, it's a real
heartbreak," said Susan P. Cohen, a social worker at the Manhattan center, who
counsels owners when pets become sick or die.  "Pets are considered members of
the family, but they're not covered by the family's health insurance.  People
become bonded to their pets and grieve when they die.  There are even Hallmark
cards for people who've lost pets."

   Kidney dialysis can be needed for weeks or months for animals that drink the
sweet but highly toxic antifreeze that is released onto the street when people
drain car radiators, Hohenhaus said.  A year of dialysis can cost pet owners
$50,000.

   Probably the most advanced medical procedure now being performed on pets is
kidney transplants, an operation that costs about $5,000 in cats, the main
recipients, and about $7,000 in dogs.  About a dozen veterinary centers,
including those at the University of Pennsylvania and North Carolina State
University, now have active kidney transplant programs for cats, which do well
even without a related donor.  All the programs require the recipient's owner to
adopt the donor cat.

   Clare Gregory, who pioneered transplant surgery at the Veterinary Medicine
Teaching Hospital at UC Davis, said his longest survivor to date was a cat that
received a transplant as a kitten 11 years ago after antifreeze destroyed her
kidneys.

   If not for cages instead of beds, the intensive care units at large animal
medical centers might resemble those in human hospitals.  They include cardiac
and respiratory monitors, breathing and feeding tubes, alarms that ring in
medical emergencies, and teams of caretakers on round-the-clock duty.

   Recently, at the Manhattan center, a 3-year-old Yorkie named Joujou was
recuperating after endoscopy of her stomach revealed an ulcer; an 11-year-old
miniature poodle named Cory was receiving oxygen, antibiotics and IV feedings
while recovering from aspiration pneumonia; and a 2-year-old pug named Zeerah,
after surgery to remove the pennies she had eaten, was receiving chelation
therapy to get rid of zinc from the pennies that had caused severe anemia.

   All were expected to recover fully and return to their owners able and more
than willing to bestow the unconditional love that only a pet can provide.


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2001


                             1602 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 26, 2001 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1225 words

HEADLINE: Stem Cell Product Still Eludes Research Firms;
Biotech: A leading company has invested hundreds of millions and has yet to see
a payoff. Others are even further from a viable discovery.

BYLINE: DENISE GELLENE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: PALO ALTO

BODY:

   Thousands of white lab mice romp in germ-free containers at Stem Cells Inc.
They look ordinary enough, but each of them has human stem cells growing in its
brain. .

   It took 13 years and losses of $130 million for the company to reach this
point, yet its scientists are far from finding a treatment for disease. They are
not even sure whether the human stem cells inside the mice work.

   With luck, they'll have a chance to find out.

   The furor over embryonic stem cells has focused attention on an industry in
which failed ventures seem as numerous as the diseases they aimed to cure. Stem
cells hold promise because they are self-generating and, in theory, can restore
damaged tissue. But the cells can be notoriously difficult to find and nurture.

   No company has yet marketed an approved product derived from the cells. And
investors aren't convinced of Stem Cells Inc.'s chances, though it is among the
industry's most visible players.

   Two deep-pocketed pharmaceutical partners have backed out of collaborative
deals. After soaring to $20 in early 2000, Stem Cell shares typically trade
around $5, in penny stock territory. The company, unable to tap conventional
financing sources, turned in May to a fund in the British Virgin Islands.

   With its 35 employees working in an office park near Stanford University,
Stem Cells Inc. is focused on cells of the liver, pancreas and nervous system.
The mice are part of a test to see whether human nerve stem cells, once
implanted, will migrate to areas of the brain that control movement, smell and
other functions.

   In experiments already completed, human cells indeed have marched along known
pathways to their proper locations. The next step, said chief scientist Ann
Tsukamoto, is to find out whether the cells function. Her team is eager to
confirm that some cells have produced dopamine, a brain chemical lacking in
patients with Parkinson's disease.

   Stem Cells isn't the only company with its sights on diseases such as
Parkinson's, diabetes and hepatitis. But its rivals are small, shunned by
investors and far from the finish line.

   "It is too early to say anyone is ahead," said John McCamant, editor of
Medical Technology Stock Letter.

   Stem Cells doesn't use cells from embryos, as does Geron Corp., which has
access to cells developed by the University of Wisconsin. But Stem Cells is not
trying to avoid the ethical quandary about their use--the company gets its cells
from fetuses, a controversial source that President Bush's father considered
limiting during his presidency. The current President Bush has placed limits on
federal funds for embryonic research.

   Stem Cells Chief Executive Martin McGlynn said fetuses are dead as a result
of therapeutic abortions, unlike frozen embryos donated by clients of fertility
clinics.

   "There is no potential whatsoever for an aborted fetus to be resuscitated . .
. which is a major factor in play in the embryonic stem cell field," McGlynn
said.

   The choice of fetal cells is rooted in science, Tsukamoto said. Embryonic
stem cells can turn into any one of the 300 cell types in the body. But there is
yet no foolproof way to do that in the laboratory.

   Tsukamoto prefers fetal cells because they are hard-wired to become a
specific type of cell. The company holds patents on the composition of its
neural stem cells and their use.

   However, fetal cells present their own challenges. Tsukamoto's team hasn't
yet identified the stem cell that will regenerate liver tissue.

   Stem Cells has informal links to Systemix Inc., a defunct company that rode a
first wave of stem cell hype in the early 1990s. Stem Cells' chairman, general
counsel and operations chief and chief scientist Tsukamoto are veterans of
Systemix. The two firms have a common founder, Irving L. Weissman, a Stanford
professor and pioneer in stem cell research.

   Systemix illustrates the perils and rewards of the stem cell business. The
company invented a method of isolating blood stem cells, which could be used to
fortify patients' immune systems.

   Sandoz, a Swiss pharmaceutical company that was a predecessor of life
sciences firm Novartis, acquired 60% of Systemix for $392 million in 1991, a
windfall for Systemix shareholders. Novartis purchased the remainder for $76
million in 1997.

   A pre-merger analysis by Lehman Bros. in 1997 forecast that by 2003 Systemix
would have nine approved cancer and AIDS therapies with total revenue of $1.9
billion. But none of those products ever reached market, a disappointment for
Novartis shareholders.

   Stem Cells' own corporate history is as complicated as its science. Until two
years ago, it had a dual focus and a different name: CytoTherapeutics, which
experimented with pain medication in Rhode Island. Its stem cell unit, acquired
in 1997, was based in Sunnyvale, Calif.

   In mid-1999, the company faced a crisis when drug maker AstraZeneca yanked
its financial support of CytoTherapeutics' chronic pain therapy. The company
shuttered its Rhode Island operations and shifted its headquarters to
California, where it focused on stem cells. It also changed its corporate name.

   The overhaul was costly. Stem Cells is on the hook for $2.2 million in annual
payments on buildings in Rhode Island. It paid $1.2 million to settle a dispute
with a Rhode Island business development agency that said CytoTherapeutics
defaulted on a financing deal when it shut down.

   Stem Cells avoided a second cash crisis last year when biotechnology company
Genentech Inc. accepted stock in lieu of the $3.1 million Stem Cells owed it.
The debt arose when Genentech ended a Parkinson's disease collaboration with the
company. The setback shouldn't be viewed as a referendum on Stem Cells, said
newsletter editor McCamant. Established drug makers, despite public excitement
about stem cells, have backed away from such research.

   Basel, Switzerland-based Novartis shut down Systemix in May 2000 in what
appears to have been a financial disaster. One problem was that the company
couldn't produce blood stem cells in enough quantity to develop a broad market.
Novartis could have treated patients individually with their own stem cells, but
"it is not in the service business," Weissman said. Novartis said it has
redirected its efforts to gene therapy.

   Another company no longer interested in stem cell research is Thousand
Oaks-based Amgen Inc., though one of its vice presidents is a Stem Cells
director. Amgen in the early 1990s invested in blood stem cell research.

   "That is not where we see our opportunities," said Roger M. Perlmutter, Amgen
executive vice president for research and development.

   McGlynn, a former president of Abbott Laboratories in Canada with a knack for
fund-raising, became chief executive of Stem Cells in January. He previously ran
a drug research firm in Utah called Pharmadign Inc., for which he said he raised
more than $50 million.

   The recent offshore equity deal should provide Stem Cells, which lost $11.1
million in 2000, with enough cash for three years, McGlynn said. Stem Cells must
tap the offshore fund in stages and, according to a regulatory filing, the
amount it receives depends in part on its stock price, potentially limiting its
access to capital. At the end of 2000, it had $6.1 million in cash.

   McGlynn wouldn't comment on financing terms. "Quite a number of biotech
companies resort to this," he said. "If they can."

GRAPHIC:  White mice with stem cells from human fetuses growing in their brains
are part of an experiment at Stem Cells Inc. PHOTOGRAPHER: ANNE DOWIE / For The
Times
 Nobuko Uchida, director of research for Stem Cells Inc., and a team of
scientists are trying to determine whether successfully implanted cells are
functioning as intended. PHOTOGRAPHER: ANNE DOWIE / For The Times
 Stem Cells Inc. holds patents on the composition and use of its neural stem
cells.
 Alison Pohl, manager of Stem Cells Inc.'s lab services, works on viral testing
of tissues at an automated experiment station. PHOTOGRAPHER: ANNE DOWIE / For
The Times

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2001


                             1603 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 26, 2001 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2436 words

HEADLINE: World of promise grows in N.J. labs

BYLINE: KEVIN COUGHLIN, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Imagine a bone pin that melts away as fractures heal. Or sutures that soothe
as they stitch. Why not "print" new organs, one layer at a time?

    This is the peculiar world of biomaterials, where biology, chemistry and
engineering forge tools for "tissue engineers" who someday may replace organs
and limbs as easily as we change light bulbs.

    Biomaterials are ingredients for implants, drugs and lab-grown organs. They
drive regenerative medicine, gearing to supply spare parts for Americans who
outlive their original equipment. It's a world of promise. And it's percolating
in New Jersey, a pharmaceuticals capital fast becoming a bastion of biomats.

   You can't dial 1-800-Bladder. Not yet. But a Princeton firm, Therics Inc., is
tweaking inkjet printers to squirt out biological "scaffolds," upon which organs
might be grown. Other labs are chasing coatings and cocktails to coax nerves and
organs to grow. Still others pursue novel ways to deliver gene therapies and
plastic drugs that pack weeks of wallop into a single dose.

   Redefining the "skin trade," Bozena Michniak of the University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey hopes to speed tests of future drugs - and maybe
spare some lab animals - with fake flesh that reacts like the real thing. At
Rutgers University, Prabhas Moghe is enticing real skin cells to grow by
dangling invisible specks of gold before them. Two other Rutgers inventions -
the "resorbable" bone pin and "poly-aspirin" for sutures and implants - are
being honed at Central Jersey firms.

    All these projects fight a common foe: Father Time. As human edges fray,
science will be asked to restock the parts department, keeping extended sunsets
golden.

    "Now, our parts are wearing out before we're ready to disappear or give up a
lifestyle. There is an increasing demand for body parts. I hate to be that
crude, but that's what it boils down to," says Richard Caruso, founder of the
Integra LifeSciences Corp., a Plainsboro maker of artificial skin for burn
victims, tissue for brain surgery and, soon, a synthetic bridge for nerves in
the arms and legs.

    Biomaterials mean living better, not longer, asserts Joachim Kohn, at ground
zero of the statewide explosion.

    "We try to allow people to age with dignity," says Kohn, director of the New
Jersey Center for Biomaterials, a Rutgers-based consortium aiming for the big
leagues of research, despite scarce funds and other sticky problems.

    For Kohn, it's personal: A replacement leg artery, had it been available,
might have saved his elderly father from fatal complications of brain cancer.

    It's business, too. The center hopes to spin off new companies, mining gold
from golden-agers yet to come. Experts foresee a biomaterials boom when today's
Boomers start to bust.

    "As all those joggers hit 65 or 70, a lot of hips and knees will be sold,"
says Michael Lysaght, director of the Center for Biomedical Engineering at Brown
University.

   A READY MARKET

   One in five Americans who reach 65 will reach for the organ replacement shelf
before they die, Lysaght predicts. Already, he says, some 20 million people
worldwide live with high-tech implants and organ replacement devices, a $30
billion market of joints and stents, kidney dialysis instruments, heart valves
and pacemakers. Biomaterials are essential for all those items.

   They also helped Boston doctors grow a cartilage chest for a teenager with a
birth defect, and new bladders for dogs. Bioengineered bladders for humans could
enter clinical trials next year. Longer term, an engineered heart will rely on
biomaterials.

    "We use the tools of the material scientist to develop and build the
scaffolding upon which we try to grow living tissue," explains Joseph Vacanti. A
pediatrics surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital, he pioneered tissue
engineering 15 years ago from a salty inspiration: seaweed.

    Tired of seeing patients die on transplant waiting lists, Vacanti searched
for ways to grow human tissue. One answer came from seaweed: simple, branching
structures that exchange oxygen and nutrients with the sea.

   Vacanti would create scaffolds, branching networks of proteins, as a
life-support system for new cells, a physical framework to supply blood and
nutrients. He used this approach to culture a new chest, shielding the heart of
a teen born without ribs.

    Scaffolds usually start with a basic protein, collagen.

    "It's what holds you together," says Simon Archibald, chief neuroscientist
for Integra.

    As new tissue grows, the scaffold is consumed.

    Anthony Atala, a urology surgeon at Children's Hospital in Boston, compares
his canine bladders to a three-layer cake. The first layer is a
computer-modeled, 3-D matrix of collagen. One side is "seeded" with muscle
cells, the other with urothelial cells. For six weeks, this "cake" incubates in
the lab. Eventually, the collagen is absorbed. What remains is a bladder, fully
functional in about six months.

   BLUEPRINTS FOR ORGANS

   The power of suggestion underlies this alchemy. Tissue experts try to furnish
basic ingredients, then "let the body's own remodeling process take over," says
Moghe, the Rutgers biochemist.

    "All we do is provide the cues," says Atala, now setting his sights on
tracheas and nerves, as he awaits government permission for the human bladder
tests.

    Livers, kidneys and hearts top Vacanti's list. Borrowing methods from
computer chip-makers and inkjet printing, he hopes to create deep-reaching
vascular networks for these organs, which are harder to supply with blood than a
hollow bladder. He advises Therics, the Princeton firm trying to "print" layers
of blood vessels and capillaries using inkjet processes from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

    "Our vision down the road is for 3-D printing technology and
microfabrication to produce incredibly complex scaffolding, for replacement
tissues, and even replacement organs," says Andrew Purcell of Therics.

    Building better scaffolds is a crusade. The New Jersey Center for
Biomaterials hunts for chains of poly-amino acids called polymers - think
plastics or crab shells - to form scaffolds that nurture nerves, blood vessels,
bones and ligaments. These polymers must be "resorbable," dissolving as new
tissue grows or a drug payload is delivered.

    With labs branching from Piscataway to Newark, Kohn's "center" is something
of a research scaffold. And building it has proven just as tough as the search
for winning combinations of polymers.

    "It should be easier," Kohn says. The New Jersey Center for Biomaterials
serves as a clearinghouse, where scientists from five schools and 17 member
companies swap ideas and target research. Kohn dreams of rivaling MIT, Harvard,
Johns Hopkins University and other titans of biomaterials.

    But cracking the big time takes money and lab space, both in short supply.
Kohn says he can't squeeze any more researchers into cramped labs scattered
across the Rutgers Piscataway campus. Plans for a $28- million building for
biomaterials and genetics, slated for winter construction, took a blow when the
Legislature recently slashed a $3 million request by two-thirds. Rutgers is
scrambling for more grants and patrons.

    While experts say Kohn's center has made big strides since its birth in
1997, some say a hit product would lure more talent and federal dollars.

    "They need some new discoveries. Then they need time, with successes. They
also need money. These guys are constantly battling for financial support," says
George Brode, a longtime chemist with Union Carbide now at Integra.

    Kohn collaborates with about 60 faculty members and 200 graduate students
from Rutgers, the New Jersey Institute of Technology and the University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. Princeton University and the Stevens
Institute of Technology play lesser roles.

    So far, the center has created 40 jobs and snared $9 million in funding from
outside the state. That's small change for an MIT, but it's a start, says Kohn.

    While private powerhouses like MIT and Stanford promote spinoffs, G. Robert
Marcus, manager of the new Conexus venture fund in Somerville, says strict rules
governing conflicts of interest for New Jersey employees, even academics,
discourage would-be entrepreneurs at state schools.

    Although Rutgers shares patent royalties with inventors, it requires faculty
reviews when professors seek more than 1 percent ownership of a start-up.
Rutgers' new guru of technology transfer, Michael Breton vows to streamline the
reviews and woo investors more ardently on behalf of start-ups.

    "Our mission is to transfer technology from labs into the commercial sector
to do public good," insists Breton, formerly of the University of Pennsylvania
and the University of Illinois.

   BATTLING ANTI-JERSEY BIAS

   Some biomaterials people claim New Jersey is a particularly hard sell to
venture capitalists, whose money is like jet fuel for start-ups in California,
Massachusetts and Texas.

    "If it's invented here," investors think "it can't be any good," says Robert
Butz, president of Polymerix, a Highland Park spinoff of the center. John
Tesoriero of the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology admits it's a
tough notion to dispel.

    The state commission got the biomaterials center rolling with $3.6 million
and may support a spinoff center for dental research. Other backing for Kohn's
consortium includes $1 million from the National Institutes of Health and
$600,000 from the National Science Foundation, to make the center a model for
industrial partnerships.

   Kohn, born in Germany and educated in Israel, is not shy about deal-making.
He says corporate know-how is crucial to move ideas from the Ivory Tower into
people's lives.

    New Jersey should be fertile ground. Up to 600 medical device companies dot
the state, with more than 60,000 people working in medical technology or
pharmaceuticals. Players include the Babe Ruth of biomaterials, Johnson &
Johnson Corp.

    Not surprisingly, then, the center is sprinkled with veterans of the
pharmaceutical wars - people who know how to make products, and who know the
people who make products.

    Arthur Schwartz, retired from Becton Dickinson, knows "upscaling." His
Rutgers lab determines if a biomaterial can be mass-produced. He also prepares
radioactive isotopes for tracking polymers inside lab animals. When the center
needs a new polymer fiber, NJIT's Michael Jaffe, formerly of Hoechst-Celanese,
has the gear. Contacts? See Salvatore Romano, most recently of J&J.

    Kohn, a chemist, also boasts some academic firepower. For computer
simulations, there is Doyle Knight, a Rutgers professor who has designed French
ballistic missiles. On questions of nerve regrowth, it's hard to beat Wise
Young, a Rutgers expert on spinal injury. "Bo" Michniak, the skin maven at
UMDNJ, was recruited for her expertise in pharmaceuticals science. Kathryn
Uhrich of Rutgers is emerging as a polymers impressario.

    "There is not a single scientific challenge you can name for which I can't
find a faculty member in 24 hours, within 40 miles' distance," says Kohn, 49, a
stickler for detail with deep reservoirs of energy.

    Practicing what he preaches, Kohn has small stakes in several companies.
Integra is perfecting his bone pin, made from a class of polymers called
tyrosine polycarbonates, with $4 million from the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. The company hopes to revolutionize orthopedics,
spurring new bone growth while sparing surgery for pin removal.

    Bone surgeon Charles Gatt of New Brunswick says the New Jersey center excels
at this sort of cross- pollination.

    "When I say, 'These are the things I can do as a surgeon in 2001, and these
are the things I'd like to do,' industry and researchers hear my talks and may
be spurred to do new things," says Gatt, a guest speaker at the center.

    He cites efforts by Michael Dunn, a center member from UMDNJ, to regrow ACL
tissue, a ligament injured by athletes. Repairs now require grafts from the
patient, or from cadavers.

    Someday, Gatt hopes to pluck Dunn's biomaterial from a bag, put it inside a
knee, and watch new ligament grow. Bio-coatings may deliver gene therapies,
growth factors and enzymes - restoring cartilage to creaky joints with a few
dabs.

    "It may be the end of arthritis," Gatt says. As the human genome reveals its
secrets, the center is teaming up with Johnson & Johnson to explore how to
deliver future gene therapies.

    Lifecell Corp. of Branchburg, meanwhile, is talking with Kohn about nerve
guides that blend biology and biotech. It's a hot area, offering hope to 250,000
paralyzed Americans.

    Lifecell is best known for AlloDerm, a burn treatment made from skin donated
to tissue banks. The company removes cell matter, leaving a matrix of collagen,
elastin and other proteins. This scaffold serves as a "house" for the patient's
own cells, which take over, says Stephen Livesey, Lifecell founder and chief
scientist.

    He envisions growing nerves in this fashion - within a synthetic wrapper, to
ward off scar-forming cells. Livesey, who has 140 employees and a
60,000-square-foot plant, moved his $30-million firm from Houston in 1999.

    "The intense concentration of biotech and medical device companies in New
Jersey made the state attractive," says Livesey, a doctor from Australia.

    Others say Kohn is the magnet.

    Advanced Materials Design is working on a polymer powder to ease pain.
Doctors would sprinkle it during surgery. Arikha Moses, a former venture
capitalist, started her company to push Kohn's ideas after scouting the
fledgling center in 1997. "It was very unique, and we decided to build a company
around it," says Moses.

    Kohn also rates kudos from potential funding rivals, such as Peter Johnson
of the Pittsburgh Tissue Engineering Initiative and Anthony Ratcliffe of
Advanced Tissue Sciences, a San Diego firm that makes skin grafts from neonatal
foreskins.

    MIT bioengineer Robert Langer, Kohn's mentor, recalls him as a "fantastic
chemist" and a "mover and shaker." He says Kohn spurned a tempting offer from
the University of Minnesota for Rutgers, where he has taught since 1986.

    "New Jersey is lucky to have him," says Langer, who feels Kohn has struck
gold. "The question is, can you mine it right?"

    For now, most of the mining is medical. But the real fun begins when this
crowd starts messing with everyday things, says Richard Oliver, author of "The
Coming Biotech Age, The Business of Biomaterials."

    "Bioterials," as Oliver calls them, will transform society just like
computers did, he says. By 2030, engineers will grow paper and computer chips,
solvents, oils and rubber, "things you don't think about but that make the world
go round and keep it greased."

GRAPHIC: 1. Simon J. Archibald of Integra LifeSciences, Plainsboro, shows an
absorbable implant for the repair of severed nerves.

 2. Kathryn Uhrich of Rutgers with a model of her invention poly-aspirin, a
plastic with aspirin-like qualities.

 3. Integra LifeSciences of Plainsboro has devised a system that places cow
collagen and shark cartilage over a burn victim's skin. The patient's own cells
invade the sheet and gradually absorb and replace it.

 4. Joachim Kohn heads the New Jersey Center for Biomaterials, a clearinghouse
through which scientists from five schools and 17 member companies share
research. Kohn hopes to rival the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard
and Johns Hopkins universities.

 5. Top, microscopes show manmade materials (yellow) interacting with bone cells
(red). Center, bone cells (red) on polymer metals (green). Bottom, particles on
polymeric biomaterial.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1604 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                     August 26, 2001 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. L02

LENGTH: 373 words

HEADLINE: FUND-RAISERS THE FOLLOWING EVENTS BENEFIT NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIO

BODY:

   The following events benefit nonprofit organizations. All telephone listings
are in the 503 area code unless otherwise noted.

   Classical music: Radio station KBPS will present an afternoon of music for
the whole family beginning at 1 p.m. today at Montinore Vineyard, 3663 S.W.
Dilley Road in Forest Grove. Los Peregrinos, a Tango collective featuring two
violinists and a pianist, will perform the music of Raymond Granlund, which
blends traditional tango with Bach and jazz. A separate performance for
children, "Thomas and His Musical Tales," will include puppet instruments. All
proceeds will benefit classical music station KBPS (89.9 FM). Food and beverages
can be purchased, or bring a picnic. A blanket and/or a low back chair is
suggested. Tickets: $12 general admission, $10 KBPS members (show card), $5
youth (ages 6-16), $28 family pass, free for children under 7; 916-5828.

   Lofty goals: A tour of lofts and an afternoon of Art in the Pearl will be
from noon to 5 p.m. Saturday. The tour, sponsored by the Northwest District
Council of Epsilon Alpha International, will begin at 401 N.W. Flanders St. Each
loft will offer a different event, including a book signing with Portland author
Phillip Margolin, an opportunity to speak with a representative of the Chinese
Garden, a demonstration of flower arranging by Sharon McKenney, a display of
artwork at The Pearl Gallery and a visit to the Aequis Spa. Proceeds will
provide scholarships for women in transition. Tickets: $20, can be bought from
any member or at the door; 641-8454.

   Gene therapy: Michael Allen Harrison and Tom Grant will perform together at
7:30 p.m. Sunday, Sept. 9, in the Newmark Theater at the Portland Center for the
Performing Arts. This is the first time the two Portland musicians have played
together, and proceeds will benefit Michael's uncle, Gene Miller, who has
cancer. There will also be guest performances of family and friends. Tickets:
$25-$75 at Fastixx outlets or 224-8499. Items should be submitted at least two
weeks before the event. Please send announcements to Fund-raisers, Living
section, The Oregonian, 1320 S.W. Broadway, Portland, OR 97201, or fax to
503-294-7691. Details: 503-221-8147.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2001


                             1605 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      August 24, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY, Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: Group calls for boycott of Disney's 'Bubble Boy';
 Protest : A Towson-based organization says the movie is insensitive to the
real-life 'bubble boy' and others with immune deficiencies.

BYLINE: Michael Scarcella

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   From its national headquarters in Towson, the Immune Deficiency Foundation is
leading the nationwide campaign to deflate the mighty Walt Disney Company -- or
at least its new comedy, Bubble Boy.

   "It's like David vs. Goliath," said the foundation's president, Tom Moran.
"We're a small organization but we'll do whatever it takes."

   IDF, a patient advocacy outlet for people diagnosed with primary immune
deficiencies, objects to the movie because it pokes fun at the consequences of
living with a potentially fatal disease. The film's main character is a
teen-ager afflicted with an immune deficiency who builds a plastic bubble in
which he can move through the world.

   The real "bubble boy," David Philip Vetter, suffered from a rare
immune-deficiency disease and got his nickname because he lived in an
experimental plastic environment that was germ-free. Vetter, from suburban
Houston, died in 1984.

   Members of the IDF have criticized the Disney film because they say Vetter
and the unique circumstances of his life shouldn't be a source of amusement. The
movie's producers say the film isn't based on Vetter's life.

   With 30 chapters across the country, IDF members have deluged Disney with
letters since mid-July, when the group learned of the movie. Some chapters are
planning to protest at theaters when Bubble Boy opens today.

   The group is also calling for the movie's removal from theaters, a national
boycott and an apology from Michael D. Eisner, Disney's chairman, to Carol Ann
Demaret, David Vetter's mother.

   Marcia L. Boyle, who founded IDF in 1980, has taken charge of the crusade. "I
shouldn't have to tell you that diseases and disabilities are no laughing
matter!" she wrote to Eisner July 31. "There's a part of me that almost feels
sympathy for the criticism that you must continuously face over good-natured
movies that cause protest. There is nothing good-natured, however, about this
movie."

   David was born in 1971 with a rare genetic disorder called severe combined
immunodeficiency, or SCID, which rendered his immune system unable to fend off
even the mildest of microbes.

   Texas Children's Hospital designed an experimental treatment, the first of
its kind, to shield David from disease and infection. He would grow up in a
sterile environment, sheltered by a thick plastic "bubble" -- similar to that in
Disney's movie.

   The media nicknamed David "bubble boy" because he spent his life inside this
plastic womb.

   "It was an affectionate title," Demaret said in a telephone interview. "The
media really respected him. The world was watching."

   Until his death at age 12, David's surname was not released, in order to
protect his privacy, his mother said.

   IDF claims Bubble Boy -- released by Touchstone Pictures, a Disney
subsidiary, and promoted as a gag-a-minute comedy -- is offensive to people with
primary immune disorders like David's. The teen-ager in the film builds a
spherical, translucent bubble in order to leave his "bubble room" at home and
enter the outdoors for the first time.

   And when he gets outside, the comedy begins. He is tossed around atop a crowd
at a rock concert; he falls off a motorcycle; he is hit by a speeding school
bus; he is thrown through a billboard. But none of this hurts him: The bubble
protects him from physical harm.

   Demaret claims the movie shamelessly exploits the life of her son, even
though the film claims likeness to anyone living or dead is coincidental.

   "The movie cheapens what I believe is a revered life," Demaret contends.
"What doctors have learned from David's life they've been able to apply to
treatment and ultimately to a cure."

   The movie's producer, Beau Flynn, and director, Blair Hayes, say there's no
connection between the movie's character and the real-life bubble boy.

   "This movie is in no way a parody of (David's) life," Flynn told Matt Lauer
of NBC's Today. "We're not poking fun at any disease at all in this film."

   "There's plenty of offensive things in (the) movie for different groups,"
Hayes said. "And the last thing we ever thought would be controversial was the
actual disease itself."

   Fred Modell of New York isn't buying the argument. "The idea of a comedy on a
theme of this nature is troubling," said Modell, co-sponsor of the Jeffrey
Modell Foundation, named for his son who died from an immunodeficiency. "I am
perplexed that Disney would say this is not connected to a disease."  SCID is
the most serious of the nearly 100 primary immune deficiencies, said Dr. Jerry
Winkelstein of Johns Hopkins University Children's Center, chairman of IDF's
Medical Advisory Committee. Although there is no cure, treatment today is more
effective than when David Vetter was diagnosed in 1971. Gene therapy and bone
marrow transplants have allowed a 75 percent survival rate for children
diagnosed with SCID during infancy, Winkelstein noted.

   Through its letter-writing campaign, IDF hoped to persuade Eisner to cancel
the release of Bubble Boy.

   According to Boyle, whose son, John, 23, has an antibody deficiency, IDF also
wanted Disney to place a video at the end of the PG-13 film about David Vetter's
life and the seriousness of genetic immune disorders.

   Disney is releasing the movie without a reference to David.

   A merchandising campaign has started: On movies.com, Touchstone Pictures' Web
site, you can win a life-sized, inflatable Bubble Boy ball -- "perfect for
backyard or beach play," reads the ad's copy.

   Regarding the placement of an informational trailer following the movie,
Disney spokesperson Andrea Marozas said in a telephone interview: "They never
really made a request." She added that by the time IDF approached Disney in July
about canceling the movie's release, it was too late in the production schedule.

   Disney intends to work with IDF in a public awareness campaign about primary
immune deficiencies, Marozas said. No details have been made public.

   Disney's movie isn't the first reference to "bubble boy" in popular culture.
John Travolta starred in a 1976 television movie called The Boy in the Plastic
Bubble. And an episode of NBC's Seinfeld depicted a surly "bubble boy" whose
face was never shown.

   IDF criticized Seinfeld, too, but not to the degree that it is protesting the
Disney comedy.

   Eisner couldn't be reached for comment. But in an Aug. 20 statement to
Demaret's congressman, Eisner said, "We are aware and sensitive to the concerns
raised on behalf of those with immune deficiency and we assure them and you that
Jimmy Livingston is portrayed as a likeable and heroic figure."

   Boyle intends to use the controversy for IDF's benefit.

   "If we can alert people that these diseases exist, I think realistically
that's all we can hope for now," she said. "I would like to hear down the line
that maybe some lives were saved -- because people are more aware now."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Mother: Carol Ann Demaret's son David Philip Vetter died,
in 1984.; , 2. Founder: Marcia L. Boyd is leading the boycott against Disney's,
"Bubble Boy.", 1. ASSOCIATED PRESS , 2. ANDRE F. CHUNG : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2001


                             1606 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     August 24, 2001 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg.C-13

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: NO LAUGHING MATTER;
 GROUP PROTESTS DISNEY'S 'BUBBLE BOY' FOR POKING FUN AT DREADFUL DISEASE

BYLINE: DAVID CHO, THE WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   Disney's latest movie "Bubble Boy," promoted as a gag-a-minute comedy about a
bumbling teen-ager who lives in a plastic bubble to avoid illness, ends with a
disclaimer saying that the story is pure fiction.

    But a group of angry parents and doctors wants Walt Disney Co. to halt the
film's release today, saying it cuts too close to the real and tragic story of
David Philip Vetter, a Texas youth who spent his entire 12 years inside a
plastic enclosure because a life-threatening genetic disease made him
susceptible to even the most common germs.

    The 15,000-member Immune Deficiency Foundation, based in Towson, Md., is
leading the charge against the movie, calling for a nationwide boycott.

    Even before his death in 1984, David Vetter had become the symbol for
children suffering from severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or SCID. His
lifelong isolation, which included wearing an astronaut-like bubble suit, was a
one-time experiment. It forever linked the nickname "Bubble Boy" with him and
the term "Bubble Boy Disease" with SCID.

    Disney's movie, parents of SCID victims say, will exacerbate the teasing and
misunderstanding that their children experience.

    About 50 SCID babies are born each year in this country; now, approximately
half survive into adulthood, thanks to treatments such as gene therapy. Some
live nearly cured of the disease, while others have to be extremely careful,
wearing protective gear such as gloves and masks, or staying home during
outbreaks of flu and other illnesses.

    "All of our children are known as bubble boys," said Barbara Ballard, of
Clifton, Va., whose son, Ray, 7, has SCID. "What are they going to have to face
at school after this comes out?"

    If Disney won't pull back, members of the Immune Deficiency Foundation plan
to protest at theaters showing the PG-13 film, handing out educational
materials, founder Marcia Boyle said.

    A Disney executive in Burbank, Calif., speaking on condition of anonymity,
said the company had no plans to drop the movie, which is being distributed by
its Touchstone Pictures division. "I think many fears will be assuaged once
people see the film," she said. "The bubble is just a setup for [the comedy].
There is no relationship with real life at all."

    According to the film's Web site and ads, the main character is a California
teen-ager who has spent his life in a plastic bubble. The boy falls for a local
girl, and when he hears she is getting married in New York, he makes his way
across the country, wearing a special bubble suit, to stop the wedding.

    Previews for the movie show the boy getting run over by a bus and bounced
around like a beach ball at a rock concert.

    The images sicken Carol Ann Demaret, David Vetter's mother.

    "Disney says the resemblance to my son is purely coincidental," she said in
a phone interview from her home in Houston. "But that can't be true if there was
only one 'Bubble Boy' in history. Did they even think about how this might
affect those who have to deal with this life-threatening disease?"

    This is not the first time Disney has found itself in hot water with
viewers. Controversy erupted a few years ago when some moviegoers saw the word
"SEX" in a cloud of dust in the animated film "The Lion King."

    In 1999, the company recalled 3.4 million video copies of "The Rescuers"
because an animator had added a fleeting image of a topless woman in the
background of one scene. It also disassociated itself from the film "Dogma"
after pressure from U.S. Catholic groups that saw it as irreverent. But industry
analysts said "Bubble Boy" was too far along in the pipeline to be stopped now.

    NBC's "Seinfeld" aired a now-famous episode about a spoiled bubble boy who
irritated everyone with his bratty behavior.

    After it aired, the Immune Deficiency Foundation asked NBC never to show it
again but was rebuffed, said Demaret.

    "My daughter watched it and just cried and cried," she said, adding that she
refused to watch it and had no plans to see the movie, either.

    "I just don't want this next generation to associate David's life with this
movie," Demaret said. "It's a mockery to his memory and the courageous life he
lived."


GRAPHIC: Photo: Susan Biddle/Washington Post: Barbara and Don Ballard of
Clifton, Va., parents of Ray, 7, who suffers from severe combined
immunodeficiency disease, or SCID, object to the Disney movie "Bubble Boy."
Barbara Ballard worries about the ridicule children with SCID will face once the
comedy opens at theaters today. "All of our children are known as bubble boys,"
she said. "What are they going to have to face at school after this comes out?"

 Photo: Touchstone Pictures: In the Disney comedy "Bubble Boy," Jake Gyllenhaal
plays teen-ager Jimmy Livingston, who has lived in a plastic bubble room kept
free of germs by his mother, played by Swoosie Kurtz. Wearing a plastic bubble
suit, the teen heads out on a cross-country journey to stop a local girl's
wedding.
 Photo: Susan Biddle/Washington Post: Barbara and Don Ballard of Clifton, Va.,
parents of Ray, 7, who suffers from severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or
SCID, object to the Disney movie "Bubble Boy." Barbara Ballard worries about the
ridicule children with SCID will face once the comedy opens at theaters today.
"All of our children are known as bubble boys," she said. "What are they going
to have to face at school after this comes out?"

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2001


                             1607 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 August 23, 2001, Thursday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 456 words

HEADLINE: CANCER DRUG CONNECTION

BYLINE: BY NANCY DILLON DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
Enthusiasm over a new lung cancer therapy turned biotech firm Isis
Pharmaceuticals into the star of the Nasdaq yesterday.

   Isis, maker of an experimental drug meant to reverse the growth of lung
cancer tumors, took center stage after announcing pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly
was buying a stake in the company.

   That hefty vote of confidence, worth at least $200 million, sent Isis stock
soaring 48%, from $10.08 to $14.89, making it Wall Street's biggest percentage
gainer.

   The Isis drug, called ISIS 3521, is based on a genetic therapy called
"antisense" that inhibits the production of disease-causing proteins.

   "It's exciting," said Dr. Vincent Miller, a lung cancer specialist at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. "There's been skepticism about the
promise of [this] technology, and [the Lilly investment] lends validity."

   According to the American Cancer Society, lung cancer is the leading cancer
killer among American men and women, causing about 150,000 deaths in the U.S.
each year. Treatment is generally limited to chemotherapy and surgery.

   "There's tremendous room for new lung cancer therapies, especially ones [like
this] with few side effects," Miller said, adding quickly that while the Isis
drug clearly impressed Lilly researchers, it's not a cure and still must undergo
a final round of rigorous trial testing.

   Dr. Stanley Crooke, Isis' chairman, said the $200 million Lilly investment is
equal to about half of what Isis has so far spent on this family of drugs.

   "Lilly enhances the potential of [these drugs] because of the financial
muscle it brings to bear," Crooke said, explaining that if it turns out the
government requires a second Phase III clinical study before approving ISIS
3521, Isis will tap the Lilly investment to begin the second trial immediately.

   "There's always a chance we won't make it to market, but the plan is to get
approval in 2003," Crooke said. Lilly will own the license for the drug's
distribution.

   Other drugs using the same genetic technique and now in development by Isis
target diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, hepatitis C and a variety of cancers.
Lilly stands first in line for distribution of these as well.

   The California company's main competitor, New Jersey-based Genta, is now
testing a trial drug designed to treat melanoma, or skin cancer.

   Genta stock jumped $2.10 yesterday, or 27%, to end the day at $10.

   "Genta performed well today because Lilly's move adds clout to the entire
concept," said Andrew Gitken, a biotech analyst at UBS Warburg.

   "There's definitely room for both companies in this field," he added.
"There's no reason for them to step on each other's toes."GRAPHIC: ISIS STOCK
SOARS ON LILLY DEAL

GRAPHIC: Isis Pharmaceuticals, headed by Stanley Crooke, gets $200 million in
Eli Lilly deal.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                             1608 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   August 22, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 1384 words

HEADLINE: CHIPPING AWAY AT GENETIC CODE ;
NEW RESOURCE CENTER GIVES ACCESS TO GENE-CHIP TECHNOLOGY TO HELP
RESEARCHERSFIGURE OUT HOW CELLS BECOME DISEASED

SOURCE: VIRGINIA GEWIN - The Oregonian

BODY:

   The Human Genome Project gave us the blueprint for life, but no instruction
manual.

   Now that scientists have figured out how to open human cells, release the
encased genetic code and sequence it, they have one more hurdle: Figure out how
it works.

   A chip of glass the size of a toenail is quickly helping scientists realize
that goal. The gene chip, which holds thousands of genes on its surface, is
opening a window into how the human body works. And how it blunders.

   The gene chip is also called a microarray because it arranges the gene pieces
in a specific order on the chip. The chip is used in experiments that instantly
determine which genes in a cell are being expressed or are making proteins.

   Proteins are the players in cell function. The entire genome is contained in
each cell type, but skin cells, stomach cells or heart cells will make different
proteins because they express different genes specific to that cell type.

   Oregon Health & Science University recently opened the Gene Microarray Shared
Resource facility, the only one of its kind in Oregon, to provide universitywide
access to gene-chip technology. The resource center consists of three core
units: the Affymetrix Microarray Core, the HEDCO/ Oregon Cancer Institute
Spotted Microarray Core, and the Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core. The
HEDCO Foundation of Northern California, contributed more than $550,000 to speed
the establishment of the center.

   OHSU researchers are eager to use the technique in disease studies because of
its ability to process massive amounts of genetic information. Mutations in the
genetic code can increase a person's chances of getting a disease. If scientists
can identify the genes responsible for a disease and define their functions,
they can more quickly develop treatments.

   "It's just being able to look at a whole genome in action. That is really
new," said Klaus Fruh, director of the Gene Microarray Shared Resource Facility.

   Cancer and stroke researchers have been among the first to use the technology
at OHSU.

   "What we need to know is what goes wrong with the cells in our body," said
Grover Bagby, director of the Oregon Cancer Institute at OHSU. "One of the ways
that we can determine what's happening is to get a report directly from the
cells."

   RNA is key to the technique of interpreting a cell's behavior. RNA translates
the genetic information from DNA into the production of proteins. RNA is a
simple molecule that is the precursor to proteins and much easier to examine in
volume than proteins would be.

   "The proteins are what really determines what goes on in that cell," said
Chris Harrington, manager of the Affymetrix Core at OHSU.

   Matching RNA to DNA Great care must be taken to get good microarray data,
because RNA can degrade rapidly. If the RNA extracted from a cell corresponds to
the DNA on the chip, the match indicates the expression of a gene that can code
for specific proteins.

   Once the fragile RNA has been labeled and prepared, the directions are fairly
straightforward:

   Pour RNA on the chip. Spin it. Incubate it. Wash it. Scan it with a special
laser.

   A union of the labeled RNA to the DNA on the chip will light up under the
scanner. At the end of the process, you can have the answer to thousands of
genetic questions.

   Never before has there been a technique that offered promises of both
diagnosis and treatment. Researchers now know the function of only about 8,000
genes. Isolating the genes of interest from among the 30,000 to 40,000 possible
genes gives scientists a powerful new tool. With gene-chip technology, they can
instantly distinguish a gene of interest whose function might not have been
known.

   The Affymetrix Microarray Core facility opened universitywide about three
months ago. Affymetrix is a commercial business that produces gene chips with
fragments of up to 12,000 genes on them. The immediate benefits will come in
cancer treatment, Fruh said, because researchers will be able to distinguish
different types of cancers.

   People with cancers that seemingly are the same often respond differently to
standard treatments. "The reason is that the two cancers are actually not
identical, but with all current technology you cannot distinguish this," Fruh
said.

   Finding cell differences Grover Bagby studies Fanconi anemia, a rare genetic
disorder caused by the inheritance of two mutated genes. It causes bone marrow
failure and can lead to acute leukemia and cancer.

   Bagby recently used the gene-chip technique to compare the genes expressed in
two siblings who have Fanconi anemia. Only one has a preleukemic condition. The
new technology will help him "figure out some very fundamental mechanisms by
which leukemia cells are different than normal cells," he said.

   In one week, Bagby got information that it would have taken him seven years
to obtain without gene-chip technology. Now Bagby can identify the genes
responsible for the leukemic cell's behavior. The genes may even lead to
explanations of other types of malignancies in patients who do not have Fanconi
anemia.

   "There's a gazillion questions that can be answered using RNA as a report for
the behavior of cell types," Bagby said.

   Mary Stenzel-Poore, an OHSU researcher, investigates how tiny strokes before
a big stroke actually precondition people, protecting them from cell damage
during what she calls "the big hit."

   She and her collaborators think the genes are producing protective proteins
that guard against cell death following injury. The protective proteins may be
expressed during very different events such as trauma, tiny seizures and after
exposure to small amounts of endotoxin.

   Stenzel-Poore is using microarrays to uncover the genes that may be involved
in a pathway common to each of these events. She is attempting to produce better
alternatives than the only existing therapy, tissue plasminogen activator, a
blood thinner that must be administered within three hours of the stroke to be
effective.

   Therapeutic treatments have long been a goal for stroke researchers.

   "There are mechanisms that come into play that protect you against the big
hit -- the major stroke. Imagine if you knew what these were?" Stenzel-Poore
said. "You would have neuroprotective therapies close at hand."

   For researchers, gene-chip technology can solve extraordinarily complicated
problems that no one person could ever figure out by conventional methods. The
technique allows scientists to look at all the players at once.

   "You're seeing something that nobody else has ever seen before,"
Stenzel-Poore said. "It's very exciting."

   One-stop gene research The Spotted Microarray Core will open in a few weeks.
It provides custom arrays that might not be available from companies such as
Affymetrix. The arrays are produced in-house from gene libraries. The scientists
have acquired libraries of human, mouse and rat gene sequences that can be used
to make the specialized chips easily, quickly and cheaply.

   "We can design arrays for organisms that normally wouldn't be profitable for
companies to produce," said Robert Searles, manager of the Spotted Microarray
Core.

   The major bottlenecks with the techniques are data analysis and
interpretation.

   "We're not used to dealing with this much data," Searles said. "We can easily
generate a million data points in one experiment."

   To help resolve that problem, the third core, Bioinformatics and
Biostatistics Core, was set up to analyze, interpret and integrate the data
pouring in from genome research. Bioinformatics is a new field combining
computer science, database management and statistical knowledge to manage the
data.

   Scientists say that assimilating the genetic information will be challenging
but immediately rewarding. Because gene chips provide a window into cell
function, researchers can determine which potential treatments to try first and
more easily assess their effectiveness.

   Tailor-made treatments are a realistic outcome with gene-chip technology.
Doctors would be able to tell which treatments will be most effective for each
individual, pharmacologists could tailor drug therapies and researchers
eventually could see instantly whether gene therapies are working.

   You can reach Virginia Gewin at virginiagewin@news.oregonian.com or
503-294-4153.

GRAPHIC: Photo by Stephanie Yao - The Oregonian; 2 photos courtesy of Brian
Tompkins - OHSU; Sidebar - Crunching the Data

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2001


                             1609 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     August 21, 2001 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 06B

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: 'Bubble Boy' comedy is seen as insensitive;
Angry parents say it cuts too close to true story of Texas youth's disease

BYLINE: DAVID CHO Washington Post

BODY:

   Disney's "Bubble Boy," promoted as a gag-a-minute comedy about a bumbling
teenager who lives in a plastic bubble to avoid illness, ends with a disclaimer
saying the story is fictitious. But a group of angry parents and doctors wants
Walt Disney Co. to halt the film's release -- planned for Friday -- saying it
cuts too close to the real and tragic story of David Philip Vetter, a Texas
youth who spent his entire 12 years inside a plastic enclosure because a
life-threatening genetic disease made him susceptible to even the most common
germs. The 15,000-member Immune Deficiency Foundation, based in Towson, Md., is
leading the charge against the movie, calling for a nationwide boycott. Even
before his death in 1984, Vetter had become the symbol for children suffering
from severe combined immunodeficiency disease. His lifelong isolation, which
included a one-time experiment involving wearing an astronaut-like bubble suit,
linked the nickname "Bubble Boy" with him. About 50 babies are born with the
disease each year in this country; about half survive into adulthood, thanks to
treatments such as gene therapy. Some live nearly cured of the disease, while
others have to wear protective gear such as gloves and masks, or stay home
during outbreaks of flu and other illnesses. "All of our children are known as
bubble boys," said Barbara Ballard, of Clifton, Va., whose son, Ray, 7, has the
disease. "What are they going to have to face at school after this comes out?" A
Disney executive in Burbank, Calif., speaking on condition of anonymity, said
the company had no plans to drop the movie. "I think many fears will be assuaged
once people see the film," the executive said. "The bubble is just a setup for
(the comedy). There is no relationship with real life at all." According to the
film's Web ads, the main character is a teenager who has spent his life in a
plastic bubble. The boy falls for a local girl, and when he hears she is getting
married he makes his way across the country, wearing a special bubble suit, to
stop the wedding. Previews for the movie show the boy getting run over by a bus
and bounced around like a beach ball at a rock concert. The images sicken Carol
Ann Demaret, Vetter's mother. "Disney says the resemblance to my son is purely
coincidental," she said in a phone interview from her home in Houston. "But that
can't be true if there was only one 'Bubble Boy' in history. Did they even think
about how this might affect those who have to deal with this life-threatening
disease?"

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2001


                             1610 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      August 21, 2001 Tuesday, Final / All

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: With help, failing hearts may heal,;
Clinic finds

BYLINE: Roger Mezger, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   Failing hearts showed signs of healing themselves after battery-powered
devices took over their pumping chores and gave the hearts a chance to rest,
Cleveland Clinic researchers report.

   The finding is important because it bolsters doctors' hopes that within a
decade, new treatments will be able to reverse heart failure.

   The only cure for end-stage heart failure now is a transplant.

   "We think this is sort of another piece of the puzzle indicating that the
heart can recover while it's resting on this device," said Dr. Patrick McCarthy,
head of heart transplantation at the Clinic and an adviser to the study.

   Results of the study are being published today in the medical journal
Circulation.

   Researchers looked at how failing hearts performed before and after patients
had temporary electric helper pumps called LVADs - for left ventricular assist
devices - implanted in their chests.

   LVADs relieve the heart's main pumping chamber, the left ventricle, of the
demands of beating dozens of times a minute to send oxygen-rich blood to the
body.

   The devices buy time for dying patients awaiting heart transplants.

   When doctors implant an LVAD, they remove a slice of the heart. Monique
Ogletree-Hughes, a post-doctoral fellow at the Clinic who was the lead
researcher for the study, tested that diseased tissue and found that it did not
respond to the chemicals that the body produces to make the heart work harder in
times of stress.

   Months later, after the patients with LVADs had received heart transplants,
Ogletree-Hughes ran the same tests on the old hearts doctors had removed.

   "We saw that the ability [of the heart to respond] had recovered," said
Christine Moravec, a cardiac physiologist who runs the Clinic lab where
Ogletree-Hughes did her work.

   "We didn't cure heart failure. We showed that one of the changes associated
with heart failure can be reversed, which we didn't know previously."

   The hearts that LVADs had assisted responded significantly better to the
chemical tests than did the hearts of patients who had not received LVADs before
getting transplants, Moravec said.

   Also, the LVAD patients' hearts performed about the same in the tests as did
non-failing donor hearts that were given to research after being found
unsuitable for transplant, she said.

   But McCarthy said that in order for a heart to recover enough to eventually
be weaned off an LVAD, additional treatments will be required while the heart is
resting. Those treatments might include a new drug, gene therapy or cell
transplants that could help the heart grow new tissue.

   "The next phase is to go from just improving [the heart] to actually
recovering it and making it back to where it was," McCarthy said.

   Contact Roger Mezger at:

   rmezger@plaind.com, 216-999-4446

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1611 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    August 18, 2001, Saturday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: Patients, families aren't laughing at new film;
Some say Disney's new slapstick comedy "Bubble Boy" makes light of a serious
immune deficiency disease.

BYLINE: H.J. Cummins; Staff Writer

BODY:

   RSEC:             From his birth, sweet-faced Isaac Antilla coughed like a
smoker. By two months, he had bronchitis. At three months: pneumonia. Four
months: ear infection. Six months: vomiting. Nine months: possible asthma.

        Not the usual baby book entries.

        Instead, they were the early signs of a rare immune deficiency disease
that would force the Antilla family of Isanti, Minn., through five years of
unrelenting sickness, constant rounds of antibiotics, blood tests, CAT scans, a
barium swallow and an endoscope, before Isaac, now 9, had his disease finally
diagnosed and treated with regular blood transfusions.

        Next Friday, Walt Disney's Touchstone Pictures will release a movie
about a boy with the same kind of sickness as Isaac, except it's so severe that
he can live only in a germ-free bubble.

        But "Bubble Boy" is not a heartwarming movie. It's a slapstick comedy in
which the young man has a series of misadventures as he bounces across America
to try to catch up to a sweetheart.

        The Antillas are offended. So is the Immune Deficiency Foundation, a
national organization of patients and their families, which is asking the
moviegoing public to boycott the film.

   'No joke'

        "You know why?" said Kathy Antilla, Isaac's mother. "Because this is
just not a joke."

        The Walt Disney Co. declined to comment. But parents, doctors and
advocates from the Maryland-based foundation complain that the movie makes fun
of a life-threatening illness in a way that filmmakers would never do with
breast cancer or leukemia, for example.

        One indication that these opponents won't like what they see: The movie
is rated PG-13 for "language and crude sexual humor."

        Also, they complain that it is insensitive to the memory of David
Vetter, the only real person ever to live in a bubble and the one the media
called "Bubble Boy" during his lifetime. He died in 1984 at the age of 12.

        "I'm offended because I think it insults David's memory," said Carol Ann
Demaret of Houston, David's mother and a trustee of the Immune Deficiency
Foundation. A disclaimer denies any link between her son and the comic character
in the movie, she said, "but that doesn't hide the connection, because there was
just one 'Bubble Boy.'

        "I'm pleading to the public, as a mother of a handicapped child, not to
go to this movie," she said.

        There's no official count of Americans with one of the estimated 100
types of immune deficiencies, according to Dr. Ralph Shapiro, an immunologist in
Plymouth. Isaac is one of about 5,300 who have "common variable
immunodeficiency." David Vetter had "severe combined immunodeficiency" _ that
means no immune system to fight off germs, bacteria or other assaults to health.
Current estimates of cases of this type run about 800 nationwide.

        Besides being "appalled" by the movie's target of humor, Shapiro said,
he's upset that it ignores scientific advances such as gene therapy that can
sometimes cure the kind of immune deficiency that David Vetter had.

        He also worries that the ridicule and misinformation in the film will
only shrink recognition of the kind of "primary" immune deficiency disorders
that Isaac and David were born with. It's already low, he believes, because many
doctors don't recognize the symptoms, and many adults are ashamed of the
diagnosis because they confuse it with AIDS _ an "acquired" immune deficiency
syndrome.

   Gross-out movies

        In Isanti, Antilla said she recognizes that the boycott comes at a time
of great popularity for gross-out movies. But maintaining the honorable memory
of David Vetter is crucial to children with immune deficiency disorders, she
said.

        "David is our point of reference," she said. "When we explain our son's
disease to anyone, we always start with 'Remember the Bubble Boy?' "

        Isaac, now a busy athlete whose biggest remaining accommodation to his
disorder is a three-hour gamma-globulin drip every 21 days, decided that the
memory of the real Bubble Boy will stop him from seeing the new movie.

        "They are making fun of a person who really did live in a bubble, and
who died," he said. "It's insulting."

   For more information: Immune Deficiency Foundation,
http://www.primaryimmune.org; 1-800-296-4433

       _ H.J. Cummins is at hcummins@startribune.com


GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2001


                             1612 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 17, 2001 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: Disney's 'Bubble Boy' Puts Parents On Offensive

BYLINE: David Cho, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Disney's upcoming movie "Bubble Boy," promoted as a gag-a-minute comedy
about a bumbling teenager who lives in a plastic bubble to avoid illness, ends
with a disclaimer saying that the story is pure fiction.

    But a group of angry parents and doctors wants Walt Disney Co. to halt next
Friday's release of the film, saying it cuts too close to the real and tragic
story of David Philip Vetter, a Texas youth who spent his entire 12 years inside
a plastic enclosure because a life-threatening genetic disease made him
susceptible to even the most common germs.

    The 15,000-member Immune Deficiency Foundation, based in Towson, is leading
the charge against the movie, calling for a nationwide boycott.

    Even before his death in 1984, David Vetter had become the symbol for
children suffering from severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or SCID. His
lifelong isolation, which included wearing an astronaut-like bubble suit, was a
one-time experiment. It forever linked the nickname "Bubble Boy" with him and
the term "Bubble Boy Disease" with SCID.

    Disney's movie, parents of SCID victims say, will only exacerbate the
teasing and misunderstanding that their children experience.

    About 50 SCID babies are born each year in this country; now, approximately
half survive into adulthood, thanks to treatments such as gene therapy. Some
live nearly cured of the disease, while others have to be extremely careful,
wearing protective gear such as gloves and masks, or staying home during
outbreaks of flu and other illnesses.

    "All of our children are known as bubble boys," said Barbara Ballard, of
Clifton, whose son, Ray, 7, has SCID. "What are they going to have to face at
school after this comes out?"

    If Disney won't pull back, members of the Immune Deficiency Foundation plan
to protest at theaters showing the PG-13 film, handing out educational
materials, founder Marcia Boyle said.

    A Disney executive in Burbank, Calif., speaking on condition of anonymity,
said this week that the company has no plans to drop the movie, which is being
distributed by its Touchstone Pictures division. "I think many fears will be
assuaged once people see the film," she said. "The bubble is just a setup for
[the comedy]. There is no relationship with real life at all."

    According to the film's Web site and ads, the main character is a California
teenager who has spent his whole life in a plastic bubble. The boy falls for a
local girl, and when he hears she is getting married in New York, he makes his
way across the country, wearing a special bubble suit, to stop the wedding.

    Previews for the movie show the boy getting run over by a bus and bounced
around like a beach ball at a rock concert.

    The images sicken Carol Ann Demaret, David Vetter's mother. "Disney says the
resemblance to my son is purely coincidental," she said in a phone interview
from her home in Houston this week. "But that can't be true if there was only
one 'Bubble Boy' in history. Did they even think about how this might affect
those who have to deal with this life-threatening disease?"

    This is not the first time Disney has found itself in hot water with
viewers. Controversy erupted a few years ago when some moviegoers saw the word
"SEX" in a cloud of dust in the animated film "The Lion King." In 1999, the
company recalled 3.4 million video copies of "The Rescuers" because an animator
had added a fleeting image of a topless woman in the background of one scene.

    Howard Suber, who teaches ethics at UCLA's film school, said Disney receives
more complaints than any other movie studio because people associate it with
family entertainment and hold it to a higher standard.

    The company has bowed to public protests before, disassociating itself from
the film "Dogma" in 1999 after pressure from U.S. Catholic groups that saw it as
irreverent. But industry analysts said "Bubble Boy" is too far along in the
pipeline to be stopped now.

    Kevin Smith, who directed "Dogma," said movie boycotts can have the opposite
effect, attracting more viewers than they turn away. "If you want people to
ignore a movie, don't point at it, screaming, 'Look at it! It's evil!' " he
said.

    Disney's "Bubble Boy" is not the first to satirize the subject. NBC's
"Seinfeld" aired a now-famous episode about a spoiled bubble boy who irritated
everyone with his bratty behavior.

    After it aired, the Immune Deficiency Foundation asked NBC never to show it
again but was rebuffed, said Demaret, David Vetter's mother.

    "My daughter watched it and just cried and cried," she said, adding that she
refused to watch it and has no plans to see the movie, either. "I just don't
want this next generation to associate David's life with this movie," she said.
"It's a mockery to his memory and the courageous life he lived."

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2001


                             1613 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             August 17, 2001 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: Parents Pan 'Bubble Boy' Film;
Disney Movie Makes Light of Illness, Say Advocates for Afflicted Children

BYLINE: David Cho, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Disney's upcoming movie "Bubble Boy," promoted as a gag-a-minute comedy
about a bumbling teenager who lives in a plastic bubble to avoid illness, ends
with a disclaimer saying that the story is pure fiction.

    But a group of angry parents and doctors wants Walt Disney Co. to halt next
Friday's release of the film, saying it cuts too close to the real and tragic
story of David Philip Vetter, a Texas youth who spent his entire 12 years inside
a plastic enclosure because a life-threatening genetic disease made him
susceptible to even the most common germs.

    The 15,000-member Immune Deficiency Foundation, based in Towson, is leading
the charge against the movie, calling for a nationwide boycott.

    Even before his death in 1984, David Vetter had become the symbol for
children suffering from severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or SCID. His
lifelong isolation, which included wearing an astronaut-like bubble suit, was a
one-time experiment. It forever linked the nickname "Bubble Boy" with him and
the term "Bubble Boy Disease" with SCID.

    Disney's movie, parents of SCID victims say, will only exacerbate the
teasing and misunderstanding that their children experience.

    About 50 SCID babies are born each year in this country; now, approximately
half survive into adulthood, thanks to treatments such as gene therapy. Some
live nearly cured of the disease, while others have to be extremely careful,
wearing protective gear such as gloves and masks, or staying home during
outbreaks of flu and other illnesses.

    "All of our children are known as bubble boys," said Barbara Ballard, of
Clifton, whose son, Ray, 7, has SCID. "What are they going to have to face at
school after this comes out?"

    If Disney won't pull back, members of the Immune Deficiency Foundation plan
to protest at theaters showing the PG-13 film, handing out educational
materials, founder Marcia Boyle said.

    A Disney executive in Burbank, Calif., speaking on condition of anonymity,
said this week that the company has no plans to drop the movie, which is being
distributed by its Touchstone Pictures division. "I think many fears will be
assuaged once people see the film," she said. "The bubble is just a setup for
[the comedy]. There is no relationship with real life at all."

    According to the film's Web site and ads, the main character is a California
teenager who has spent his whole life in a plastic bubble. The boy falls for a
local girl, and when he hears she is getting married in New York, he makes his
way across the country, wearing a special bubble suit, to stop the wedding.

    Previews for the movie show the boy getting run over by a bus and bounced
around like a beach ball at a rock concert.

    The images sicken Carol Ann Demaret, David Vetter's mother. "Disney says the
resemblance to my son is purely coincidental," she said in a phone interview
from her home in Houston this week. "But that can't be true if there was only
one 'Bubble Boy' in history. Did they even think about how this might affect
those who have to deal with this life-threatening disease?"

    This is not the first time Disney has found itself in hot water with
viewers. Controversy erupted a few years ago when some moviegoers saw the word
"SEX" in a cloud of dust in the animated film "The Lion King." In 1999, the
company recalled 3.4 million video copies of "The Rescuers" because an animator
had added a fleeting image of a topless woman in the background of one scene.

    Howard Suber, who teaches ethics at UCLA's film school, said Disney receives
more complaints than any other movie studio because people associate it with
family entertainment and hold it to a higher standard.

    The company has bowed to public protests before, disassociating itself from
the film "Dogma" in 1999 after pressure from U.S. Catholic groups that saw it as
irreverent. But industry analysts said "Bubble Boy" is too far along in the
pipeline to be stopped now.

    Kevin Smith, who directed "Dogma," said movie boycotts can have the opposite
effect, attracting more viewers than they turn away. "If you want people to
ignore a movie, don't point at it, screaming, 'Look at it! It's evil!' " he
said.

    Disney's "Bubble Boy" is not the first to satirize the subject. NBC's
"Seinfeld" aired a now-famous episode about a spoiled bubble boy who irritated
everyone with his bratty behavior.

    After it aired, the Immune Deficiency Foundation asked NBC never to show it
again but was rebuffed, said Demaret, David Vetter's mother.

    "My daughter watched it and just cried and cried," she said, adding that she
refused to watch it and has no plans to see the movie, either. "I just don't
want this next generation to associate David's life with this movie," she said.
"It's a mockery to his memory and the courageous life he lived."

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2001


                             1614 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      August 16, 2001 Thursday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-02

LENGTH: 1273 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFING

BODY:

   Local

   WORKERS' COMP PREMIUMS TO DROP: Colorado employers could see a  reduction in
workers' compensation premiums as early as December  because of a drop in the
average cost of claims. Insurance  Commissioner Bill Kirven said the National
Council on Compensation  Insurance, which analyzes workers' compensation claims
for the  state, has filed a report showing that the average cost of claims  has
dropped by 6.2 percent in the past year. The council's annual  filing sets a
standard for premiums. The council reported  reductions ranging from 0.1 percent
to 8.8 percent for four of  five major industrial categories: contracting;
office and  clerical; goods and services; and miscellaneous. Manufacturing was
the only major category showing an increase in the cost of claims. (AP)

   QWEST WINS PUBLIC CONTRACTS: Qwest Communications International  Inc. said
Wednesday it won $ 120 million in contracts from public  schools and state and
local governments in 26 states during the  second quarter. Qwest will provide
high-speed Internet access and  other communications services to schools,
universities and  government agencies, said company spokesman Vince Hancock.
Some  existing contracts were also expanded over the next year, the  company
said. (Bloomberg)

   GREAT LAKES LOSSES CONTINUE: Great Lakes Aviation, a regional  airline that
serves 38 cities from Denver International Airport,  said Wednesday it has lost
$ 5.1 million during the quarter as  revenues fell 21 percent to $ 27 million.
Great Lakes has lost  nearly $ 14 million this year. The carrier blamed the loss
on  declining demand and ticket prices, as well as customers' use of  travel
vouchers issued by United Airlines during last year's  schedule disruptions.
United dropped Great Lakes as a United  Express carrier this year, but the
airlines still have a  code-share agreement. Great Lakes also said Wednesday
that  Tennenbaum & Co. had withdrawn its offer to buy the company. (The  Denver
Post)

   BUSINESS AGENCY PROVIDES HOUSING HELP: The Southeast Business  Partnership
today will kick off a pilot program that will provide  housing assistance for
employees of its member companies. The  program will provide rental or
down-payment assistance for  qualified employees of Centura Health, Douglas
County School  District and HealthOne. The Southeast Business Partnership,
through its sister entity, the Southeast Community Development  Corp., plans to
raise $ 300,000 from participating employers and  through grants and donations.
Once the pilot is complete, the  partnership plans to expand it to other member
businesses. (The  Denver Post)

   ATRIX, HUMAN GENOME TO PRODUCE DRUGS: Fort Collins-based Atrix  Laboratories
will partner with Human Genome Sciences Inc. to turn  protein-based medical
treatments into commercial drugs. Human  Genome Sciences will provide the
genetic therapy - a protein - and  Atrix will test how effective its Atrigel
Depot drug-delivery  system is in introducing the protein into the body. Human
Genome  Sciences will provide funding for the project, and the work will  be
performed at Atrix. No financial terms were disclosed, and  Human Genome
Sciences did not disclose what ailment its protein  targets. (The Denver Post)

   SUN ASKS WORKERS TO USE VACATION: Sun Microsystems, with 3,600  employees in
Colorado, has asked all workers with unused vacation  time to take five of those
days off by year's end to cut costs.  The network computer and software maker,
hit hard by weakening  demand for workstations and servers, recently announced
plans to  cut up to 300 jobs. (AP)

   ENSIGN BUYS WESTERN OILFIELDS: Denver energy firm Ensign  Operating Co. said
it has purchased seven oil and gas fields for  $ 45 million in Colorado, Wyoming
and North Dakota. The properties  produce the equivalent of 2,100 barrels of oil
per day, with 60  percent of the production from oil and 40 percent from natural

  gas. The deal raises Ensign's daily production by 60 percent.  Ensign is
wholly owned by the Merchant Navy Officers Pension Fund,  one of the oldest and
largest pension funds in Great Britain. (The  Denver Post)

   GE ACCESS SLASHES WORKFORCE: Boulder-based GE Access said  Wednesday that it
has laid off 126 employees, or 17 percent of its  workforce. The layoffs
affected 110 employees in Boulder. The  computer products distributor employs
725 worldwide, including 510  in Boulder. (The Denver Post)

   INTRADO GETS CREDIT LINE: Boulder-based Intrado, formerly SCC
Communications, announced Wednesday that it has secured a  three-year, $ 15
million line of credit with GE Capital. Intrado  provides 911 data-management
services to local exchange carriers.  (The Denver Post)

   RHYTHMS FILES PAPERWORK: Rhythms NetConnections Inc., an  Arapahoe
County-based provider of broadband communication  services, said it sent a
no-action letter to the Securities and  Exchange Commission on Wednesday. The
letter requests that the  company file its monthly reports within 15 calendar
days after the  report is due to bankruptcy court and the U.S. Trustee's Office
in  lieu of filing the 10-Q (quarterly) and 10-K (annual) reports. The  company
has not filed and, pending an SEC response, does not  intend to file its 10-Q
for the quarter ended June 30. (The Denver Post)

   GRAPHIC PACKAGING ISSUES NOTES: Graphic Packaging  International Corp.
announced Wednesday that it has issued $ 50  million of 10 percent subordinated
unsecured notes with a  seven-year term to Golden Heritage LLC, a company owned
by several  Coors family trusts. The proceeds of the financing have been used
to repay the remaining $ 28 million of a short term note due  Wednesday and to
reduce the company's five-year, senior secured  term and revolver loans, due in
2004. (The Denver Post)

   PENTASTAR HAS TOUGH QUARTER: Denver-based PentaStar  Communications on Monday
cited the nationwide economic slowdown in  reporting second-quarter revenue of $
7.8 million, a cash-flow loss  of $ 455,000 and a net loss of $ 1.3 million.
PentaStar also  disclosed that it has defaulted on its credit agreement with
Wells  Fargo Bank West in that it no longer meets certain financial  covenants
required under the agreement. PentaStar is talking with  Wells Fargo about
gaining an extension. (The Denver Post)

   XCARE.NET REVENUES RISE: Arapahoe County-based XCare.net on  Tuesday
announced second-quarter revenues of $ 9 million, an  increase of 236 percent
over the same quarter a year ago. The  company reported a net loss of $ 1.2
million, or 7 cents per share,  for the second quarter of 2001. XCare.net had a
net loss of $ 5.1  million, or 31 cents per share, during the same quarter in
2000.  (The Denver Post)

   LEGACY NAMES REGIONAL VEEP: Legacy Partners appointed Peter  Llorente as
regional vice president for Legacy Partners Commercial  Inc. Llorente will
manage acquisitions and development activity in  the Denver area. (The Denver
Post)

   Nation/World

   BANK OF AMERICA STREAMLINES: Bank of America Corp., the  third-largest U.S.
bank, will take a $ 1.25 billion charge to  earnings this quarter to exit two
unprofitable ventures: leasing  autos and lending to people who can't qualify
for standard loans.  The bank, which loses an average of almost $ 2,000 on each
vehicle  it leases, will quit that business immediately. It will liquidate  its
$ 26.3 billion portfolio of sub-prime loans in seven to nine  months.
(Bloomberg)

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2001


                             1615 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                           August 15, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell scientists beware: You can't avoid politics

BYLINE: David Alan Grier

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Most scientists within my circle dismiss the machinations of Washington as
"mere politics," activities that exist wholly apart from science. As a group,
American scientists enjoy great freedom from politics. They can set their own
research agendas, be the sole judge of scientific work, and even determine who
can be a member of the scientific community.

This freedom is not the natural state of society, but a hard-won right.  During
the 19th century, a handful of scientists argued that they needed to be free
from outside domination in order to do good science.  Joseph Henry, the first
director of the Smithsonian and a founder of the National Academy of Sciences,
best summarized the position of these scientists when he wrote, "We must put
down quackery or quackery will put down science."

But as Mr. Henry himself discovered, the American citizenry retained some right
to judge the scientific community and determine who might be "quacks." Through
their representatives, they regularly rejected or modified scientific projects.
In the early 1950s, the Eisenhower administration terminated a series of
mathematical projects that seemed too international. In the 1980s, the public
criticized nuclear fallout experiments that seemed too irresponsible. More
recently, Congress rejected the superconducting supercollider, on the grounds
that it seemed too expensive. President Bush's Aug. 9 statement that "even the
most noble ends do not justify any means" is more evidence that American science
is not independent of the political framework in which it resides.

In order to conduct stem-cell research freely, the biologists will need to
address the fact that the results of their research will unsettle traditional
notions about the nature of human life. Their current approach, which promises
relief for certain diseases, may not be as convincing as they might hope. When
the projected cures do arrive, they are likely to be expensive. And getting
there can be dangerous, as was seen in the death of a subject in a gene-therapy
trial at the University of Pennsylvania two years ago.

In his studies of scientific research, the historian George Daniels has noted
that "[scientists are] often led to making outrageous claims for the past
importance of science and to making promises that neither they nor their
colleagues could reasonably expect to keep."

Further undermining the position of the scientists are the private biotech
firms, which stand to profit greatly from the results of successful stem-cell
research. While we live in a society that celebrates free enterprise, we have
generally assumed that scientists are motivated by a love of knowledge, not by a
love of money.

Mr. Bush drew attention to the "vast ethical minefields" of stem-cell research,
but there are political "minefields" as well. In navigating through these
political minefields, biologists will hazard the professional autonomy they have
enjoyed for the past century and a half. In the current political climate, the
most deadly mines combine respect for free enterprise with the traditional
values that undergird the pro-life wing of the Republican Party.

To preserve their professional autonomy, scientists may have to restrain their
more aggressive colleagues who would attempt to circumvent any restrictions on
their laboratory work. Such restraints may not sit well with all scientists.
They may think them a poor way to do research or argue that any restriction will
fundamentally damage science. Such is the cost of doing science in a democracy.

David Alan Grier is a member of its Research Center for the History of Recent
Science.

   (c) Copyright 2001. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2001


                             1616 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 15, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 1148 words

HEADLINE: Titan revenues increase 10 percent

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Defense work continued to drive internal growth at Titan Corp.

   Based on generally accepted accounting principles, the San Diego-based
conglomerate reported a net loss of nearly $8 million, or 16 cents a share, for
the three months ended June 30. That compares with a loss of almost $12.7
million, or 24 cents a share, during the same period last year.

   Titan reported second-quarter revenue of $280 million, a 10 percent increase.

   Titan Systems, which provides information technology services to military and
government agencies, accounted for nearly $220 million of Titan's second-quarter
revenues.

   Following this month's acquisition of Vista-based Datron Systems for $51
million, Titan Systems is close to generating annual revenue of $1 billion, said
Gene Ray, Titan's chairman and chief executive.

   "This is the engine that's really driving Titan's growth, both in revenues
and in intellectual property," said Michael Crawford, a Los Angeles analyst who
follows Titan for B. Riley & Co.  "It's very profitable."

   Excluding amortization of goodwill, deferred compensation and other charges,
Titan posted pro forma net income of $4 million, or 6 cents a diluted share, for
the second quarter.  That compares with pro forma income of $10 million, or 17
cents a share, during the same quarter last year.

   Other local earnings

   SureBeam Corp., a food technology company owned mostly by Titan Corp.,
reported a loss of almost $9.2 million, or 16 cents a share, for the second
quarter ended June 30. Those results, based on generally accepted accounting
principles, compare with a loss of $617,000, or a penny a share, during the same
three-month period last year.

   It was the company's first full quarter of operation following its initial
public offering in March.

   SureBeam said second-quarter revenue was $9.6 million, a 37 percent increase.
The $9.6 million includes $1 million in sales to Titan Scan, an affiliated
company.

   SureBeam attributed its pro forma operating loss of $3.6 million to planned
increases in SureBeam's advertising and branding campaign following the IPO.

   Amylin Pharmaceuticals reported a loss of $19.4 million, or 30 cents per
share, for the second quarter, compared with a loss of $10.6 million, or 17
cents per share, for the second quarter of 2000. The company attributed the
increased loss to expenses associated with the development and pre-marketing of
three drug therapies for diabetes and cardiovascular disease.

   For the first six months of 2001, the company reported a loss of $34.4
million, 54 cents per share, compared with a loss of $20.2 million, 34 cents per
share, for the first six months of 2000.

   GenStar Therapeutics posted a loss of $3 million in the second quarter ended
June 30, compared with a loss of $3.4 million in the same period a year ago.
Revenue was $40,000 in the quarter.

   The San Diego gene therapy company continues to evaluate results from an
early-stage clinical trial that was halted in June after a patient suffered
adverse effects.

   The company said it is working closely with regulatory agencies to develop
and adopt a modified patient study, at which time the trial to test its
hemophilia A gene therapy may resume.

   GenStar had cash and short-term investments of $19.8 million at the end of
June.

   The Immune Response Corp. reported a loss of $5.3 million in the second
quarter ended June 30, compared with a $4.6 million loss in the same period a
year ago.  Revenue declined 23 percent to $1 million.

   The Carlsbad-based biotech, which is developing an experimental HIV vaccine
called Remune, had cash and short-term investments of $12.6 million at the end
of June.

   Immune Response said it has enough money to fund operations through the end
of the year.  In July, drug company Pfizer terminated a key collaboration with
Immune Response to develop Remune.

   Collateral Therapeutics said its second-quarter loss increased to $4.5
million from a loss of $3.3 million in the same period a year ago.  Revenues
fell to $200,000 from $800,000.

   The San Diego gene therapy company had $17.2 million in cash and short-term
investments at the end of June.

   Collateral said the decrease in revenues, and its effect on losses, reflects
reduced costs reimbursable to Collateral under an agreement with partner
Schering AG.

   Mobile PET Systems reported a $2.3 million fourth-quarter loss, compared with
a $3.5 million loss a year earlier.  Revenue rose 485 percent, to $2.9 million.

   For fiscal 2001, the San Diego medical imaging services company lost $9.3
million, compared with a $7.8 million loss last year.  For the year, revenue
rose to $7.1 million from $1.1 million.

   Other earnings

   Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s second-half growth will likely miss the company's
goals, company officials said yesterday as the retail giant released
second-quarter earnings that met Wall Street's estimates.

   Wal-Mart executives said third-quarter earnings will be at the low end of
consensus estimates and that second-half earnings growth would be between 7 to 9
percent.

   For the three months that ended July 31, Wal-Mart earned $1.62 billion, or 36
cents per share, 2 percent higher than the $1.60 billion, or 36 cents per share,
earned in the same quarter in 2000.

   Analysts had been expecting a range of 33 to 36 cents per share in the third
quarter and a consensus estimate of 84 cents per share for the final six months
of its fiscal year, which ends in January.

   Applied Materials Inc., a leading maker of the equipment needed to produce
computer chips, reported third-quarter earnings of $28.5 million, or 3 cents per
share, down from $603.8 million, or 70 cents per share, in the comparable period
last year.  Sales plunged 51 percent to $1.33 billion.

   With demand weak for most kinds of semiconductors, Applied Materials'
customers are seeing "near-historic lows" in factory utilization and capital
spending, said James Morgan, the chairman and chief executive.

   The Home Depot Inc. reported record net income for its second quarter of $924
million, or 39 cents per share.  Net income was $838 million, or 36 cents per
share, in the same quarter last year.

   "Against a stubborn economy, Home Depot delivered positive comparable sales
growth, improving expense trends, and record earnings," said Robert L. Nardelli,
the company's president and chief executive.

   J.C. Penney Co. posted a second-quarter loss but said improving performance
at its department stores, catalog and Eckerd Drugstores will lead to a profit in
the third quarter.

   The company reported a loss of $69 million in the three months ended July 28,
compared with a profit of $23 million in the year-ago period.  The company did
not disclose per-share figures.


LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2001


                             1617 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 15, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 1104 words

HEADLINE: Titan revenues increase 10 percent

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Defense work continued to drive internal growth at Titan Corp. Based on
generally accepted accounting principles, the San Diego-based conglomerate
reported a net loss of nearly $8 million, or 16 cents a share, for the three
months ended June 30. That compares with a loss of almost $12.7 million, or 24
cents a share, during the same period last year. Titan reported second-quarter
revenue of $280 million, a 10 percent increase. Titan Systems, which provides
information technology services to military and government agencies, accounted
for nearly $220 million of Titan's second-quarter revenues. Following this
month's acquisition of Vista-based Datron Systems for $51 million, Titan Systems
is close to generating annual revenue of $1 billion, said Gene Ray, Titan's
chairman and chief executive. "This is the engine that's really driving Titan's
growth, both in revenues and in intellectual property," said Michael Crawford, a
Los Angeles analyst who follows Titan for B. Riley & Co.

   "It's very profitable." Excluding amortization of goodwill, deferred
compensation and other charges, Titan posted pro forma net income of $4 million,
or 6 cents a diluted share, for the second quarter.

   That compares with pro forma income of $10 million, or 17 cents a share,
during the same quarter last year. Other local earnings SureBeam Corp., a food
technology company owned mostly by Titan Corp., reported a loss of almost $9.2
million, or 16 cents a share, for the second quarter ended June 30. Those
results, based on generally accepted accounting principles, compare with a loss
of $617,000, or a penny a share, during the same three-month period last year.
It was the company's first full quarter of operation following its initial
public offering in March. SureBeam said second-quarter revenue was $9.6 million,
a 37 percent increase.

   The $9.6 million includes $1 million in sales to Titan Scan, an affiliated
company. SureBeam attributed its pro forma operating loss of $3.6 million to
planned increases in SureBeam's advertising and branding campaign following the
IPO. Amylin Pharmaceuticals reported a loss of $19.4 million, or 30 cents per
share, for the second quarter, compared with a loss of $10.6 million, or 17
cents per share, for the second quarter of 2000. The company attributed the
increased loss to expenses associated with the development and pre-marketing of
three drug therapies for diabetes and cardiovascular disease. For the first six
months of 2001, the company reported a loss of $34.4 million, 54 cents per
share, compared with a loss of $20.2 million, 34 cents per share, for the first
six months of 2000. GenStar Therapeutics posted a loss of $3 million in the
second quarter ended June 30, compared with a loss of $3.4 million in the same
period a year ago.

   Revenue was $40,000 in the quarter. The San Diego gene therapy company
continues to evaluate results from an early-stage clinical trial that was halted
in June after a patient suffered adverse effects. The company said it is working
closely with regulatory agencies to develop and adopt a modified patient study,
at which time the trial to test its hemophilia A gene therapy may resume.
GenStar had cash and short-term investments of $19.8 million at the end of June.
The Immune Response Corp. reported a loss of $5.3 million in the second quarter
ended June 30, compared with a $4.6 million loss in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue declined 23 percent to $1 million. The Carlsbad-based biotech, which
is developing an experimental HIV vaccine called Remune, had cash and short-term
investments of $12.6 million at the end of June. Immune Response said it has
enough money to fund operations through the end of the year.

   In July, drug company Pfizer terminated a key collaboration with Immune
Response to develop Remune. Collateral Therapeutics said its second-quarter loss
increased to $4.5 million from a loss of $3.3 million in the same period a year
ago.

   Revenues fell to $200,000 from $800,000. The San Diego gene therapy company
had $17.2 million in cash and short-term investments at the end of June.
Collateral said the decrease in revenues, and its effect on losses, reflects
reduced costs reimbursable to Collateral under an agreement with partner
Schering AG. Mobile PET Systems reported a $2.3 million fourth-quarter loss,
compared with a $3.5 million loss a year earlier.

   Revenue rose 485 percent, to $2.9 million. For fiscal 2001, the San Diego
medical imaging services company lost $9.3 million, compared with a $7.8 million
loss last year.

   For the year, revenue rose to $7.1 million from $1.1 million. Other earnings
Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s second-half growth will likely miss the company's goals,
company officials said yesterday as the retail giant released second-quarter
earnings that met Wall Street's estimates. Wal-Mart executives said
third-quarter earnings will be at the low end of consensus estimates and that
second-half earnings growth would be between 7 to 9 percent. For the three
months that ended July 31, Wal-Mart earned $1.62 billion, or 36 cents per share,
2 percent higher than the $1.60 billion, or 36 cents per share, earned in the
same quarter in 2000. Analysts had been expecting a range of 33 to 36 cents per
share in the third quarter and a consensus estimate of 84 cents per share for
the final six months of its fiscal year, which ends in January. Applied
Materials Inc., a leading maker of the equipment needed to produce computer
chips, reported third-quarter earnings of $28.5 million, or 3 cents per share,
down from $603.8 million, or 70 cents per share, in the comparable period last
year.

   Sales plunged 51 percent to $1.33 billion. With demand weak for most kinds of
semiconductors, Applied Materials' customers are seeing "near-historic lows" in
factory utilization and capital spending, said James Morgan, the chairman and
chief executive. The Home Depot Inc. reported record net income for its second
quarter of $924 million, or 39 cents per share.

   Net income was $838 million, or 36 cents per share, in the same quarter last
year. "Against a stubborn economy, Home Depot delivered positive comparable
sales growth, improving expense trends, and record earnings," said Robert L.
Nardelli, the company's president and chief executive. J.C. Penney Co. posted a
second-quarter loss but said improving performance at its department stores,
catalog and Eckerd Drugstores will lead to a profit in the third quarter. The
company reported a loss of $69 million in the three months ended July 28,
compared with a profit of $23 million in the year-ago period.

   The company did not disclose per-share figures.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1618 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 14, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Column 2; Science Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1514 words

HEADLINE: V.I.P. Medical Treatment Adds Meaning to a Dog's (or Cat's) Life

BYLINE:  By JANE E. BRODY

DATELINE: ITHACA, N.Y.

BODY:

   They get CAT scans and M.R.I.'s to detect the extent of cancer; lithotripsy
to dissolve kidney and bladder stones; dialysis and transplants for kidney
failure; surgery, chemotherapy and even radiation therapy to treat cancer; laser
surgery for glaucoma; pacemakers to correct abnormal heart rhythms; ultrasonic
surgery and lens implants for cataracts; root canal therapy for broken teeth;
chiropractic treatments for sore backs; spinal surgery for ruptured disks, and
arthroscopic surgery and cartilage cell transplants for crippling knee problems.

        They are treated in intensive care units for respiratory, kidney or
liver failure; they run on treadmills to test heart function, and they take
Prozac-type drugs for separation anxiety, Anipryl for senility, Tagamet for
ulcers, insulin shots for diabetes, hormones for anemia, and steroids and
antibiotics for irritable bowel syndrome.

    "They" are the pets -- dogs, cats, horses, ferrets, birds, rabbits, snakes,
lizards, guinea pigs and even turtles and fish -- of people who love them enough
to spend sometimes thousands of dollars to keep them alive and enjoying a
reasonable quality of life. And because animals rarely outlive their owners,
veterinary clinics like the one here at Cornell University and the Animal
Medical Center in New York City offer bereavement counseling for people who have
lost beloved pets.

   Nearly every medical procedure now done on humans is being used or at least
studied at the nation's leading companion animal medical centers.

   "All the big milestones in human medicine have eventually been adopted by
veterinary medicine," Dr. Robert Gilbert said in an interview here. Dr. Gilbert
is associate dean for clinical programs at Cornell's Hospital for Animals, a
referral center where more than 13,000 pets are treated each year.

   Sometimes the process goes in reverse. Procedures like embryo transplants and
cartilage cell transplants were used successfully in veterinary centers before
moving into human medicine.

   Here, for example, Dr. Alan Nixon, chief of large animal surgery, is now
using gene therapy to treat osteoarthritis in horses, while veterinary
oncologists at the Animal Medical Center are collaborating with cancer
researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center to develop limb-saving
treatments for pets and people with osteosarcoma, the bone cancer that usually
necessitates amputation when it strikes an arm or leg. The work is supported by
the National Cancer Institute.

   In these affluent times, a growing number of pet owners are willing to spend
thousands of dollars on their animals' health. For many owners, pets have
assumed an importance approaching and sometimes exceeding that of children.

   Eighty-four percent of owners refer to themselves as their pets' mommy or
daddy and/or call pets their babies, according to a 1999 survey by the American
Animal Hospital Associate. With some people now greeting their pets before their
spouses and spending up to $800 on dog beds, animals are not what they used to
be, the Cornell vets say.

   When he started practicing veterinary medicine in 1977, Dr. Gilbert said, "a
pet was a pet" and "there was a very clear boundary to what you'd do." Now he is
part of the trend, having spent thousands of dollars to have his 10-year-old
golden retriever, Buster, treated with advanced, expensive chemotherapy for
lymphoma, one of the two most common cancers in dogs.

   And since fully half of dogs and cats past the age of 10 will eventually get
cancer, this is a choice now faced by millions of pet owners every year, very
few of whom have insurance to cover treatment whose rising costs rival human
medical bills.

   Before families reach a treatment decision, veterinarians here and at the
Manhattan center fully evaluate the nature and extent of disease, estimate the
cost of treatment in dollars, difficulty for the owner and discomfort for the
animal and discuss the likelihood of success. It is not unusual for pet owners
to decide to pay the price even if treatment has a chance of buying the animal
only a year of quality life.

   "In general, dogs handle chemotherapy better than people do," said Dr.
Kenneth Rassnick, a veterinary oncologist at Cornell. "Most don't lose their
hair or develop mouth sores, though they will experience diarrhea, nausea and
sometimes vomiting." Since it is impossible to explain to pets why they are
suffering, owners are often reluctant to pursue treatments with debilitating
side effects.

   Treating cancer in dogs and cats is "a market-driven specialty that arose as
animals became such an integrated part of families," Dr. Rassnick said. "Now
more horses are being treated, particularly if their tumors are localized."
Officials at the Cornell animal hospital say it is the only place in the country
that can perform CAT scans on horses.

   What modern veterinary medicine can mean to a pet and its owners was clearly
demonstrated at the Animal Medical Center two years ago when a lethargic
15-year-old miniature poodle named Boopie was brought to Dr. Alexandra
van-der-Woerdt, a veterinary ophthalmologist. Boopie, who had previously lost
her hearing, had become blinded by cataracts. Her owners explained that now that
she could neither hear nor see, she could no longer respond to their gestures,
and she simply sat in a corner, dejected and frightened.

   The obvious treatment was cataract surgery, but would a small old dog like
Boopie be able to withstand general anesthesia? With tests showing that Boopie
still had good heart, liver and kidney function, so that she was highly likely
to survive anesthesia, Dr. van-der-Woerdt went ahead. "If Boopie dies under
anesthesia," Boopie's owners told her, "that's O.K. because she has no life
now."

   So under operating room conditions as sterile and advanced as in any modern
human hospital, an anesthesiologist put Boopie to sleep and while all her vital
signs were continually monitored, the skilled surgeon broke up the cataracts
with a fine ultrasound tip, flushed out the pieces and then inserted an
artificial lens in each eye. As soon as the anesthetic wore off, Boopie regained
her former joie de vivre. And she is still going strong.

   "Pets have definite health and psychological benefits for people," said Dr.
Ann Hohenhaus, a Cornell-trained veterinarian, who directs clinical medicine at
the Manhattan center. "With extended families spread out all over the map, a pet
can be someone's only constant companion, something to come home to and cheer
you when you're down in the dumps."

   And the value of companion animals to their owners goes way beyond dogs and
cats. Dr. Hohenhaus said she was no longer surprised when people "spend
thousands of dollars on treatment for turtles, guinea pigs, hamsters, gerbils,
snakes, lizards, birds and ferrets."

   "For people who can't afford the care their pets need, it's a real
heartbreak," said Dr. Susan P. Cohen, a social worker at the Manhattan center,
who counsels owners when pets become sick or die. "Pets are considered members
of the family, but they're not covered by the family's health insurance. People
become bonded to their pets and grieve when they die. There are even Hallmark
cards for people who've lost pets."

   Kidney dialysis can be needed for weeks or months for animals that drink the
sweet but highly toxic antifreeze that is released onto the street when people
drain car radiators, Dr. Hohenhaus said. A year of dialysis can cost pet owners
$50,000.

   Probably the most advanced medical procedure now being performed on pets is
kidney transplants, an operation that costs about $5,000 in cats, the main
recipients, and about $7,000 in dogs. About a dozen veterinary centers,
including those at the University of Pennsylvania and North Carolina State
University, now have active kidney transplant programs for cats, which do well
even without a related donor. All the programs require the recipient's owner to
adopt the donor cat.

   Dr. Clare Gregory, who pioneered transplant surgery at the Veterinary
Medicine Teaching Hospital at the University of California at Davis, said his
longest survivor to date was a cat that received a transplant as a kitten 11
years ago after antifreeze destroyed her kidneys.

   If not for cages instead of beds, the intensive care units at large animal
medical centers might resemble those in human hospitals. They include cardiac
and respiratory monitors, breathing and feeding tubes, alarms that ring in
medical emergencies and teams of caretakers on round-the-clock duty.

   Recently, at the Manhattan center, a 3-year-old Yorkie named Joujou was
recuperating after endoscopy of her stomach revealed an ulcer; an 11-year-old
miniature poodle named Cory was receiving oxygen, antibiotics and IV feedings
while recovering from aspiration pneumonia, and a 2-year-old pug named Zeerah,
after surgery to remove the pennies she had eaten, was receiving chelation
therapy to get rid of zinc from the pennies that had caused severe anemia.

   All were expected to recover fully and return to their owners able and more
than willing to bestow the unconditional love that only a pet can provide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Instructions on a cage at the animal center about the cat
inside.; Dr. Krista Wilson, above, performing ultrasound on a beagle at Cornell.
At right, Dr. Robyn Rothberg with a dog she was treating at the Animal Medical
Center in Manhattan. (Photographs by Richard Perry/The New York Times); At the
huge, high-tech Animal Medical Center in Manhattan, an image of a cat's head,
above, appeared on a computer monitor after a CAT scan. At left, a dog named
Pudge recovered in the intensive care ward after undergoing larynx surgery. An
IV tube was held in her leg with a bandage. (Kevin Rivoli for The New York
Times)

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2001


                             1619 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 14, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   ImageWare buys 2 companies

   Software maker ImageWare Systems Inc. of San Diego purchased two Costa Mesa
software companies that supply professional photographers with products for
digital photos.  ImageWare bought Castleworks LLC and E-Focus West for a
combined $2.2 million in cash and stock, marking ImageWare's first foray into
the software market for professional photographers.  ImageWare now provides
software to police agencies to capture, store and archive digital photos.  The
company's stock closed down 3 cents yesterday at $2.97 on the American Stock
Exchange.

   Unicom Horizon in BREW pact

   Qualcomm said that Unicom Horizon Mobile Communications Co. Ltd., a
subsidiary of China Unicom, has signed a non-binding agreement to use Qualcomm's
wireless Internet platform known as BREW. Unicom Horizon plans to make the
services available to its subscribers early next year.  Those wireless Internet
services will include news and weather updates as well as game and chat
applications.  Unicom Horizon is the second largest mobile phone service
provider in China with more than 30 million subscribers.

   Collateral receives payment

   Collateral Therapeutics yesterday said it received a $4 million payment from
Schering AG related to development of Collateral's experimental gene therapies
to treat heart disease.  The San Diego biotech is testing gene therapies in
patients suffering from angina and peripheral vascular disease.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Chevron, Texaco sign FTC order

   Chevron Corp. and Texaco Inc. have signed a consent order with the Federal
Trade Commission, outlining the terms they expect to meet in order to gain
regulatory approval for their merger.  In a filing made with the Securities and
Exchange Commission, the companies also said their shareholders would vote on
the merger on Oct. 9 -- by which time they hope to have received regulatory
clearance for the deal.  Texaco said it anticipates divesting its U.S. refining
and marketing affiliates, certain natural gas processing and transportation
facilities and some of its jet fuel marketing businesses.

   'Dummies' publisher bought

   John Wiley & Sons Inc. reached an agreement to purchase Hungry Minds Inc.,
the publisher of the "For Dummies" series, for $90 million in cash.  Wiley will
offer shareholders $6.09 per share and assume $92.5 million in debt, Hungry
Minds said in a statement.  Following regulatory approval, the companies expect
the deal to be completed by September.

   Fed approves Wachovia deal

   The Federal Reserve approved Wachovia Corp.'s $14.6 billion merger with First
Union Corp., a deal that will create the nation's fourth-largest banking company
with operations from Florida to Connecticut.  The approval came in a vote
yesterday by the Fed's board of governors, who determined that First Union's
acquisition of Wachovia would not threaten competition.  Both banks are based in
North Carolina.  They already have put 38 branches on the auction block to
satisfy regulators' concerns about competition.

   AOL may be planning cuts

   AOL Time Warner Inc. plans to make further job cuts at its America Online
unit, according to The Wall Street Journal, which reported this round of cuts is
likely to involve hundreds of employees, though the exact amount and timing of
the cuts was not known.  AOL Time Warner already cut 725 positions of the unit's
15,000 employees in January, part of a company-wide job cutback that trimmed
more than 2,000 jobs.  An AOL spokesman declined to comment on the report.

   McDonald's to provide data

   McDonald's Corp. said its U.S. division is posting nutrition information on
its Web site regarding ingredients in what it terms "natural" food flavoring.
Customers may learn if the flavoring comes from a dairy, meat or vegetable
source, the company said.  The company was sued earlier this year by vegetarians
for using beef flavoring in its french fries in the United States.

   Lucent discloses severance pay

   Telecommunications equipment giant Lucent Technologies Inc. said it will pay
its former chairman Richard McGinn, who was ousted last fall, a severance
package that includes a $5.5 million one-time payment and assumption of bank
loans.  McGinn is already slated to receive about $1 million a year for life
under his pension plan, according to a Lucent proxy statement filed in February.
McGinn was forced out last October after the company suffered through several
quarters of disappointing profits, operational blunders, and a plummeting stock
price.


LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2001


                             1620 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 14, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA ImageWare buys 2 companies Software maker ImageWare
Systems Inc. of San Diego purchased two Costa Mesa software companies that
supply professional photographers with products for digital photos.

   ImageWare bought Castleworks LLC and E-Focus West for a combined $2.2 million
in cash and stock, marking ImageWare's first foray into the software market for
professional photographers.

   ImageWare now provides software to police agencies to capture, store and
archive digital photos.

   The company's stock closed down 3 cents yesterday at $2.97 on the American
Stock Exchange. Unicom Horizon in BREW pact Qualcomm said that Unicom Horizon
Mobile Communications Co. Ltd., a subsidiary of China Unicom, has signed a
non-binding agreement to use Qualcomm's wireless Internet platform known as
BREW. Unicom Horizon plans to make the services available to its subscribers
early next year.

   Those wireless Internet services will include news and weather updates as
well as game and chat applications.

   Unicom Horizon is the second largest mobile phone service provider in China
with more than 30 million subscribers. Collateral receives payment Collateral
Therapeutics yesterday said it received a $4 million payment from Schering AG
related to development of Collateral's experimental gene therapies to treat
heart disease.

   The San Diego biotech is testing gene therapies in patients suffering from
angina and peripheral vascular disease. WORLD AND NATION Chevron, Texaco sign
FTC order Chevron Corp. and Texaco Inc. have signed a consent order with the
Federal Trade Commission, outlining the terms they expect to meet in order to
gain regulatory approval for their merger.

   In a filing made with the Securities and Exchange Commission, the companies
also said their shareholders would vote on the merger on Oct. 9 -- by which time
they hope to have received regulatory clearance for the deal.

   Texaco said it anticipates divesting its U.S. refining and marketing
affiliates, certain natural gas processing and transportation facilities and
some of its jet fuel marketing businesses. `Dummies' publisher bought John Wiley
& Sons Inc. reached an agreement to purchase Hungry Minds Inc., the publisher of
the "For Dummies" series, for $90 million in cash.

   Wiley will offer shareholders $6.09 per share and assume $92.5 million in
debt, Hungry Minds said in a statement.

   Following regulatory approval, the companies expect the deal to be completed
by September. Fed approves Wachovia deal The Federal Reserve approved Wachovia
Corp.'s $14.6 billion merger with First Union Corp., a deal that will create the
nation's fourth-largest banking company with operations from Florida to
Connecticut.

   The approval came in a vote yesterday by the Fed's board of governors, who
determined that First Union's acquisition of Wachovia would not threaten
competition. Both banks are based in North Carolina.

   They already have put 38 branches on the auction block to satisfy regulators'
concerns about competition. AOL may be planning cuts AOL Time Warner Inc. plans
to make further job cuts at its America Online unit, according to The Wall
Street Journal, which reported this round of cuts is likely to involve hundreds
of employees, though the exact amount and timing of the cuts was not known.

   AOL Time Warner already cut 725 positions of the unit's 15,000 employees in
January, part of a company-wide job cutback that trimmed more than 2,000 jobs.

   An AOL spokesman declined to comment on the report. McDonald's to provide
data McDonald's Corp. said its U.S. division is posting nutrition information on
its Web site regarding ingredients in what it terms "natural" food flavoring.

   Customers may learn if the flavoring comes from a dairy, meat or vegetable
source, the company said.

   The company was sued earlier this year by vegetarians for using beef
flavoring in its french fries in the United States. Lucent discloses severance
pay Telecommunications equipment giant Lucent Technologies Inc. said it will pay
its former chairman Richard McGinn, who was ousted last fall, a severance
package that includes a $5.5 million one-time payment and assumption of bank
loans.

   McGinn is already slated to receive about $1 million a year for life under
his pension plan, according to a Lucent proxy statement filed in February.

   McGinn was forced out last October after the company suffered through several
quarters of disappointing profits, operational blunders, and a plummeting stock
price.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1621 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 13, 2001 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 885 words

HEADLINE: Patents;
Amid the debate on stem cell studies, a small but growing number of patents are
issued in the field.

BYLINE:  By Sabra Chartrand

BODY:

   PRESIDENT Bush addressed at least part of the debate over embryonic stem cell
research by deciding last week to permit federal financing of such experiments,
but to limit it to work with cells that have already been extracted. The stem
cell controversies seem likely to continue on many fronts -- including the
patent field.

        Much of the research conducted now is devoted to isolating the cells,
coaxing them to multiply and mature, and figuring out how they can be used to
treat disorders and disease. The scientists and companies leading stem cell
research are following the trend toward patenting that has prevailed in recent
years across the biotechnology industry. Thus, a small but growing number of
patents are being issued for technologies that revolve around stem cells -- the
elemental cells that can develop into any of the hundreds of cells in the body.

    From 1996 through last week, the Patent and Trademark Office had issued 191
patents with the term stem cell included in the abstract of the invention on its
first page. The patents cover the use of stem cells in a variety of scientific
practices for purposes like repairing cartilage, creating artificial skin or
treating H.I.V. And the stem cells would be drawn from a variety of sources
other than embryos, like a person's blood or bone marrow, or from mice or
monkeys. While a tally of patent abstracts is hardly an official accounting of
stem cell technologies, it does indicate an increasing desire to stake claims in
that developing field of science.

   In contrast, only 29 patents issued from 1991 to 1996 refer to stem cells in
their abstracts.

   Supporters of stem cell research have argued that it is crucial to treating
degenerative diseases, but opponents say destroying embryos to obtain the cells
is no different than murder. Patenting such fundamental facets of human biology
seems likely to become part of the debate.

   Last spring, a stem cell patent was granted to Karl K. Johe, a researcher
from Potomac, Md., and assigned to NeuralStem, a company in Gaithersburg, Md.,
that he co-founded. Mr. Johe developed a method of spawning stem cells drawn
from the central nervous system of mammals -- animals, individual people and
human embryos.

   The patent says the "invention relates to a technology where stem cells from
embryonic and adult brains are isolated, propagated, and differentiated
efficiently in culture to generate large numbers of nerve cells."

   The technology, according to the patent "enables one to generate large
numbers of many different kinds of neurons found in a normal brain and provides
a new foundation for gene therapy, cell therapy, novel growth factor screening,
and drug screening for nervous system disorders."

   Millions of people around the world are affected by disorders ranging from
depression to degenerative conditions like Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's
disease. The problem in treating them is the complex nature of the brain. As Mr.
Johe's patent points out, the brain is "composed of highly diverse nerve cell
types making specific interconnections and, once destroyed, the nerve cells
(neurons) do not regenerate."

   One of the major challenges of the biotechnology industry, the patent says,
"is to find an efficient mechanism for delivering potential gene therapy
products directly into the brain in order to treat nervous system disorders."

   Mr. Johe says the future of gene therapy is based on creating cells that can
carry normal genes, be transplanted into the brain and be absorbed into the
person's neural network. To achieve that, researchers need neural cells that can
multiply in a laboratory.

   "However, there have been no such cells for therapeutic purposes since
neurons do not divide and therefore cannot be propagated in culture," Mr. Johe
concludes.

   Alternatives like nonneural and muscle cells do not work, he says, because
while they will multiply in a culture, they can never perform the job of neural
cells. That leaves scientists with neural stem cells -- a source of which is
human embryos.

   "A developing fetal brain contains all of the cells germinal to the cells of
an adult brain, as well as all of the programs necessary to orchestrate them
toward the final network of neurons," Mr. Johe writes in the patent.

   The patent covers an in vitro method of propagating neural stem cells from
mammals so they mature into the three major brain cell types (called neurons,
astrocytes and oligodendrocytes). The patent says the stem cells can be taken
from parts of the central nervous system like the brain cortex, olfactory
tubercle, retina, the hippocampus, thalamus or hypothalamus, and the brain stem,
cerebellum and spinal cord.

   The cells are placed in a serum-free culture containing a growth factor and
chemicals like glucose, insulin and hormones. This culture is eventually
replaced with a similar culture that excludes the growth factor. The cells are
harvested, and then distributed into densities of 100,000 to 250,000 cells per
square centimeter, and placed in another acid and serum-free culture.

   Last week, NeuralStem announced that it planned to use its patented neural
stem cells to help develop a biological sensor for studies on how evolving drugs
affect the brain.

   Mr. Johe, who won an earlier patent in 1998 for stem cell technology,
received patent 6,040,180.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2001


                             1622 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                      AUGUST 13, 2001 Monday 4STAR EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: A&E takes a not-quite-so 'perfect' look at bio research

BYLINE: ELLEN GRAY

BODY:

   PERFECTING BABY:

   CONTROLLING DNA.

   10 tonight, A&E.

   CBS ANCHOR Dan Rather probably startled more than a few viewers last week
when he suggested TV might not be the ideal source of information on the
complexities of stem-cell research.

   Instead, reports the Washington Post's Tom Shales, Rather's post-presidential
speech analysis Thursday night included a recommendation that viewers read "in
detail, one of the better newspapers."

   It's a rare public admission for a TV newsman, but one good turn deserves
another.

   There are things television does at least as well, if not better, than most
newspapers, and one of them is putting a human face on complex issues.
Unfortunately, those faces sometimes overwhelm the issues they're meant to
illustrate.

   Tonight, A&E's "Investigative Reports" takes a timely, but scattershot,
approach to the potential and consequences of genetic research in "Perfecting
Baby: Controlling DNA."

   The first consequence we meet is Molly Nash, a 6-year-old who was facing
certain death from Fanconi's Anemia when her parents decided to conceive a
bone-marrow donor. It's the kind of decision that keeps bio-ethicists in
business, but it's tripled Molly's life expectancy, to age 15, and given her a
little brother.

   An even brighter future seems to await Ashanti DeSilva, who in 1990 became a
gene-therapy guinea pig to treat the rare immune-system disorder commonly known
as "bubble boy's" disease. She's such a glowing success story that it's easy to
pass over the program's brief mention that there have been only a handful of
such cures since, and that in 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died during a
University of Pennsylvania gene-therapy experiment.

   Either one of these complicated cases might have been worth an hour by
itself, but host/producer Bill Kurtis instead takes viewers on a quick tour of
the genetic frontier, dragging in an already overpublicized Web site that's
selling model's eggs, privacy issues, the Nazis, and even an albino rabbit that
glows green when it's exposed to blue light.

   It's a lot of sizzle, but not nearly enough steak. Let's hope the president
held on to that Post subscription.

   Dead on arrival

   I'd have given anything to be at the pitch meeting for the WB's "Dead Last,"
just to see if they managed to make it without someone saying, "It's like, you
know, 'The Monkees' meets 'The Sixth Sense.' "

   Hard to believe we had to get to 2001 before anyone thought of doing a show
about a struggling rock band whose members see dead people.

   I'm guessing, though, that "Dead Last" (9 tomorrow night, Channel 17) will be
just that. Despite the pedigree of co-creators Steve Pink, D.V. DeVincentis and
Patrick O'Neill, the first two of whom wrote the John Cusack vehicles "Grosse
Pointe Blank" and "High Fidelity," this thing doesn't seem to have a ghost of a
chance (sorry).

   Not only does our rocking trio - portrayed by Kett Turton, Tyler Labine and
Sara Downing - not play their own instruments, but I'm pretty sure those weirdly
dressed people they keep encountering aren't really dead. Unless they expired
from sheer embarrassment.

   'Iyanla' A.M.

   "Iyanla," the syndicated talk show that sounded the death knell for Wally
Kennedy's "Philly After Midnight," premieres tonight (12:35 a.m., Channel 6)
with motivational author Iyanla Vanzant moving from "Oprah" guest to "Oprah"
wannabe. *

   You can reach Ellen Gray by e-mail at

   elgray@phillynews.com, by fax at 215-854-5852 or by mail at the Philadelphia
Daily News, Box 7788, Philadelphia, Pa. 19101.

NOTES: TELEVISION

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2001


                             1623 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     AUGUST 13, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1612 words

HEADLINE: Scientists' 'publish or perish' credo now 'patent and profit';

'Recombinant U.' phenomenon alters academic culture

BODY:
The night President George Bush announced limited support for embryonic stem
cell research, I asked Stanford chemist Paul Berg for his reaction to the policy
and the process by which it was decided.

    Berg holds a special place in biotechnology and not simply because of his
Nobel Prize in chemistry. During the mid-1970s, Berg called for a moratorium on
what lay people call gene-splicing and scientists call recombinant DNA.

    The term refers to cutting DNA from one organism and pasting it into the
genome of another. This cut-and-paste process reprograms the second organism.
Recombinant DNA is biotech's foundation. It's how we trick bacteria into making
new medicines for us, and how we teach grains to produce pesticides to protect
themselves.

    Of course, none of this was known back when Berg urged caution until
scientists could be certain they wouldn't cut-and-paste biological perils. Berg
was traveling the night Bush spoke. I reached him in the hotel room where he was
taking calls from reporters who wanted his thoughts about the so-called
compromise.

    "I am sitting here mystified," Berg said, voicing the standard scientific
concerns, such as whether there are really 60 different batches of stem cells
and, if so, whether 60 would be enough.

    When I asked what he thought about the furor leading up to Bush's decision,
Berg became animated.

    "A year ago, when we became involved in moving stem cells forward, I could
never have imagined the public would become so fascinated," he said.

    He contrasted the stem cell debate with the gene-splicing moratorium 25
years ago. "The recombinant DNA controversy arose from the ranks of science," he
said. The technique was so new that only scientists could grasp its promise or
perils.

    "It came like a bolt out of the blue," he said. "There were lots of kudos to
the scientists for raising it and deciding how to deal with it."

    Opposition to stem cell research came from outside science, mainly from the
religious right. Nor was this the only instance of political opposition to
biotechnology he found troubling.

    "Today, almost every controversy we have has hardened constituencies," Berg
said. These controversies revolve around value judgments rather than scientific
differences, he said. And that makes the issues more difficult to resolve.

    "You could not organize a conference on genetically modified foods today and
expect it to come out with a consensus," Berg said.

    What has changed during the past quarter-century? Have Luddites set out to
limit different avenues of science, with the right walling off the embryo, while
the left protects grains and the environment?

    Perhaps. But I think we the people haven't changed nearly so much as they,
the scientists.

    Since the 1980s, bipartisan government policies have encouraged scientists
and universities to patent their discoveries, attract venture capital and form
companies to convert knowledge into products.

    Bioscience has been the greatest practitioner of this new approach to
knowledge creation. The National Institutes of Health subsidize academic
research. After federal grants have flushed out blind alleys, private capital
takes the promising avenues toward new medicines.

    This process has given rise to the biotech industry, to the many jobs and
fortunes it has created, and to the many life-saving medicines it has produced.

    But this social engineering also has produced side effects. When we spliced
the profit gene into academic culture, we created a new organism -- the
recombinant university. We reprogrammed the incentives that guide science. The
rule in academe used to be "publish or perish." Now bioscientists have an
alternative -- "patent and profit."

    Let me give you an example.

    Earlier this year I reported that several University of California
scientists had won a patent for a process for putting genes into pills. Until
then, the prevailing wisdom had been that our digestive juices would dissolve
any DNA we swallowed. That's what I was told when I called gene therapy experts
to make sure I wasn't being hoaxed.

    These experts were as astonished as I was because the UC professors hadn't
published their work in the way scientists traditionally did. Instead, they used
the patent filing to help them raise money to form a company in Alameda, called
Genteric, to try and make gene pills as medicines.

    Other scientists are doing the same. In the recombinant university, the
advance of scientific knowledge in return for glory -- what most of us would
consider pure science -- is no longer the only incentive. Researchers can opt
for rapid commercialization, in which case they may wish to keep some data under
wraps.

    But if academic science has changed, why should we trust its self-policing
mechanisms -- especially if they trod on some value we hold dear?

    I posed that question to Roger Pedersen, the stem cell researcher who
recently decided to move from the University of California at San Francisco, to
the United Kingdom, where the government has placed fewer restrictions on public
support for stem cell work.

    "It's an issue I concern myself about in terms of ethical behavior as a
scientist," Pedersen told me during a brief interview Friday.

    Pedersen alluded to recent scandals, in which researchers who owned stock in
biotech firms pushed safety limits.

    "Disclosure is one aspect," he said. "You have to say to your subject, 'I
could benefit from this commercially.' "

    But these instances, he said, are rare and the scientists involved quickly
get ostracized.

    "I think it's a self-regulating system," Pedersen said, adding with a smile
that came through the phone, "We're not all cowboys."

    Certainly not the Bergs and the Pedersens. Nonetheless, bioscientists today
are like the homesteaders of a bygone era. They've got their wagons lined up at
the edge of unclaimed land, waiting for the shot to fire so they can race out
and stake their claims.

    I wonder whether it's possible for them to still exhibit the sort of
self-restraint they did a quarter-century ago, or whether caution gets lost in
the heat of ambition and the thundering of the hooves.Look for BioScope every
Monday in the Business section. Send your bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail,
tabate@sfchronicle.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or phone, (415) 777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2001


                             1624 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 August 13, 2001 Monday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: HYSTERIA IN THE HOUSE

BODY:

   HUMAN CLONING

   RACING far ahead of any public consensus, or even public awareness of
different, complicated cloning processes, the House of Representatives cast a
frenzied vote to severely criminalize all forms of human cloning. Debating less
than a day before rushing to the safety of summer recess, the members failed to
examine the facts and make the basic, critical distinction between reproductive
cloning and therapeutic cloning -- different processes conducted for profoundly
different reasons.

   Instead of doing the difficult and politically perilous work of educating
themselves and the public, most members simply played to sci-fi movie hysteria
over the "tinkering" of "mad scientists," as Rep. J.C. Watts, R-Okla.,
ridiculously warned. Reproductive cloning would attempt to clone human embryos
that would be implanted and born -- an undertaking that no reputable scientific
body in this country supports. Therapeutic cloning would fuse human somatic
cells, such as skin scrapings, with an egg that has had its nucleus removed,
stimulate the cells to grow a short period of time in a petri dish and then use
them for medical purposes. This type of cloning, which could provide the sick
with perfect tissue matches -- their own cells -- in pancreatic, liver, spinal
cord or other tissues, is widely supported in the scientific community. Years
down the road, tissue replacement therapies could revolutionize the treatment of
virtually all illness and injury, including heart disease and cancer -- the two
most prolific killers of Americans.

   If the Senate allows the ban on therapeutic cloning to stand, America's
privately funded embryonic stem cell researchers would be denied a promising
source of stem cells. That is all the more important now, since President George
W. Bush has severely restricted federal funding for embryonic stem cell research
to existing stem cell lines. Genetic research capitalizing on the mapping of the
human genome would be similarly compromised.

   "Cell therapy is the wave of the future," said Rep. James Greenwood, R-Pa.,
the sponsor of a less-restrictive measure that would have banned reproductive,
but not therapeutic cloning. He described the House vote last week as flat-Earth
kind of thinking, adding that it has no basis in science and is not
compassionate.

   With strict limitations that would prevent reproductive cloning, human
therapeutic cloning should be allowed in this country. It is already legal in
Great Britain, where some American scientists have already relocated.
Unfortunately, three renegade scientists vowing to attempt human reproductive
cloning -- including one who believes we are all clones of aliens from outer
space -- briefly grabbed center stage at a cloning symposium conducted in
Washington last week by the National Academy of Sciences. Three renegade
scientists in the entire world hardly warrant our attention, much less
hysterical, over-reaching laws that could reward a scientist who finds the cure
for cancer by throwing him in jail.

   When the Senate returns from summer recess on Sept. 4, it must undo the hasty
and ignorant work of the House. Millions of ill Americans who may one day
benefit from stem cell and genetic therapies deserve better.

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2001


                             1625 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 12, 2001 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 036

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: SUNDAY PEOPLE; Norman named business development VP at Harpell

BYLINE: By A.J. O'Connell

BODY:

   J.D. Norman was named vice president of business development at Maynard
marketing firm Harpell.

   Corporate counseling group Kathleen Greer Associates, of Framingham, hired
Elizabeth Whitman Hahn as clinical director.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a Cambridge biopharmaceutical company, named
Helen Critchley as vice president of international regulatory affairs.

   John Hancock Financial Services, of Boston, named Derek Chilvers, chief
executive of John Hancock International, as executive vice president and member
of the company's policy committee; Jerry Healey as senior vice president of the
Signator financial network; Daniel Ouellette as senior vice president of John
Hancock Signature Services; James Magner as vice president of estate and
business planning; Roy Anderson as second vice president of public relations;
Lily Lee as second vice president of corporate development; and Alpa Patel as
second vice president of information technology. The company also elected Thomas
Glynn to the board of directors.

   The Boston Home, a care facility for adults with physical disabilities, named
Patricia Golden Webb and Douglas Williams to the board of directors.

   Boston consulting firm Kowal Associates named Ray Hicks as senior consultant.

   BBK Healthcare Inc., a health-care communications agency in Newton, hired
Steve Wishnack as business development director.

   Bob Cargill was hired as senior creative director at Holliston consulting
firm L.W. Robbins.

   E. Edward Klozbier was hired as director of communications at Northeastern
University in Boston.

   Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, of Wellesley, appointed Lynn Bowman as vice
president of customer service.

   VERC Enterprises, a convenience store and gasoline chain with locations in
Eastern Massacusetts and offices in Duxbury, named Darryl Grant as store manager
for the Stoughton location.

   Shawmut Design and Construction, of Boston, named Bill Hughes to the senior
management team at the construction managing firm.

   Cox Broadcasting Inc., a subsidary of national media company Cox Enterprises
Inc., named Sudbury native Heidi Wiedenbauer to Washington bureau chief of
television and radio.

   Patrick Nettles was named to the board of directors at Axcelis Technologies
Inc., a technology firm in Beverly.

   The Lynn law firm of Bradley, Moore, Primason, Cuffe & Weber named Stuart
Kaufman as managing director.

   Bo Thurmond was named vice president of sales at Lowell technology company
Storigen Systems.

   Woodmeister Corporation, a millwork company in Worcester, named Gary Ludden
as president.

   The Protector Group Insurance Agency Inc., of Worcester, hired George Breen
as account executive and Tricia McConnell as personal lines supervisor.

   Richard Goldman was hired by Boston law firm Nutter, McClennen & Fish as a
partner in the business department.

   Pioneer Investment Management Inc. in Boston named Marc Rappaport as
divisional senior vice president for the East-Central region.

   Middlesex Savings Bank, of Natick, named Susan Richards as assistant vice
president and assistant controller, William Onorato as retail banking officer
and Paula Spindler as information center director.

   Please send items to the Boston Herald, Sunday Business People, attn. A.J.
O'Connell, One Herald Square, Boston, Mass. 02106 or fax them to (617) 426-1865.
No phone calls, please.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                             1626 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: New hope for reversal of Alzheimer's

SOURCE: Sunday Telegraph

BYLINE: Jenny Booth

DATELINE: LONDON

HIGHLIGHT:
Nerve cells regenerated in experiments with mice

BODY:

   Scientists have succeeded in reversing the effects of Alzheimer's disease in
mice, and clinical trials on humans have begun using the experimental method.

   In an operation offering a glimmer of hope for the 20 percent of people who
will develop Alzheimer's, a California neurosurgeon has injected genetically
modified skin cells into the brain of a 60-year-old woman in the early stages of
the disease.

   Both the work on mice and the human experiments are concentrating on the
effects of a protein molecule called nerve growth factor, which is naturally
produced in the brains of fetuses and babies, and appears to be important in
brain development. Production of the protein switches off soon after birth.

   British and American scientists will announce Monday that they have proved
that the factor causes damaged nerve cells to regenerate when injected into the
brains of mice with Alzheimer's.

   No information is available about the condition of the woman who received the
factor in an operation in April, other than that she initially recovered well.
The researchers in La Jolla, Calif., who oversaw the surgery are now looking for
six other Alzheimer's patients to volunteer for the treatment.

   The woman's husband said the couple were eager to promote a cure for
Alzheimer's, which their four children and one grandchild might inherit.

   "If there are benefits for my wife, that will be a plus," said the husband.

   The leader of the study in Britain, Jon Cooper, of the department of medicine
at King's College, London, said: "Findings suggest that NGF deprivation is
responsible for the age-related cell loss associated with Alzheimer's disease
and that treatment could reverse the pathological changes associated with this
disorder."

   Dr. Richard Harvey, director of research at the Alzheimer's Disease Society,
said the work heralded a cure for Alzheimer's within the next 10 to 15 years.

   Harvey said the difficulty was to get the factor into the fluid at the
brain's base. Ordinary injections or tablets would not work.

   In the human trial in California, a small hole was cut in the front of the
patient's skull and five batches of skin cells--genetically modified to produce
pure NGF--were implanted at the base of the frontal lobe, in a region linked to
learning and memory. A specific type of nerve cell in this area shrinks and
apparently dies in Alzheimer's, and this is thought to contribute to dementia
and memory loss.

   Cooper's team has shown that the neurons can be "brought back to life" by the
factor.

   Mark Tuszynski, the neurologist leading the La Jolla team, said he was not
ready to claim that the nerve growth factor gene therapy would completely cure
Alzheimer's disease. However, he added: "We hope it might protect and even
restore certain brain cells and alleviate some symptoms, such as short-term
memory loss, for a period that could last a few years."

   It could be some years before the procedure has been tested on enough
patients to decide whether it would be useful therapy. Harvey said: "The
Tuszynski work is quite audacious, which is why they're doing the trial in only
one or two patients. They have to proceed quite carefully."

   Sunday Telegraph

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                             1627 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: New hope for reversal of Alzheimer's

SOURCE: Sunday Telegraph

BYLINE: Jenny Booth

DATELINE: LONDON

HIGHLIGHT:
Nerve cells regenerated in experiments with mice

BODY:

   Scientists have succeeded in reversing the effects of Alzheimer's disease in
mice, and clinical trials on humans have begun using the experimental method.

   In an operation offering a glimmer of hope for the 20 percent of people who
will develop Alzheimer's, a California neurosurgeon has injected genetically
modified skin cells into the brain of a 60-year-old woman in the early stages of
the disease.

   Both the work on mice and the human experiments are concentrating on the
effects of a protein molecule called nerve growth factor, which is naturally
produced in the brains of fetuses and babies, and appears to be important in
brain development. Production of the protein switches off soon after birth.

   British and American scientists will announce Monday that they have proved
that the factor causes damaged nerve cells to regenerate when injected into the
brains of mice with Alzheimer's.

   No information is available about the condition of the woman who received the
factor in an operation in April, other than that she initially recovered well.
The researchers in La Jolla, Calif., who oversaw the surgery are now looking for
six other Alzheimer's patients to volunteer for the treatment.

   The woman's husband said the couple were eager to promote a cure for
Alzheimer's, which their four children and one grandchild might inherit.

   "If there are benefits for my wife, that will be a plus," said the husband.

   The leader of the study in Britain, Jon Cooper, of the department of medicine
at King's College, London, said: "Findings suggest that NGF deprivation is
responsible for the age-related cell loss associated with Alzheimer's disease
and that treatment could reverse the pathological changes associated with this
disorder."

   Dr. Richard Harvey, director of research at the Alzheimer's Disease Society,
said the work heralded a cure for Alzheimer's within the next 10 to 15 years.

   Harvey said the difficulty was to get the factor into the fluid at the
brain's base. Ordinary injections or tablets would not work.

   In the human trial in California, a small hole was cut in the front of the
patient's skull and five batches of skin cells--genetically modified to produce
pure NGF--were implanted at the base of the frontal lobe, in a region linked to
learning and memory. A specific type of nerve cell in this area shrinks and
apparently dies in Alzheimer's, and this is thought to contribute to dementia
and memory loss.

   Cooper's team has shown that the neurons can be "brought back to life" by the
factor.

   Mark Tuszynski, the neurologist leading the La Jolla team, said he was not
ready to claim that the nerve growth factor gene therapy would completely cure
Alzheimer's disease. However, he added: "We hope it might protect and even
restore certain brain cells and alleviate some symptoms, such as short-term
memory loss, for a period that could last a few years."

   It could be some years before the procedure has been tested on enough
patients to decide whether it would be useful therapy. Harvey said: "The
Tuszynski work is quite audacious, which is why they're doing the trial in only
one or two patients. They have to proceed quite carefully."

   Sunday Telegraph

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2001


                             1628 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 12, 2001 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1416 words

HEADLINE: The Nation: Morality Play;
Ought We Do What We Can Do?

BYLINE:   By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   ON Aug. 1, the morning after the House of Representatives passed a broad ban
on cloning, two bioethicists arrived on Capitol Hill, toting wildly different
moral arguments in their briefcases. The first, Nigel M. De S. Cameron,
testified to a Senate subcommittee that experimenting on human embryos is
patently immoral. The second, Arthur Caplan, testified that it isn't.

        Dr. Cameron cited a "strong intuitive commitment" to protecting embryos
as the most vulnerable members of the human species. Dr. Caplan cited "the moral
principle of making something good happen out of the reality that something
unfortunate exists." In the end, of course, there was no way to know which man,
if either, was right.

    Most Washington debates feature a standard cast of characters: lawmakers,
lobbyists, activists, bureaucrats. But the twin controversies of cloning and
embryonic stem cell research, which dominated the news last week, have injected
a new breed, bioethicists, into the mix. Indeed, President Bush, who announced
on Thursday night that he would allow limited federal financing of embryonic
stem cell research -- on cells already extracted "where the life and death
decision has already been made" -- said that Leon Kass, a noted bioethicist at
the University of Chicago, would head a new Council on Bioethics to "monitor"
such research.

   All of which raises a question: Why is society relying so heavily on
bioethics -- a profession that barely existed three decades ago -- to resolve
matters traditionally reserved for personal conscience and faith?

   "Our time," said Larry L. Rasmussen, a professor of social ethics at Union
Theological Seminary in Manhattan, "is a time of the ascendancy of ethics,
because cutting edge science means that we can do more. The question then
becomes: Ought we to do what we can do? You always have the ascendancy of moral
and ethical issues when you have a new range of possibilities."

   That range is broader now than at any point in human history. The inexorable
march of science is altering the rules of life itself, creating dilemmas that,
as President Bush said of stem cell research, "forces us to confront fundamental
questions about the beginnings of life and the ends of science."

   Nor is Dr. Rasmussen's question "Ought we to do what we can do?" just a
philosophical abstraction. Stem cell and cloning experiments could yield
treatments for disease, and so decisions about them have the potential to affect
all of us. One man's moral anathema may be another man's cure.

   Cloning is a classic example. Scientists now have the technology to create
embryos in a Petri dish by inserting bits of DNA into a woman's egg alone. No
sperm, thus no man, is required

   While some people accept the idea of making embryos this way for research,
most find the prospect of human cloning -- making babies that are genetic
replicas of adults -- morally abhorrent.

   Yet just last week, three scientists announced they intend to proceed with
human cloning experiments. And Dr. John A. Robertson, a professor of law at the
University of Texas at Austin, went so far as to argue that, if human cloning
could be made safe, it should be used to treat certain infertile couples.
"That," he said, "would be a plausible and indeed legitimate use."

   For centuries, religion served as society's moral standard-bearer on matters
concerning the beginning and end of life. But science is uncovering the
mysteries of these fundamental matters with such speed that religion not only
lacks all the answers, religious figures may not even comprehend the questions
that they are being asked to judge.

   Even the pope has found it necessary to consult bioethicists on matters
ranging from gene therapy, which the Roman Catholic Church supports, to embryo
research, which it staunchly opposes.

   "Things are changing around us daily," said John M. Haas, a moral theologian
and president of the National Catholic Bioethics Center in Boston. "We have to
try to find ways to apply our moral tradition to these changing practices. And
it is not always easy."

   Medical ethics is as old as the Hippocratic oath, but bioethics is a young
discipline. It began as a social movement, triggered by a 1966 article by Henry
Beecher, a doctor at Harvard Medical School, who chronicled research abuses,
including experiments on patients without their consent. Soon philosophers and
theologians were arguing for greater patient protection.

   Doctors, accustomed to making ethical decisions on their own, reacted with
hostility. But the 1970's brought the disclosure of the notorious Tuskegee
experiment, in which government doctors studying syphilis among poor black men
in rural Alabama left them untreated for decades, as well as the Karen Ann
Quinlan case, in which the family of a comatose young woman had to fight doctors
for the right to take her off a respirator. As mistrust of physicians grew, so
did the bioethics movement.

   "There is a very clear sense that physicians and researchers could not be
left alone to make decisions," said David J. Rothman, a medical historian at
Columbia University. "In the research world, they will minimize the risk and in
the medical world they will simply allow their own perspective to trump the
patient's perspective."

   Today, virtually every hospital in the country has an ethics committee.
Academic research centers have review boards that include ethicists. Various
presidents have created bioethics panels, just as President Bush did last
Thursday, and most doctors and research scientists now welcome ethics advice.

   "We as a society are in the midst of a massive debate about what to do with
these new and very powerful technologies, which affect the essence of human
life," said Dr. William Haseltine, chief executive of Human Genome Sciences, a
biotechnology company in Rockville, Md. "I don't think the bioethicists tell us
what to do. But I do think we need help in framing these issues."

   The value of bioethics, its practitioners say, is that the discipline
provides a framework for moral decision-making by examining modern scientific
problems in the context of history, philosophy and religious traditions.

   As Glenn McGee, an assistant professor of bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, said, "We provide an enormous amount of research muscle on
questions the scientists can't answer, like what is potentially an embryo, what
does it mean to destroy an embryo and what rights have historically been
assigned to embryos and people who make them. These are matters of sociology,
history, philosophy, political theory."

   But in today's sound-bite world, where politicians want quick answers to
validate their own views, and reporters have room in their stories for just one
perfect, pithy quote, bioethicists are increasingly being called upon to make
moral pronouncements. And that, some say, is dangerous territory.

   "It's almost as if we have taken these issues and pushed them up in the ivory
tower and given them to people who have the most letters after their names,"
said Wesley J. Smith, a consumer advocate and author of a recent book, "Culture
of Death: The Assault on Medical Ethics in America" (Encounter Books, 2001).

   RELIGIOUS conservatives, in particular, see bioethicists as relying on what
Richard Doerflinger of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops,
describes as "utilitarian reasoning" and for being in "open rebellion against
the idea of moral absolutes."

   And the conservative journalist William Kristol recently founded The
Bioethics Group, with Mr. Smith on its board, to counter what he views as the
prevailing liberalism of bioethicists, whom he calls "secular priests."

   But while bioethicists may give the appearance of being divorced from
religion, many are not, says Arthur Dyck, who teaches ethics at Harvard's
Divinity School and its School of Public Health.

   "Religion is everywhere," said Professor Dyck, who added that most
bioethicists "use reason and facts, and they don't appeal to their religious
traditions directly, even if they are informed by them."

   That was clearly the case during the Senate hearing this month. Dr. Caplan's
views were rooted in secular philosophy, although he did not say so. Dr.
Cameron's were rooted in Christianity, though he did not say so. Their
point-counterpoint debate was perhaps the best evidence yet that being an ethics
expert is no guarantee of ethical infallibility, much less moral superiority.

   As Professor Rasmussen says, "My grandmother may well have made better moral
judgments than I do."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: August 19, 2001

CORRECTION:

   A picture caption last Sunday with an article about the role of bioethicists
in the stem cell debate misstated the age of an illuminated manuscript. While
its subject, the philosopher-physician Avicenna, lived in the 11th century, the
manuscript itself was created in the 15th.

GRAPHIC: Photo: An illuminated 11th-century manuscript showing the
philosopher-physician Ibn Sina, also called Avicenna, visiting a pharmacy.
Avicenna (981-1037) lived most of his life in what is now Iran, where he wrote
his million-word medical encyclopedia, al-Qanun, or the Canon. (Corbis)

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                             1629 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 11, 2001, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Bush's stem cell point man ;
Ethicist overseeing research is firmly against cloning

SOURCE: Staff, Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The man named by President Bush to chair a national advisory
council on stem cell research is a staunch opponent of physician-assisted
suicide, human cloning and the sale of human organs for transplants.

   For Bush, who said he consulted with dozens of scientists, politicians,
doctors, theologians and others before deciding to allow limited use of federal
funds for stem cell research, Leon Kass stood out as the best choice for a tough
job.

   Bush said it would be the job of the council that Kass will chair to "monitor
stem cell research, to recommend appropriate guidelines and regulations, and to
consider all of the medical and ethical ramifications of biomedical innovation.
. . .  This council will keep us apprised of new developments and give our
nation a forum for continuing to discuss and evaluate these important issues."

   Kass, 62, who has spoken out frequently on the perils of modern medical
advances, is a biomedical ethicist and popular professor at the University of
Chicago.

   Proponents of stem cell research almost immediately expressed some concern
about Kass' appointment, noting that he was widely described as being against
such research when he met with Bush to discuss the subject.

   At the same time, Sen. Sam Brownback, R-Kan., a leader of senators opposed to
stem cell research, called Kass "a very good man, and he is very thoughtful and
well-regarded in this topic."

   Kass has come out squarely against human cloning. He warns that if the world
goes in the direction of "baby design and manufacture," the result will be a
brave new world of subservient subhumans who indulge themselves in superficial
pleasures.

   "The prospect of cloning, so repulsive to contemplate, is the occasion for
deciding whether we shall be slaves of unregulated innovation and, ultimately,
its artifacts, or whether we shall remain free human beings who guide our
medical powers toward enhancement of human dignity," he told the House Energy
and Commerce Committee on June 20.

   "The preservation of the humanity of the human future is now in our hands."

   His deep reservations about some new frontiers of medicine come across in his
writing, lectures and interviews. Science and society, he says, are at a
"crossroads."

   "But what are the new standards going to be, and where are they going to come
from?" he told the Washington Post earlier this year. "Who has the wisdom to say
these 'improvements' are going to make us better human beings?"

   Because it will report to Bush, the council is expected to be the highest
ranking governmental panel on bioethics created. A National Bioethics Advisory
Commission was created by President Clinton, but members said it was buried in
levels of bureaucracy and never had much influence.

   The panel will have as its mandate not only to look at stem cell research,
but also important and related bioethical issues such as cloning, assisted
reproduction, gene therapy, psycho-active drugs and brain implants, according to
a senior administration official.

   Kass is a favorite of neoconservatives, some of whom tout him as a model for
a modern surgeon general. University of Pennsylvania liberal bioethicist Arthur
Caplan describes his friend as an open-minded conservative who will talk to
people of all viewpoints and who is not motivated by religious thinking.

   The conservative commentator Charles Krathammer ticked off his attributes in
a column this spring: "A doctor by training, a philosopher by nature, he is one
of those rare Socratic beings who can get you to see what you have never seen -
and get you to like it. He has practiced medicine, published in biochemistry,
written and reflected on everything from Darwin to Babel, from cloning to
euthanasia."


GRAPHIC: Photo: University of Chicago professor Dr. Leon Kass, a conservative
biomedical ethicist, was picked by President Bush on Friday to lead a panel that
will monitor medical research on embryonic stem cells and recommend guidelines
and regulations.; Associated Press

TYPE: -LINKS-; Appointments

NOTES: Chronicle staffers contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2001


                             1630 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            August 9, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: DOWNTOWN PICAYUNE; TO THE RIM; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: Tulane professor takes talks abroad

BYLINE: By Tina Soong

BODY:

   Dr. Darwin Prockop, professor and director of the Center for Gene Therapy at
Tulane University Health Sciences Center, recently visited Japan and Taiwan.

   He was the keynote speaker at the International Conference on New Strategies
for the Treatment of Liver Cirrhosis, held June 6-9 in Tokyo , followed by a
trip to Japan where he spoke at the International Symposium on Biomedical
Technology and Strategy of Biotech Industry.

   Prockop first visited Japan 33 years ago and made presentations at the
International Congress of Biochemistry and at a special meeting of the Japan
Society for Connective Tissue Biology.

   Since then, he has had 10 postdoctoral fellows from Japan to work in his
laboratory, spending two years each. Among them were Dr. Shunpei Sakabibara, who
now presides over Peptide Institute of Osaka University; Dr. Diasoburo Fujimoto,
who now heads the department of applied biological science at Tokyo University
of Agriculture and Technology; Dr. Tadashi Takeuchi, who is now a professor at
the Women's Medical College of Tokyo; and Yoshihoko Hayashi, who is now a
professor at the University of Tokyo and president of the Japanese Connective
Tissue Society.

   Currently, Dr. Ichiro Sekiya, an orthopedic surgeon from Toyko Medical and
Dental University, is a postdoctoral fellow in Prockop's laboratory.

   In the past 30 years, Prockop was invited to speak at international
conferences in Japan five times.

   Prockop said Taiwan is interested in advancing its biomedical technology and
developing the new field of stem cell research.

   "I have many long associations with Japan who sent me postdoctoral fellows. I
hope, in Taiwan, to set up exchanges of scientists in a similar fashion. Tulane
University has developed strong ties with Taiwan in the past. We wish to
increase future cooperation in biomedical and stem cell researches. We are also
hopeful about developing commercial ventures in collaborations with the people
in Taiwan," Prockop said.

   Among other positions Prockop held before he joined Tulane in 2000 were
director of the Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine at Thomas Jefferson
University from 1986 to 1996, and director for Gene Therapy, MCP Hahnemann
University from 1996 to 2000.

   He has received many awards from different institutions, including the
National Academy of Sciences, National Institute of Medicine, Arthritis
Foundation, British Biochemical Society, University of Manchester, University of
South Florida, University of Pennsylvania and George Washington University.

   . . . . . . .

   The consulate general of Japan at New Orleans and the New Orleans Museum of
Art will jointly present "The World of Kabuki: A Demonstration and Lecture,"
today at 7 p.m. with a reception at 6:15 p.m. at the NOMA auditorium.

   Kamejiro Ichikawa, a young kabuki actor, will make a rare appearance in New
Orleans and demonstrate the elaborate makeup and costuming techniques necessary
for kabuki productions. He will also perform kabuki dances. Reservations are
required; call Nancy Canada at 529-2101.

   . . . . . . .

   The Philippine American Women Association of Louisiana will have an
installation luncheon Aug. 18 from noon to 3 p.m. at La Maison Creole in Harvey.

   The new officers for 2001-2003 are Aida Jocson-Grace, president; Ramona
Ramos, vice president; Corazon Lafuente, secretary; Lenny Shimizu, treasurer;
Emma Sutis, public relations; and Zenaida Cunanan, auditor.

   . . . . . . .

   Shawn Liu, martial artist from China, who has taught martial arts to
Jefferson Parish law enforcement officers and at the Evergreen Group of the
Chinese Presbyterian Church in 1999, will lead a tour group to China from Aug.
27 to Sept. 14.

   For information, call 334-343-6023 or send e-mail to
shawnliu@liuinstitute.com.

   . . . . . . .

Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Darwin Prockop, professor and director of the Center for Gene
Therapy at Tulane University Health Sciences Center, was the keynote speaker at
the International Conference on New Strategies for the Treatment of Liver
Cirrhosis in Tokyo. He also spoke in Japan at the International Symposium on
Biomedical Technology and Strategy of Biotech Industry.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2001


                             1631 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            August 9, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: GRETNA PICAYUNE; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: Tulane professor takes talks abroad;
Medical technology is his primary focus

BODY:

   Dr. Darwin Prockop, professor and director of the Center for Gene Therapy at
Tulane University Health Sciences Center, recently visited Japan and Taiwan.

   He was the keynote speaker at the International Conference on New Strategies
for the Treatment of Liver Cirrhosis, held June 6-9 in Tokyo , followed by a
trip to Japan where he spoke at the International Symposium on Biomedical
Technology and Strategy of Biotech Industry.

   Prockop first visited Japan 33 years ago and made presentations at the
International Congress of Biochemistry and at a special meeting of the Japan
Society for Connective Tissue Biology.

   Since then, he has had 10 postdoctoral fellows from Japan to work in his
laboratory, spending two years each. Among them were Dr. Shunpei Sakabibara, who
now presides over Peptide Institute of Osaka University; Dr. Diasoburo Fujimoto,
who now heads the department of applied biological science at Tokyo University
of Agriculture and Technology; Dr. Tadashi Takeuchi, who is now a professor at
the Women's Medical College of Tokyo; and Yoshihoko Hayashi, who is now a
professor at the University of Tokyo and president of the Japanese Connective
Tissue Society.

   Currently, Dr. Ichiro Sekiya, an orthopedic surgeon from Toyko Medical and
Dental University, is a postdoctoral fellow in Prockop's laboratory.

   In the past 30 years, Prockop was invited to speak at international
conferences in Japan five times.

   Prockop said Taiwan is interested in advancing its biomedical technology and
developing the new field of stem cell research.

   "I have many long associations with Japan who sent me postdoctoral fellows. I
hope, in Taiwan, to set up exchanges of scientists in a similar fashion. Tulane
University has developed strong ties with Taiwan in the past. We wish to
increase future cooperation in biomedical and stem cell researches. We are also
hopeful about developing commercial ventures in collaborations with the people
in Taiwan," Prockop said.

   Among other positions Prockop held before he joined Tulane in 2000 were
director of the Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine at Thomas Jefferson
University from 1986 to 1996, and director for Gene Therapy, MCP Hahnemann
University from 1996 to 2000.

   He has received many awards from different institutions, including the
National Academy of Sciences, National Institute of Medicine, Arthritis
Foundation, British Biochemical Society, University of Manchester, University of
South Florida, University of Pennsylvania and George Washington University.

   . . . . . . .

   The consulate general of Japan at New Orleans and the New Orleans Museum of
Art will jointly present "The World of Kabuki: A Demonstration and Lecture,"
today at 7 p.m. with a reception at 6:15 p.m. at the NOMA auditorium.

   Kamejiro Ichikawa, a young kabuki actor, will make a rare appearance in New
Orleans and demonstrate the elaborate makeup and costuming techniques necessary
for kabuki productions. He will also perform kabuki dances. Reservations are
required; call Nancy Canada at 529-2101.

   . . . . . . .

   The Philippine American Women Association of Louisiana will have an
installation luncheon Aug. 18 from noon to 3 p.m. at La Maison Creole in Harvey.

   The new officers for 2001-2003 are Aida Jocson-Grace, president; Ramona
Ramos, vice president; Corazon Lafuente, secretary; Lenny Shimizu, treasurer;
Emma Sutis, public relations; and Zenaida Cunanan, auditor.

   . . . . . . .

   Shawn Liu, martial artist from China, who has taught martial arts to
Jefferson Parish law enforcement officers and at the Evergreen Group of the
Chinese Presbyterian Church in 1999, will lead a tour group to China from Aug.
27 to Sept. 14.

   For information, call 334-343-6023 or send e-mail to
shawnliu@liuinstitute.com.

   . . . . . . .

Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Darwin Prockop, professor and director of the Center for Gene
Therapy at Tulane University Health Sciences Center, was the keynote speaker at
the International Conference on New Strategies for the Treatment of Liver
Cirrhosis in Tokyo. He also spoke in Japan at the International Symposium on
Biomedical Technology and Strategy of Biotech Industry.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2001


                             1632 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 9, 2001, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 11D

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: Fired researcher assails St. Jude hospital

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

BODY:
A researcher who was fired from the prestigious St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis says negligent treatment of "hundreds" of children there may
have put their health at risk and could have resulted in deaths of children with
cancer.

   Hospital officials call the charges "completely false," suggesting they arise
from a disgruntled ex-employee. "Patient risk was never a factor here," says
spokesman Jerry Chipman.


   In response to the researcher's complaint, a federal investigation of St.
Jude found some problems with diagnostic tests at the hospital, but did not halt
any research efforts there.

   Pediatric neurologist June Caruso of Havertown, Pa., who worked at the
hospital last year, claims that St. Jude physicians failed to read brain wave
scans, or electroencephalograms (EEGs), of children stricken with brain cancer
or other disorders. Those patients were inappropriately treated with cancer
drugs because of this failure, possibly contributing to deaths of "at least 20"
children, she says.

   "The EEGs were never read correctly, they were just treating kids with
anything (as a result)," says Caruso. She plans to file suit against the
hospital for firing her, saying her dismissal resulted from her complaints about
hospital care.

   A July 13 letter from the federal Office for Human Research Protection
(OHRP), which looked into some of Caruso's charges, reports that sometimes five
years went by without EEGs being written up at St. Jude, and that no evidence
indicated that doctors had used the brain wave reports in some diagnoses. This
failure "may have represented unanticipated problems involving risks to
(research) subjects or others," says the letter. OHRP officials would not
comment further on their ongoing investigation.

   St. Jude officials strongly denied this finding. "In absolutely no cases did
it have any adverse effect," says hospital deputy chief Bill Evans. All doctors
received spoken reports about the EEGs, he says, calling the failure to write
them up a "clerical error." By Friday, hospital officials are supposed to submit
a plan for ensuring that EEGs are quickly read and recorded in research trials.

   The July letter found no evidence of two other Caruso charges: alleged
misreading of magnetic resonance imaging and misuse of radiation treatment for
cancer-stricken children. Only 17 children enrolled in research trials at the
hospital were considered by OHRP in its investigation, as everyday patients are
not part of its responsibilities. The letter concludes by saluting the head of
St. Jude's internal research review committee as "a well-respected, dedicated
leader" who has shown "exceptional commitment" to protecting research
participants.

   A March audit of St. Jude performed by National Cancer Institute officials
found the hospital's conduct of clinical trials "perfectly acceptable," says
Joan Mauer, NCI's monitoring chief.

   Last year, OHRP investigated St. Jude over a gene-therapy vaccine whose
possible contamination was not promptly reported to an internal review
committee. Tests later found no problems with the vaccine. Since 1962, the
hospital has been a national center for pediatric cancer treatment.

LOAD-DATE: August 09, 2001


                             1633 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 7, 2001 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-02

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: New cream may ward off skin cancer

BYLINE: By Lauran Neergaard, The New York Times,

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The key to preventing skin cancer is  protecting yourself from
the sun, but too few people heed that  advice: Skin cancer strikes more than 1
million Americans annually.

   Now researchers have developed an experimental cream that may  repair some
sun damage and help ward off cancer. Consider it gene  therapy in a bottle, a
lotion containing an enzyme that repairs  sun-damaged DNA.

   It reduced the incidence of the most common form of skin  cancer when tested
on some of the world's most sun-sensitive  people - sufferers of a rare,
inherited disease called xeroderma  pigmentosum, or XP, who can blister in
minutes and suffer skin  cancer at 1,000 times the rate of average people.

   Might the cream, called Dimericine, also help the general  population?
Ultraviolet rays damage DNA the same way in XP  patients as in anyone else. So
this fall, researchers plan to take  Dimericine to three sunny cities - San
Diego, Los Angeles and  Jacksonville, Fla. - to test it on 600 people who have
had one  skin cancer removed and thus are at high risk for more.

   Don't put away your sunscreen yet. Even if the cream  ultimately works, it's
not perfect and so wouldn't be a license to  fry.

   But 'right now when someone forgets or misuses or washes off  a sunscreen and
has a sunburn, there's nothing that can be done  for the long-term damage that's
been done to the skin,' said  molecular biologist Daniel Yarosh, who created
Dimericine.

   Now that scientists have pinpointed UV-caused gene  mutations, 'sooner or
later, there's going to be a morning-after  cream' to help fix them, said Yale
University dermatologist Dr.  David Leffell.

   About 1.3 million Americans will be diagnosed with  basal or squamous cell
carcinoma this year, the most common skin  cancers and the ones easily cut away
if caught early, according to  the American Cancer Society.

   The deadliest skin cancer, melanoma, will strike an  additional 51,000
Americans, a toll rising 3 percent a year. Skin  cancer will kill almost 10,000
this year, the majority melanoma  sufferers.

   One burn doesn't mean cancer. Skin has complex repair  mechanisms that remove
about half of UV-damaged DNA in 24 hours,  half the remaining damage in another
day, and so on, Yarosh  explained. But missed repairs build up. Enough damage
equals cancer.

   A bacterial enzyme called 'T4 endonuclease V' has long been  known to help
repair DNA. But no one knew how to get it through  skin. Then Yarosh's
biotechnology company, AGI Dermatics, put the  enzyme into microscopic fat
bubbles called liposomes that can slip  inside skin cells. There, the enzyme
binds to UV-caused DNA  mutations and initiates repair.

LOAD-DATE: August 07, 2001


                             1634 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 07, 2001, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: Cream may deter skin cancer ;
Researchers test enzyme in lotion on damaged DNA

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The key to preventing skin cancer is protecting yourself from
the sun, but too few people heed that advice: Skin cancer strikes more than 1
million Americans annually and is on the rise.

   Now researchers have developed an experimental cream that may repair some sun
damage and help ward off cancer. Consider it gene therapy in a bottle, a lotion
containing an enzyme that repairs sun-damaged DNA.

   It reduced the incidence of the most common form of skin cancer when tested
on some of the world's most sun-sensitive people - sufferers of a rare inherited
disease called xeroderma pigmentosum, or XP, who can blister in minutes and
suffer skin cancer at 1,000 times the rate of average people.

   Might the cream, called Dimericine, also help the general population?
Ultraviolet rays damage DNA the same way in XP patients as in anyone else. So
this fall, researchers plan to take Dimericine to three sunny cities - San
Diego, Los Angeles and Jacksonville, Fla. - to test it on 600 people who have
had one skin cancer removed and thus are at high risk for more.

   Don't put away your sunscreen yet. Even if the cream ultimately works, it's
not perfect and so wouldn't be a license to fry.

   But, "right now when someone forgets or misuses or washes off a sunscreen and
has a sunburn, there's nothing that can be done for the long-term damage that's
been done to the skin," says molecular biologist Daniel Yarosh, who created
Dimericine.

   Now that scientists have pinpointed UV-caused gene mutations, "sooner or
later, there's going to be a morning-after cream" to help fix them, adds Yale
University dermatologist Dr. David Leffell.

   The deadliest skin cancer, melanoma, will strike 51,000 Americans this year.

    . . .

    Repairing the sun's damage

    Sun rays penetrate the epidermis layer of the skin and damage the lower
cells within the layer. Here's how an experimental cream may prevent some skin
cancer by repairing damaged cells.


   Damaged cells

    Ultraviolet rays damage DNA inside the nuclei of skin cells. The majority of
damage is naturally repaired. However, over time a buildup of gene mutations can
lead to cancer.

    Repaired cells

    The cream is absorbed into the skin. It has a special enzyme placed within
microscopic fat bubbles that slip inside the skin cells.

   The enzyme binds to the DNA mutation and initiates repair.

    . . .


   For full detail of drawings see, Houston Chronicle microfilm.

    Ultraviolet rays Tumor Buildup of DNA damage Dimericine lotion Fat bubbles
Cell nucleus DNA Mutation Enzyme


GRAPHIC: Associated Press, Sources: AGI Dermatics; Ultimate Visual Dictionary of
Science

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2001


                             1635 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     August 7, 2001 Tuesday REGION EDITION

SECTION: MISCELLANEOUS, Pg.B-1

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: U.S. GENEROUS TO STATE MED SCHOOLS CONGRESSIONAL CLOUT, REPUTATIONS
SPUR CASH

BYLINE: CLAUDE R. MARX, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Despite increased competition for federal research funds, Pennsylvania
medical schools continue to be among the biggest recipients.

    The caliber of its medical schools, combined with some assistance from
well-placed members of Congress, have helped Pennsylvania receive a larger share
of federal research funds than more populous states have.

    The state's six medical schools received $947 million from the National
Institutes of Health last year, more than Florida or Texas.

    That was at a time when only 32 percent of grant applications to the NIH
were accepted. By contrast, 35 percent of applications were funded 10 years ago
and 40 percent received funds 20 years ago.

    "It is a very rigorous system and sometimes good projects are not funded. It
does not get easier to get money just because there may be more of it
available," said Andrew Rudczynski, the University of Pennsylvania's executive
director of research services.

    Though the NIH's $20.3 billion annual budget is more than twice what it was
in 1994, almost twice as many new organizations are seeking money.

    The University of Pennsylvania Medical School received $270 million in
federal funds last year, the second-largest amount in the country after
Baltimore's Johns Hopkins University, which received $305 million.

    The University of Pennsylvania's grants include a five-year $5 million
project to determine genetic tendencies for breast cancer and a $4 million grant
for a project to find a cure for sleep disorders.

    Federal funds account for 80 percent of the school's research funds. The
national average is 75 percent, according to the American Association of Medical
Colleges.

    The state's other medical schools received NIH funds at these levels last
year: University of Pittsburgh, $170 million; Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, $65 million; Penn State University, $37 million; Temple University
in Philadelphia, $29 million; and MCP Hahnemann University in Philadelphia, $14
million.

    The funds at Pitt are subsidizing a five-year, $14 million study that is
examining ways to treat female lung cancer patients with gene therapy. At Penn
State, a $5 million study is examining whether young people who snore face an
increased risk of high blood pressure.

    Unlike many other federal programs, the NIH budget approved by Congress
contains only a few directed allocations.

    About 99 percent of all federal medical research funds are distributed
through a peer-review system.

    Outside panels of scholars are brought in to review grant proposals and
decide which projects should be funded.

    Congress does more than just give NIH money: It helps set the research
priorities of the 27 institutes and centers that make up the NIH.

    When writing funding bills, the chairmen of the subcommittees that oversee
the NIH budget list those areas that should be given special attention. The NIH
generally follows the recommendations.

    Until the GOP lost its majority status in the Senate in June, the man to see
was Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., who chaired the subcommittee that oversees
federal health and education spending.

    Specter, now the subcommittee's ranking Republican, never steered specific
NIH funds to a Pennsylvania project. However, some of his priorities as
chairman, such as finding cures for Alzheimer's disease, cancer and diabetes
research, are areas where significant work is done in the state's schools.

    "He was supportive of NIH funding increases but our relationship with him
was distant. He knows what we are working on but was careful to distance himself
from individual projects," said Gerald Litwack, vice dean for research at Thomas
Jefferson University.

    A lobbyist who helps schools get research funds said the influence of
members such as Specter is more subtle.

    "People who give grants know where their money comes from and they respond.
It's not that bad programs get funded, but a good project from a chairman's
state has a better chance than one from another state," he said.

    Other members from Pennsylvania play a more direct role on behalf of
individual funding requests.

    Rep. John Murtha, No. 2 Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee,
often signs letters endorsing individual grant requests, as do the state's three
other committee members.

    "More weeks than not, I am signing something that promotes a research
project. But often my big role is letting schools know what the priorities are
and what funds they should apply for," said Rep. John Peterson, R-Pa., a member
of the House subcommittee that oversees NIH's budget.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                             1636 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     August 7, 2001 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: STATE, Pg.B-1

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: U.S. GENEROUS TO STATE MED SCHOOLS;
 CONGRESSIONAL CLOUT, REPUTATIONS SPUR CASH

BYLINE: CLAUDE R. MARX, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Despite increased competition for federal research funds, Pennsylvania
medical schools continue to be among the biggest recipients.

    The caliber of its medical schools, combined with some assistance from
well-placed members of Congress, have helped Pennsylvania receive a larger share
of federal research funds than more populous states have.

    The state's six medical schools received $947 million from the National
Institutes of Health last year, more than Florida or Texas.

    That was at a time when only 32 percent of grant applications to the NIH
were accepted. By contrast, 35 percent of applications were funded 10 years ago
and 40 percent received funds 20 years ago.

    "It is a very rigorous system and sometimes good projects are not funded. It
does not get easier to get money just because there may be more of it
available," said Andrew Rudczynski, the University of Pennsylvania's executive
director of research services.

    Though the NIH's $20.3 billion annual budget is more than twice what it was
in 1994, almost twice as many new organizations are seeking money.

    The University of Pennsylvania Medical School received $270 million in
federal funds last year, the second-largest amount in the country after
Baltimore's Johns Hopkins University, which received $305 million.

    The University of Pennsylvania's grants include a five-year $5 million
project to determine genetic tendencies for breast cancer and a $4 million grant
for a project to find a cure for sleep disorders.

    Federal funds account for 80 percent of the school's research funds. The
national average is 75 percent, according to the American Association of Medical
Colleges.

    The state's other medical schools received NIH funds at these levels last
year: University of Pittsburgh, $170 million; Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia, $65 million; Penn State University, $37 million; Temple University
in Philadelphia, $29 million; and MCP Hahnemann University in Philadelphia, $14
million.

    The funds at Pitt are subsidizing a five-year, $14 million study that is
examining ways to treat female lung cancer patients with gene therapy. At Penn
State, a $5 million study is examining whether young people who snore face an
increased risk of high blood pressure.

    Unlike many other federal programs, the NIH budget approved by Congress
contains only a few directed allocations.

    About 99 percent of all federal medical research funds are distributed
through a peer-review system.

    Outside panels of scholars are brought in to review grant proposals and
decide which projects should be funded.

    Congress does more than just give NIH money: It helps set the research
priorities of the 27 institutes and centers that make up the NIH.

    When writing funding bills, the chairmen of the subcommittees that oversee
the NIH budget list those areas that should be given special attention. The NIH
generally follows the recommendations.

    Until the GOP lost its majority status in the Senate in June, the man to see
was Sen. Arlen Specter, R-Pa., who chaired the subcommittee that oversees
federal health and education spending.

    Specter, now the subcommittee's ranking Republican, never steered specific
NIH funds to a Pennsylvania project. However, some of his priorities as
chairman, such as finding cures for Alzheimer's disease, cancer and diabetes
research, are areas where significant work is done in the state's schools.

    "He was supportive of NIH funding increases but our relationship with him
was distant. He knows what we are working on but was careful to distance himself
from individual projects," said Gerald Litwack, vice dean for research at Thomas
Jefferson University.

    A lobbyist who helps schools get research funds said the influence of
members such as Specter is more subtle.

    "People who give grants know where their money comes from and they respond.
It's not that bad programs get funded, but a good project from a chairman's
state has a better chance than one from another state," he said.

    Other members from Pennsylvania play a more direct role on behalf of
individual funding requests.

    Rep. John Murtha, No. 2 Democrat on the House Appropriations Committee,
often signs letters endorsing individual grant requests, as do the state's three
other committee members.

    "More weeks than not, I am signing something that promotes a research
project. But often my big role is letting schools know what the priorities are
and what funds they should apply for," said Rep. John Peterson, R-Pa., a member
of the House subcommittee that oversees NIH's budget.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                             1637 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        August 7, 2001, Tuesday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: New cream may fight skin cancer

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard


BODY: WASHINGTON - The key to preventing skin cancer is protecting yourself from
the sun, but too few people heed that advice.

    Skin cancer strikes more than 1 million Americans annually and is on the
rise.

    Now, researchers have developed an experimental cream that may repair some
sun damage and help ward off cancer.

    Consider it gene therapy in a bottle: a lotion containing an enzyme that
repairs sun-damaged DNA.

    It reduced incidents of the most common form of skin cancer when tested on
some of the world's most sun-sensitive people - sufferers of a rare inherited
disease called xeroderma pigmentosum, or XP, who can blister in minutes and
suffer skin cancer at 1,000 times the average.

    Might the cream, called Dimericine, also help the general population?
Ultraviolet rays damage DNA the same way in XP patients as in anyone else.

    So this fall, researchers plan to take Dimericine to three sunny cities -
San Diego, Los Angeles and Jacksonville, Fla., - to test it on 600 people who
have had one skin cancer removed and thus are at high risk for more.

    Don't put away your sunscreen yet.

    Even if the cream ultimately works, it's not perfect and so wouldn't be a
license to fry.

    But, "right now when someone forgets or misuses or washes off a sunscreen
and has a sunburn, there's nothing that can be done for the long-term damage
that's been done to the skin," says molecular biologist Daniel Yarosh, who
created Dimericine.

    Now that scientists have pinpointed UV-caused gene mutations, "sooner or
later, there's going to be a morning-after cream" to help fix them, adds Yale
University dermatologist Dr. David Leffell.

    Some 1.3 million Americans will be diagnosed with basal or squamous cell
carcinoma this year, the most common skin cancers and the ones easily cut away
if caught early.

    Thousands more, like President Bush, will have removed sun-induced lesions
called actinic keratoses that can turn into squamous cell cancer.

    The deadliest skin cancer, melanoma, will strike an additional 51,000
Americans, a toll rising 3 percent a year.

    Skin cancer will kill almost 10,000 this year, the majority melanoma
sufferers.

    The best protection is to limit sun exposure beginning in childhood,
dermatologists say.

    Sunburns early in life are considered the most dangerous; doctors even have
begun seeing melanoma in 20-somethings.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                             1638 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 7, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-7

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Experimental cream that fights skin cancer to be tested in S.D.

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- The key to preventing skin cancer is protecting yourself from the
sun, but too few people heed that advice: Skin cancer strikes more than 1
million Americans annually and is on the rise.

   Now researchers have developed an experimental cream that may repair some sun
damage and help ward off cancer.  Consider it gene therapy in a bottle, a lotion
containing an enzyme that repairs sun-damaged DNA.

   It reduced the incidence of the most common form of skin cancer when tested
on some of the world's most sun-sensitive people -- sufferers of a rare
inherited disease called xeroderma pigmentosum, or XP, who can blister in
minutes and suffer skin cancer at 1,000 times the rate of average people.

   Might the cream, called Dimericine, also help the general population?
Ultraviolet rays damage DNA the same way in XP patients as in anyone else.  So
this fall, researchers plan to take Dimericine to three sunny cities -- San
Diego, Los Angeles and Jacksonville, Fla. -- to test it on 600 people who have
had one skin cancer removed and thus are at high risk for more.

   Don't put away your sunscreen yet.  Even if the cream ultimately works, it's
not perfect and so wouldn't be a license to fry.

   But, "right now when someone forgets or misuses or washes off a sunscreen and
has a sunburn, there's nothing that can be done for the long-term damage that's
been done to the skin," says molecular biologist Daniel Yarosh, who created
Dimericine.

   Now that scientists have pinpointed UV-caused gene mutations, "sooner or
later, there's going to be a morning-after cream" to help fix them, says Yale
University dermatologist Dr. David Leffell.

   Dimericine is one of many approaches the biotech industry is taking to fight
skin cancer.  For example, the San Diego biotech Vical is working on a cancer
vaccine, Allovectin-7, that is in testing in patients with melanoma.

   Some 1.3 million Americans will be diagnosed with basal or squamous cell
carcinoma this year, the most common skin cancers and the ones easily cut away
if caught early, according to the American Cancer Society.  Thousands more will
have sun-induced lesions called actinic keratoses removed.  Those lesions can
turn into squamous cell cancer.

   The deadliest skin cancer, melanoma, will strike an additional 51,000
Americans, a toll rising 3 percent a year.  Skin cancer will kill almost 10,000
this year, the majority melanoma sufferers.

   The best protection is to limit sun exposure beginning in childhood,
dermatologists say.


LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2001


                             1639 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 7, 2001 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: New cream gets to the root of skin cancer

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The key to preventing skin cancer is protecting yourself from the sun, but
too few people heed that advice: Skin cancer strikes over 1 million Americans
annually and is on the rise.

    Now researchers have developed an experimental cream that may repair some
sun damage and help ward off cancer. Consider it gene therapy in a bottle, a
lotion containing an enzyme that repairs sun-damaged DNA.

   It reduced the incidence of the most common form of skin cancer when tested
on some of the world's most sun-sensitive people - sufferers of a rare inherited
disease called xeroderma pigmentosum, or XP, who can blister in minutes and
suffer skin cancer at 1,000 times the rate of average people.

    Might the cream, called Dimericine, also help the general population?
Ultraviolet rays damage DNA the same way in XP patients as in anyone else. So
this fall, researchers plan to take Dimericine to three sunny cities - San
Diego, Los Angeles and Jacksonville, Fla. - to test it on 600 people who have
had one skin cancer removed and thus are at high risk for more.

    Don't put away your sunscreen yet. Even if the cream ultimately works, it's
not perfect, so it wouldn't be a license to fry.

    But, "right now when someone forgets or misuses or washes off a sunscreen
and has a sunburn, there's nothing that can be done for the long-term damage
that's been done to the skin," says molecular biologist Daniel Yarosh, who
created Dimericine.

    Now that scientists have pinpointed UV-caused gene mutations, "sooner or
later, there's going to be a morning-after cream" to help fix them, adds Yale
University dermatologist David Leffell.

    Some 1.3 million Americans will be diagnosed with basal or squamous cell
carcinoma this year, the most common skin cancers and the ones easily cut away
if caught early, according to the American Cancer Society. Thousands more, like
President Bush, will have removed sun-induced lesions called actinic keratoses
that can turn into squamous cell cancer.

    The deadliest skin cancer, melanoma, will strike an additional 51,000
Americans, a toll rising 3 percent a year. Skin cancer will kill almost 10,000
this year, the majority melanoma sufferers.

    The best protection is to limit sun exposure beginning in childhood,
dermatologists say. Sunburns early in life are considered the most dangerous;
doctors even have begun seeing melanoma in 20-somethings.

    Slip on a shirt, slop on sunscreen and slap on a hat anytime you're in the
sun, but especially between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. when UV rays are strongest, says
the cancer society's new "slip, slop, slap" sun-safety campaign.

   One burn doesn't mean cancer. Skin has complex repair mechanisms that remove
about half of UV- damaged DNA in 24 hours, half the remaining damage in another
day, and so on, Yarosh explains.

    But over time, missed repairs build up. Enough built-up damage equals
cancer.

    A bacterial enzyme called "T4 endonuclease V" has long been known to help
repair DNA. But no one knew how to get it through skin. Then Yarosh's
biotechnology company, AGI Dermatics, put the enzyme into microscopic fat
bubbles called liposomes that can slip inside skin cells. There, the enzyme
binds to UV-caused DNA mutations and initiates repair.

    First tested were XP patients, who have an incurable gene defect that leaves
them unable to repair most UV damage. Thirty applied either Dimericine or a
dummy lotion to their face and hands daily for a year. Dimericine users had a 30
percent reduction in basal cell carcinoma, and a dramatic 68 percent reduction
in precancerous actinic keratoses.

    Because the drug doesn't seem to penetrate below the epidermis, the skin's
upper layer, so far no one has experienced side effects, Yarosh reported in the
Lancet medical journal.

    He is preparing to seek Food and Drug Administration approval of Dimericine
for XP. Next come studies to see if it could help protect against general skin
cancer, too.

GRAPHIC: 1. INFO GRAPHIC: Repairing the sun's damage

2. LIST:

Protect yourself

 Here is advice from the American Cancer Society on how to protect yourself from
skin cancer:

 Ultraviolet rays are strongest between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., so limit exposure
then. That's true year-round, not just in the summer. UV rays can penetrate
water and clouds, so protect yourself even on cloudy days.

Use sunscreen with a skin protection factor of 15 or higher. Apply it 15 to 20
minutes before going outdoors, and reapply after swimming, sweating or toweling
off.

Avoiding sunburn is particularly important during childhood and adolescence. But
sunscreen isn't recommended for children younger than 6 months old, so keep
infants in the shade.

Cover up with protective clothing, including a wide-brimmed hat to shade the
face, neck and ears.

Don't forget sunglasses, even for small children. UV rays are very damaging to
eyes.

Avoid sunlamps and tanning booths.

Some prescription drugs, such as antibiotics, can greatly increase the skin's
sensitivity to the sun, so check with your doctor.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1640 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 6, 2001, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 1523 words

HEADLINE: OLYMPIC NOTES / JOHN POWERS;
Material from wire services, the US Olympic Committee, sports federations, and
interviews was used in this report.;
NEW PRESIDENT SENDS MESSAGE

BODY:

   Jacques Rogge, the new International Olympic Committee president, wasted no
time putting distance between himself and predecessor Juan Antonio Samaranch.
The issue was both major and symbolic: doping. Samaranch wanted the list of
banned substances shortened. No chance, said Rogge.

   "He is not aware of the reality," said the Belgian surgeon, who knows the
reality is simple and sobering. Olympic sports are awash in drugs and the labs
are catching only a tiny percentage of doped athletes. The most recent example
is last month's World Swimming Championships, where not a single athlete tested
positive in a sport that has been plagued by drugs for three decades. Though the
IOC finally has come up with a urine test for banned erythropoietin (EPO), it
still can't detect human growth hormones. And in a few years, those drugs may be
as passe as steroids have become among the savvier cheaters. On the horizon:
gene therapy medicines that would be even more difficult to detect.

      "The same problem will likely occur in genetic therapy as we see
elsewhere," predicted Prince Alexandre de Merode, the IOC's medical commission
chief. "There is danger here if we are not prepared for it."

   Clock is ticking

   With Rogge now president, Denis Oswald of Switzerland has taken over as the
IOC's coordinator of the Athens Olympics. Oswald's take on preparations, though,
is no rosier than his predecessor's. "Time is still a problem," said Oswald, who
also heads the international rowing federation. "It will be difficult to catch
up." With the Games only three years off, it's all but certain many venues won't
be ready for the traditional year-out test run. More likely is a Montreal
scenario: i.e., just in time . . . No chance of Marion Jones going for five gold
medals again at the World Track and Field Championships in Edmonton this week.
Three is the maximum, and that's only if the coaches let her run the 4 x 100
relay despite her skipping camp. All that's certain is Jones will defend her
title in the 100 and also chase the one she missed two years ago in the 200 . .
. Maurice Greene defended his title in the 100 last night, winning his third
straight crown in 9.82 seconds. Greene, troubled by left quad, hamstring, and
knee injuries, said he will not defend his title in the 200 and is undecided
about the 4 x 100 relay . . . Who says the track and field folks are behind the
times? Only a quarter-century after the word "amateur" vanished from Olympus,
the International Amateur Athletics Federation finally dropped it from its
title. The IAAF, after all, has been giving cars to world champions for a decade
and paying prize money since 1997. "We are facing reality," said president
Lamine Diack. At least the IAAF won't have to change its letterhead - it's now
the International Association of Athletics Federations . . . After stars howled,
the IAAF last week backed off its attempt to streamline meets by disqualifying
runners on their first false start and reducing jump attempts from three to two.
It did push through one change, though, starting in 2003: Runners in races of
400 meters or less will be disqualified after a second false start, whether or
not they were involved in the first.

   Waves of applause

   So, who topped the table at the recent World Swimming Championships in Japan,
the Yanks or the Aussies? Depends on how you count. The United States won more
medals (26-23) and had more placement points, but Australia had more golds
(13-9). "I'm a purist, so I look at the golds," said Ian Thorpe, who grabbed six
all by himself, most ever by one swimmer, and set three freestyle world marks.
Since the Aussies never have bested the United States at the global meet, they
voted en masse for purity. Still, it was an excellent meet for the Americans,
who are in rebuilding mode post-Sydney. They went double gold in the freestyle
sprints with Anthony Ervin and also picked up victories from Randall Bal (50
back), Hayley Cope (50 back), Martha Bowen (200 IM), plus teenagers Michael
Phelps (a world record in the 200 butterfly), Aaron Piersol (200 back), Brendan
Hansen (200 breast), and Natalie Coughlin (100 back). Also in the medals were
local swimmers Erik Vendt (North Easton, silver in the 400 IM) and Ian Crocker
(Portland, Maine, silver in the 100 fly). The meet, though, was a fiasco. The
timing system in Fukuoka's temporary plastic pool malfunctioned so often
officials had to consult the backup video 16 times. After the scoreboard had
Pieter van den Hoogenband winning the men's 100 with a blank next to Ervin's
name, it took three minutes to identify Ervin as winner. The timing glitch also
contributed to a comedy of errors in the women's 800 freestyle relay, which was
awarded to the British (after a day's delay) once the victorious Australians
were disqualified for jumping into the pool before the race was over and the
runner-up Americans (who claimed a touchpad glitch) were rubbed out for an
illegal change.

   Splash pool

   Except for the women's water polo team, which placed a disappointing fourth
(with 10 Olympians back) after winning silver in Sydney, the Americans fared
predictably in the other global aquatic events. The men's water polo team, with
only two Sydney regulars back, placed seventh but still qualified for next
year's World Cup. The divers, without five of seven Olympians (including gold
medalist Laura Wilkinson), placed nobody higher than fourth. The synchronized
swimmers, with Anna Kozlova the only returning Olympian, performed creditably,
finishing fourth in all three events . . . The Olympic men's ice hockey teams
from the United States and Canada will have their summer training camps after
all. Once the Czechs and Finns said they were getting their teams together, the
NHL players' association dropped its objection. Lots of restrictions, though -
the camps are for only two days, they can't be tryouts, skating is optional, and
the coaches can't be on the ice. What they'll be, then, are glorified
orientation sessions. The Americans will hold theirs in Colorado Springs after
Labor Day. Their roster stands at 14 (of 23) with the recent addition of
defensemen Chris Chelios and Gary Suter. Chelios, who'll be captain again, says
there'll be no repeat of the Nagano room-trashing in Salt Lake. "I guarantee
something like that will not happen again," vowed Chelios, who sent a $3,000
check to the Japanese organizers after none of his teammates owned up to the
damage.

   Healthy choice

   Why will the 2004 US Olympic gymnastics trials be so much earlier (in June,
seven weeks before the Games) than usual? So the athletes can have more time to
get healthy and sharp. Last year, there was a month between the trials and
Olympics halfway around the world. In 1996, there were only three weeks . . .
Yet another reconstruction project for the US women's gymnastics team, which has
only one Olympian (Tasha Schwikert) returning for this week's world team trials
in Philadelphia. Dominique Dawes has gone back into retirement and Amy Chow,
Elise Ray, Kristen Maloney, and Jamie Dantzscher all have moved on. The best
hope is that Morgan White, who would have been the table-setter in Sydney had
she not pulled out injured before the Games, makes the team as an at-large pick
. . . There'll be plenty of rookies on the US rowing team for this month's world
championships in Switzerland. Of the 15 boats that emerged from last month's
trials, only two rowers - Bryan Volpenhein in the men's uncoxed pair and
lightweight sculler Steve Tucker - were on the team in Sydney. Odds are a few
more Olympians will be added when the final nine boats (including the eights)
are put together in camp . . . Wipe out for the US judo team, which didn't place
a male or female fighter (including Alex Ottiano of Lawrence) in the top eight
in any of the 16 classes at the recent world championships in Munich. The
Japanese, who invented the sport, topped the table with four golds, followed by
the Russians and French . . . The US men's volleyball team, which was winless at
the Olympics and is rebuilding, needed only to beat the Dominican Republic and
Barbados (and beat fellow runner-up Mexico on set win-loss ratio) at the recent
regional tournament to make it into next year's 24-team event in Argentina. The
women are already in . . . Predictable finish for the green (average age: 21) US
men's field hockey team, which placed 14th of 16 at the recent qualifier for
next year's World Cup, which the Americans have never competed in. Some signs of
improvement, though: The United States won two matches and lost four by a goal.
The women have a better chance at their Cup qualifier next month in France, but
they've been getting banged around in recent tuneups in Europe, going 1-4-1
against the Germans, Dutch, and Spanish . . . So, what's Tonya Harding up to
these days? Penning an autobiography, signing autographs at minor league games
(the Jacksonville Suns gave out 2,000 miniature bats in her honor), and making
money off her 15 minutes of infamy. "We like oddballs," said the owner of a New
York gay men's club that hired her for a recent drop-by.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, JACQUES ROGGE Knows realities

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2001


                             1641 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      August 5, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 917 words

HEADLINE: 'Food cop' targets science, medicine;
 List: A new database provides information about often-hidden ties between
academics and private industry.

BODY:

   In 1971, MIT microbiologist Michael Jacobson and two other idealistic young
Ph.D. scientists, launched the watchdog group, Center for Science in the Public
Interest, which led the coalition that got nutritional labels placed on all
packaged foods.

   Jacobson has earned the title "America's top food cop," with effective
campaigns against certain restaurant menus, movie popcorn, poorly regulated
alcoholic beverages and additives such as nitrite and sulfite. Now, the center
has set its sights on the conflict-of-interest crisis in science and medicine.
It has created a free Internet database (www.integrityinscience.org) to provide
information about the often-hidden links between academic scientists and private
industry.

   Jacobson was interviewed by Peter Gorner of the Chicago Tribune.

   Your database is unique. What do you hope to do?

   Corporations increasingly are hiring academic scientists to conduct research,
speak at press conferences and provide advice. Too frequently, neither the
scientists nor the corporations disclose the funding. Important health and
environmental policies can be distorted by scientists who assert objectivity but
who receive money from affected industries. The result could be more pollution,
unsafe food additives and dangerous consumer products.

   We wanted to begin to lift the veil of secrecy by providing information about
the links between more than 1,100 academic scientists and private industry. This
is just scratching the surface, the first step. There are hundreds of thousands
of scientists, and our resources are limited. But we'll be expanding the list in
the coming months.

   What does an academic have to do to make your database?

   Have some link to business. Maybe an industry grant, or an equity interest in
a company, or serving as a consultant or on an advisory committee of a trade
organization.

   What's wrong with that? Everybody does it, even though the money angle is
regarded as a private matter between the expert and the company.

   Until our database came out, this was almost a forbidden subject. Many
reporters are reluctant to ask a scientist, "Do you receive any industry
funding?" Scientific articles generally don't indicate whether the scientist is
on, say, the board of directors of a drug company or advisory board of a trade
organization.

   On the other hand, if you were in business, you'd hire experts and pay them
for their expertise. That's the nature of competition. Anyway, isn't all this
information publicly available, if you want to take the time to look for it?

   Sure, but it can be very hard to find. A kind of secret netherworld exists in
science, filled with potential conflicts. We wanted to get it on the table. We
think it's important that the public knows about it.

   But what are we to think? The new policy of mandatory disclosure creates a
caveat emptor situation: Are we to trust the scientist or not? Doesn't your
database imply unethical behavior?

   In my own work, mostly in nutrition, I've been dealing with this issue for
almost three decades. It didn't take long for me to notice that, whenever my
organization would say some food additive posed a risk or some packaged foods
were loaded with fat and we should eat less of them, out would come a statement
from some academic, or seemingly objective organization, defending the additive
or product.

   Invariably, the private affiliations were never disclosed. Whether they're
relevant or not, I think people have a right to know about them. And journalists
should create policies that force them to seek out truly independent experts,
even if it's some professor grinding away in his lab on the third floor of a
physics building.

   Could you address concerns about scientific conflicts of interest in the wake
of the New England Journal of Medicine's failure to enforce its disclosure
guidelines and the University of Pennsylvania's failure to adequately disclose
its conflicts to a patient who died during a gene therapy trial?

   Yes. And more recently, a controversy has swirled around John Graham, who
directs the Harvard Center for Risk Analysis, which receives unrestricted
funding from more than 100 industrial, chemical, oil and gas, mining,
pharmaceutical, food and agribusiness companies and trade associations,
including Kraft, Monsanto, ExxonMobil, 3M, Alcoa, Pfizer, Dow Chemical and
DuPont. Graham has represented himself as a neutral "expert" from the Harvard
School of Public Health when testifying before Congress and speaking on risk
issues to the media. He has been nominated to an important position in the
Office of Management and Budget.

   Are there more ethical conflicts now than there used to be?

   I think it's gotten worse. There's a lot more industry funding of medical
research -- it seems as though every professor is doing research with drug
company support. Whenever there are public policy battles, with activists or
legislators pushing for one side or the other, Big business feels the need to
surround itself with academic credibility. So it hires professors as speakers,
or to appear at press conferences.

   If you're an academic, it goes with the territory, doesn't it?

   Sure, and we're not going to be able to stop it. Generally, when science
moves from basic research to applied research, there's increasing industry
involvement. Our goal is to simply make disclosure the norm. People with
potential conflicts of interest -- or "competing interests," as the British
Medical Journal calls them -- should disclose them.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                             1642 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 5, 2001, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. X1

LENGTH: 2172 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE & SOCIETY;
AGAINST THE ODDS CURES FOR RARE DISEASES COULD HELP US ALL, YET THOSE WHO SUFFER
FROM UNCOMMON DISORDERS ARE OFTEN LEFT TO FEND FOR THEMSELVES

BYLINE: By Michael Kranish, Globe Staff

BODY:

   BURLINGTON - Shea Hammond has the outsized dreams of any 11-year-old kid. He
wants to be a shortstop for the Boston Red Sox, or maybe a basketball star. Yet
in one way he never sought, he has already achieved unusual status: He suffers
from one of the rarest diseases on the planet.

   Six hundred people in the United States are known to have cystinosis; Shea is
one of them. Like most of the disorders that the government calls rare,
cystinosis doesn't have a celebrity spokesman or a television marathon or a big
chunk of federal funding for research.

      Instead of a national headquarters, the Cystinosis Research Network is run
out of the Hammond family's kitchen. The bookshelves are filled with both Shea's
medications and scientific volumes about the human genome project, the former
keeping him alive and the latter providing hope for the future.

   "Every birthday is a huge celebration, but it is also the clock ticking
against the future," says Shea's mother, Colleen Hammond, 37 and a former Army
captain, as she sits in her neat white Colonial just down the road from some of
the world's biggest biotechnology companies. "We are in a desperate battle to
get research money, and we are in competition with huge diseases."

   Shea's case sounds so extraordinary that it is easy to dismiss as the fate of
one unlucky family. But it is unusual only in its specifics. The 6,000 rare
diseases (defined by the government as those affecting under 200,000 people)
afflict a total of 25 million Americans.

   A few of these diseases are the subject of well-funded research, but many
receive little attention and are unknown even by most doctors. The National
Institutes of Health is funding clinical research at its own research hospital
on just 57 of the 6,000 diseases, with cystinosis among the "lucky" ones to get
some funding - although not nearly enough. Shea's story illustrates what
happens, in varying degrees, to millions of Americans with a rare disorder.

   In some ways, rare diseases affect everyone. Often the study of a disease
affecting only a few hundred or thousand people has led to a discovery that has
helped people suffering from seemingly unrelated but far more common illnesses.
Indeed, government incentives for the study of rare diseases helped spur the
creation of the biotech industry, which has become an integral part of the
Massachusetts economy.

   "Rare diseases are a wonderful way scientifically to understand normal
physiology," says Dr. Michael Gottesman, a deputy director of NIH who oversees
intramural research programs. "In the diseases that are common, heart disease
and stroke and cancer, a lot of what we know about these diseases came from
studying diseases that are relatively rare."

   The more difficult the disease is to cure, the greater the potential may be
for a medical breakthrough. One of the world's rarest diseases is
Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria, in which a child ages so rapidly that a 7-year-old
can take on the physical characteristics of a 70-year-old. If scientists can
find a cure for the disease, they may unlock keys to the aging process that
affects everyone.

   The study of cystinosis - a metabolic disease in which an amino acid,
cystine, is improperly stored in cells all over the body, forming crystals that
cause havoc in kidney and other organs - could provide information that could
help millions of people with other disorders. "Understanding the missing
function of the abnormal protein that causes cystinosis might help you and me,
although we don't know how at this point," says Dr. Julie Ingelfinger, a
pediatric nephrologist at Massachusetts General Hospital for Children who
diagnosed Shea's illness.

   But even with tax breaks for the production of so-called "orphan drugs," or
drugs that treat rare diseases, there are no treatments for the vast majority of
such diseases. To be sure, some pharmaceutical firms have developed drugs for
rare disorders, sometimes in money-losing gestures of good will. But many
pharmaceutical companies, which produce one successful drug for every five they
test in clinical trials, are reluctant to absorb the enormous expense of
developing a drug that will have relatively few customers.

   "If you have a patient population of 10,000 people worldwide and you have
spent an average of $500 million to research and develop one new successful
drug, it makes it difficult to get a return on investment if the patient
population is very small," says Jeff Trewhitt, spokesman for the Phamaceutical
Research and Manufacturers Association.

   Innovation is more likely to come from biotechnology companies, which are in
greater need of tax breaks for orphan drugs and are more willing to serve niche
markets. For example, Cambridge-based Genzyme has produced a drug for Gaucher
disease, which affects 3,000 worldwide. The company not only makes a profit on
the drug, which costs $170,000 per person annually, but also is about to produce
medicine for a similar illness based on what it has learned from treating
Gaucher.

   Still, about 80 percent of rare diseases of genetic origin have no
treatments, and many are not even being rigorously studied. The question of
whether to provide research dollars often comes down to a cold cost-benefit
analysis. If it will cost tens of millions of dollars to cure 600 people, is
that worth it? What is the value of a human life?

   In the past few years, some advocates for Americans with rare diseases have
felt that their cause is being shortchanged. A decade ago, they considered
asking Congress for special funding to research certain disorders. The advocates
eventually decided to seek an overall increase for NIH funding, hoping money
would trickle down to affect rare diseases. But while the NIH budget is doubling
over a five-year period, the trickle-down has not materialized. The vast
majority of the money still goes to the most publicized diseases.

   "Maybe we were being naive and altruistic," says Dr. Jess Thoene of Tulane
University, who headed a national commission on rare diseases and is an expert
on cystinosis. "What we learned is the basics of human nature. It's sandbox
politics: The kid who grabs first gets most of the marbles."

   While the NIH has created an Office of Rare Diseases, it has an annual budget
for just five employees and $2 million, one-tenth of what is sought by
advocates. The NIH's Gottesman stresses that the agency funds much research that
benefits all rare diseases, but he understands the need for more advocacy,
saying, "the more they agitate, the more likely we are to get the resources we
need."

   A similar funding shortfall is evident at the Food and Drug Administration's
Office of Orphan Drugs, which provides incentives for the development of
rare-disease medicines. It has an annual $12 million research budget, but that
is so small that 80 percent of grant applications can't be fulfilled. "We are a
rounding error in the NIH budget," says Marlene Heffner, the FDA official
overseeing the office.

   These financial calculations are difficult to discuss in the presence of Shea
Hammond.

   "People should focus on the illnesses that aren't well known, not just the
ones that people know about," Shea says in a quiet voice, sitting at his dining
room table. Asked what he wants, he says, "I hope I don't have to take so much
medicine." As he says this, the look on his mother's face only becomes more
determined.

   At first, Colleen Hammond didn't know what was wrong with her son. As an
infant, he cried uncontrollably, his diapers were unusually wet, and his growth
was slow. Finally, after eight months of misdiagnoses, the Hammonds were
referred to Dr. Ingelfinger at Mass., who diagnosed the infantile form of
cystinosis.

   Many people with rare diseases go years without a diagnosis. About 30 percent
of the 25 million people with a rare disease are not diagnosed correctly until
three to five years after symptoms appear. In 15 percent of the cases, it takes
seven years to receive a correct diagnosis. For many patients, it is a relief
just to know what's wrong with them.

   Like many rare diseases, cystinosis is transmitted genetically. It occurs
only when both of a person's parents carry the cystinosis gene. The gene is
"recessive," meaning the parents don't know they carry it and aren't directly
affected by it. The odds of two people with the gene meeting each other and
having children who then get cystinosis are about the same as winning the
lottery, notes Hammond dryly. But the financial outcome is the opposite. Even
with insurance, Shea's treatments were so expensive that the Hammonds were in
bankruptcy by the time he was three.

   Shea spent about half of his first seven years at Mass. General, coming near
death numerous times. He was fed mostly intravenously until he was 9. When his
parents asked for a plain assessment of his future, they were told that he would
be so weak he would never play Little League.

   But Shea today is a Little Leaguer, and after 25 surgeries, he attended
school last year on a nearly full-time basis.

   Indeed, among those with rare diseases, Shea is considered a success story.
If he had been born a generation earlier, he almost surely would have died by
the time he was 10. But in the 1970s, Thoene, the Tulane University specialist,
co-developed a medicine to treat cystinosis. At the very least, the medicine has
helped people with cystinosis extend their lives into their 20s, and it may yet
prove to help them live much longer; it is impossible to say because children
began taking the medicine only 20 years ago.

   While Shea's survival is often called a miracle, his is a difficult life. The
medicine must be taken four times a day, and it leaves a patient with
sulfur-smelling breath. Moreover, the medicine is not tolerated by about 14
percent of patients. Even many of the most successful patients have so many
medical problems that they cannot have a career.

   Hammond, while deeply grateful that the medicine has extended Shea's life, is
not willing to wait and see whether it will enable him to live to an old age.
Scientists in 1998 discovered the gene that causes cystinosis. With gene therapy
, which is controversial and in its infancy, there is a reasonable chance the
disease can be cured, says Thoene, who receives funding from the Hammonds'
network to conduct research. "Gene therapy could work and should work," Thoene
says.

   But that takes research, which takes money. And the fact that a
life-prolonging medicine for cystinosis sufferers has been developed may work
against the fight for a cure. Some government officials have told Hammond it is
difficult to come up with more funds to research a disease that at least has a
basic treatment.

   So Hammond, tapping organizational skills she learned in the Army as a public
information officer at Otis Air Force Base in Falmouth, has taken charge. She
has held bake sales, craft fairs, and other fund-raisers. But she knows the
$100,000 that her research network has raised is a pittance compared to the
millions of dollars needed.

   Hammond hopes a powerful legislator such as Senator Edward M. Kennedy - who
posed for a 1994 picture with Shea that hangs in the Hammond household - will be
able to earmark money for cystinosis research. (A Kennedy aide says the senator
"is generally opposed to earmarks," while adding that the staff would be
"delighted" to discuss the request with Hammond.   Many parents have decided the
fight must be waged on two fronts, seeking both a big pot of money for many
diseases, as advocated by the National Organization for Rare Disorders, and a
separate pot for the one affecting themselves or their children.

   The long-term solution may be provided by biotech innovation and gene therapy
. Another key step is the establishment of nonprofit enterprises that work
exclusively on screening drugs for rare diseases. The question, as always, is
one of funding. In what may be a prototype for the nation, the
philanthropy-financed Harvard Center for Neurodegeneration and Repair next month
plans to open a Cambridge laboratory that will screen drugs that could treat
rare neurological disorders, including the fatal Lou Gehrig's Disease.

   Dr. Robert Brown of Mass. General helped establish the lab after being
frustrated by the reluctance of some pharmaceutical companies to tackle rare
diseases. "Maybe we can do it here," Brown says. "This has never been tried
before."

   As a neurological lab, the facility will not deal with cystinosis. But if the
lab is successful, Brown hopes the experiment will draw major government funding
and be replicated by other organizations focusing on other types of diseases. If
that happens, Boston's reputation as a medical and biotechnology center could
rise another notch. And, just possibly, one of those biotech companies near the
Hammond household will come up with a cure for cystinosis.

   That moment cannot come soon enough for Shea.

   Michael Kranish is the Globe's Focus writer. He can be reached at
kranish@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Colleen Hammond is leading an effort to bring public awareness
to the plight of children like her son Shea, who has cystinosis. / GLOBE STAFF
PHOTO / JANET KNOTT

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                             1643 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      AUGUST 5, 2001 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: New Penn chief has an ability to inspire;
Arthur H. Rubenstein has a world-class stature
as a researcher, clinician and administrator.

BYLINE: Josh Goldstein INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   After 30 years teaching students, interns and residents at the University of
Chicago's medical school and hospital, Arthur H. Rubenstein missed the daily
interaction with aspiring young doctors when he became dean of the Mount Sinai
School of Medicine in 1997.

   So, two years ago at the age of 61, Rubenstein began teaching again.

   The class was on the ethic of medicine and was built around the work of
legendary physician-educator William Osler.

   Now Rubenstein, who tries to heed Osler's advice of reading anything but
medical subjects for at least a half-hour each night, is following his medical
idol to the University of Pennsylvania.

   On Sept. 1 - 117 years after Osler came here - Rubenstein will become dean of
Penn's medical school and head of its health system.

   And on Penn's medical campus, where morale has been low as the health system
has struggled financially and confronted a high-profile gene-therapy death,
Rubenstein's world-class stature as an academic, researcher, clinician and
administrator has generated great enthusiasm.

   "He is really one of the top people in the country and is just an outstanding
choice," said William N. Kelley, whom Rubenstein succeeds as dean and executive
vice president of the health system.

   What has helped Rubenstein achieve success at nearly every level, according
to those who have worked with him, is his ability to inspire those around him.

   Rubenstein's work with longtime collaborator Donald Steiner at the University
of Chicago resulted in groundbreaking discoveries for the treatment of diabetes.

   "Arthur was a wonderful person to have in my lab because he has such good
people skills in addition to great research skills," Steiner said in an
interview last week. "We had wonderful basic science already going and
[Rubenstein] provided the link to the clinical applications, which is always the
thing that makes research most exciting."

   After becoming the chairman of the University of Chicago's department of
medicine in 1981, Rubenstein helped elevate the school to one of the nation's
best.

   Stanford Goldblatt, a lawyer and member of Chicago's board of trustees,
recalled that Rubenstein always put the university first in their discussions,
even when they disagreed.

   "It was not a personal matter, it was not about power. He was always focused
on what he thought would be best for the university."

   Rubenstein left the University of Chicago in 1997 to become dean of the Mount
Sinai School of Medicine in New York, where he focused on improving and
expanding the school's research efforts.

   "He sets high goals and makes the people around him want to deliver," said
Helene L. Kaplan, who chaired Mount Sinai's board during Rubenstein's tenure.
"He has a very loyal following and that only comes from not wanting to let him
down."

   Mount Sinai's former president, John W. Rowe, now chairman and chief
executive officer of the giant health insurer Aetna, recruited Rubenstein to the
school because of his accomplishments in science and his leadership in academic
medicine.

   But it was also at Mount Sinai that Rubenstein demonstrated what colleagues
describe as his considerable business skills.

   "He was responsible for the faculty practices, which was about 600
physicians," Rowe said. "He was responsible for negotiating with managed-care
companies, controlling medical expenses . . . overseeing a budget of well over
half a billion dollars and thousands of employees all in a very competitive
marketplace."

   Those business skills will be needed to guide Penn's health system, with its
four hospitals that generate $1.6 billion in annual revenue, its network of 230
primary-care doctors, its ambulatory-treatment centers, and its faculty-practice
plan of more than 940 specialists.

   And Rubenstein's imminent arrival garnered cheers at Penn.

   "This was an unbelievable coup," said Michael S. Parmacek, who worked under
Rubenstein as a young faculty member at Chicago. Parmacek, now chief of
cardiovascular medicine at Penn, tries to follow Rubenstein's example and
encourage younger faculty members and students.

   Before Rubenstein arrives in Philadelphia, he plans to spend time doing some
of the things he loves - playing tennis, reading and listening to opera.

   Next week, Rubenstein and his wife of 39 years, Denise, will be in Seattle
for a festival of four operas by Wagner known as the Ring Cycle.

   Rubenstein has two sons, Jeffery and Errol, and a 2-year-old granddaughter,
Ayelet.

   A native of South Africa, Rubenstein received his medical degree in 1960 from
the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg.

   He said he would continue to live in North Jersey and commute to
Philadelphia, where Penn has arranged for him to have an apartment until his
younger son graduates from college in about a year.

   Rubenstein is looking with excitement toward his newest challenge.

   "Osler wrote many times that there is something reinvigorating to change,"
Rubenstein said. "Penn seemed to be something exciting and new. There was
nothing wrong here [at Mount Sinai], it just seemed like a good opportunity at
Penn."

   Josh Goldstein's e-mail address is jgoldstein@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
Arthur H. Rubenstein will lead Penn's health system.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1644 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 4, 2001 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 024

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   Wall Street study predicts flat Q4

   NEW YORK - The U.S. economy and corporate profits were expected to turn
around in the fourth quarter, but Wall Street now predicts that U.S. companies
will report flat earnings in the period, according to market research firm
Thomson Financial-First Call. - REUTERS

   IMF accelerates loan

   WASHINGTON - The International Monetary Fund announced yesterday that it was
prepared to accelerate a $ 1.2 billion loan to Argentina and establish a $ 15
billion line of emergency credit for Brazil in an effort to keep economic
troubles in the two South American nations from spreading. - AP

   Tower Records leases

   Tower Records has found a temporary new home in the Fenway, after getting
bumped from prime real estate at Massachusetts Avenue and Newbury Street by a
Virgin Megastore.

   Tower said it will open at 1249 Boylston St., site of a former Staples store
on Aug. 15. The music retailer, based in Sacramento, Calif., said the location
is temporary while it looks for a permanent home in Boston. - STAFF

   Networks are vulnerable

   NEW YORK - Researchers have discovered a way to quickly break through the
security system that protects the leading corporate wireless networking system,
a trade group said yesterday. The new attack allows a hacker to discover the
"secret key" used to encrypt data before it goes into the air. - REUTERS

   FleetCenter gets Trials

   The U.S. Olympic Team Trials will return to the FleetCenter in 2004, USA
Gymnastics said yesterday. Boston hosted the competition last year and in 1996,
and will be the first city to host three consecutive quadrennium trials. The
trials, slated for June 24-27, 2004, will decide which American gymnasts compete
in Athens, Greece. - STAFF

   Europe OKs TKT drug

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and Genzyme Corp.'s General Division said the
European Commission approved their Fabry disease treatments, granting both
exclusive marketing rights in Europe. Approval clears the way for Replagal,
Transkaryotic's first approved drug, and Genzyme's Fabrazyme to be sold in the
15 countries of the European Union. The drugs are awaiting U.S. regulatory
approval. - BLOOMBERG

   Theglobe.com axing site

   NEW YORK - Online media company theglobe.com plans to close its marquee site
and fire half its remaining employees, pulling the plug on a company whose stock
soared a record 606 percent in its 1998 debut and sparked the dot-com mania,
only to became a symbol of Internet-era excesses. - REUTERS

   Correction

   Net income for the second quarter at John Hancock Financial Services Inc. was
$ 180.8 million. The figure reported in The Herald yesterday was incorrect.


LOAD-DATE: August 04, 2001


                             1645 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 4, 2001, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: TRANSKARYOTIC, GENZYME WIN OK TO SELL RIVAL FABRY DRUGS IN EUROPE

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Krasner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Two Cambridge companies that have simultaneously developed drugs for a rare
genetic disease won approval yesterday to begin selling their drugs in Europe.

   The European Commission awarded the drugs from Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.
and Genzyme Corp. joint status as orphan drugs, giving the companies 10 years of
protection from similar products for Fabry disease. Both firms are awaiting
approval from the US Food and Drug Administration.

       The announcement, while not unexpected, didn't stop the two companies
from continuing to spar over whose drug is better, cheaper, and more effective.

   TKT says its drug, Replagel, is more effective than Genzyme's Fabrazyme.

   "The drugs are structurally different, which means they function
differently," said Dr. Richard F. Selden, president and chief executive of TKT.
"That's based on the published literature."

   David Meeker, a senior vice president for Genzyme in Europe, said he's not so
sure. "We're trying to understand if the molecules are different. There's no
data publicly available that clearly demonstrates that these two molecules are
different."

   The two companies can't even agree on how many patients might be helped by
their new medications. Transkaryotic says about 5,000 people worldwide are
affected, with perhaps 2,000 in Europe. Meeker says there could be 5,000
patients just in Europe.

   Although the numbers are small, the market potential is huge. Each company
expects an annual course of treatment to cost about $160,000, meaning that just
sharing the European market would give each company hundreds of millions of
dollars in revenue.

   The drugs also could transform the lives of patients. People with the disease
lack the ability to process a particular kind of fat. Fat deposits cause pain,
numbness, and cell damage, ultimately leaving patients at risk for kidney
damage, heart disease, and stroke. Many die by age 40.

   The approval is a milestone for Transkaryotic Therapies, which, though
founded in 1988, has never before had an approved product to sell. Recently, the
company was challenged by Amgen Inc. for allegedly violating Amgen's patents on
a drug for anemia. Transkaryotic had sought to produce a similar drug using a
novel manufacturing method. Amgen won many of its significant claims in US
District Court this year; Transkaryotic is appealing that decision.

   "I'm very pleased that we today have become an operating company," said
Selden, the chief executive. In its most recent quarter, Transkaryotic had a net
loss of $21 million, with sales of $297,000.

   Both companies said they have already been supplying their respective drugs
to patients in Europe under a "compassionate care" program that enables patients
outside of clinical studies to take drugs that haven't yet received formal
approval. They also said they have relationships with doctors and sales forces
ready to go.

   But some equity analysts had strongly differing views about the two drugs.

   "In our opinion, Transkaryotic has the better drug," said Eric T. Schmidt, an
analyst with SG Cowen Securities in Boston. "It appears to have a better safety
profile, and it appears to have efficacy benefits."

   Schmidt also said Replagel is easier to take, with patients requiring a
40-minute infusion, compared to several hours for Fabrazyme. Still, he said,
with a market he estimates at $800 million at stake in Europe, "It should be a
win for both companies."

   Transkaryotic shares surged 9 percent, gaining $2.72 to close at $32.60.
Genzyme shares gained $1.07 to close at $58.75.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached by e-mail at krasner@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                             1646 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            August 4, 2001 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 152 words

HEADLINE: Battle Looms as Fabry Drugs Gain Approval

BYLINE:  By Reuters

BODY:

   Two biotechnology companies, Genzyme General and Transkaryotic Therapies,
said yesterday that they had won regulatory approval to sell drugs to treat
Fabry disease in Europe, setting the stage for a battle between them that could
soon expand to the United States.

        The companies, both based in Cambridge, Mass., will be competing for
just a few thousand patients who could nevertheless constitute a global market
that analysts say could reach $800 million by 2005.

    Fabry disease is characterized by a buildup of dead red blood cells in major
organs like the heart, typically leading to death at about the age of 40. Until
now there has been no treatment for the condition.

   Neither Genzyme's drug, Fabrazyme, nor Transkaryotic's drug, Replagal, has
received approval in the United States. In Europe, both companies were granted
orphan drug status, which means no third party can compete with them for 10
years.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2001


                             1647 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2001 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     August 3, 2001, Friday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: 'U' researchers find gene for a type of muscular dystrophy;
Test should be available soon for myotonic dystrophy Type 2

BYLINE: Maura Lerner; Staff Writer

BODY:

   RSEC:             Researchers at the University of Minnesota have discovered
the gene that causes a form of muscular dystrophy, according to a report today
in the journal Science. Their finding is changing scientists' thinking on how
such diseases develop.

        In addition, the discovery has resulted in the development of a genetic
test for the disorder, known as myotonic dystrophy Type 2. The test should be
widely available soon, said the researchers, Laura Ranum and John W. Day of the
university's Institute of Human Genetics.

        The researchers found the gene in part by studying a northern Minnesota
family affected by the disease, which attacks the heart, eyes and other body
systems, as well as muscles. It is considered the most common type of muscular
dystrophy in adults and affects more than 30,000 Americans, according to the
Muscular Dystrophy Association.

        The discovery of the gene on chromosome 3 solves a mystery that has
puzzled scientists for almost a decade, said Ranum, an associate professor of
genetics and cell biology.

       In 1992, other scientists found a genetic mutation on chromosome 19 that
caused one type of myotonic dystrophy.

        Now, the Minnesota researchers have discovered a second gene that causes
essentially the same illness. They found that both genetic mutations have an
intriguing similarity: a key change in the RNA, the molecule that carries out
the DNA's instructions.

        "For the first time, there is strong evidence that RNA itself can cause
disease," said Day, an associate professor of neurology.

        Although there is no cure, the new findings will help scientists focus
their research on possible new treatments, Day said.

        As part of their research, the scientists tested about 60 members of a
family in northern Minnesota that was known to carry the disease (which, among
other things, can cause heart attacks and early death). One family member, who
asked to be identified only as Darrell, said his symptoms began in his 40s, when
he had trouble unclenching his hands and had irregular heartbeats. He didn't
know the symptoms were related until the myotonic dystrophy was diagnosed in
1988, when he was in his 50s.

        After his family volunteered to take part in the research, he said,
scientists found that about 20 relatives have the same genetic defect, which is
particularly common in German families. The family asked to keep its name
private, for fear that members might have difficulty getting health insurance.

        Darrell said he hopes the research will lead to new medicines or genetic
therapy to correct the disease. He doesn't expect any benefits for himself, or
even for members of his children's generation, he said. But "if there's any
grandchildren that have it, I'm hoping that they would never even have to be
concerned about it."

         The research was praised by the Muscular Dystrophy Association, which
financed the research along with the National Institutes of Health.

         The discovery will "improve diagnosis of myotonic muscular dystrophy
almost immediately, with better treatment strategies to follow," said Sharon
Hesterlee, the association's research director.

       _ Maura Lerner is at mlerner@startribune.com.


LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2001


                             1648 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 2, 2001, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 3C

LENGTH: 987 words

HEADLINE: IOC's most trying test: Drugs

BYLINE: Dick Patrick

DATELINE: EDMONTON

BODY:
EDMONTON -- There's nothing like a drug controversy to welcome the newly elected
president of the International Olympic Committee to the World Track and Field
Championships.

   Last week, Russian middle-distance runner Olga Yegorova earned the dubious
distinction of becoming the first non-cyclist to test positive for EPO, a drug
that increases red blood cells and thus endurance. The results of the
confirmation sample are expected to be announced today.

   Wednesday's reaction of a competitor, Romania's Gabriela Szabo, the Olympic
5,000-meter champ: "If she's there (at the start line), I will not run. Or maybe
I'll use EPO and we'll see who's the fastest.  . . .  OK, make a 5,000 for those
using EPO and one for those not using EPO."


   That's the climate greeting Jacques Rogge, who is making the rounds of the
Olympic family and is expected here Friday. He makes no secret of the IOC's
biggest challenge: drug testing.

   'Quantum leap' in fight

   He says testers never win the war, but "we'll have to fight to reduce it as
much as possible." He faces mixed reviews about drug testing.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency, which consists of IOC insiders as well as
governmental and science leaders, is in its second year of operation. Its
independent tests supplements those done by international and national
federations and has earned praise. Federation testing has been criticized
because of the inherent conflict of interest of an organization policing itself.


   "We've taken a quantum leap forward from where we've been -- and I'm a
cynic," says Gary Wadler, a doctor, an adviser to the drug czar's office and a
member of a WADA committee. "Is it a work in progress? Absolutely. Anybody who
thinks otherwise is pie in the sky."

   WADA faces challenges in funding and leadership. Former IOC vice president
Dick Pound of Canada heads the organization but, in the wake of losing in the
IOC presidential election, says he's quitting.

   Rogge and others, including Wadler, are urging him to remain. "He's done a
commendable job in standing WADA up and moving it forward," says Barry
McCaffrey, a former U.S. drug czar and initially a Pound critic.

   Some recent events putting drug issues back in the headlines:

    * EPO testing will continue at the track championships. But at last week's
world swimming championships there was no EPO testing, illustrating the lack of
consistency in testing.

    * Ma Junren was recently named deputy coach of the Chinese women's team at
Edmonton that includes two of his athletes. Never mind that last year six of
Ma's female runners were dropped from the Olympic team because of fears they
might fail the new EPO test because of high red blood cell counts. After Ma was
appointed for Edmonton, it was learned that two of his runners tested positive
for testosterone last summer.

   Ma first achieved notoriety in 1993 when his women rewrote middle-distance
and distance world records. The sudden and startling performances produced
speculation of drug use, denied by Ma and Chinese officials.

   "You would think that now (that) China has the (2008) Olympics, they would
want to look like they wanted to clean things up," British 10,000 runner Paula
Radcliffe says. "You have to reserve judgment, but because of Ma's past, if
there are good performances in Edmonton by the Chinese, there is going to be
skepticism."

    * An independent commission appointed by USA Track & Field at the Sydney
Olympics issued its report last month, exonerating the federation from blatant
cover-ups of drug tests. But the report details conduct by USATF and the IAAF,
showing the conflicts that exist when an organization conducts testing of its
members.

   Credibility an issue

   According to the report, USATF hid behind a faulty confidentiality process to
withhold testing information from the IAAF and public, impeded
out-of-competition testing by the U.S. Olympic Committee and the IAAF and, along
with the USOC, improperly managed testosterone cases.

   The commission also stated that the IAAF tried to cut a deal with C.J.
Hunter, who tested positive four times last summer for the steroid nandrolone
and was announced positive during the Olympics after withdrawing from the
Olympic team following knee surgery. A month before the Sydney Games, the IAAF
offered to delay announcement of the positive until after the Olympics if Hunter
withdrew from the U.S. team.

   In some ways the report was academic. USATF has been out of the testing
business since the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency took over Oct. 2.

   There are questions about USADA. The Indianapolis lab, cited for mistakes in
the commission report, was headed by Larry Bowers, now with USADA. Others
question USADA's independence: "The USOC appointed those people," says Texas
professor and author John Hoberman. "Independent, my foot. That's unacceptable."


   USADA President Frank Shorter, the 1972 Olympic champion in the marathon,
says USADA is sufficiently independent and that drug testing has improved in the
past year.

   "There are three reasons," he says. "One is the level of unannounced testing
has increased, and athletes are realizing they have to let us know where they
are. Plus the litigation system has improved. An athlete can't buy time anymore
(in lengthy appeals). Drug companies are contacting us to work with setting up
markers for testing."

   Shorter calls the saying that the cheaters are ahead of the testers "a myth."
But the testers have challenges ahead in the form of new drugs, new delivery
systems and gene therapy.

   "There is exponential growth in technologies that will benefit mankind,"
Wadler says. "A strange irony. Here we are making progress for mankind, but some
of it will be diverted (to athletes). Detecting that abuse will be much more
complicated."

   Which is why Rogge says drugs are the most crucial issue facing the IOC.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Stu Forester,
Allsport; PHOTO, B/W, Andy Lyons, Allsport; PHOTO, B/W, Gray Mortimore,
Allsport; Let's make a deal: The IAAF offered to withhold news of C.J. Hunter's
positive tests for steroids if the shot putter withdrew from the U.S. Olympic
team, a report says. Under scrutiny: Russian middle distance runner Olga
Yegorova is the first track athlete to test positive for EPO, the blood doping
drug. Gabriela Szabo: Olympic 5,000 gold medalist takes a tough stance vs.
drugs. Suspicious: Some of Ma Junren's Chinese athletes have tested positive.

LOAD-DATE: August 02, 2001


                             1649 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            August 2, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   * Winstar Communications, a New York-based provider of fixed-wireless phone
services for businesses, confirmed it will cut 950 jobs in a bid to emerge from
bankruptcy protection sooner. Winstar also hired Blackstone Group as an adviser
to assist with a possible sale of the company, it said in a statement.

   * Igen International, the Gaithersburg maker of biological detection devices,
lost $ 11.9 million (69 cents per share) in its first fiscal quarter ended June
30, compared with $ 5.1 million (36 cents) a year earlier. The company's revenue
rose to $ 8.3 million, from $ 7.6 million.

   * GenVec, a Gaithersburg company that develops gene-therapy treatments, lost
$ 3.8 million (21 cents per share) in the three months ended June 30, compared
with $ 220,000 (1 cent) a year earlier. The per-share numbers reflect a larger
number of outstanding shares resulting from its December initial public stock
offering. GenVec's revenue fell to $ 2 million, compared with $ 5.2 million in
last year's second quarter.

   * Digex, a Laurel-based provider of Web and application hosting services,
said its net loss reached $ 47.3 million (74 cents per share) on revenue of $
53.8 million in the second quarter. That compares with a net loss of $ 34.5
million (54 cents) on revenue of $ 40.4 million for the same period a year ago.
The results were in line with analysts' expectations.

   * Group 1 Software, a Lanham firm that sells software to help companies
manage customer data, reported profit of $ 72,000 (1 cent per share) for the
three months ended June 30, down 93 percent from $ 1.1 million (16 cents) during
the same period last year. Revenue for the three months ended June 30 was $ 20.7
million, compared with $ 20.1 million last year. Group 1 stock closed down 60
cents to $ 16.40.

   * XO Communications's junk bonds surged, indicating the money-losing
telephone and Internet-services company backed by Craig McCaw and buyout firm
Forstmann Little is buying back the debt, investors said. XO's 10.75 percent
notes due 2008, sold before the company changed its name from Nextlink
Communications in 2000, were bid about 4 points higher to 38 cents on the
dollar, traders said. Reston-based XO said last month it was considering
swapping cash or stock for its battered bonds to shore up its finances,
according to a filing with the SEC.

   * OpNet, a Bethesda-based company that sells network management software,
posted second-quarter earnings of $ 1.2 million (6 cents a share) on $ 11.1
million in revenue, compared with earnings of $ 220,000 (2 cents) on $ 6.4
million in revenue in the year-ago period.

   * InforMax of Bethesda said it lost $ 3.9 million (17 cents a share) in the
three months that ended June 30, compared with a loss of $ 3.7 million (59
cents) in the same period a year earlier. The company, which creates software
for biologists, said revenues in the quarter jumped 129 percent from the
year-ago period, to $ 7.6 million.

   Compiled from reports by Washington Post and Washtech.com staff writers and
Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             1650 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           August 1, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT, Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 159 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTIFIC ADVANCES ARE BENEFICIAL, NOT SCARY

BODY:


   I respond to David W. Thiel's July 22 letter "Don't do research with
embryonic stem cells.''

   I am tired of hearing stem-cell research, gene therapy and every other new
branch of human science constantly being equated to the Holocaust.

   Further, I am sick of being labeled as having low moral standards because I
believe in such revolutionary scientific research and the incredible potential
it has to benefit humanity, such as ending starvation, illness and suffering.

   To set the record straight, scientists didn't invent Nazi Germany. To the
contrary, many notable scientists fled Germany or were exterminated. The fact
is, Nazi Germany was the product of ignorant, bigoted, right-wing people who
made it their primary objective to force their intolerant views on the rest of
society and then the world.

   Don't blame the scientists. It's because of science that people are alive
today to hold their opinions.

   Paul Volker

   Columbus

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2001


                             1651 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   August 01, 2001, Wednesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: House votes broad ban on cloning;
Targets embryo research

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: JOHN C. HENRY, Houston Chronicle Washington Bureau

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Trying to head off rapid developments in biotechnology, the
House approved legislation Tuesday night to outlaw the cloning of humans,
including the creation of embryos for medical research.

   Following an emotional debate over morality and when human life begins, the
House voted 265-162 to impose fines of at least$ 1 million and prison terms of
up to 10 years on researchers who clone human embryos.

   "Human beings should not be cloned to stock a medical junkyard of spare parts
for experimentation," said House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Sugar Land. "This
exploitative, unholy technique is no better than medical strip-mining."

   House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Irving, said: "Cloning is the way amoebas
reproduce. It was never intended for man."

   Lawmakers on the other side countered with equally emotional arguments and
cautioned against stifling scientists' search for ways to help people suffering
from diseases.

   "None of us want to see human beings come out of the laboratory," said Rep.
Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Houston. "What we can do is save lives."

   Rep. James Greenwood, R-Pa., asked: "Why would we kill this research? Why
would we condemn the world for future generations not to have the benefit of
this miracle?"

   A less restrictive measure drafted by Greenwood, who had the backing of
medical groups and the biotechnology industry, was rejected, 249-178.

   The House bill now goes to the Senate, where Majority Leader Tom Daschle,
D-S.D., said Tuesday he opposes human cloning "under virtually any
circumstances."

   Late Tuesday, President Bush reaffirmed his opposition to human cloning,
saying the House vote "is a strong ethical statement, which I commend."

   In a prepared statement, the president said government should "advance the
promise and cause of science, but must do so in a way that honors and respects
life."

   While making it a federal crime to clone people to produce children or to
create embryos for medical research, the bill stops short of barring cell and
molecule cloning, in vitro fertilization or efforts at gene therapy.

   The measure also would prohibit anyone from importing an embryo produced by
human cloning or a product from a cloned embryo. Critics argued those
restrictions would deprive U.S. residents from remedies developed abroad using
cloned products.

   Still unanswered is what role the federal government will play in research
using embryonic stem cells derived from non-cloned human embryos. Bush is
mulling whether to allow federal funding for such studies.

   Early last month, Advanced Cell Technology and Geron Corp. announced they
already had begun working toward cloning human embryos. The companies' stated
goal was to provide scientists with alternative sources for stem cells, the
building blocks for all human tissue.

   Opposition to using cloned human embryos for research "is rooted in fear and
ignorance," said Dr. Michael West, president of Massachusetts-based ACT. "It's
absolutely certain that the vast majority of people in the United States, if
they understood the broad applications in medicine," would support using clones
for medical research.

   Anti-abortion and some religious groups oppose any use of human embryos in
research that destroys them, but some have been willing to back research using
"spare" embryos from fertility clinics that otherwise would be discarded.

   In addition to Jackson Lee, area lawmakers voting against the cloning ban
were Reps. Ken Bentsen, D-Houston; Nick Lampson, D-Beaumont; and Ron Paul,
R-Surfside. Supporting the measure along with DeLay were Reps. Kevin Brady,
R-The Woodlands; John Culberson, R-Houston; Gene Green, D-Houston; and Jim
Turner, D-Crockett.

   "While many good people struggle with the ethics of research on embryonic
stem cells, we ought to be able to agree on the danger of human cloning," Brady
said. "This measure will prevent irresponsible experimentation while allowing
the rich fields of medical research in genetics and plant and animal cloning to
continue to move forward."


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             1652 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   August 01, 2001, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 641 words

HEADLINE: House votes broad ban on cloning;
Targets embryo research

SOURCE: Staff, Houston Chronicle news services

BYLINE: JOHN C. HENRY, Houston Chronicle Washington Bureau

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Trying to head off rapid developments in biotechnology, the
House approved legislation Tuesday night to outlaw the cloning of humans,
including the creation of embryos for medical research.

   Following an emotional debate over morality and when human life begins, the
House voted 265-162 to impose fines of at least$ 1 million and prison terms of
up to 10 years on researchers who clone human embryos.

   "Human beings should not be cloned to stock a medical junkyard of spare parts
for experimentation," said House Majority Whip Tom DeLay, R-Sugar Land. "This
exploitative, unholy technique is no better than medical strip-mining."

   House Majority Leader Dick Armey, R-Irving, said: "Cloning is the way amoebas
reproduce. It was never intended for man."

   Lawmakers on the other side countered with equally emotional arguments and
cautioned against stifling scientists' search for ways to help people suffering
from diseases.

   "None of us want to see human beings come out of the laboratory," said Rep.
Sheila Jackson Lee, D-Houston. "What we can do is save lives."

   Rep. James Greenwood, R-Pa., asked: "Why would we kill this research? Why
would we condemn the world for future generations not to have the benefit of
this miracle?"

   A less restrictive measure drafted by Greenwood, who had the backing of
medical groups and the biotechnology industry, was rejected, 249-178.

   The House bill now goes to the Senate, where Majority Leader Tom Daschle,
D-S.D., said Tuesday he opposes human cloning "under virtually any
circumstances."

   Late Tuesday, President Bush reaffirmed his opposition to human cloning,
saying the House vote "is a strong ethical statement, which I commend."

   In a prepared statement, the president said government should "advance the
promise and cause of science, but must do so in a way that honors and respects
life."

   While making it a federal crime to clone people to produce children or to
create embryos for medical research, the bill stops short of barring cell and
molecule cloning, in vitro fertilization or efforts at gene therapy.

   The measure also would prohibit anyone from importing an embryo produced by
human cloning or a product from a cloned embryo. Critics argued those
restrictions would deprive U.S. residents from remedies developed abroad using
cloned products.

   Still unanswered is what role the federal government will play in research
using embryonic stem cells derived from non-cloned human embryos. Bush is
mulling whether to allow federal funding for such studies.

   Early last month, Advanced Cell Technology and Geron Corp. announced they
already had begun working toward cloning human embryos. The companies' stated
goal was to provide scientists with alternative sources for stem cells, the
building blocks for all human tissue.

   Opposition to using cloned human embryos for research "is rooted in fear and
ignorance," said Dr. Michael West, president of Massachusetts-based ACT.

   Anti-abortion and some religious groups oppose any use of human embryos in
research that destroys them, but some have been willing to back research using
"spare" embryos from fertility clinics that otherwise would be discarded.

   In addition to Jackson Lee, area lawmakers voting against the cloning ban
were Reps. Ken Bentsen, D-Houston; Nick Lampson, D-Beaumont; and Ron Paul,
R-Surfside. Supporting the measure along with DeLay were Reps. Kevin Brady,
R-The Woodlands; John Culberson, R-Houston; Gene Green, D-Houston; and Jim
Turner, D-Crockett.

   "While many good people struggle with the ethics of research on embryonic
stem cells, we ought to be able to agree on the danger of human cloning," Brady
said. "This measure will prevent irresponsible experimentation while allowing
the rich fields of medical research in genetics and plant and animal cloning to
continue to move forward."


TYPE: -LINKS-

NOTES: Chronicle news services contributed to this story.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             1653 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    August 1, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C11

LENGTH: 216 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS ADVANCE KNOWLEDGE OF T CELL IN FIGHTING VIRUSES

SOURCE: Oz Hopkins Koglin - of The Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   A new study throws light on the role that protective immune system T cells
play in destroying viruses in the body. Researchers hope the finding will help
in the fight against immune system ailments and will improve vaccine technology.

   A report on the work by Mark Slifka, an assistant scientist at Oregon Health
& Science University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, and a collaborator,
Dr. J. Lindsay Whitton at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif.,
appears in the August issue of the journal Nature Immunology.

   T cells are a form of white blood cell that can bind to an infected cell and
destroy it before the virus can replicate itself. Researchers are trying to
solve the long-standing mystery of how certain virus-specific T cells learn to
identify infected cells much more effectively than other T cells.

   Slifka, senior author of the report, said that in a matter of days after the
virus infected the body, CD8+ cells -- a form of T cell -- somehow educated
themselves to become significantly better at identifying foreign bodies.

   The scientists think this targeting is one of the principal mechanisms
underlying the success of many current vaccines. The research was financed by
the National Institute of Allergy and Infections Disease. -- Oz Hopkins Koglin

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             1654 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             July 31, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: Death at the Hands of Science

BODY:

   The recent death of a healthy young woman participating in a research project
at Johns Hopkins University has cast a disturbing pall over the elaborate
protective mechanisms that are supposed to ensure the safety of all biomedical
research supported by the federal government. This is the second time in two
years that a research volunteer has died in a medical experiment at a
prestigious university. If even the best of the nation's medical institutions
are experiencing such problems, there is reason for concern.

        For the past several decades there has been a steady and healthy trend
toward tightening up the procedures governing the ethics and safety of
biomedical research. Today all researchers receiving federal funds must follow
accepted ethical guidelines, all patients must be fully informed of the hazards,
and special institutional review boards at hospitals and medical schools must
approve and monitor the experiments. The question raised by the recent tragedies
is whether the review boards are performing up to snuff or are mostly
rubber-stamping what the researchers want to do.

    The death at Hopkins, it now seems clear, might well have been avoided were
it not for misjudgments by the scientist conducting the study and insufficient
diligence by an institutional review board that was supposed to ensure that the
study would do no harm. The cause of the young woman's death was almost
certainly a drug that she inhaled so that doctors could test a theory on how
asthma occurs. The chief researcher searched the scientific literature and found
no evidence that the drug might be unsafe. Unfortunately, he missed some reports
of safety problems published in the 1950's and relied in part on a 1978 asthma
study that seemed to demonstrate the drug's safety when inhaled but that in fact
showed hints of danger that were discounted at the time.

   Worse yet, the institutional review board at Hopkins failed to press the
researcher hard for more safety data, even though the drug had not been approved
by the Food and Drug Administration. When a volunteer developed a cough and
shortness of breath, the researcher discounted the symptoms and never alerted
the review board as he was supposed to. Although each step in this chain has
been deemed defensible by some scientists, the result was a death that might
have been avoided.

   The second recent death of a research volunteer occurred in September 1999 at
the University of Pennsylvania, when an 18-year-old suffering from a mild
genetic disease volunteered for a gene therapy experiment testing the safety of
a treatment for babies with a fatal form of his disorder. This case had similar
lapses in diligence and oversight but was even more disturbing because of
revelations that the scientist had founded a biotechnology company that might
profit from the work.

   What should be done to prevent such tragedies is a matter of debate. The
federal government has suspended much of the research at Hopkins and is
insisting on reviews and reforms before it can resume. But some top medical
experts at Hopkins complain that the changes amount to administrative busywork
that will not greatly reduce the risks of research, which they already regard as
minimal.

   One clear improvement at many institutions would be to create more review
boards -- as Hopkins is now doing -- so that the volume of research each must
supervise is reduced. Another advance would be to increase the size of the staff
supporting the work of the review boards. Even before the Hopkins tragedy,
federal reviews were under way on how best to protect human subjects and deal
with conflicts of interest. But in the final analysis, the system will always
have to rely on the diligence and good judgment of all involved -- to search as
hard as possible for potential dangers, to be candid in warning volunteers of
the dangers, and to review and monitor all research to ensure that subjects are
protected from beginning to end.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2001


                             1655 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    JULY 30, 2001 Monday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: NEWS ABOUT TOMORROW

BODY:

   A convention of futurists opens this week in Minneapolis and about 1,000
people who spend lots of time figuring out what will happen next year and beyond
will meet to hobnob on their forecasts.

    For the convention, editors of the Futurist magazine have selected their top
forecasts by futurists in 2001.

   1. The Dow Jones Industrial Average will hit 40,000 by 2016.

   2. Then again, maybe not and we're in for a period of excess supply and
falling prices.

   3. Lots of single people expected. That could lead to opportunities for
"single-minded" services such as housecleaning, travel and pet care.

   4. Women may one day be able to take a pill to postpone menopause until age
70.

   5. By 2030, more than half of U.S. adults will be 50 or older.

   6. Child malnutrition will remain widespread globally for 20 years.

   7. Leisure-oriented business by 2015 will account for roughly half the U.S.
gross national product by 2015.

   8. The "echo-boom generation," -- 80 million people born from 1977 to 1997 --
will soon wield more economic power than their baby boomer parents.

   9. Gene therapy may improve learning abilities and reverse the effects of
aging on memory.

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2001


                             1656 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       July 30, 2001 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 1508 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell debate hits state backers where they live

BYLINE: JASON GERTZEN of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Second of two stories

   The researchers, investors and business leaders who aspire to make Wisconsin
a hub of biotechnology were startled by the recent attempt in the state
Legislature to restrict embryonic stem cell research.

   Wisconsin, after all, gained national prominence in biotechnology in 1998,
when a researcher here pioneered the groundbreaking stem cell technology. It
offers hope for curing some of the most troubling maladies and, though a long
way off, the possibility of riches for companies that bring those cures to
market.

   "It would have been a major blow to the image of Wisconsin as a biotechnology
center," said John Neis, co-founder and senior partner of Venture Investors
Management in Madison.

   The threat of state- imposed restrictions on embryonic stem cell research has
passed for now, but Wisconsin biotechnology backers said the experience in
Madison will have a lasting impact. Meanwhile, in Washington, the Bush
administration is close to a decision regarding federal funding for stem cell
research. That decision, as well, could have a significant impact on biotech
development here.

   After the latest stem cell debate in Madison, the Wisconsin Biotechnology
Association vows to be more aggressive in looking out for the industry's
interests.

   "The stem cell issue united a lot of us," said Michael D. Bishop, a DeForest
biotechnology executive who is president of the association. "We definitely
mobilized."

   A handful of researchers and companies in the state would have been affected
by the embryonic stem cell research restrictions, Bishop said. The cause for so
much concern was that the attention directed at stem cells today could lead to a
clampdown on research into cloning or other new biotechnology areas tomorrow, he
said.

   "When those kinds of things gain momentum, sometimes they don't stop until
they go too far," Bishop said.

   Bishop's concern is for the broader biotech community in Wisconsin, as well
as his own company, Infigen Inc., which is working to genetically alter and
clone pigs to produce organs that would be at less risk of rejection when
transplanted into humans.

   Making 'tremendous strides'

   Others involved in a wide-ranging initiative to bolster the biotechnology
sector of Wisconsin's economy said they also intended to redouble their efforts.

   "We are making tremendous strides in this state," Neis said. "The direction
we are moving is all very positive, but we can't make a change like this
overnight."

   Forward Wisconsin, a key economic development group, offers one example of
how much the state has stepped up its attempts to build on the existing base of
biotechnology research and business. The group devoted $115,000 to biotechnology
marketing out of a $500,000 marketing budget in the past year alone.

   A study that Forward Wisconsin commissioned a year ago identifies
biotechnology as a top target. It is not just that the industry would offer
Wisconsin good, high-paying jobs, but also that the state has something to offer
the industry, said Scott Reigstad, director of communication for Forward
Wisconsin.

   "Wisconsin offers the industry a good location for research, development and
manufacturing," says a report by the Wadley-Donovan Group in Morristown, N.J.
"It has an impressive array of emerging companies, it has one of the nation's
leading universities in biotechnology programs and research, and it has direct
access to agricultural and forestry resources to assist in product development."

   The consultants characterized the University of Wisconsin as a national
leader in research involving embryo technologies, cloning, genetics and DNA
mapping. A "strong technical college program" that prepares laboratory
technicians for the industry was another advantage.

   Biotechnology applies to a wide range of businesses.

   It includes a firm such as Promega Corp. in Madison, which makes substances
and other tools researchers use to analyze genes, cells and proteins. Other
firms are involved in research to create new pharmaceuticals and treatments. The
industry also includes firms working with animals or new strains of crops. Some
even loosely apply the biotech label to medical device manufacturers and
information technology businesses that assist medical researchers.

   Forward Wisconsin organized a strong presence of state officials, including
Gov. Scott McCallum, and business leaders at this year's major biotechnology
trade show in California. The group also led prospecting trips to Minnesota and
the Coasts.

   The initiative should not be dismissed as merely chasing the latest economic
development trend, Reigstad said.

   "We are hoping to boost the image of the state for biotechnology," Reigstad
said. " For us, it is not going to be a flash in the pan. This will be a
long-term growth industry in Wisconsin."

   Recruitment trips and other efforts to make the state more nurturing toward
biotech companies were set aside temporarily when a state legislator gained
support for a measure to restrict stem cell research.

   Rep. Sheryl Albers (R-Loganville) placed the provision in the state budget at
the end of June. A week later, she found the support for a 64- 35 vote to block
its removal.

   Albers said it would be wrong to portray her as an opponent of biotechnology
research. She said she was aware of its potential to strengthen the state
economy.

   However, Wisconsin businesses and researchers should stop short of activities
that "cut off a human life" in the way that they use embryos, she said.

   "You can't look just at economic development," Albers said. "We have to
pursue a course that is ethical."

   The proposal would have prohibited research on embryonic stem cells developed
for research after Jan. 1. Violating the measure could have brought fines of up
to $50,000 and prison time.

   Albers said her proposal was removed from the state budget during conference
committee negotiations. It was just a matter of Democrats and Republicans
jockeying to keep favored proposals, and the stem cell provision was sacrificed
this time, she said.

   Stem cell researchers are not in the clear, she said. Federal restrictions
still could be imposed, and Albers said she does not rule out taking another
look at state regulation of the issue.

   "They better be watchful," Albers said.

   Trouble for state feared

   Neis, the Madison venture capitalist, said he wrote letters to every member
of the state Legislature to encourage rejection of such restrictions. Passing
such a proposal into law would have delivered a crippling blow to Wisconsin's
biotechnology aspirations, Neis said.

   "It sends the message that we are placing a higher regulatory burden on
biotechnology companies," Neis said. "That is the kind of thing that can strike
fear in the hearts of entrepreneurs and investors. They might worry whether this
is the right place to start a company."

   The worst damage was avoided when the proposal was rejected. But Neis said
the state would have to polish an image tarnished by national news coverage of
the budget measure.

   Investors and biotech business executives pay attention, cautions William
Hendee, an associate dean and vice president of technology at the Medical
College of Wisconsin.

   "The state put itself at great risk in regard to its efforts to increase
biotechnology," Hendee said. "It would have painted us almost as primordial in
our outlook scientifically. Anybody thinking about moving here or developing
biotechnology in this state would have had to think twice."

   Recent events have shown those involved in biotechnology that they need to do
a better job of forming relationships and educating the state's policy-makers,
he said.

   "We really need a level of scientific understanding on the part of our
political leaders," Hendee said.

   The pace and magnitude of development in life sciences research are
outstripping the ability of many public policy-makers to keep up, Hendee said.

   The flap over stem cells will be far from the last over biotechnology issues,
Hendee predicted. With increasing frequency, science is working in murky areas
that border cultural values, he said.

   One such area involves gene therapy and gene transplantation. It shows great
promise for improving people's health, but it also is sure to raise questions
about genetic engineering, he said.

   "This is going to recur and recur," Hendee said. "We are really going to be
challenged where science is taking us."

   ------------

   Jason Gertzen writes about electronic commerce and business technology for
the Journal Sentinel. He can be reached at jgertzen@onwis.com or (414) 224-2768.

   Biotechnology

   Job Prospects

   Here is a breakdown of Wisconsin's biotechnology employment in 1996:

   41% Commercial economic, sociological and educational research

   24% Testing laboratories

   19% Commerical biological research

   16% Biological products

   Wisconsin Biotech Statistics (1996)

   Total

   Employment 4, 336

   Establishments 220

   Average establishment size 19.7

   Average annual earnings $25,082

   Source: The Wadley-Donovan Group

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2001


                             1657 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  July 30, 2001 Monday Five Star Lift Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: SON'S INJURY DRIVES MAN'S PLAN FOR SPORTS COMPLEX ;
 LOU SENGHEISER HOPES ARENA WILL PAY FOR RESEARCH

BYLINE: Joan Little Of The Post-Dispatch

BODY:

   Lou Sengheiser has raised $300,000 over six years to find a cure for spinal
cord injuries. Now he's taking on his biggest project -- a $65 million youth
sports complex that he hopes will become a steady source of funding for research
on spinal cord injuries.

   Ever since his son, Jason, fell and broke his neck in an accident at the
family home in Imperial in 1994, Sengheiser's one dream has been to see Jason
walk again. He has raised the money mostly with car and home raffles through his
charity group, Gateway to a Cure.

   The sports proposal calls for a 7,500-seat arena for amateur sports
tournaments. Its exterior design is inspired by, and would evoke memories of,
the old St. Louis Arena.

   While some have scoffed at the idea of the group raising $65 million,
Sengheiser has hired a professional fund-raiser and has won the support of a key
official -- St. Louis County Councilman John Campisi, R-south St. Louis County.

   "This is no pipe dream; this is definitely reality," Campisi said. "I'd like
to see it happen."

   The plans include five indoor ice rinks, an Olympic-size swimming pool, as
well as tennis, volleyball and basketball courts, two outdoor football-soccer
fields, eight baseball-softball fields and an outdoor jogging track around the
property's perimeter.

   The complex would have facilities for sports medicine, sports training and
sports rehabilitation, as well as a free-standing hotel and a small RV park.

   Sengheiser has two possible locations -- the old NL Industries site along the
Mississippi River in Lemay or the old Carondelet Coke plant property in St.
Louis. On June 29, Gateway to a Cure submitted a proposal for the coke plant to
the St. Louis Development Corp. This spring, Sengheiser informally pitched the
Lemay site to a group of St. Louis County officials.

   On Wednesday, the St. Louis County Port Authority will start taking proposals
from developers for the Lemay property, which is near the Mississippi River off
Hoffmeister Road.

   As Sengheiser sees it, the sports complex would attract local, regional and
national youth sporting events and tournaments. It would emphasize sports
activities for youth in wheelchairs. But it would also have a sports clinic that
would educate young athletes on how to prevent spinal cord injuries.

   The complex would also fill a need for a place to play hockey and hold
amateur hockey tournaments, said Sengheiser, who's been active in the local
hockey scene.

   "We can do it"

   Gateway to a Cure has hired an executive fund-raiser, Raymond Ganz, for the
project, as well as an architectural firm, Rataj-Krueger Architects Inc.

   "We can do it," Sengheiser said. "We've gotten some pretty strong corporate
commitment, nationally and locally."

   Campisi, whose district includes the Lemay area, says he's looked closely at
the project and that it's the best plan he's seen for the NL Industries
property.

   Campisi, the father of a 6-year-old boy who's just started to play hockey,
said he knows personally the crunch for playing time at local hockey rinks. "My
son's on a waiting list just to get on the ice."

   Denny Coleman, president of the St. Louis County Economic Council, said he
thought the biggest challenge for Gateway to a Cure is raising the $65 million
to build the complex.

   "It's a wonderful, wonderful cause," Coleman said. "I have no idea of the
level of support out there in the community to raise that type of money."

   Any profits from the sports complex, Sengheiser says, would go to Dr. John
McDonald, a Washington University doctor who is considered one of the top
researchers in the nation in spinal cord injuries. McDonald is director of the
Spinal Cord Injury Program at Barnes-Jewish Hospital and is also a physician to
actor Christopher Reeve, who visits every two months to get an assessment of his
rehabilitation regimen.

   Society forgets

   Jason Sengheiser was 17 and a promising high school hockey player when the
accident happened early in the morning of July 3, 1994. He apparently became
disoriented after taking some over-the-counter allergy medicine. He got up to go
the bathroom about 2 a.m. and fell over the second-floor banister.

   The accident devastated the Sengheiser family, which includes Lou's wife,
Candy, and two other sons, Jamie, 21, and Jeffrey, 25. Lou Sengheiser would
eventually quit his job in manufacturing and devote himself full time to raising
money for research.

   After Jason was injured, the Sengheisers looked into the statistics behind
spinal cord injury victims. About 80 percent are young men, most of them age 14
to 24.

   "Society forgets about them," Sengheiser said. "We both decided our son was
not a throwaway."

   Jason, now 24, is a second-year law student at St. Louis University. He has
some arm movement, uses a mechanized wheelchair and drives a specially equipped
van. He looks toward the day when he can walk again, and he believes it is not
that far off. He works out on a hand-powered cycle and other machines to keep
his muscles in shape.

   "You have to be ready," he said. "I think, with all the advancements and gene
therapies, that things are looking really good. We aren't there yet, but I hope
we'll get there before too long."

NOTES:
Reporter Joan Little: E-mail: jlittle@post-dispatch.com Phone: 314-849-1531

GRAPHIC: PHOTO; (1) Color Photo Headshot - Jason Sengheiser, Suffered broken
neck in accident; (2) Photo by KAREN ELSHOUT / POST-DISPATCH - Lou Sengheiser
(right) explains to carpenter Simon Valle what needs to be done last week in the
renovation of an old bank building on Lemay Ferry Road. The building will be the
headquarters of Gateway to the Cure, Sengheiser's charity group.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2001


                             1658 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              July 30, 2001 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2379 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell uncertainty spells agony;
A medical miracle or a slippery slope?

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Mullener; Staff writer

BODY:

   It was New Year's Eve 1998 when Michelle Lane first noticed something was
strange. She had gone to Bayou Segnette with a group of family and friends for
the holiday and she had been cooking like mad all afternoon: ham, sweet potato
casserole, baked macaroni.

   Finally the crowd sat down to eat dinner, and Lane lifted her first forkful
to her mouth.

   "Look at that!" she said out loud. "My hand is shaking!"

   Within a year -- at age 32, with a husband, three young children and a house
in Harahan -- she had been diagnosed with Parkinson's disease.

   Her best hope, doctors tell her, is that the scientific research now being
conducted on stem cells will pay off before the degenerative disease has
progressed too far.

   "It means my life," she said. "It means I can stay normal, be mobile, help my
children grow up, take my sons on field trips, see my daughter on her wedding
day.

   "This is what we're all looking for and hoping for -- that this research will
be the cure."

   So as President Bush agonizes over whether to support federal financing of
embryonic stem cell research, Lane agonizes over what might happen to her if he
doesn't.

   The issue has kicked up a roiling controversy that has brought into play
science, politics, religion and ethics.

   To some people, it appears to be a medical advance of miraculous dimensions,
promising relief for much human suffering.

   "There's no question this is the most exciting and potentially valuable area
in medicine in the near future," said Paul Whelton, senior vice president for
health sciences at the Tulane Health Sciences Center.

   To others, it appears to be a dangerous step toward the degradation of human
life, since some of the stem cells used for research are obtained from embryos
stored in freezers in fertility clinics, left over from couples' in-vitro
fertilization efforts.

   "This is opening Pandora's box even wider," said Sally Campbell, an
anti-abortion activist and former executive director of Louisiana's Christian
Coalition. "I'm very apprehensive about any research that involves harvesting an
unborn human life. I think we're taking it too far."

At the forefront

   Darwin Prockop is squarely in the thick of things. As director of Tulane
University's brand new $25 million Center for Gene Therapy, he is working at the
forefront of stem-cell research. Although he is dealing with adult stem cells,
which are not the focus of controversy, he fully supports unimpeded research on
stem cells from embryos.

   "What do you do with these embryos we have?" he asked. He answers his own
question, without addressing the idea put forth by critics that they could be
put up for adoption.

   "There are three possibilities: You can keep the freezers going forever, you
can pull the plug and let the embryos die or you can use them for research --
research that might cure some terrible disease.

   "If this were some idle, far-out research that had nothing to do with people,
OK. But we're dealing with diabetes, heart disease, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's,
and there's the possibility we can cure them. Not just treat them but cure them.

   "To say we have a chance of doing that but instead we should just destroy
these embryos and not get any benefit from them -- well, sometimes the arguments
against it sound silly."

   David Goldstein, rabbi at Touro Synagogue, sees the morality of the issue in
much the same way.

   "The relief of human suffering through scientific research is a religious
imperative," he said. "I believe wholeheartedly in advancing human life through
research.

   "This does not imply a lack of regard for embryonic life," he added, "because
there is something sacred even in the embryo. But stem cell research doesn't
fall into that category of exploiting the human being created in God's image.

   "Generally I struggle over a moral issue. But this one seemed immediately
clear to me."

   Michelle Lane continues to hope.

   In the past two years, since she was diagnosed with Parkinson's, she has
deteriorated some. Her left leg is dragging now, her handwriting is hard to
read, she drools when she sleeps, and, if she's holding hands with her son, he
has to pull down hard on her arm to keep it from shaking.

   "It's a scary thought that this research might get halted," she said. "I'm
praying that doesn't happen. I have to look down the line at how my future would
be. Ten years from now, I might have to be on medication to be able to walk. Or
I might be on a cane. Or I might not be able to work -- and then how could I
help support my kids?

   "Well, I'm only 33. I have time to wait."

The pope weighs in

   Pope John Paul II, who also has Parkinson's disease, spoke out last week
against stem-cell research that results in the destruction of embryos. In a
meeting with Bush, he advised against federal financing. The church's opposition
is rooted in the belief that life begins at conception and that the embryos,
even though frozen, are alive.

   The Rev. Andre McGrath, a Catholic moral theologian in the Shreveport
diocese, listened carefully to the pope's words.

   "The church's basic stand, which the holy father was trying to stress, was
that we need to be careful; there's a slippery slope here."

   McGrath sees a consistency to church doctrine.

   "The church's position has always been, in reference to human life, very
cautious, some people would say maddeningly cautious: Human life is of
incomparable value and must never be used as a means to an end, no matter how
glorious the end. Even if the end is the greater good of all mankind, no
individual human life must be sacrificed.

   "At the same time, we want to be as dedicated as we can be to the health and
well-being of people and to encourage medical research in any way that respects
basic human dignity."

   He allows it is not an easy matter to think through.

   "Sometimes it's a problem. There's kind of a fine line there," he said. "T.S.
Eliot commented in 'Murder in the Cathedral' that the greatest treason is to do
the right thing for the wrong reason.

   "This is not the easy way out. It's difficult -- above all for people who are
desperately in need of help."

   Campbell of the Christian Coalition also believes that that tampering with
embryonic cells is just another step down the slippery slope. She thinks
scientists frequently don't deal with the ethical aspects of their work and that
they are sometimes solely concerned with advancing their careers. She is
skeptical that the results will live up to the ballyhoo. And she thinks that the
profit motive is ever-present.

   Although Prockop said there are hundreds of thousands of embryos sitting in
freezers already -- enough to last scientists for a very long time, possibly
forever -- Campbell believes they are already in commercial trade.

   "I think cells are being sold now for every purpose under the sun, including
for stem cell research," she said. "If you ask me whether I have proof of that,
I don't. I just know from 25 years of being a political activist for unborn life
that that's where we're going with this. That's where we've been headed ever
since abortion became legal."

Federal money needed

   If Bush declines to put federal dollars behind embryonic stem cell research,
the impact on the area would be enormous.

   "We'd be in serious trouble," Prockop said.

   Research probably would not come to a halt, and Prockop's work wouldn't be
directly affected because it doesn't involve embryos. But the United States
probably would lose control over the field to Italy or France or China. And what
research did continue in this country probably would be sponsored by private
companies, such as biotech or pharmaceutical firms.

   There is a fundamental difference between research that is federally
sponsored and research that is privately sponsored.

   "Federal funding is the cornerstone of intellectual research," Whelton said.
"It's more creative research. It's at the core of the really big new advances."

   Privately sponsored research, on the other hand, is more narrowly
goal-driven, usually in service of developing a marketable drug or treatment.

   "A biotech company might want X done, so you go ahead and do it," Whelton
said. "But that's not the creative kind of research that initiates in an
investigator's head."

   Generally speaking, about 40 percent of the financing for medical research
comes from the government and 60 percent from private sources, including
commercial ventures and some foundations.

   "Federal funding allows you to follow out your intellectual intuitions, and
that is not the way the pharmaceutical industry operates," Whelton said.

   "It's a business. There's nothing wrong with that. They have a very important
role to play.

   "But you will never get private funding to pursue free-ranging ideas."

Can become anything

   The science of stem cells seems more like science fiction.

   "A stem cell is a cell that can divide into two cells," Prockop said. "One of
the cells you get back becomes specialized -- becomes a red blood cell or a bone
cell or a hair follicle. The other is identical to the first stem cell.

   "You get it back. It never gets used up. Isn't that amazing?"

   And just as amazing, stem cells are pluripotent, meaning they can morph into
any kind of cell a body needs. How they morph is mysterious.

   "You take a tissue that's been damaged," Prockop said, "and somehow it picks
up the signals to make new cells there. So if it goes to the bone, it makes new
bone cells. If it goes to the cartilage, it makes new cartilage cells.

   "We don't know how it knows where to go, but there's a whole bunch of signals
there.

   "We need these guys. They're on our side."

   In Prockop's laboratory, stem cells are harvested not from embryos but from
the marrow of adult patients, drawn from the bone above the hip. They are grown
easily in the laboratory: Just an ounce of marrow can provide more than 1
billion stem cells.

   It appears, Prockop said, that adult stem cells and embryonic stem cells
could have different roles in the medical revolution he has heralded. "It's most
likely that some diseases will respond to adult stem cells and others to
embryonic stem cells," he said. "But we just don't know until more research is
done.

   "There are limitations to both kinds of cells. Stem cells are very
complicated. If you can't do something with them today, it's not certain you
can't do it tomorrow."

   Meanwhile, the world waits to hear from Bush about whether he will endorse
federal financing to promote stem cell research. Louisiana senators Mary
Landrieu and John Breaux, both Democrats, haven't declared one way or the other.

   "What a challenge this is for our society -- the challenge of knowing the
boundaries," Rabbi Goldstein said. "We bring a lot to the question. We bring our
religious values, we bring our social values, we bring our own sense of right
and wrong."

   . . . . . . .

Elizabeth Mullener can be reached at emullener@timespicayune.com or (504)
826-3393.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO COURTESY DR. DARWIN PROCKOP STAFF PHOTO BY MATT ROSE Dr. Darwin
J. Prockop, Director of Tulane Gene Therapy Center, poses Thursday before a Flow
Cytometer, which sorts cells, in the Tulane Health Science Center for Gene
Therapy. At right, an adult marrow stromal cell, or stem cell, is pictured. This
type of cell has the potential to develop into any type of cell in the human
body, a prospect that researchers hope could lead to cures for numerous
diseases.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2001


                             1659 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       July 29, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2535 words

HEADLINE: 2 faulty clinical trials, 2 federal responses;
 Research: Like Johns Hopkins, Maryland has faced problems with one of its human
experiments. But regulators' reactions and how each handled the cases differ
drastically.

BYLINE: Tom Pelton

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   As scientists looked on, the healthy young volunteer pumped away on a
stationary bicycle in a laboratory. He huffed into the mouthpiece of an
air-monitoring machine as plastic tubes looped from the blood vessels of his
legs.

   A technical problem caused the researchers to call off the experiment. When
the sweaty 24-year-old man climbed off to rest, he complained that his head
ached, his heart was beating rapidly, and he felt chilly, feverish and stiff.

   After he was wheeled to the emergency room of the Baltimore VA Medical Center
on a gurney, doctors discovered that he had a life-threatening bacterial
infection of the bloodstream.

   And, it turned out, his illness was caused by the scientists.

   The man was hospitalized for 19 days in spring of last year because a
researcher fed contaminated fluids into his veins, according to an internal
investigation by the University of Maryland School of Medicine, where the
researcher worked.

   A university review board issued a blistering criticism of Associate
Professor Andrew Coggan's conduct in the experiment. The school didn't renew his
contract, which expired this past June 30.

   The incident prompted the university to suspend 19 other experiments and
order a mandatory retraining of all the researchers in Coggan's division. It
also helped spur an overhaul of the university's system for reviewing and
monitoring experiments.

   Like the death June 2 of a young woman in an asthma study at the Johns
Hopkins University, the Maryland case is among the unknown number of "adverse
events" suffered by research volunteers nationally every year. But while the two
incidents seem similar in some ways, they were treated very differently by
federal regulators.

   Hopkins, regarded as one of the world's great medical research institutions,
was chastised by the federal Office for Human Research Protections, which began
an investigation and then shut down most of the school's federally funded
experiments.

   Maryland, which is not as widely lauded as a research institution, was not
investigated or punished.

   The reason for the discrepancy reveals some of the thought process of the
federal officials who authorized the rare, tough sanctions against Hopkins,
which administrators there condemned as overzealous and unjustified.

   Bill Hall, a spokesman for the federal agency, said the fact that the
Maryland volunteer survived is only part of the difference between the cases.

   More significant, Hall said, was that Maryland quickly sent the agency a
report detailing sweeping improvements it planned to make to its system for
reviewing experiments. In contrast, Hopkins maintained a system that the agency
had been criticizing for at least eight months before the death of research
volunteer Ellen Roche, Hall said.

   "We felt there was no reason to investigate the University of Maryland,
because they took the bull by the horns and said they were going to make several
important changes," Hall said. "Hopkins failed to take the initiative to correct
their own problems, and so we felt we had to act."

   Hopkins did promise to make several improvements, including adding a third
internal review board to help scrutinize experiments. But overall, federal
officials were unsatisfied with the school's initial response to Roche's death,
Hall said.

   During a three-day site inspection of Hopkins a couple of weeks ago that
involved five investigators reviewing records and interviewing scientists and
staffers, the agency discovered weakness in Hopkins' system of reviewing
experiments and acted aggressively to prevent any more deaths, Hall said.

   Investigators criticized Hopkins lack of scrutiny and research before the
asthma experiment for failing to detect the risks of using an unapproved
medication, hexamethonium, the likely cause of Roche's death.

   The problem at Maryland resulted not from inadequate review of an experiment,
but from poor execution by a researcher, university officials said.

   The agency took Maryland administrators at their word when they reported that
they did not have systemic problems. A 1998 audit of Maryland by the agency had
found none.

   "We were cooperating with them (the Office of Human Research Protections) and
beefing up our review boards even before this incident" last year, said Larry
Roberts, a spokesman for the Maryland school of medicine.

   The university had decided to improve its protections of research subjects
because of heightened government expectations for safety after the death in 1999
of Jesse Gelsinger, a volunteer in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
trial, said Dr. Howard B. Dickler, associate dean for research and graduate
studies at Maryland. The incident last year prompted it to make further
improvements.

   "We've had an overall strengthening of our safety procedures for human
subjects," said Dickler. "Human subject protection is an important issue for us,
and we're working very hard to keep people safe."

   Injuries a rarity

   Scientists say it is rare for healthy volunteers to be injured or killed in
medical experiments but especially troubling because they - unlike terminally
ill patients who have a personal motivation to volunteer for risky experimental
treatments - have nothing to gain by offering themselves to science except
perhaps a few hundred dollars in compensation.

   "Anytime you have problems with healthy volunteers, it raises big issues,
because these people should be walking out as well as they went in," said Dr.
Jonathan Moss of the University of Chicago, who heads two research review boards
there.

   "It's the response to the adverse events that is more important than the
adverse event itself," Moss said. "If you don't learn anything, if you don't
make any changes, the public would have a right for concern."

   The test

   The researcher who led the experiment in May of last year at Maryland was
Andrew Coggan, a 42-year-old Columbia resident and an exercise physiologist who
received his doctorate from the University of Texas in Austin.

   Maryland administrators hired Coggan in June 1998 as an associate professor
in the medical school's division of gerontology, which is based in the Baltimore
VA Medical Center. The hospital is affiliated with the university.

   As part of his department's research into the problems of senior citizens,
Coggan wanted to determine whether obesity, hypertension, diabetes and other
conditions are related to a declining ability of older people's muscles to burn
fat. He wondered whether endurance training could help elderly people prevent or
reverse this decline, according to university documents.

   Coggan won a federal grant from the National Institutes on Aging to perform a
study called "Aging and Skeletal Muscle Fatty Acid Metabolism."

   Using advertisements in local media, Coggan recruited 48 healthy volunteers,
half of them between 18 and 39 years old and half between 60 and 70 years. The
younger volunteers were paid $400, the older ones $600, according to university
documents. The older volunteers would be subjected to 16 weeks of progressive
endurance training on bicycles and then would be tested again.

   Coggan's plan was to infuse fatty acids into his subjects and take blood
samples from their legs to test how quickly their muscles burned fat while
exercising on stationary bicycles.

   Volunteer No. 14 in Coggan's study showed up at the geriatric research center
at the Veterans Affairs hospital at 8:01 a.m. on May 10, 2000, according to a
university report. University officials have not released the man's name but
said he was not a university student or employee.

   A nurse inserted an intravenous line into the volunteer's left arm, according
to the report. The volunteer then went to the hospital's radiology department,
where a doctor inserted two more tubes into a vein in his right thigh and a
fourth line into an artery in the same leg.

   After being given infusions of fatty acids and a blood thinner called
heparin, he started pedaling a stationary exercise bicycle while researchers
monitored blood samples from his legs.

   At 1:35 p.m. the experiment was aborted because the plastic tubes were bent
and his blood was not flowing out properly, according to a university report.

   When the man laid down to rest, he reported feeling feverish, with a
headache, weakness and chills, Dickler said.

   The researchers paged a doctor, and the volunteer was wheeled to the
hospital's emergency room.

   The staff discovered he had low blood pressure and a "life-threatening"
bacterial infection in his bloodstream, known as bateremia or septicemia,
according to university officials.

   He was in the hospital for five days receiving intravenous antibiotics, then
released. But 11 days later, tests showed that the bacteria persisted in his
blood. Starting May 26, he spent two more weeks in the hospital on intravenous
antibiotics, according to a university report.

   "If it's untreated, systemic infection with bacteremia can lead to shock and
collapse of the vascular system," said Dickler. "But bacteremia is fairly easy
to treat, and in this case (the patient) totally recovered."

   'Multiple deficiencies'

   A panel appointed by the University of Maryland Institutional Review Board
issued a report in August that found "multiple deficiencies" in the execution of
Coggan's experiment.

   There was a "breakdown in research practice by the principal investigator and
clinical co-investigator," the report said.

   University investigators concluded that Coggan gave the volunteer the blood
infection by injecting him with a fatty acid solution that had been left out at
room temperature in an opened container for 10 days, far longer than the four
hours considered acceptable, according to university reports.

   "The protocol followed by Dr. Coggan's group had poor clinical practices and
put subjects at unacceptable levels of risk," the report said. "His actions
resulted in a subject developing a life-threatening condition."

   Other criticisms

   Among more than a dozen other problems, Coggan also failed to test the
solution for sterility or pass it through a filter, as he should have done,
according to another university report.

   University investigators also criticized Coggan for changing the procedures
of his experiment without approval of the university's review board, conducting
invasive medical procedures not approved by the review board and failing to have
direct oversight by a physician. Coggan is not a medical doctor; he holds a
Ph.D.

   In his grant proposal, Coggan listed Dr. Elliot Siegel, chief of radiology at
the medical center and a respected clinician, as his co-investigator.

   Coggan had said Siegel would examine the volunteers and be responsible for
inserting tubes into the veins of volunteers during the experiment, according to
the report.

   "Although Dr. Siegel is listed ... as co-investigator, responsible for
overseeing all medical aspects of the project, Dr. Siegel did not agree to this
role and was unaware of that language to that effect was in (the grant
proposal). ... He was not involved in the study in any way," the report says.

   In addition, the investigation found that two of the 13 other volunteers in
Coggan's study also experienced "adverse events." One developed a fever that was
never reported to the university's review board; another suffered a minor blood
clot, according to a university report.

   Although Coggan had been on a tenure track at the university, the school
ended its relationship with him, university officials said.

   Coggan declined to be interviewed for this article. But his attorney, Joseph
T. Mallon Jr., said that his client did nothing wrong and that three prominent
professors in Coggan's field wrote letters supporting his laboratory practices.
Moreover, Mallon said, the federal agency's decision not to investigate the
study implies that it found nothing wrong.

   "It was an unfortunate incident," Mallon said of the volunteer's illness.
"But to suggest that he (Coggan) acted intentionally is without merit. ... He
has an excellent history in the world of academia."

   Defending his work

   In a letter to Dr. Donald E. Wilson, dean of the medical school, Mallon said
the university's criticism was based in part on an inaccurate report that the
bottle of solution was stored improperly at room temperature.

   Coggan also maintained that he did not need to test the liquid for sterility
because the labels on the bulk compounds used to create the mixture said they
were sterile, according to a university report.

   Reacting to the university's decision not to renew his contract, Coggan filed
a lawsuit May 23 against the university and the chairman of the university
review board that criticized him.

   The chairman, Dr. William Blattner, an AIDS researcher, stepped down July 5,
a year before the normal three-year rotation would have ended. Blattner said he
resigned not because of the lawsuit, but because of the increasing time demands
of his research.

   The lawsuit, which seeks $200,000 in damages, complains that Blattner
improperly "sought to terminate Dr. Coggan" and "maliciously stated on numerous
occasions that Dr. Coggan had engaged in academic misconduct ... impugning him
to be dishonest and a liar."

   'Deviations' in practices

   After the illness in Coggan's experiment was reported, the university
conducted an investigation of other experiments involving human subjects.

   The investigators did not find problems throughout the university. But they
discovered a "significant pattern of deviations from good research practices" at
the Geriatric Research Education Clinical Center where Coggan worked, according
to a university report. Officials suspended 19 studies at the center.

   The director of the geriatric research center and the other researchers in
that division were required to undergo "mandatory retraining ... concerning
their responsibilities with respect to human subject projections," a report
said.

   This was part of a widespread effort to strengthen the review of experiments
throughout the university. The university has required 1,134 people to complete
a training course on safety in human experimentation.

   Over the past year, the school has doubled its number of review boards (from
two to four), tripled the staffing of its office that monitors stafety standards
(from three to nine), increased its budget and hired an auditor to perform
surprise inspections to make sure that experiments are conducted as proposed.

   Lessons from experiment

   Dickler said there was a lesson to be learned from the Coggan experiment. On
paper, it looked fine. A university review board scrutinized it and approved it.
But even effective review of a proposal in advance cannot prevent human error
during the study itself, Dickler said.

   "If Dr. Coggan had followed everything in the way of procedure the way he
told the (review board) he would, this event would never have occurred," said
Dickler. "So the system was really working, except for the actions of Dr.
Coggan.

   "It just points out no matter how many (review boards) you have, the linchpin
is the researchers and how they carry out their work. That's why education is
important, and why we now conduct audits of experiments."

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Andrew Coggan was blamed for a UM test's problems.,
University of Md.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2001


                             1660 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       July 29, 2001 Sunday EARLY EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 01C

LENGTH: 2579 words

HEADLINE: Industry out of control?;
Unregulated sports supplements big business

BYLINE: LUKE CYPHERS AND MICHAEL O'KEEFFE New York Daily News

BODY:

   New York -- As Barry Bonds chases baseball's single-season home run record,
he faces the daily question that drove Roger Maris and Mark McGwire crazy: Can
you do it?

   He's also hearing another, thoroughly modern query: What supplements are you
on?

   Everyone in sports is assumed to be taking something, and for good reason. In
the last decade, dietary supplements have swallowed sports, filling lockers from
the pros to junior high schools and fueling profits for tiny firms run out of
garage labs to giant companies overseen by multinational conglomerates. Sports
products account for a quarter of the $16.7 billion dietary supplement industry,
says stock analyst Scott Van Winkle.

   "It plays right into an attitude in society that says, 'If you've got an ill,
we've got a pill,' and people discovered you can make millions of dollars off
it," says Mark Asanovich, Tampa Bay Buccaneers strength coach and supplement
critic.

   While many athletes credit supplements with enhancing performance, an
analysis by the New York Daily News finds these pill-popping jocks and the
companies who serve them are changing the culture of sports, and creating, in
the eyes of experts, a public health menace.

   Leading physicians say some sports supplements, many of them wildly popular
among high-school athletes, pose risks for cancer, heart attack, stroke,
psychosis -- even mad-cow disease -- and have already claimed dozens of lives.

   On the field, supplements have changed the way games are played, as potions
like creatine create ever-larger athletes. "I started lifting with it and it has
made me stronger," says Lodrick Stewart, a basketball player at Rainier High in
Seattle, whose body-building father gave him creatine. "It's not a drug. My dad
is drug-free. He wouldn't let me use anything that's a drug."

   Meanwhile, substances banned by the Olympics and other sports show up in
legal supplements, causing failed drug tests and suspensions for elite athletes.

   More than that, top sports officials believe they act as "gateway drugs" into
illegal steroids and growth hormone. "If a kid takes something to build muscle
faster," says Larry Bowers of the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, " there's always a
guy at the gym who's got something better."

   No one knows where the supplement feeding frenzy will lead. A 1994 federal
law, the Dietary Supplement Health & Education Act, known as DSHEA, leaves
consumers with no guarantees of a product's safety, ingredients or country of
origin. Dosage strengths can vary wildly from product to product and pill to
pill, and some companies' quality control is hardly better than for street
drugs, say experts.

   University of Arkansas pharmaceutical professor Bill Gurley says many
products don't even contain the listed ingredients. When Gurley tried to measure
the amount of several ingredients, including ephedra, listed on a $40 bottle of
Exandra Lean, he found no trace. He called the manufacturer, Kutting Edge of
Corinth, Miss. "They pretty much fessed up," he says. "They said there was
nothing in it. They had gotten into a tiff with their supplier so the supplier
didn't put any ephedra in the pills."

   Major supplement makers blame the FDA for not policing the industry, but the
FDA has neither the authority nor the budget to catch wrongdoers: Just 21 full-
time employees work in the dietary supplements program, and five of those are
devoted to regulatory and compliance issues.

   "The way our system is designed now," says John Tiedt, a California attorney
who represents plaintiffs in product-liability cases against supplement makers,
"we need a very big body count before the government does anything."

   No Self-Control

   Sports supplement makers say many of the problems of the last decade are
overhyped and result from consumers' willful abuse of their products, and that
others are part of the growing pains of an exploding industry. Rik Deitsch,
director of science at Unicity, a sports supplement company, says fly-by-night
peddlers of dangerous products are hurting the entire industry.

   "As the industry consolidates, the bar is going to be raised," says Deitsch.
" Everyone is trying to validate their product with science." Adds Loren
Israelsen, executive director of the Utah Natural Products Alliance, of
companies that don't police themselves: "When DSHEA was drafted and passed,
nobody ever envisioned this problem. Nobody in this industry wants to sell
products that are unsafe to boys in high school."

   Others, however, are doubtful that the industry can self-regulate, including
Gerard Weissmann, an NYU physician who has warned of the possibility of mad-cow
disease in popular supplements containing chondroitin. "These supplements are
basically unregulated," he says. "Taking them is like getting on a plane with no
metal detector, no FAA scrutiny, a pilot who may or may not be licensed, and
mechanics who may or may not be qualified to do the proper maintenance. The
plane may or may not fly. I wouldn't get on that airplane."

   Collision Course

   Several medical experts see potential for crashes everywhere, and place blame
squarely on DSHEA. The law, passed by Congress and signed by President Clinton,
essentially freed any product that called itself a dietary supplement from
federal regulation before going on the market. It can take years and millions of
dollars to get a drug approved by the FDA; a supplement can make it to store
shelves in the time it takes to bottle and deliver it.

   Critics say the law has led to a series of health disasters, many involving
sports supplements. One example is GHB, a dangerous sedative marketed as a
muscle-building supplement and sleep aid from 1994 until 1999. Sold legally
under names such as Verve, Renewtrient and Invigorate, the drug was pulled off
shelves and listed as a controlled substance last year after it was linked with
several fatal overdoses and date rapes. More recently, GHB has been shown to be
as addictive as heroin, and its withdrawal symptoms have been linked to a
half-dozen suicides of body-builders.

   Ephedra products -- used as energy boosters and for weight loss -- have been
blamed for 80 deaths and more than 1400 adverse reactions since 1994, according
to the FDA.

   The reason, says Barb Michals, who heads an anti-ephedra organization called
HEAT, is these products are alkaloids of ephedrine, which is the active chemical
in the illegal drug crystal meth. "It's legalized speed, and they're selling it
to kids," Michals says.

   Fifteen-year-old Rosanna Porras died in April 1998 after taking an ephedrine
product before soccer practice at Fillmore (Calif.) High. Coroners concluded she
died of a pre-existing heart condition but her father believes ephedra caused
her death.

   "Ephedra needs to be regulated by the government," says Henry Porras, who
testified before the California legislature on the need for regulation, "but I
think it will take hundreds of thousands of deaths before anything is done.
Money is more important than human life to legislators."

   Federal regulators attempted to toughen laws on ephedra supplements last
year, but the efforts stalled in the face of a massive lobbying campaign from
the supplement industry. Ephedra manufacturers spent more than $4 million to
beat back stricter regulations in Texas in 1999-2000. In 1999, supplement
companies spent $1 million on federal lobbying alone. According to U.S. News &
World Report, nutritional product companies have contributed more than $10.9
million to Congressional and presidential candidates since 1995.

   With the purchase of companies such as GNC and MetRx by conglomerates with
big-tobacco-like financial and legal clout -- and powerful backing in Congress
and the White House -- the industry is becoming, if anything, more powerful.

   The lobbying money allows the industry to do a regulatory dance with the
government: The FDA has few resources to research products to see whether
they're dangerous, so when regulators try to pull substances, the industry says
there's not enough science to justify it.

   The tangle has slowed efforts to rid stores of hormonal supplements like DHEA
and androstenedione, the so-called Mark McGwire pills. "I think andro is still
the most dangerous product out there, on a par with ephedrine," says Gary
Wadler, a Long Island sports physician and expert on doping."

   Wadler has long warned that andro presents health risks, especially to
teenagers, because it works on the body's endocrine system. "Studies show that
when people take andro, it increases not only testosterone, but estrogen,"
Wadler says. "If estrogen is seen as a cancer risk that menopausal women should
be cautious about when it's prescribed by a doctor, how is it we accept this
risk for teenagers buying something over the counter?"

   Perhaps more frightening is the potential risk for contamination of some
sports supplements with mad-cow disease. Weissmann, a past president of the
American College of Rheumatology, recently outlined the risk on the
Rheumatologyweb.com site, saying chondroitin supplements sold to promote joint
health, and widely used by athletes, may be derived from European cattle -- and
potentially contaminated with mad-cow disease.

   A Spanish manufacturer of chondroitin disputed that, saying it uses American
beef and only cattle parts thought to be unable to transmit the disease.

   But Weissmann says under current U.S. laws, there is simply no way to verify
products' origins. "I'm not sure about this stuff, and I worry," says Weissmann.
"When hundreds of thousands are taking ground-up beef cartilage and there's no
certainty where it's from, there's cause for concern. The risk is there."

   Pharm Teams

   The huge growth in the sports-supplement industry has changed the face, and
the body, of competition. Supplement use -- along with weight training and, many
believe, steroid use -- is acknowledged to have contributed to the last decade's
increase in home runs in Major League Baseball.

   "It's enabled a lot of players to maintain fitness and stay in the game
longer," says former Yankee Jim Leyritz, who believes a fitness and supplement
regimen prolonged his big-league tenure.

   But the products have caused some athletes to test positive for banned
substances. A rash of track and field athletes has failed tests for the steroid
nandrolone in the past three years.

   A popular product, 19-norandrostenedione, converts to nandrolone in the human
body, and many sports officials suspect it is sneaked into other supplements to
give them a kick. "The majority of nandrolone cases are coming out of
supplements," says Larry Bowers of the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency.

   One such case was Jets tackle Jason Ferguson, who says a supplement resulted
in his positive test for steroids and a four-game suspension in 1999.  "All you
have to do is look at Jason's body to know he wasn't on them," says Jets
spokesman Frank Ramos.

   What's legal over the counter and what's banned in sports don't always
overlap. "Our country has taken for granted that what's sold in stores is safe,
so people don't use any caution when they buy these products," Bowers says.

   A generation of athletes conditioned to take substances to improve
performance, says Wadler, will be more likely to misuse the next class of
performance-enhancers -- gene-therapy drugs.

   By the 2012 Olympics, muses Hoberman, we may be cheering not for athletes,
but "creatures. "

   New Law, No Sheriff

   Until 1994, mass-market consumption of sports supplements was limited mostly
to skinny teenagers chugging protein shakes. That all changed with DSHEA. Pushed
through by Sen. Orrin Hatch of Utah, whose state is a center of the supplement
industry, Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin and Indiana Rep. Dan Burton, it had massive
congressional support despite warnings by medical groups.

   Designed to get the government off the backs of American vitamin companies
and the budding herbal health business, DSHEA " created a large gap into which
the sports supplement industry jumped," says Bowers. "It really broadened what
could be sold, and it pretty much prohibited the FDA from doing any efficacy or
safety testing."

   Unshackled by FDA laws, hippie health-food gurus rejoiced for the first few
years after DSHEA's passage; then they began noticing a change at their
conventions. Sports supplement booths blared music and screamed claims about
products that could make you bigger and leaner and sexier all at once. The
industry was shifting from "health" to "enhancement," from vegan to Vegas.

   Some of these companies had shady beginnings. Colorado-based EAS was founded
by an admitted steroid user, Bill Phillips, and its magazines featured columns
by Dan Duchaine, the author of "The Underground Steroid Handbook." A felon who
did time for steroid distribution, Duchaine died last year at the age of 48 from
kidney disease.

   MetRx's list of endorsers now includes the Yankees, the Jets' Wayne Chrebet
and the Giants' Jason Sehorn, but in past years they paid bodybuilders Craig
Titus, incarcerated for violating probation on a steroid possession charge; and
Paul DeMayo, a bodybuilder given a 30-month sentence for firing a gun during an
argument with his wife.

   MetaboLife's founder, Michael J. Ellis, is a former cop who pleaded guilty in
1990 to charges linking him to a San Diego methamphetamine lab, but he's become
a titan selling legal ephedrine alkaloids to dieters and workout buffs.
According to Salon.com, Ellis' company was projecting sales of about 20 million
bottles of Metabolife 356 last year, or about 225,000 pills every hour.

   Rexall Showcase, which has been absorbed into the giant Royal Numico
conglomerate, is being investigated by the Federal Trade Commission for its
marketing methods, which the government says may amount to a pyramid scheme.

   But consumers have stayed loyal to sports supplements; jock products are a
juggernaut, growing 12% annually.

   "This market is driven by gym participation, and that's increasing," says
Scott Van Winkle, and industry analyst. "It's not strictly driven by marketing."

   Supplement suppliers are entrenched in big-time sports, cutting deals with
many pro teams and elite athletes. Cytodyne Technologies, a supplier of several
sports supplements, is endorsed by all-pro NFL back Marshall Faulk and Giants
wideout Joe Jurevicius. Unicity has consulting agreements with the Rangers,
Knicks and Islanders, and ex-Jet Keith Byars is a distributor. The company
forged a marketing agreement with the Toronto Blue Jays last year, until the
Jays found a more lucrative deal with CytoSport. Members of the Denver Broncos
and the Colorado Avalanche have prominent ties to EAS.

   It isn't just stars who get supplement bucks; the companies provide some of
the only outside endorsement opportunities for non-superstar pro athletes, now
that equipment and sneaker companies have scaled back, says sports agent Joseph
Linta.

   So sports supplements are here to stay. Athletes use them. Politicians and
big money protect them. But few safeguards exist for the average folks who buy
them.

   "At the end of the day, the law still requires that if you want to know if
this stuff is safe or if it works, you as the consumer have to analyze it -- not
the government, and not the companies," Wadler says.

   And there's no change on the horizon. For the foreseeable future, the sports
supplement industry is likely to remain a mostly unsupervised experiment in what
the market, and the human body, will bear.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2001


                             1661 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       July 27, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1452 words

HEADLINE: Bruised, Hopkins regroups;
 Reputation: Despite embarrassing scrutiny after the death of a research
subject, experts say, Hopkins is unlikely to suffer long-term harm to its
standing as a top medical institution.

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor and Michael Stroh

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   The public scolding of the Johns Hopkins medical school after the death of a
young woman in an experiment was the sort of thing that happened to other
institutions - not to the place that likes to consider itself the world's
greatest medical center.

   Most observers say the intense scrutiny, though humiliating and wrenching in
the short run, will do little to diminish Hopkins' standing if it shows it is
working vigorously to protect research volunteers. So far, despite flashes of
anger by Hopkins administrators over the federal action, most experts say
Hopkins has done that.

   While scientists at other institutions say the incident will heighten public
queasiness over the safety of medical research, they say the public will still
look to Hopkins and other elite institutions for medical breakthroughs.

   "There is no question that when people die and there is a lot of coverage, it
leaves you more cynical about the most respected institutions," said Dr. Robert
Blendon, who runs a program on public opinion and health at the Harvard School
of Public Health.

   "But Hopkins is a very well respected institution, and Americans have a
desire for cures. They want to wake up and have cures for cancer and Alzheimer's
and Parkinson's - and they think the major medical institutions is where those
will come from."

   Hopkins isn't the first medical institution to deal with a high-profile
crisis. In recent years, schools including Duke and the University of
Pennsylvania had to weather bad press and public criticism after federal
regulators found widespread lapses in their protections of volunteers in
research studies.

   Doctors at those centers said they felt shame and irritation over news
accounts and the constant questioning of friends and colleagues. Faculty and
administrators worried that recruiting top-flight faculty and students would
become more difficult, some researchers might leave, grants would be harder to
obtain and that donations would drop off.

   "It's the kind of thing that alumni become angry about," said Arthur Caplan,
director of Penn's bioethics program. "They don't like their school's reputation
dragged through the mud and having to talk about it at cocktail parties, the
golf course or the water cooler."

   A government oversight agency suspended federally funded medical experiments
at Hopkins on July 19 after an investigation into the death of Ellen Roche, a
24-year-old lab technician who had volunteered for an asthma study.

   She died June 2, about a month after inhaling a chemical, hexamethonium, that
doctors gave her to help them understand how healthy lungs protect against
asthma attacks.

   The suspension lasted only three days, but the agency ordered Hopkins'
Institutional Review Boards to reconsider about 2,000 studies that they had
approved.

   The federal Office for Human Research Protections found that the boards had
not carefully discussed the proposals and, in the case of the asthma study, had
mistakenly approved a consent form that did not mention the risk of severe lung
reactions to the drug. It also criticized doctors for not discovering published
studies that mentioned lung toxicity.

   Though most research was able to continue uninterrupted, Hopkins doctors
serving on the review boards have been forced to put other work aside to
complete a process that, by some estimates, could take four months. While most
experts said Hopkins would survive the crisis, they generally agreed that the
pressure to prevent tragedies at Hopkins and other institutions will intensify.

   "Hopkins is a great institution with a tremendously strong reputation which
will continue," said Dr. George Lundberg, editor of the online medical journal
Medscape and former editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association.
"On the other hand, this doesn't help because the charges were serious and
apparently valid at some level. It almost seems like our great institutions are
standing in line to have approximately the same indictments by federal
investigators."

   Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of the Public Citizen Health Research Group,
agreed that if protections are flawed at esteemed places such as Hopkins, they
are likely flawed elsewhere.

   "Other places should notice they have the opportunity to tighten up their
process now rather than waiting to become another Hopkins or Penn," he said.

   Inside Hopkins, doctors and administrators acknowledge that they have been
shaken by the tragedy and stung by the government sanctions and public
attention.

   "We clearly have things to do to assure safety and we need to raise the bar,"
said Dr. William R. Brody, president of the Johns Hopkins University.
"Internally, the faculty are demoralized in the sense they believe they are
doing all they can in the best interests of the patients."

   Though careful not to criticize the federal agency, Brody said he was
concerned that government regulators might be fostering the unrealistic
expectation that medicine comes without risk.

   "One wants a completely risk-free environment," Brody said. "At the same
time, society wants advances in medical science."

   Dr. Morton Goldberg, director of Hopkins' Wilmer Eye Institute, said he
remains proud and confident of the safeguards that have long been in place at
the school.

   "I don't think any slur on our reputation is justified," said Goldberg, whose
eye center is perennially ranked No. 1 in the U.S. News & World Report annual
rating. (Hopkins Hospital has been ranked No. 1 for 11 years.) "Are there some
people who might take perverse pleasure in this? I hope not, though I think some
people like this exist."

   Forced to reconsider existing projects, Hopkins will face delays in getting
new projects started, he said. Already, Hopkins might have to forgo taking part
in a privately funded trial of a treatment for macular degeneration, the
nation's leading cause of blindness. Goldberg said he could not promise the drug
company sponsoring the study when the project would come before the review
boards.

   Talking to those who have lived through similar episodes offers a glimpse of
what those at Hopkins might encounter in the months ahead. When the University
of Minnesota became embroiled in a scandal over federal research money,
regulators stepped in and imposed restrictions on research spending. The pace of
research slowed, and some scientists felt frustrated and ashamed.

   "It's embarrassing," said David Hamilton, a genetics professor.

   The worst part was the constant questioning from colleagues at other
universities. "People would say, 'What in the devil is happening at Minnesota?'"
said Hamilton. "There was this implication that we were not very good."

   The death of Jesse Gelsinger, a volunteer in the University of Pennsylvania's
pioneering gene therapy program during a clinical trial in 1999, sparked
congressional hearings and months of negative news coverage. Today, the program
can no longer do research involving humans.

   "It became bad for morale," said Arthur Caplan, who runs the school's
bioethics program. "Many people felt that the school was getting picked on."

   Even those not directly involved were affected. Penn oncologist Dr. Stephen
Eck, for example, had a brain tumor study put on hold. "I can tell you that
doesn't feel good," said Eck, who only now is resuming the study. "You're sort
of being tarred with the same brush."

   The good news for Johns Hopkins is that even lesser-known schools have
emerged from their troubles without lasting damage.

   At Minnesota, research grants from the National Institutes of Health grew
despite the government sanctions. This year the school received $160 million, up
from $112 million in 1995.

   At the University of Illinois at Chicago, where human subject research was
put on hold for two months after federal watchdogs found deficiencies in the
school's research practices, the school's applications from students increased,
said Bill Burton, the campus spokesman.

   Dr. Catherine DeAngelis, the former vice dean for faculty and educational
affairs at Hopkins, said tragedies such as the death of Ellen Roche are
devastating not only to the family but to doctors throughout the institution.

   "The fact ... that it was someone who was part of the team just destroys
you," said DeAngelis, on leave from Hopkins while serving as JAMA's current
editor. "Then to make it look like you're not doing your job or not doing it
right and breaking the rules is just not right."

   She rejected, though, any suggestion that the incident would hurt Hopkins'
ability to recruit top faculty and students.

   "Are you kidding?" she said. "If we have over 100 years of excellence, the
No. 1-ranked hospital for 11 years running, it's unthinkable."

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2001


                             1662 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       July 27, 2001 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 022

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients may ask FDA to continue gene program

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Cardiac patients who received experimental gene therapy treatments at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center will gather tonight at the hospital to meet each
other, thank their doctors and, perhaps, start a petition drive to get the FDA
to allow the program to be restarted.

   "I'm going full-steam now," said the Rev. Charles Wilson, who flew in from
Charlotte, N.C., yesterday for the event. "Before, I was having 20 to 25 severe
angina episodes a day. Something as simple as shaving would bring on angina.
Now, I'm back in the pulpit."

   Wilson organized the "reunion" of patients, few of whom have actually met,
and said he wants to start a petition drive asking the FDA to allow the gene
therapy trial to resume.

   "I was baffled by it," he said of the agency's decision to halt the trial a
little over a year ago. "I'm still concerned they haven't opened it back up."

   Wilson said he has written the FDA on his own, as have many of the patients
who got the therapy.

   Beyond the goal of circulating a petition to the FDA, he said the meeting of
patients is designed to form a support group to help others who may one day get
gene therapy. "Plus, we just want a chance to meet each other," he said.

   At least 17 patients will be coming from 10 states, he said.

   The study gave genetically engineered DNA - known as VEGF or vascular
endothelial growth factor - to cardiac patients to help them grow new blood
vessels to the heart. All had undergone bypass surgery and angioplasty, but had
no options left.

   About 82 patients had been enrolled in several studies headed by Dr. Jeffrey
Isner at St. Elizabeth's dating back to 1998. Two of the patients died.

   One of the studies was shut down in March, 2000. The FDA said the program
violated protocols, accepting an ineligible patient, failing to notify proper
review boards of the death of a patient and other improprieties.

   Isner said he has been in discussions with the FDA about allowing the program
to be restarted and hopes a positive ruling is in the works. Some of the
patients got the gene by direct injections into the heart muscle, while others
got it via catheter.

   The FDA has already agreed to let another of Isner's gene therapy experiments
resume. It involves regrowing blood vessels in the legs of patients with
arterial disease.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2001


                             1663 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 26, 2001, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 922 words

HEADLINE: S.D. biotechs skirt dispute; They advance regenerative medicine while
staying outside stem cell debate

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 While the Bush administration weighs whether to fund human embryonic stem cell
research, some biotechnology companies are pursuing less controversial
techniques to restore human tissues and organs.

   The research field, dubbed "regenerative medicine," embraces the notion that
human flesh, nerves and bone can best repair and replenish itself -- if it gets
the right cellular nudge.

   So far, embryonic stem cells, a kind of master cell with the ability to morph
into any cell or tissue in the body, have captured most of the spotlight focused
on the budding regenerative medicine industry.

   Some ethicists and anti-abortion activists oppose embryonic stem cell
research because the days-old embryos are destroyed during the process of
extracting the cells.  They are urging President Bush to maintain a strict ban
on funding for the research.

   Yet outside of the stem cell debate, scores of companies, including a handful
in San Diego, are quietly moving forward with regenerative technologies that may
hold much of the same promise for curing disease as embryonic stem cells --
without the political and ethical baggage.

   "I think everyone in the biotech community is supportive of embryonic stem
cell research, but there are a lot of issues surrounding the technology," said
Haro Hartounian, president of MicroIslet, a San Diego biotech that is developing
a pig cell transplant product for diabetic patients.  "Stem cells are still in
the proof-of-concept stage.  It will take time to develop the data and the data
will speak for itself.

   "Meanwhile, companies are working on other technologies because stem cells
can't address all of the needs."

   Regenerative medicine technologies, including products derived from embryonic
stem cells, could be worth millions and perhaps billions to the companies that
successfully develop and market them to an aging U.S. population.

   But the field is fraught with scientific hurdles -- such as figuring out
which genes induce cell and tissue growth -- and most companies working in the
field are at the earliest stages of development, and are years away from
producing products.

   Still, many agree the research now being done is intriguing, even if it
doesn't yet provide much substance for investors.

   In pioneering mode

   "Regenerative medicine is a huge treasure chest that is just being opened,"
said Joseph Panetta, chief executive of BioCom, the San Diego biotech trade
organization.

   One of the potential treasures is San Diego-based MorphoGen Pharmaceuticals,
a privately held stem cell company.  Researchers there are using stem cells
extracted from adult tissue to develop a product to regenerate damaged cartilage
and bone.

   Though some believe stem cells from adult tissue are not as flexible or
long-lived as embryonic stem cells, recent research indicates that adult stem
cells may be far more versatile than once thought.

   For instance, researchers at La Jolla's Salk Institute have been able to get
brain stem cells from cadavers to divide and reproduce, and to grow into
different kinds of nervous system cells.

   At MorphoGen, scientists working in collaboration with 18 universities are
testing stem cells derived from adult muscle as therapies to regenerate nerves
and heal damaged heart tissue.

   "All the benefits claimed for embryonic stem cells, we are finding can be
replicated by adult stem cells," said Terry Ruysaki, president and chief
operating officer of MorphoGen, which employs 10 in San Diego.

   Yet stem cells -- embryonic and adult -- aren't the only weapons in the
regenerative medicine arsenal.  In San Diego, companies are using growth factors
and biomaterials to engineer everything from human skin to cardiac valves, while
others are developing "living" artificial organs.

   A bioartificial liver

   Privately held VitaGen is developing a bioartificial liver that incorporates
human liver cells.  The device, which acts as a dialysis machine to clean out
liver toxins, is designed to maintain a patient's failing liver until a
transplant can be performed.

   CyThera, a privately held San Diego biotech, is developing a cell transplant
product comprised of human donor cells and stem cells to treat patients with
severe diabetes.

   At Collateral Therapeutics, researchers are working on a gene-based growth
factor therapy to spur the growth of new blood vessels in damaged hearts, while
privately held Selective Genetics uses gene therapy to signal cells to repair
fractures, dermal ulcers and nerves.

   And one of the oldest local companies in the regenerative medicine arena,
Advanced Tissue Sciences, has developed engineered human tissue patches to heal
wounds.

   The company now hopes to take its technology a step further.  Working with
researchers at the University of Washington Engineered Biomaterials Center in
Seattle, Advanced Tissue is developing a heart cell "patch" to spur the growth
of new heart tissue and blood vessels.

   Ultimately, regenerative medicine companies insist they may be able to
replace tissue or organs with bioengineered counterparts that could work as
well, or better, than the original.  But that's probably decades, and a sci-fi
movie or two, in the future.

   "What most of us are working toward is to rebuild you or maintain you at some
modest level -- not make you better," said Dr. Anthony Ratcliffe, vice president
of research at Advanced Tissue Sciences.  "Biology is something that is
difficult to improve upon."

   Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone
number is (619) 293-1237.


GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 1,2,3,4. Charlie Neuman / Union-Tribune photos; 1,2. Adult stem
cells, like those frozen in the vial pictured above, could yield new medical
therapies; Mohammed ELKalay (left) and Terry Ryusaki of MorphoGen
Pharmaceuticals stored adult stem cells. 3. MorphoGen scientist Nicole Rose
placed stem cells into an incubator. (C-2) 4. Stem cells were "fed" to make them
grow and multiply. (C-2)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2001


                             1664 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 26, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 913 words

HEADLINE: S.D. biotechs skirt dispute;
They advance regenerative medicine while staying outside stem cell debate

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   While the Bush administration weighs whether to fund human embryonic stem
cell research, some biotechnology companies are pursuing less controversial
techniques to restore human tissues and organs. The research field, dubbed
"regenerative medicine," embraces the notion that human flesh, nerves and bone
can best repair and replenish itself -- if it gets the right cellular nudge. So
far, embryonic stem cells, a kind of master cell with the ability to morph into
any cell or tissue in the body, have captured most of the spotlight focused on
the budding regenerative medicine industry. Some ethicists and anti-abortion
activists oppose embryonic stem cell research because the days-old embryos are
destroyed during the process of extracting the cells.

   They are urging President Bush to maintain a strict ban on funding for the
research. Yet outside of the stem cell debate, scores of companies, including a
handful in San Diego, are quietly moving forward with regenerative technologies
that may hold much of the same promise for curing disease as embryonic stem
cells -- without the political and ethical baggage. "I think everyone in the
biotech community is supportive of embryonic stem cell research, but there are a
lot of issues surrounding the technology," said Haro Hartounian, president of
MicroIslet, a San Diego biotech that is developing a pig cell transplant product
for diabetic patients.

   "Stem cells are still in the proof-of-concept stage.

   It will take time to develop the data and the data will speak for itself.
"Meanwhile, companies are working on other technologies because stem cells can't
address all of the needs." Regenerative medicine technologies, including
products derived from embryonic stem cells, could be worth millions and perhaps
billions to the companies that successfully develop and market them to an aging
U.S. population. But the field is fraught with scientific hurdles -- such as
figuring out which genes induce cell and tissue growth -- and most companies
working in the field are at the earliest stages of development, and are years
away from producing products. Still, many agree the research now being done is
intriguing, even if it doesn't yet provide much substance for investors. In
pioneering mode "Regenerative medicine is a huge treasure chest that is just
being opened," said Joseph Panetta, chief executive of BioCom, the San Diego
biotech trade organization. One of the potential treasures is San Diego-based
MorphoGen Pharmaceuticals, a privately held stem cell company.

   Researchers there are using stem cells extracted from adult tissue to develop
a product to regenerate damaged cartilage and bone. Though some believe stem
cells from adult tissue are not as flexible or long-lived as embryonic stem
cells, recent research indicates that adult stem cells may be far more versatile
than once thought. For instance, researchers at La Jolla's Salk Institute have
been able to get brain stem cells from cadavers to divide and reproduce, and to
grow into different kinds of nervous system cells. At MorphoGen, scientists
working in collaboration with 18 universities are testing stem cells derived
from adult muscle as therapies to regenerate nerves and heal damaged heart
tissue. "All the benefits claimed for embryonic stem cells, we are finding can
be replicated by adult stem cells," said Terry Ruysaki, president and chief
operating officer of MorphoGen, which employs 10 in San Diego. Yet stem cells --
embryonic and adult -- aren't the only weapons in the regenerative medicine
arsenal.

   In San Diego, companies are using growth factors and biomaterials to engineer
everything from human skin to cardiac valves, while others are developing
"living" artificial organs. A bioartificial liver Privately held VitaGen is
developing a bioartificial liver that incorporates human liver cells.

   The device, which acts as a dialysis machine to clean out liver toxins, is
designed to maintain a patient's failing liver until a transplant can be
performed. CyThera, a privately held San Diego biotech, is developing a cell
transplant product comprised of human donor cells and stem cells to treat
patients with severe diabetes. At Collateral Therapeutics, researchers are
working on a gene-based growth factor therapy to spur the growth of new blood
vessels in damaged hearts, while privately held Selective Genetics uses gene
therapy to signal cells to repair fractures, dermal ulcers and nerves. And one
of the oldest local companies in the regenerative medicine arena, Advanced
Tissue Sciences, has developed engineered human tissue patches to heal wounds.
The company now hopes to take its technology a step further.

   Working with researchers at the University of Washington Engineered
Biomaterials Center in Seattle, Advanced Tissue is developing a heart cell
"patch" to spur the growth of new heart tissue and blood vessels. Ultimately,
regenerative medicine companies insist they may be able to replace tissue or
organs with bioengineered counterparts that could work as well, or better, than
the original.

   But that's probably decades, and a sci-fi movie or two, in the future. "What
most of us are working toward is to rebuild you or maintain you at some modest
level -- not make you better," said Dr. Anthony Ratcliffe, vice president of
research at Advanced Tissue Sciences.

   "Biology is something that is difficult to improve upon." Penni Crabtree's
e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone number is (619)
293-1237.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1,2. Adult stem cells, like those frozen in the vial
pictured above, could yield new medical therapies; Mohammed ELKalay (left) and
Terry Ryusaki of MorphoGen Pharmaceuticals stored adult stem cells. 3. MorphoGen
scientist Nicole Rose placed stem cells into an incubator. (C-2) 4. Stem cells
were "fed" to make them grow and multiply. (C-2); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4. Charlie
Neuman / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1665 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             July 26, 2001 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: Leukemia drug shows promise

BYLINE: JEFF DONN, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   A genetically engineered drug shows great early promise in tracking down and
killing a rare leukemia, raising doctors' hopes in the long quest for a magic
bullet against cancer.

    Eleven of the 16 patients treated in a study of the drug were left with no
readily detectable trace of the disease.

    The experimental drug relies on a piece of antibody from a mouse's immune
system to latch tightly onto the cancer cells, while shunning normal cells. A
bacterial poison fused to the antibody is then carried inside the cancer cells
and kills them.

    Doctors have long tested mouse antibodies as drugs. Researchers said this
drug - and similar ones under study - may eventually prove useful for some other
types of cancer, too.

    "People thought this kind of thing was going to happen 25 years ago, and it
just didn't happen," said immunologist Terry Strom of Beth Israel Deaconess
Hospital in Boston. "Something's happening now."

    He cowrote an accompanying editorial on the leukemia study, which was
published today in the New England Journal of Medicine.

    The researchers at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., developed
and tested the drug, a so-called immunotoxin known as BL22, on 16 patients with
hairy cell leukemia untreatable by the usual chemotherapy.

   The blood and bone marrow cancer, named for the hairy look of the cells under
a microscope, accounts for about 2 percent of all leukemia cases. Many hairy
cell cases are easily controlled, but the disease can sometimes be fatal.

    The early experiment was designed largely to find out if the drug can be
taken safely. The researchers said three patients were clearly given too little
or were immune to the bacterial toxin.

    Of the 13 others, 11 were left completely free of the disease, judged by
standard techniques, after an initial cycle of treatment. During two years of
follow-up, only three of those 11 needed more treatment.

    "We expected that some patients would respond to the treatment," said senior
investigator Ira Pastan. "But we didn't imagine in our wildest dreams that
almost all of the patients would go into complete remission."

    The news was welcomed yesterday by other cancer researchers. Joseph E. Eid,
a hemotologist and oncologist at the Cancer Institute of New Jersey, called the
new drug innovative.

    "It gives us hope that we are on track for a magic bullet," he said. He
likened the treatment to smart bombs, which hit a specific target, as opposed to
bombs that hit everything in sight.

    Edmund Lattime, who is researching vaccines and gene therapy at the cancer
institute, said the therapy may work better with blood-borne cancers than with
solid tumors, such as breast and prostate cancers.

    "It's promising. However, antibodies are big molecules. They don't get into
solid tumors," he said. Still, he's impressed that the treatment stopped cancer
in the majority of patients, a stunning result for such an early stage human
trial.

    Two of the 16 patients did develop serious blood clotting in their kidneys,
but the researchers said they learned it can be avoided simply by giving enough
fluids.

    Mouse antibodies were studied for potential as human drugs because it was
impossible to make human antibodies until more recently. In this study, the
patients' immune systems did not appear to reject the mouse antibody as foreign,
in part because just a small segment was used.

    The attached toxin came from a Pseudomonas bacterium. As an unwanted
invader, it can spur pneumonia or other potentially fatal infections in patients
with weakened immune systems. In the drug, it does not sicken patients because
it is carried right into cancer cells.

    Lead author Robert Kreitman said that if larger tests succeed, the drug may
eventually become a first- line treatment - instead of a last resort - for some
patients.

   Staff writer Carol Campbell con tributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: INFO GRAPHIC: A discriminating cancer weapon

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1666 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 25, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-3

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: Using natural defenses; 'Poison detector' could help fight off body's
enemies

BYLINE: Gareth Cook; THE BOSTON GLOBE

BODY:
 CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- In her MIT laboratory, Linda Griffith has built a machine
with the pulse of life.

   Inside a circular box just larger than a watch face, she has built what she
hopes will be tomorrow's poison detector: a teeming colony of liver cells on a
tiny wafer of silicon.

   The liver chip, patented this spring, has already drawn the attention of the
U.S. Department of Defense for its potential on the battlefield of the future,
where it could detect a surprise biological attack.

   In other hands, it could also be a major weapon in the battle to test the
toxicity of new drugs.

   Eventually, researchers and a swarm of interested pharmaceutical companies
are expected to try to adapt the same technique to create tiny models of human
body parts, such as the heart, muscles, and even the brain.

   "We hope to someday build the human body on a chip," said Griffith, associate
professor of bioengineering and chemical engineering at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

   The liver chip, which combines advances in miniaturized manufacturing with
breakthroughs in cell biology, is part of an engineering revolution: the
mingling of cells and electronics to create machines with living components.

   In laboratories across the country, innovations such as toxin-tracking
bacteria mounted on chips and a robotic arm directed by monkey brain waves are
blurring the line between what is alive and what is a machine.

   Though some might see this as the stuff of nightmares, researchers see
promise for dramatic advances in medicine.  Deciphering the communications of
nerve cells, for instance, would help in building better prosthetic limbs.

   Bio-machines

   The liver chip was made possible by new techniques of growing cells, which
have also brought artificial skin and cartilage and could one day make it
possible to grow replacement organs.

   The groundbreaking insight behind the liver chip was a way to grow what its
creator calls 3-D liver cells.  On the flat terrain of a petri dish, liver cells
don't behave as they do in the body, making it hard to use them for research.

   The liver chip has a three-dimensional architecture that channels a
nutrient-rich liquid through tiny chimneys that hold and protect the cells,
allowing them to form colonies and creating an environment in which they behave
more naturally.

   That could be tremendously useful for drug companies.  The liver is the
body's gatekeeper, breaking down dangerous substances in the bloodstream.  Many
drugs fail because they are toxic to the liver or because the liver breaks them
down before they can act.  To know whether a drug will work in humans,
researchers must know how the liver will respond to it.

   "I'm pretty excited about this," said Ronald White, a scientist with the
Schering-Plough Research Institute.  "The promise is that the results you get
from this will be much more like the results you would get from real human
beings."

   Comforting cells

   The chip's preliminary results have been promising, said White and others in
the biotech industry, but the team will need to test its response to a wider
range of substances before it will be used for medical research.

   The chip could have other applications.  It could be used to test new methods
of delivering gene therapies into the body, said Simon Eastman, a senior
scientist at Genzyme.  And it could also be used to follow how liver cancer
moves through healthy cells.

   One challenge facing the team that built the liver chip, Griffith said, was
designing the channels so that the fluid flows well.  Cells need a constant
flow, not just for food, but also as a signal that all is well and that they
should continue with their business.

   In the liver, "the constant flow of blood creates forces like patting a
kitten on the back," Griffith said.

   Another central problem is finding building materials that don't interfere
with biological processes.  Griffith said that the silicon is chemically treated
to minimize interference and make it more biocompatible.

   Roberta Brinton, a scientist at the University of Southern California, is
part of a team that is building neurochips, devices that mimic the way neurons
fire in the brain or spinal cord.

   She has faced many of the same challenges that Griffith has faced with her
liver chip at MIT and said that seemingly mundane considerations like building
materials have proved vital to getting neurons to attach themselves to
electrodes.

   In the long term, Brinton said she hopes to use neurochips to repair damage
to the brain or spine.

   Scientists have already made remarkable strides in their ability to decode
the language of neurons, she said.  In November, a team from Duke University and
MIT announced that they had made an arm stretch under the control of a monkey's
brain.

   Yet as the boundary between humans and machines erodes, ethicists and some of
the scientists involved warn that new, difficult ethical territory lies ahead.

   As scientists learn to grow and control entire organs, the same technology
that could improve millions of lives could also make possible things like
superhuman bionics and even "mind control," Brinton said.  The time has come, he
added, to begin a public debate about the possibilities.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; The Boston Globe; Linda Griffith of MIT has built what she hopes
will be tomorrow's poison detector: a teeming colony of liver cells on a tiny
wafer of silicon.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2001


                             1667 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JULY 24, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Johns Hopkins research resumes;
Studies were stopped last week after a volunteer died. But some programs still
must be reviewed.

BYLINE: John Biemer ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BALTIMORE

BODY:

   Johns Hopkins University resumed some medical experiments on humans yesterday
after reaching an agreement with the government to fix problems found after the
death of a healthy volunteer in an asthma study.

   The agreement was reached four days after regulators halted federally
financed human research at Johns Hopkins, one of the world's premier medical
institutions.

   Low-risk studies resumed immediately yesterday, as did those with higher
risks that had been reviewed. An undisclosed number of other studies must be
individually reviewed before they can continue.

   "They're not completely back in business," said Bill Hall, a spokesman for
the U.S. Office for Human Research Protections.

   Hopkins spokesman Gary Stephenson would not comment on the agreement with
regulators.

   Regulators halted the tests last week, saying Hopkins review boards often
approved studies without enough information, failed to monitor continuing
experiments, and tried to supervise too much research with too little staff.

   The order affected at least 15,000 patients and volunteers. Johns Hopkins
received more than $300 million in federal research financing last year, more
than any other institution in the United States.

   The scrutiny followed the June 2 death of Ellen Roche, a healthy 24-year-old
who died after inhaling hexamethonium, which restricts airways. The drug was not
approved for inhalation.

   Regulators said researchers did not sufficiently warn subjects in the study
of the risks and did not promptly report another subject's symptoms after that
person inhaled hexamethonium.

   The university accepted full responsibility for the death. It also suspended
the project and nine others led by Dr. Alkis Togias, who remains on staff.

   The university will have to submit monthly progress reports to regulators
detailing how the school is fixing problems. If studies meet the requirements,
they will be reinstated one at a time - a process that could "take more than a
few weeks," Hall said.

   Dr. Paul Fishman, a former review board president at the University of
Maryland Medical System, said institutions typically addressed such suspensions
in quick order.

   "Nobody here wants to interrupt research that's going to benefit society or
that's going to benefit people," he said.

   The Office for Human Research Protections replaced the Office for Protection
from Research Risks, which was criticized for not doing enough to protect
patients in clinical trials. The OHRP was formed shortly after the 1999 death of
18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger during a University of Pennsylvania gene-therapy
experiment.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1668 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             July 24, 2001 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 2010 words

HEADLINE: Using Genes and Cells to Help The Body Build Blood Vessels;
Therapeutic Angiogenesis May Open a New Era in Treatment

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Like so many procedures in medicine these days, the one Edwin Griffin is
getting looks like a video game.

    Something resembling a lumpy asteroid fills the monitor screen, in faux 3-D
and garish colors. An object shaped like a spacecraft hovers tentatively over
it. Shmuel Fuchs, dressed in a sterile gown, steers the vehicle through a thin
tube placed in one of Griffin's legs. Every so often, he squeezes an injector
and a black blotch like a bomb crater appears on the fiery landscape.

    But this is not a game.

    Fuchs, a cardiologist and medical researcher at Washington Hospital Center,
is trying to coax Griffin's ailing heart to grow more blood vessels. His method
of persuasion is to inject into it cells extracted from a patient's own bone
marrow.

    Fuchs hopes they then will initiate the immensely complicated job of
building an auxiliary system of arteries and veins in Griffin's oxygen-hungry
heart.

    This is "therapeutic angiogenesis" -- angiogenesis being the scientific term
for the birth and growth of blood vessels. It's one of medicine's most
tantalizing goals: If successful, it will open a new era in the treatment of
heart disease.

    Coronary heart disease -- insufficient blood flow to the ever-beating heart
muscle -- affects more than 12 million Americans, and is the nation's leading
cause of death. Each year, about 800,000 people undergo angioplasty and 500,000
people have bypass surgery for cases of the disease that can't be treated
adequately with medicine.

    However, there are about 100,000 people like Edwin Griffin, 51, a disabled
contractor from Vesuvius, Va., whose symptoms can't be controlled by any form of
therapy. To help them, researchers such as Fuchs are injecting cells, genes and
proteins into the heart in an attempt to stimulate new vessels -- "natural"
coronary artery bypasses.

    Only recently have biologists learned how much remodeling occurs in the
heart throughout life. Simultaneously, genome research is putting into
scientists' hands new tools -- genes and proteins -- that actually do the work.
Advances in medical engineering, at the same time, allow doctors to reach,
visualize and manipulate organs to a degree scarcely imaginable.

    Together, those developments are making possible a new kind of therapy --
therapy that uses the body's own molecular vocabulary to direct, amplify and
possibly even re-awaken its native talents.

    "You're making brand-new vessels that haven't been exposed to the disease
process. Theoretically, they should be better than the vessels that already
exist," said Michael Simons, a cardiologist at Dartmouth Medical School and a
leading angiogenesis researcher. "Of course, it's still just a hypothesis."

    The evidence for the hypothesis is encouraging, although mixed.

    Laboratory animals treated with angiogenic substances have grown natural
bypasses around experimental blockages in coronary arteries. In several small
studies, people getting gene therapy reported less chest pain and a greater
ability to exercise. But in the only two controlled trials of the treatment,
patients getting active substances did no better than those getting placebos.

    Therapeutic angiogenesis may, also, have hazards -- at least theoretically.

    A major cause of blindness in diabetics and the elderly is "proliferative
retinopathy" -- the overgrowth of blood vessels in the eye. Also, most cancers
propagate new blood vessels to support their growth. In both cancer and
retinopathy, stimulating angiogenesis could worsen things. In fact, the search
for inhibitors of angiogenesis is a hot area of research in those fields.

    Nevertheless, Simons, one of the harshest critics of angiogenesis hype, is
solidly optimistic about it.

    "If you are a pig and you have an occluded [blocked] coronary artery, we can
fix you so that you would be able to do anything you wanted," he said recently,
jesting only a bit. "In people, I don't think it's any less efficacious. It's
just harder to do."

    Current interest notwithstanding, therapeutic angiogenesis is actually an
old idea. Claude S. Beck, a Cleveland surgeon, tried it in 1935, nearly three
decades before the first coronary artery bypass.

    It was obvious the body retained the ability to grow new blood vessels long
after fetal development -- the healing of every cut or wound was proof of that.
Beck's strategy was to gently wound the heart.

    He roughened its surface with a burr and sprinkled it with ground bone (or,
in some cases, asbestos). He hoped the resulting inflammation would cause new
vessels to grow into the muscle from the pericardium, the thin sac surrounding
the organ. He and others performed the operation more than a thousand times,
into the 1960s. Its usefulness, however, was never proved.

    To some extent, therapeutic angiogenesis occurs spontaneously in many heart
patients. Pictures of the coronary vessels (called angiograms) show that over
time, blood flow can be shunted from one area to another through the expansion
of existing vessels and the sprouting of new ones. But often this adaptation
isn't enough to protect the heart or get rid of a person's symptoms.

    Certainly for Edwin Griffin, it hasn't been sufficient.

    He used to be a runner and an indefatigable worker. Four summers ago, he
fell to his knees at the top of a flight of stairs in an apartment building
where he was working. He was living in Chesapeake, Va., at the time.

    He was diagnosed with coronary heart disease and underwent angioplasty. A
stent was placed to prop open a narrowed artery. Within two months, though, the
pain returned.

    Since then, he has undergone angioplasty numerous times and gotten three
more stents. His blocked coronary has been reamed out and irradiated. Each time,
the symptoms come back. For reasons peculiar to his case, bypass surgery isn't
possible, and until recently he was running out of options.

    In their effort to stimulate angiogenesis in Griffin's heart, the Washington
Hospital Center researchers are leaving most of the important decisions to the
body.

    "Compared to nature, we're totally ignorant about the factors that increase
blood vessels," said Stephen E. Epstein, director of the hospital's
Cardiovascular Research Institute. "Growing blood vessels requires so many
diverse factors, we don't know one-tenth or one-hundredth of them."

    Epstein's team is using bone marrow because it contains cells capable of
growing into blood vessels, given the right set of signals from the environment.
The researchers believe Griffin's oxygen-starved muscle is putting out the
signals.

    "These cells can sense low oxygen, and they are designed to respond to low
oxygen," Fuchs said.

    In the recent procedure, the cells were removed from the patient's pelvic
bone, strained and inspected. While that was being done, the cardiologists
threaded a catheter into Griffin's left ventricle, the heart's main pumping
chamber.

    The catheter tip, when pushed up against the inner wall of the ventricle, is
able to record two key measures of muscle health -- contraction and electrical
conduction. Using it, Fuchs and his colleagues "mapped" the condition of
Griffin's heart. An image of the organ appeared on the video screen, with colors
depicting the condition of different regions.

    The physicians identified tissue that appeared to be in jeopardy. Into it --
and the border of healthy tissue around it -- they injected the bone marrow
cells through a retractable needle, also housed in the catheter tip.

    They hope the cells will initiate angiogenesis. But they're hedging their
bets. Like other researchers around the country, they are also testing
angiogenesis genes.

    One of those other scientists is Todd K. Rosengart, a heart surgeon at
Northwestern University in Chicago. He has two studies of angiogenesis gene
therapy underway.

    One employs VEGF, whose protein product, "vascular endothelial growth
factor," has been the subject of previous research. The other gene is HIF-1
alpha, which resides "upstream" of VEGF in the cascade of biological events
leading to blood vessel formation. Like Simons, Rosengart is enthusiastic, based
on his animal research.

    "In some of our animal studies, we could see a picture that looked like a
bridge over a dam break. We could see vessels going from Point A to Point B,
bridging a blockage. In other animals, we could see a blush [of dye on the
angiogram] that was probably thousands of small vessels," he said.

    If angiogenesis gene therapy works, it may rejuvenate a field whose promise
was trumpeted a decade ago but has proved almost uniformly disappointing.

    Gene therapy's main problem is its lack of staying power. Researchers
engineered viruses that could deliver a crucial missing gene to the lungs of
people with cystic fibrosis. But the genes worked only for a week or so, and
repeated treatments weren't practical because the effect wore off.

    To date, gene therapy hasn't been very useful for chronic diseases. But
angiogenesis for coronary artery disease may be an exception, says Ronald G.
Crystal, a researcher at Weill Medical College of Cornell University. That's
because angiogenesis is a construction project, and the genes responsible for it
may only have to work for a week or two.

    "It became apparent, when we thought about it, that we could start using
transient gene therapy to build biologic structures that would be permanent,"
said Crystal, who previously worked on cystic fibrosis but has turned his
attention to coronary disease.

    So far, the dramatic results seen in animals haven't been seen in human
beings. This may be because doses of angiogenic proteins and genes are generally
lower in human studies than in animal studies. Also, the animals' coronary
narrowing is produced quickly and artificially. In people, it occurs through the
decades-long process of atherosclerosis, which may leave arteries less
responsive to angiogenesis.

    Age may make a difference, too.

    Coronary artery disease is most prevalent in middle-aged and elderly people;
most animals used in experiments are young. Blood vessel cells taken from old
animals and stimulated in the laboratory to secrete angiogenic factors put out
smaller amounts of the material than cells from young animals.

    This may mean older vessels are less able to make new branches and
connections. But it may mean that all they need is more stimulation -- which is
exactly what therapeutic angiogenesis is prepared to give them.

    Even if the genes, proteins or cells work, there's still the issue of how to
deliver them practically.

    In the most successful animal experiments, the angiogenic substances were
delivered to the exterior of the heart. This was done by injecting into the
pericardial sac, into the outer layer of heart muscle, or, in one case, by
attaching capsules impregnated with angiogenic factors, which then leached out
their material over many weeks.

    All these approaches, however, require incisions into the chest. That will
be fine if therapeutic angiogenesis is used to supplement bypass surgery. But if
it's going to compete with surgery or angioplasty, it will probably have to work
through catheters as well.

    One company working on a device designed to give physicians maximum
flexibility is Microheart of Mountain View, Calif. Its catheter has a tip that,
among other things, takes ultrasound pictures.

    Inside the left ventricle and pressed against the heart wall, it transmits
an image that shows the thickness of the heart muscle under it. The cardiologist
then decides how close to the inner or outer surface he wants to inject
material, using a retractable needle that's also in the tip and whose length can
be adjusted from outside the body.

    At the moment, there are so many variables in therapeutic angiogenesis that
it will take many years and many large clinical trials to determine what the
optimal procedure is -- assuming, of course, that any of them work.

    Griffin, the first American patient to test one of the strategies, is
confident.

    "You get to the point where you just want to do something," he said. "I
think this is going to do it."

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2001


                             1669 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 23, 2001, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1377 words

HEADLINE: Academic fraud largely an unexplored subject;
 Federal grants to allow initial studies

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: RON NISSIMOV

BODY:

   Within the past several weeks, a professor at the University of Texas
resigned for publishing invalid data, while Texas A&M University decided to fire
a professor for committing plagiarism and falsifying data.

   But experts say publicized incidents such as these shed little light on how
frequently academic misconduct occurs, or why it happens.

   What's needed to learn more about research fraud, they say, is more research.

   Next month, the federal government will award at least $ 500,000 in grants to
study academic misconduct, the first time the federal government has funded
major research on the topic.

   "With the amount of (federal) money going to support biomedical research
approaching $ 20 billion a year and with controversial research going on such as
gene therapy, now is a good time for the public health service to take a better
look at research," said Chris Pascal, director of the Office of Research
Integrity in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

   There has been some study of the topic, and last year ORI hired University of
Michigan history professor Nicholas Steneck to review the literature to see what
has been learned so far. Steneck says it hasn't been much.

   "There are literally thousands of articles written on research misconduct,
but the vast majority are newspaper reports and accounts in professional
journals about specific cases," Steneck said. "The bottom line is, I don't know
what causes researchers to commit fraud. I can't tell you why it happens."

   Steneck said a major issue that needs to be examined is to what extent
scientific misconduct is caused by "bad apples" who tend to cheat, or by a
system that pressures researchers to produce results at all costs.

   Although there may be a public perception fueled by notorious cases that
academic misconduct is on the rise because of increased pressure on scholars to
publish or receive grants, Steneck said there is no sound evidence showing
either a rise in the rate of misconduct or greater pressure to publish or win
grants.

   Pascal said most of the research on misconduct will focus on the biomedical
sciences, because that is where politicians are most concerned about potential
controversy. But ORI also wants to investigate research practices in the
so-called soft sciences, such as sociology, economics, psychology, education and
applied philosophy.

   The two recent Texas cases were in the latter group.

   On June 22, UT psychology professor Karen M. Ruggiero submitted her
resignation after disclosing she published invalid data in two journals. A
winner of the alumni-sponsored Texas Excellence in Teaching Award last spring,
Ruggiero was hired as an assistant professor last September.

   Before turning in her resignation, Ruggiero had asked the Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin and the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
to retract articles she published that were based on her research at Harvard
University, where she was an assistant professor for two years. Her resignation
is effective Aug. 31.

   Ruggiero and university officials declined to comment for this story.

   On July 15, Texas A&M Provost Ronald Douglas announced professor Mary Zey
would be fired next year for plagiarizing the work of two colleagues and
falsifying data. Zey, a 12-year tenured professor in agricultural economics, has
denied the allegations, claiming the two colleagues plagiarized her work. She
can appeal the decision to A&M President Ray Bowen.

   The colleagues, A&M sociology professor Harland Prechel and former A&M
sociology professor John Boies, were exonerated by the university.

   Zey's attorney, Andrew Golub of Houston, claims A&M has a vendetta against
Zey because she dared to speak out against wrongdoing by faculty members.

   Little is known about the Ruggiero case because officials have been
tight-lipped about it. But A&M released a detailed report of the Zey
investigation, which highlights several of the key issues the federal government
wants to examine.

   One is the prevalence of outright fraud versus less serious problems of
procedural errors or incorrect attribution.

   Pascal said his office, which was created in 1989 because of highly
publicized scientific fraud cases in the early 1980s, investigates 150
misconduct allegations a year and typically confirms 12 to 15 cases of
misconduct a year. He said that with more than 20,000 grants funded by the
National Institutes of Health every year, the number of proven misconduct cases
is less than one in 1,000 grants.

   Although the rate of outright fraud is apparently very small, Steneck said
his review of existing literature shows that less serious questionable practices
may be "more of a problem than the scientific community would like to admit."

   He said limited research on the topic shows "marginal practices" may affect
as much as 10 percent of research projects. Such projects include improper
attribution, publishing studies in more than one journal without acknowledgment,
which leads to the mistaken perception that more than one study was conducted,
and failures to report conflicts of interest.

   The failure to report conflicts of interest is becoming increasingly
problematic as pharmaceutical and other companies pour more and more funding
into cash-strapped university research programs. Steneck said a study published
in the New England Journal of Medicine showed researchers funded by
pharmaceutical companies tended to interpret data in the companies' favor.

   The Zey case was fraught with accusations of improper attribution since it
first surfaced six years ago.

   According to the Chronicle of Higher Education, Boies, Prechel and two other
A&M professors first accused Zey of plagiarizing their work in 1995. A
university committee concluded in 1996 that Zey committed an "honest error" by
using prose similar to that of the other professors without attributing it to
them.

   Zey was also criticized in the most recent investigation for not properly
attributing work done by Boies. But this time, she was not accused of "mere
sloppiness of scholarship or a single incidence of plagiarism, but a protracted
pattern of misconduct in research or scholarship."

   Another issue that ORI plans to examine is whether researchers feel free to
report violations. A 1987 study showed that one-third of scientists suspected
their colleagues of committing plagiarism, but 54 percent made no reports to
university officials.

   Steneck said studies also show whistle-blowers are punished by universities
more than the alleged perpetrators if the allegations are not found to be true.

   Golub said Zey feels A&M violated her state-guaranteed whistle-blower
protection because she came forth with allegations against Prechel and Boies in
1999, but the university also investigated her.

   Steneck said sometimes "dysfunctional departments" play a role in research
misconduct. Some have called A&M's sociology department "Peyton Place" because
of the dozens of charges and countercharges. Zey and Prechel are currently suing
each other for libel.

   The federal government also wants to try to find ways to minimize misconduct,
and will research whether professional education on the topic will help. Steneck
says universities do very little to teach faculty members about research
integrity, and a federal proposal to require universities to teach proper
research techniques has been temporarily put on hold because of university
concerns over the lack of federal funding to implement these programs and overly
rigid regulations.

   A&M Executive Associate Provost Bill Perry said new faculty members are told
about the university's policy on research conduct. But he added that "our
working assumption is graduate students need more education than the faculty do
in this regard."

   UT officials did not return calls about that school's policy.

   Ed Sheridan, University of Houston provost and senior vice president for
academic affairs, summed up the feelings of many university officials:

   "By the time you become a graduate student, I think the assumption is that
you have been frequently told how to cite and acknowledge sources," he said. "I
find it hard to believe we need to educate faculty. If they haven't learned it
by then, you have a serious problem."


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2001


                             1670 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 23, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 198 words

HEADLINE: Monitor / MEDICINE;
Gene-Therapy Test on Breast Cancer

BYLINE: Shari Roan

BODY:

   A gene-based therapy used in some patients with late-stage breast cancer will
now be tested on women with early-stage cancers, according to UCLA researchers.

   More than 3,000 women who possess a specific gene alteration and who have
early-stage cancers will be solicited for the study, which will be conducted at
UCLA and hundreds of other institutions nationwide.

   The study will test standard chemotherapy combinations for early-stage breast
cancer with and without the therapy, known as Herceptin.

   Herceptin was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1998 for
patients with advanced cancer. The drug is thought to attack a specific mutation
in the HER-2/neu gene. Women with this gene abnormality--about 25% to 30% of
breast cancer patients--tend to have cancer that grows and spreads quickly.

   Studies have already shown that Herceptin increases survival rates for
advanced-stage breast cancer patients with the gene defect. Researchers hope
that Herceptin, if given in breast cancer's early stages, can provide the best
chance for a cure.

   Women interested in finding out more about the study can call the Jonsson
Cancer Center clinical trials hotline toll-free at (888) 798-0719.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2001


                             1671 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             July 22, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 1015 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS

BODY:

   More political power to the voters
Since the adoption of the U.S. Constitution in 1787, there has been an ongoing
struggle as to which groups should have the most political and economic power.
Even in the Federalist Papers, James Madison was concerned that factions, i.e.
pressure groups, would have too much influence in the national government.
There are still grave questions as to whether the nation is operating in the
private or public interest under our democratic progressive or regulated
capitalism.
Political theorists C. Wright Mills and David Riesman have somewhat differing
views on this. Mills maintains that a small power elite made up of top
government executives, military officials, corporation directors and labor
leaders primarily runs the country to its collective advantage. The remainder of
special-interest groups also have some influence in Congress, but the mass of
people are unorganized, atomized and ruled.
Riesman holds that Mills' apex of power does not exist. The second level of
Mills', made up of special-interest groups represented in Congress, says
Riesman, is a veto group which generally represents a diversified and balanced
plurality of interest groups. According to Riesman, the more or less unorganized
public is often sought as an ally by various blocks of interest groups in the
later maneuvering.
Whichever of these political theorists is nearer to the truth, many political
leaders in the U.S. are most concerned about where political and economic power
resides. This is a major reason many political leaders and voters are very
supportive of campaign finance reform as a possible way of returning at least a
little more political power to individual voters.
KENNETH R. WALKER
Russellville
U.N. wants to disarm us
Make no mistake. The U.N. wants to
disarm all civilians. They explain on their own Web site that civilian ownership
threatens the legitimate power monopoly of the state.
Many of their officials have stated in the past that their ultimate goal is
total disarmament of the world's populations. For the U.N. to even hint at
anything to the contrary is an absolute distortion.
An organization that employs the use of lies and double-talk to implement its
goals should not be trusted.
CHRIS KENDALL
Jacksonville
Problems with stem cells
Termed "a nightmare," 15 percent of Parkinson's patients in one group study
using fetal stem cells reacted with chronic writhing, twisting and flailing
movements, and others either showed no improvement at all or now suffer from
similar intermittent bizarre behaviors, according to the New England Journal of
Medicine. Once implanted, these cells can never be de-activated or removed.
In China, fetal nerve cells caused the death of one Parkinson's patient by
initiating the growth of bone, skin and hair
inside his brain, according to Neurology magazine. Technology Review recently
reported that "pluripotent stem cells are hard to rein in. The potential that
they would explode into a cancerous mass might turn out to be the Pandora's box
of stem cell research."
In contrast, a patient's own bone marrow cells are capable of being directed
toward bone repair and possibly brain repair. New cardiac blood vessels have
been grown with gene therapy. Damaged corneas are being replaced using new
tissue grown from the patient's cells, those of a cadaver or a relative. Human
stem cells extracted from umbilical cord blood have readily regenerated brain
tissue in animal trials. The procedure will be tried on stroke victims within a
year. Two cords would supply enough for one patient.
Adult tissue-specific stem cells and genes have consistently demonstrated a
superior propensity for controlled outcomes over fetal cells. The obligatory
exploitation of human embryos for "the common good" is a lie.
SUSAN McLEOD
Arkadelphia
Call session on bed tax
My family is greatly affected by the bed tax law and the unreasonable increases
in private-pay care. My stepmother is one of the 17 percent (according to an
earlier report in your paper) that has scrimped, saved and planned to take care
of herself in old age rather than depending on the state. Her July bill
increased $ 729.74.
The July 13 paper reports that those who helped pass this law thought they were
bringing our state into compliance with federal law. Yet, there is no such
federal policy, although Peter Ashkenaz, the spokesman for the federal agency
overseeing Medicaid, [previously] had spoken of a federal rule before he
researched the matter and discovered it is actually a state policy. The
spokesman doesn't know the law.
May I suggest that Gov. Mike Huckabee truly inform himself of this situation,
make genuine facts available to our legislators and call a special session to
intelligently deal with this situation?
My representative spoke of "being led to believe that he was doing what was
right for everyone." When the governor appeared before his committee in support
of the bill, one would expect decisions based on fact.
The idea that the taxpayers are paying more for Medicaid patients yet are asking
discounts for private individuals is absurd. Does the state want to pick up the
total tabs for the other 17 percent when they are soon broke?
Individuals paying their own way now have paid taxes for 50-70 years. Doesn't
that count for something?
KATHRYN B. CRAWFORD
Arkadelphia
Something positive for all
We have all been listening to our leaders in the Democratic Party complain about
the Bush tax cut. Now they have said the subsidy to help senior citizens pay for
their medication is also a bad idea.
To show support for our Democratic Party leadership and show George W. Bush our
displeasure with these schemes, I would suggest you send back the money, payable
to the U.S. government's general fund. This act would show our liberal leaders
what we think of these irresponsible ideas.
Personally, I'm going to thank our government leadership for doing something
positive for the American public for a change. I'm going to spend the money.
CURTIS R. FESLER
Mountain View

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2001


                             1672 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                              July 22, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS SPECIAL EDITION; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Hair loss may be here to stay--for now

BYLINE: Art Golab

HIGHLIGHT:
Science has made strides, but lasting regrowth is years off

BODY:


   For men losing their hair, the bald truth is that the pharmaceutical industry
hasn't come up with a magic bullet to help them--and experts say it's likely to
be a long time before it does.

   Hopes of the follicularly challenged were raised with the introduction in
recent years of the first drugs approved by the Food and Drug Administration as
being able to regrow hair, or at least help retain hair.

   Rogaine, also sold generically as minoxidil, is applied directly to the
scalp. Propecia, generically known as finasteride and introduced after Rogaine,
is a pill.

   These drugs, which both work primarily on the crown, or rear top, of the
head, have had only limited success.

   Talk of next-generation drugs, which flowed freely in the days after the
first baldness medications were approved, has quieted.

   "There are things that people have been looking at, but there's nothing
imminently in the pipeline," said Dr. Virginia Fiedler, who heads the
dermatology department at the University of Illinois Chicago Medical Center.

   Three years ago Fiedler's research helped lead to the latest advance. She
helped prove that increasing the dose of minoxidil to a 5 percent solution from
2 percent safely increased its effectiveness.

   Still, Rogaine slows or stops hair loss in only 40 percent of men. About 33
percent experience some regrowth. Propecia has been shown to slow hair loss in
88 percent of patients, with about 66 percent growing some new hair.

   Then there's the cost: $30 to $50 a month for the rest of your life because,
if you stop, the hair you grew will wind up down the drain.

   Meanwhile, many Internet sites are pushing a new treatment: adding retinoic
acid, or Retin-A, to Rogaine. But Fiedler said that's a dead end.

   "I've done some double-blind studies, and we could not increase the
effectiveness of minoxidil with Retin-A," she said.

   Hair transplants are another alternative. But they can be painful, and
responsible cosmetic surgeons warn patients they'll never again have the hair
they had as teenagers. Experts say gene therapy is another promising avenue, but
it is many years away from practical use.

   The research most likely to hit the next home run is going on in Europe,
according to Fiedler and other experts. Researchers in Scotland and the
Netherlands are looking into cloning dermal papilla cells, which surround the
hair follicle. The idea is to take a few healthy dermal papilla cells from an
area of the scalp where hair is growing, use DNA technology to clone thousands
more, and then transplant the new cells via injection to bald spots. The process
could be 10 years off.

GRAPHIC: See also related stories page 16.,

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2001


                             1673 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       July 20, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 816 words

HEADLINE: Shutdowns have wide effect on programs;
 Cutting-edge treatments become unavailable; funding, name damaged

BYLINE: Michael Stroh

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   John Moorhead knows exactly what happens when federal regulators shut down a
university's human subject research - a lot of work and a lot of headaches.

   An associate dean for research affairs at the University of Colorado Health
Sciences Center, Moorhead and his colleagues were ordered by federal regulators
in September 1999 to suspend thousands of its human research studies and
overhaul the school's research program.

   The four-month suspension cost the school $3 million to revamp research
guidelines, strengthen its internal review board and hire consultants.
Administrators endured grueling 15-hour days, punctuated by yelling and
screaming. Researchers lost months of work - and in some cases had to start all
over. But, worst of all, Moorhead says, some patients seeking cutting-edge
experimental treatment couldn't get it.

   "It's devastating," says Moorhead of the experience. "I wouldn't wish it on
my worst enemy."

   Now it's Johns Hopkins' turn. Yesterday's order from the federal Office for
Human Research Protection that the Baltimore institution stop human research
until it fixes some safety practices is just the latest effort by regulators to
step up oversight of human research.

   In the past several years, schools including the University of Pennsylvania,
Yale University, Duke University, the University of Miami and Georgetown
University have been sanctioned by federal regulators for reasons ranging from
sloppy paperwork to safety violations that led to deaths of research subjects.
Suspensions lasted from less than a week to months.

   "The days of cutting corners and expecting to get away with it are gone,"
says Moorhead. "The watchdogs are looking for problems."

   Being ordered to shut down human studies goes beyond just rewriting a few
rules in the rule book. "It has an impact on your entire research program," says
Cheryl Chanaud, who directs the office of clinical trials at the University of
Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. For example, some universities have seen
research money from private sources - drug or biotech companies - disappear over
nervousness about the school's ability to get results. Other schools have felt
their reputation took a big hit because of extensive media coverage.

   When federal inspectors conducted a surprise review of the University of
Texas Medical Branch's Institutional Review Board - which oversees human studies
- and found minor rule violations, they ordered 300 of the university's 1,400
studies shut down. The media, says Chanaud, covered the four-month suspension as
if someone had been hurt.

   "We didn't have any patient issues, we had administrative issues," says
Chanaud. "It's embarrassing when you have punitive actions like that."

   And science can suffer. Researchers conducting studies usually have to
resubmit their research proposals for approval. Newly chastened Institutional
Review Boards can overreact by not approving worthwhile studies or delaying them
needlessly, says Moorhead.

   Medical centers have been taken by surprise by the increasingly aggressive
tactics of the newly renamed Office for Human Research Protection, a once tiny
part of the Department of Health and Human Services that for years did little
but the most perfunctory policing of researchers.

   While ensuring patient or volunteer safety is critical, Chanaud and others
say that some of that enforcement is overzealous. Some universities complain
that the agency focuses too much emphasis on petty paperwork lapses. Others,
such as Hopkins, say the penalties - shutting down research than can affect
thousands of patients - are disproportionate and harmful.

   The increased oversight of universities conducting human experiments is
partly the result of high-profile cases such as the death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania in 1999. The
university was found to have improperly included Gelsinger in the study, failed
to disclose its risks and overlooked danger signs of medical complications.

   But that's not all. Peter Kazon, a Washington health care law expert, says
recent breakthroughs in molecular biology have led to a flood of research
applications, overwhelming many university research review boards. Meanwhile, as
more money pours into universities from drug and biotech companies, more
conflict-of-interest problems arise.

   For all these reasons, Kazon and others say, federal regulators are stepping
up their enforcement. "This is going to be an area people are going to hear more
and more about," says Kazon.

   Today, while he's not glad about what happened at his school, Moorhead, like
many administrators who have had their research programs suspended or
overhauled, says he's not sorry, either.

   "It was a hard pill to swallow," says Moorhead. "But there's no question in
my mind we are a much better institution than we were before the shutdown."

CORRECTION:
An article in Friday's Sun incorrectly suggested that regulators once suspended
federally funded medical research at Georgetown University. In fact, regulators
had required only that the school take corrective measures to comply with
federal law. The Sun regrets the errors.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), Angry response: Dr. Edward D. Miller, dean and chief,
executive officer of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,, voices
objections to the action of the Office for Human Research, Protection., CHIAKI
KAWAJIRI : SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2001


                             1674 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 20, 2001, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: Material from Globe wire services was used in this report.;
HUMAN TESTS AT HOPKINS HALTED

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Faulting Johns Hopkins University for the death last May of a healthy young
woman in a medical experiment, the federal government suspended all federally
funded human experiments yesterday at the huge medical campus in Baltimore.

   The suspension of research at Johns Hopkins, the leading recipient of federal
research grants among medical schools, is the most severe sanction imposed since
Dr. Greg Koski took the helm of the federal office overseeing research safety
last fall.

       Koski, a former administrator at Massachusetts General Hospital, took
office promising to professionalize the way research is conducted and policed.

   "It sends the message that if you're going to use humans in research, you
have to make sure they're protected," said Dr. Sanford Chodosh, president of
Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research, a Boston-based research
organization. "Even the best funded of institutions must follow the rules."

   The stakes are high for the university, which last year alone received $310
million in federal research grants for its medical school.

   On Monday, Johns Hopkins officials acknowledged that the probable cause of
death for 24-year-old Ellen Roche was inhalation of the drug hexamethonium,
which restricts airways, as part of an asthma experiment. The university halted
other experiments conducted by Dr. Alkis Togias and said it would tighten
oversight of all other research.

   Yesterday, university officials called the government action "unwarranted,
unnecessary, paralyzing, and precipitous.

   "We strongly believe that this action was taken in total disregard of
patients' health," Johns Hopkins spokeswoman Joann Rodgers said in a statement.

   The federal Office for Human Research Protections cited not only Roche's
death, but many other significant flaws in the way medical school officials
review research for potential hazards and in the way volunteers are informed of
possible risks.

   "We found serious problems and took the actions that were necessary," said
Bill Hall, a spokesman for Koski's office. "We're trying to protect human
lives."

   Among advocates for research volunteers, the action dispelled concerns that
Koski would not be as aggressive as his predecessor in enforcing federal rules.
Koski, who previously oversaw research at Partners Healthcare, the parent of
Mass. General, has taken a more conciliatory approach in his first year, but has
repeatedly stated that he would not hesitate to impose sanctions.

   Reviewing the experiment that led to Roche's death, Koski's office said the
Johns Hopkins research review committee failed to consider published studies
that said hexa methonium caused damage to the lungs and failed to tell Roche and
other volunteers that the drug was not approved for human use.

   Roche, a lab technician at the Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, was
one of three volunteers given the drug. She died a month later. The experiment
was designed to induce asthma symptoms in an effort to study how the body fights
the illness.

   The committee Johns Hopkins formed to study the death raised questions about
whether the experiment should have been stopped after the first volunteer
developed a cough, indicating possible respiratory harm. Yesterday, a member of
that review committee said she was "staggered" by the government's action.

   "The tragedy that occurred with Ellen Roche was horrible," said Ruth Faden,
executive director of the Bioethics Institute at Johns Hopkins and a nationally
recognized expert on research ethics. "But this is an extraordinatry step."

   Faden was chairwoman of a national committee that in 1995 found major
problems with the protection of human research participants.

   "There are still serious deficiencies" in protecting research subjects, she
said yesterday. "Those need to be addressed strategically. I'm not sure that
pulling funding is the wisest course, but it is certainly a wake-up call."

   Pressure has been mounting, both in Congress and in the courts, for stronger
action and tougher rules to protect research participants, since the death in
1999 of Jesse Gelsinger, a healthy teenager, in a gene-therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ELLEN ROCHE Died in experiment

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2001


                             1675 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                        July 17, 2001 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1311 words

HEADLINE: NO MENIAL MIRACLES;
WINDSOR FIRM'S AUTOMATED SYSTEMS DESIGNED TO TAKE TEDIUM OUT OF LAB WORK

BYLINE: STACY WONG; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: WINDSOR --

BODY:

   When Peter Massaro tried lab work for the first time a few years ago, he had
an epiphany.

   A mechanical engineer by training, he was engaged in a tedious process of
placing small but precisely measured amounts of fluids in row upon row of little
tubes on a rectangular plate.

      After doing two rows one day, he lost his place. When other researchers
gave him memory tricks to keep track of his work, he couldn't believe people
with Ph.Ds were doing this stuff.
   "This is amazing to me," he said. "This is chimp work."
   Massaro realized he could design a machine that would speed up the work
while making experiments more accurate. Automation would reduce the drudgery
and repetitive stress injuries for scientists.
   Today, Massaro is one of four founders of Protedyne, a year-old, privately
held company that builds entire laboratory automation systems for
biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, as well as university research
centers.
   Protedyne machines can accomplish in hours what normally takes lab workers
days to complete. The systems are so automated that, eventually, scientists
will be able to rent time on the machines and use their own computers in
faraway labs to run experiments on Protedyne machines in Windsor.
   Although other companies have made automated lab equipment for years,
Protedyne's first machines have been so good that the company snagged a prime
customer in Celera Genomics, the Maryland biotechnology company that made a
race out of the massive effort to sequence the entire human genome.
   Protedyne also snagged the award for best early-stage company at the
Crossroads Venture Fair in New Haven, where the firm sought $5 million in
venture financing to ramp up manufacturing and sales efforts.
   Ultimately, the company thinks it can profit from the multibillion-dollar
search to develop new medicines out of the human genome -- the entire set of
roughly 30,000 genes that go into making a human body -- and the related field
of proteomics.
    Praised as the next big thing in biotech, proteomics looks at the proteins
created by genes in the body. By understanding the role of the proteins in
disease, scientists hope to develop drugs for those diseases.
   A machine that could automate this process is the next Holy Grail for lab
machine builders. Companies such as Applied Biosystems Inc. in California have
figured out how to build fast gene sequencers, but no one has made proteomics
fast and efficient.
   "Everybody who builds equipment and plays in that field has to be focused
on that," said Massaro, now Protedyne's vice president of engineering.
   Speed has become essential in drug development as companies seek to profit
off the genome. Government money paid for the years-long sequencing effort, so
the results are publicly posted on the Internet.
   But drug companies need to sift through loads of this information and
process millions of samples in their search for the most promising drugs, and
they need to file for patents.
   There's no way to know whether a competitor is also looking at the same
genes and proteins, so a company has to work fast.
   That's where automated systems come in. Whereas other companies make
equipment, Protedyne officials talk of being a "solutions provider" that
designs and builds systems to meet the customer's need.
   "We go in and look at a customer's entire goal, and sell a solution for
that goal," Massaro said. "We don't just sell a machine."
   Modular, robotic and programmable, their systems can be adapted to research
needs and individual experiments. Companies or universities that could not buy
their own equipment could rent instead.
   By sending bar-coded lab samples and using a secure Internet connection,
researchers could conduct their own experiments in total confidentiality.
   Protedyne officials estimate that this "rental" capability, coupled with
sales and leases, could make up about half of its revenue within three to five
years and let the company break even by 2002.
   The founders plan to tap into the $36 billion pharmaceutical research
market, where about half the work is outsourced. Estimates of the size of the
lab automation equipment market are harder to find, but Protedyne estimates
that to be worth about $5 billion a year.
   The company declined to release its sales figures.
   A mechanical engineer who specializes in automating systems, Massaro ran
the East Coast office for Adept Technologies Inc., a San Jose-based automation
firm, when he first tried lab work.
   He was building a "colony picker," a machine that samples bacteria for
analysis, on a contract basis for a company named Autogen. Few machines
existed for the task at that time, and Massaro soon learned that researchers
spent hours with sterilized toothpicks, manually sampling the bacteria.
   He built a machine from scratch for that company, using software specially
designed by Adept programmer Dave Wilson.
   Meanwhile, Autogen President Stanley Klein went to Europe on a business
trip, and when he returned, he asked Massaro to build him a proteomics
machine.
    Massaro said, "What the heck is proteomics?"
   Klein, Massaro and Wilson decided to create their own company. They named
it Protedyne by combining "proteomics" with "dyne," a unit of force.
   The company gathered $1.1 million from its founders and their friends and
family, and the investment firm Fechtor, Detwiler & Co. in Boston.
   Massaro found a 22,000-square-foot building in Windsor's industrial
section, which has its own exit off I-91. The company also established a sales
and marketing office in Ashland, Mass.
    Protedyne had been looking in Massachusetts for a place to put its own
laboratory, but found the prices high. "We couldn't afford to be in the
Boston area," Klein said.
   Windsor had other benefits, too. Massaro knew he could find engineers
experienced in automation, as well as good industrial vendors, such as Eastern
Plastics Inc. in Bristol.
   Protedyne now has 19 employees -- 15 in Connecticut and four in
Massachusetts. The company expects that number to double during the next year.
   Scientific Director Jung-Joo Hwang used to be an assistant professor in the
gene therapy lab at the University of Southern California, and was recruited
from a San Diego company.
   She had been doubtful about moving to Connecticut, but once she saw the
machines, she was convinced. "I really think this kind of automation will
free researchers' hands," she said.
   She envisions one machine serving an entire university's needs for handling
certain samples. Or, colleges could send samples to be run at Protedyne on a
contract basis, a cheaper alternative to technician labor.
   Using robotic machines, researchers can already process more than 100,000
compounds in 24 hours. That speed is expected to increase as researchers
switch from plates with 96 wells in them to plates with 384, sort of in the
way new computer chips process information faster than older chips.
   Protedyne has also created the first machine to run gel samplesfor DNA
comparisons. The machine process 2,000 samples in an hour -- work that would
take a technician two to three days to complete.
   Such machines don't come cheap. One built for Celera cost $500,000.
   Klein said the company envisions reworking the systems so that companies
have the flexibility to change the configurations to suit research needs,
extending machine life beyond a single function.
   This would mean a machine would not be consigned to the scrap heap, and
would give its owners longer life and value.
   "It's a living machine," Klein said.



GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (color), JOHN LOOMIS / THE HARTFORD COURANT; PETER MASSARO is a
co-founder and vice president of engineering for Protedyne, a year-old
Windsor-based company that manufactures laboratory automation systems for
biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies, as well as university research
centers.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2001


                             1676 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             July 17, 2001 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1191 words

HEADLINE: Johns Hopkins Admits Fault in Fatal Experiment

BYLINE:  By GINA KOLATA

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, July 16

BODY:

   Johns Hopkins University said today that it accepted full responsibility for
the recent death of a volunteer in an experiment. In a report on its
investigation into the death, the university said the researcher who conducted
the experiment and the ethics committee that approved it had failed to take
adequate precautions to protect research subjects.

        "Regardless of the fact that we are unlikely ever to know precisely how
or why this happened, Hopkins takes full responsibility for what did happen,"
said Dr. Edward B. Miller, the dean and chief executive of Johns Hopkins
Medicine.

    The volunteer, Ellen Roche, died from lung failure on June 2. Ms. Roche, a
24-year-old technician at the university's asthma and allergy center, had been
ill since May 5, one day after she inhaled an experimental compound as part of a
study to understand the cause of asthma.

   Ms. Roche spent several weeks in an intensive care unit as teams of doctors
tried to halt the unrelenting failure of her lungs. Her air sacs collapsed, her
lungs became stiff, air began to leak out of them, her organs began to fail,
and, finally, her family decided to remove her life supports.

   The fatal illness probably was precipitated, university officials said, when
Ms. Roche took a drug in the study. The study was conducted at the center where
she worked, but not by the researcher she worked for. She was healthy, and the
study was not intended to help her personally. Volunteers were paid up to $365
for their time and effort.

   While stressing that they might never know why Ms. Roche became so ill and
died, the medical center's internal committee wrote in its report that they
believed the drug she took "was either solely responsible for the subject's
illness or played an important contributory role."

   The report is being submitted to the federal Office of Human Research
Protection.

   "This was a horrible tragedy," said Dr. Miller at a solemn news conference
today to release the medical center's report. Dr. Miller said another committee,
of experts from outside the university, was also investigating and would issue
its report by late summer.

   The Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Health and Human
Services are investigating as well.

   The university has suspended all of the 10 studies being conducted by the
principal investigator, Dr. Alkis Togias, an associate professor of clinical
immunology.

   Joann Rodgers, a university spokeswoman, said the university was "having
discussions with the family." But she did not know whether a lawsuit had been
filed.

   The report issued today depicted a study that went horribly awry. And it
raises questions of what is required to assure the utmost safety for volunteers
in research. The study was investigating why healthy people and people with
asthma responded so differently to substances that constricted their airways.
When the constriction occurs, people without asthma can breathe deeply and make
their airways relax, but those with asthma cannot get their airways to relax.

   The researchers hypothesized that nerves in the lungs controlled this
relaxation. They proposed constricting the airways of volunteers with one drug
and then giving them a second drug, hexamethonium. That drug temporarily blocks
the nerves in their lungs from responding normally. The combination of drugs can
simulate an asthma attack.

   Hexamethonium, however, is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
Dr. Togias reported to the institutional review board, or I.R.B., an ethics
group overseeing his work, that had concluded that the drug's main risk was in
causing a temporary drop in blood pressure. His conclusions were reflected in a
consent form signed by Ms. Roche and the other study volunteers.

   That form "should not have been approved" by the institutional review board,
the Hopkins investigating committee concluded. The form did not mention that
hexamethonium was not approved by the F.D.A., and it did not say that the drug's
safety was uncertain or that the only data on the safety of inhaling it came
from the experience of just 20 people. In addition, the committee found that Dr.
Togias had apparently missed some papers suggesting that the drug might injure
the lungs.

   "The majority of the committee believed that the I.R.B. should have required
more evidence of safety in the use of hexamethonium," the report says.

   Ms. Roche was the third subject in the study to inhale hexamethonium. The
first subject developed a cough and shortness of breath upon exertion. Those
effects lasted for a week. But Dr. Togias did not report that subject's symptoms
to the review board overseeing the study, reasoning that they were not serious
and that they were probably due to a cold that was going around in the research
unit, or to the acidity of the hexamethonium solution.

   A few days after the first subject recovered, Ms. Roche took the drug, became
ill and went to the hospital. Dr. Lewis Becker, the chairman of the internal
investigating committee, said he did not blame Dr. Togias for not recognizing
the possible significance of the first volunteer's reaction to the drug.

   "I can completely understand how he could have attributed it to a cold or the
high acidity of the solution," he said.

   But, the committee said, Dr. Togias should have reported the first subject's
experience to the review board. Dr. Miller stressed that clinical research must
go on.

   "Ellen sacrificed her life in an important study," Dr. Miller said.

   The committee said the university would redouble its efforts to ensure safety
in its clinical research. And that raised questions of whether the Food and Drug
Administration should have been involved. The committee said in its report that
the institutional review board should have asked Dr. Togias to find out whether
he needed the F.D.A.'s approval to do the study. The agency, Dr. Miller said,
often has information from drug company studies that can address safety
questions. It could also have required the Hopkins researchers to do additional
studies of their own, perhaps giving the drug to animals, before giving it to
people.

   Drug companies are required to get F.D.A. permission before doing a study
like the one at Johns Hopkins, said Dr. Bert Spilker, senior vice president for
scientific and regulatory affairs for Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers
of America. Complying with the agency's requirements typically would take one to
two years and cost $1 million to $5 million, Dr. Spilker said.

   The F.D.A. used to exempt most academic research from this process, said
William Vodra, a former F.D.A. lawyer who now works for the law firm Arnold &
Porter in Washington. But, he said, with recent problems, including the death of
a subject in a gene therapy study at the University of Pennsylvania, that policy
"was shaken to the core."

   But if the F.D.A. did require universities to adhere to the same standards
for research studies as industry, it was not clear where the money would come
from, he said.

   "I don't think society will be comfortable with industry picking up the tab,"
Mr. Vodra said. "And I don't think George Bush wants to repeal his tax cut to
pay for this."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ellen Roche died after taking a drug as part of an asthma study.
(Johns Hopkins University)

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2001


                             1677 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JULY 16, 2001 Monday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1325 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell research provides scientists with new hope;
They claim cures might be found for debilitating diseases.
Stem cells provide hope for scientists

BYLINE: Faye Flam INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Second of two articles

   As President Bush agonizes over whether to allow taxpayer-funded research on
stem cells from human embryos, neurologist Jeffrey Rothstein is injecting these
cells into mice to see whether they can slow the relentless nerve degeneration
that comes with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Rothstein and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins University, who are privately
funded, are transplanting so-called embryonic stem cells into mice with a
condition similar to ALS, which often starts with weakness in the arms or legs
and eventually robs the patient of the ability to walk, talk, and, in the end,
breathe.

   Other scientists around the country, most of them testing the controversial
embryonic cells in mice or rats, are looking at their potential for some of the
most devastating conditions - brain diseases such as Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's, spinal-cord injuries, and the irreparable scarring caused by heart
attacks.

   The research is so new and the power of these cells is so little understood
that scientists don't know whether stem cells will revolutionize medicine. But
they will never know if they aren't allowed to study them, they argue.

   Adding fuel to the debate over using embryos is new evidence that stem cells
taken from adult donors show some of the same promise.

   Currently, research is allowed on embryo stem cells only if private money is
used, but that restriction has made such research impossible for many
scientists, who can't gather sufficient funds. Wise Young, director of the W.M.
Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience at Rutgers University in Piscataway,
Middlesex County, said stem cells represent one of the most promising avenues of
research for spinal-cord injury. If Bush decided to allow federal funding for
work with these cells, "that would stimulate a flurry of research in my lab and
other labs."

   "Stem cells are a very major issue to the spinal-cord injury community,"
Young said. "Why should they be penalized for the religious beliefs of a few?"

   The promise of these embryonic stem cells comes from their seemingly magical
ability to transform themselves into any of the more than 100 kinds of tissue
that make up the human body.

   First isolated and grown in the lab in 1998, the cells have spawned visions
of new spinal-cord tissue for paralysis patients, pancreatic cells to cure
diabetes, heart cells that would repair the scarring of a heart attack,
reinforced bone for osteoporosis, or new skin for burn victims.

   Currently, some embryonic stem cells are taken from aborted fetuses,
isolated, and then allowed to multiply in culture dishes. Others come from the
microscopic embryos that are routinely created and either frozen or destroyed in
fertility clinics. Such embryos develop for just a handful of days and, never
progressing beyond the stage of a cluster of "undifferentiated" cells, have yet
to specialize as different types of tissues.

   Lobbying against using embryonic stem cells are the Catholic Church and
others who believe that life begins at conception with a fertilized egg.

   These groups argue that there is no need to exploit human embryos, citing
reports of stem cells being obtained from bone marrow and other sources in
adults, either live donors or cadavers.

   Scientists are not yet ready to say whether adult cells would work as well as
embryonic cells. Not enough research has been done, they say, and almost all of
it has been in animals.

   So far, embryonic stem cells have been turned into more than 100 different
types of cells, far more than adult stem cells. Also, embryonic stem cells can
reproduce indefinitely in the lab; adult stem cells eventually die.

   Peter Donovan, who conducts stem-cell research at Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, said it is possible that the medical community may decide never to use
embryonic stem cells, opting instead for the adult cells. But to learn how to
use any of these stem cells, he said, "we'll need to study both types."

   John McDonald at Washington University, St. Louis, has been studying the
embryonic stem cells as a treatment for paralysis. In 1999, he injected the
severed spinal cords of paralyzed rats with rat stem cells.

   While the rats didn't recover completely, they gained function - some degree
of mobility, sensitivity, bladder control - the kinds of things that can be
important to people with spinal-cord injuries. And such success may not ever
come from the adult stem cells, he argued.

   He has since begun using human embryonic stem cells in rats and mice, with
similar results.

   McDonald just started testing this technique, using stem cells from pig
embryos, on people paralyzed by spinal-cord injuries. There are no results yet
from the one patient who has received treatment.

   Meanwhile, Ira Black of the New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry,
working with former Hahnemann University professor Darwin Prockop, who is now at
Tulane in New Orleans, is concentrating on adult stem cells. They obtained such
cells from bone marrow taken from student volunteers.

   Black and Prockop knew that stem cells from bone marrow could become bone,
cartilage, fat and muscle. But last year they proved they could also transform
it into brain tissue. That led them to inject the stem cells into rats that had
been given a form of Parkinson's disease. The cells took up residence in the
brain, where new brain tissue was needed, Prockop said, and the animals showed
some improvement.

   Prockop said the bone marrow stem cells are now being tested as a treatment
for a genetic abnormality called brittle bone disease, which causes people to
fracture at the slightest impact. In animals, the cells seem to migrate to the
deficient skeleton. Human trials are expected soon.

   Some opponents of embryo research point out that some patients are now
getting stem cells from umbilical-cord blood, taken when babies are born. But so
far such cells have only produced blood cells, limiting their use to blood
diseases such as leukemia.

   The first study to compare the benefits of embryonic stem cells with adult
cells is the ALS work on mice being done at Johns Hopkins.

   Early results, in which they transferred mouse stem cells to mice, showed
"dramatic" improvement for the mice that got embryonic stem cells, Rothstein
said, but not for the ones that got cells from other sources. The Hopkins group
has since begun transplanting human stem cells of different types into the mice.
The results, Rothstein said, are confidential, having been sent to a journal but
not yet published.

   Rothstein hopes the mice experiments will answer some questions beyond ALS.

   "We're one small disease, but it has a pretty big impact," said Rothstein.
Their research could point to similar treatments for multiple sclerosis,
Parkinson's disease, paralysis, or Alzheimer's.

   Even if the adult stem cells prove superior in the ALS trial, Rothstein
remains convinced that embryonic stem cells hold tremendous promise. He said
that any decision to continue the federal funding ban would be "a bad mistake."

   Donovan of Jefferson argues that embryonic cells hold keys to our
understanding of the way life works. Virtually every cell in the body carries
the person's complete genetic code, and yet the cells take myriad forms and
functions. Some mysterious mechanism seems to tell them whether to become bone,
muscle, organ, nerves, or blood.

   Stem cells may hold the secret behind the cells' ability to find their
identities, and, combined with the knowledge from the human genome project,
could give scientists a huge insight into the way life is put together.

   Such an understanding would be critical, Donovan said, for making the stem
cells truly useful in medicine.

   Still, he cautioned that impressive new ideas - such as gene therapy - don't
always live up to the public's hopes.

   "We don't want to promise too much too soon."

   Faye Flam's e-mail address is fflam@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND DRAWING;
DAVID M WARREN, Inquirer Suburban Staff
Stem cells represent a promising avenue of research for spinal-cord injury,
according to Wise Young, director of the W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative
Neuroscience at Rutgers University.
Thomas Jefferson University
Peter Donovan, who conducts stem-cell research at Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital, said the medical community must have the option of studying embryo and
adult stem cells.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1678 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              July 16, 2001 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS/EDGE; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: There are still jobs out there

BYLINE: DORY DEVLIN, FOR THE STAR-LEDGER

BODY:

   There was not much to celebrate in this month's labor report, which announced
the loss of another 114,000 jobs in June along with the first quarterly dip in
the expansive service job market since the late 1950s.

   Just a few more distasteful tidbits in a steady news diet of dot-com breakups
and floundering old-line companies. As I read about Lucent Technologies' latest
round of layoffs and the end of Webvan, the online grocery delivery venture that
ran profitless through $1.2 billion in funding, it seemed a good time to take a
look at where the jobs are and where they are going to be.

   It may seem as though opportunities are shrinking with each major layoff
announcement and the upward tick of unemployment to 4.5 percent, but demand
remains great in certain fields, including technology and health care.

    "Everything is looked at through a different prism now - 4.5 percent used to
be considered near full employment," says Mark Oldman of Vault.com, an online
career network.

   Here's how he sees it: The hard-core technically skilled, such as Java
programmers, will continue to have an easy time of it, no matter what happens on
the Nasdaq. "It's estimated there are more than 500,000 unfilled IT positions,"
Oldman says.

   If you're not technically inclined, however, don't force yourself into a
career in which you'll be miserable, even if the jobs are plentiful, advises
Marty Nemko, career coach and author of "Cool Careers for Dummies" (IDG Books).

   Nemko's top pick for the young and science-oriented is biotechnology,
specifically genetic research. No recession will stop the demand for gene
therapy research that may lead to cures for cancer and other diseases, as well
as the legal and counseling skills required to handle the ethical questions
surrounding it. "There is no question in my mind that in five to 15 years, this
will be a boom field," he says.

   For the not-so-science-oriented, Nemko believes good writing will always be
in demand. "Hone your real-world writing skills - the ability to convey
important information in a both terse and reasonably entertaining, palatable way
is a skill set that can be used in so many careers," he says.

   And don't count the Internet out as a future place to apply writing and other
skills. "In the short term, the Internet has slowed down, but it is impossible
to believe the Internet is going away," he says. "As a center for commerce, it
makes so much sense."

   As for some other jobs that are here to stay, consider these:

   Teachers: The demand for all teachers, science and math in particular, is
great, especially in cities. Like nursing, this women-dominated field is wide
open as women pursue many other career choices as their numbers continue to rise
in the work force. The need for teachers of English as a second language will
grow as the population continues to diversify, Nemko says.

   Health care: The demand runs throughout the entire industry but will be
keenest in jobs associated with the aging population. There's a strong market
for medical assistants, dental assistants and X-ray technicians. Geriatric care
managers, who combine administrative and care-giving skills to coordinate
elderly care, will be needed in this top emerging career.

   Sales: Many companies are thinning sales ranks, while others are scrambling
to reinforce sales forces for existing products. "You'd think with the legions
of unemployed sales people, the going would be tough, but if you are an innate
salesperson, you're actually in a good position," Oldman says.

   Engineers are still in demand, while positions go begging in the hotel and
restaurant industry. Jobs abound, but finding the right one is still as hard as
ever. Says Oldman, "The headlines focus on the layoffs but they don't announce
all of the jobs being created."

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1679 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                       July 15, 2001 Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: @issue; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: DISCOVER: Bodyweek

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   A neighborhood's heart: Where you live --- that is, the characteristics of
your neighborhood --- may contribute to your risk of heart disease, Columbia
University researchers reported in the New England Journal of Medicine. Their
research, examining four residential areas of the United States, found that
whites in poorer neighborhoods had a 70 percent to 90 percent higher risk of
coronary disease, while blacks in poorer neighborhoods had a 30 percent to 50
percent higher risk. Potential reasons for the increased incidence: tobacco ads,
access to healthy foods, exercise opportunities, exposure to sources of chronic
stress and sources of social support, scientists said.


   Smoking, pancreatic cancer: Cigarette smoking, already known to double the
risk of pancreatic cancer, may also cause the deadly cancer to strike decades
earlier in smokers than in nonsmokers. A study of almost 500 people with
hereditary pancreatitis found that smokers developed pancreatic cancer about 20
years earlier than nonsmokers did. The findings, published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association, provide insight into how smoking affects cancers
in organs that are not directly exposed to smoke, said University of Pittsburgh
researchers. Smoking also increases the risk of cervical, bladder and kidney
cancers.


   New gene therapy technique: A team of scientists, neurosurgeons and
physicians at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital are for the first time using
a novel form of gene therapy for Canavan disease, a fatal neurodegenerative
childhood disorder. Doctors at Thomas Jefferson University's Medical College in
Philadelphia introduced 90 billion copies of a healthy gene into the brains of
three children whose brains lacked the gene. The scientists hope the technique
will rectify the genetic defect in the patients as a way of treating the
illness.


   Herbs, surgery collide: Several common herbal treatments may raise the risk
of surgical complications and interfere with conventional treatments, a new
report warns. University of Chicago physicians are urging doctors to question
patients about supplements after reviewing the effects of echinacea, ephedra,
garlic, ginkgo, ginseng, kava, St. John's wort and valerian on patients during
and after surgery. The review, in the Journal of the American Medical
Association, found that some herbs --- including garlic and ginseng --- should
be halted a week before surgery because they may affect sedation, pain control,
bleeding, heart function, metabolism, immunity and recovery.


   Shellfish warning: Raw Gulf of Mexico oysters may be tasty, but one
Washington food safety organization warns that the oysters might be dangerous to
your health. The Center for Science in the Public Interest released "Death on
the Half Shell," a report with recommendations to protect consumers from
bacteria found in shellfish that can lead to a deadly disease. According to the
center's statistics, there have been 135 deaths related to oysters since 1989,
and it estimates that 15 to 20 people will die this year. People with
compromised immune systems who eat raw shellfish, such as oysters and mussels,
tainted with Vibrio vulnificus bacteria may contract a disease called
septicemia. This disease kills 50 percent of those it infects, according to the
center.

GRAPHIC: Graphic:
The human body, male

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2001


                             1680 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 15, 2001, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 977 words

HEADLINE: STEVEN SYRE & CHARLES STEIN / BOSTON CAPITAL BUSINESS & MONEY;
A LONG SHOT ON SHORT LIST FOR HEAD OF THE FDA

BYLINE: BY STEVEN SYRE & CHARLES STEIN

BODY:

   Michael J. Astrue, one of the state's most visible biotechnology executives,
is stuck in the middle of an escalating dispute between the White House and
Democrats led by Senator Edward M. Kennedy.

   Astrue, general counsel of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge and
chairman of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, surfaced last week as a
leading candidate to become the new head of the Food and Drug Administration.

      The short list for FDA commissioner is also believed to include Eve
Slater, a senior executive at Merck & Co., and possibly Lynn Drake, an academic.
The selection of Astrue or Slater would be a departure from the typical choice
of medical doctors or academic scientists.

   The FDA commissioner's confirmation process runs through the Senate Health,
Education, Labor and Pensions committee. Kennedy, who chairs the committee, had
voiced opposition to the idea of an industry nominee in news reports about
Astrue last week.

   By late Friday, seven of the committee's 10 Democrats closed ranks on the
issue in a letter to President Bush, which was obtained by the Globe.

   "We understand that a number of candidates are under serious consideration,"
the letter said. "We would emphasize, however, that it would be unprecedented
for the commissioner to be appointed from an industry regulated by the FDA. To
do so could raise irresolvable conflicts of interest, undercut public
confidence, and undermine the agency's worldwide reputation as the gold standard
of public health regulators."

   Besides Kennedy, the letter was signed by Jeff Bingaman of New Mexico, Jack
Reed of Rhode Island, Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, Paul Wellstone of
Minnesota, John Edwards of North Carolina, and Hillary Rodham Clinton of New
York.

   They noted the historical medical or scientific background of FDA
commissioners and said that "such expertise has proven to be an important
consideration in selecting the head of our premier public health regulatory
agency."

   Astrue declined to comment on the letter.

   Rating the FDA's work handling applications for new drugs and other medical
products depends a great deal on who you ask. Some, particularly investors and
some industry insiders, believe the agency has taken a big step backward
recently from dramatic progress speeding approval times during the 1990s.

   A much broader range of observers agree that the FDA faces greater challenges
in the immediate years ahead coping with a wave of new products created by
biotechnology and genomics companies that offer better options to treat
increasingly specific problems and situations.

   Biotech industry officials and many others were excited by the possibility of
Astrue, 44, taking the FDA reins at a time when evolving medical technology is
entering such a promising stage. They point to his blend of experience in the
patent process from an industry perspective and as an administrator with a
government background.

   Astrue, who served as general counsel at Biogen Inc. before moving to
Transkaryotic, has extensive experience working inside government bureacracy for
the Reagan and the previous Bush administrations, including a turn as general
counsel at the Department of Health and Human Services, which oversees the FDA.

   "The industry knows and respects Mike a lot and believes he's absolutely
well-qualified to be commissioner," said Steve Lawton, vice president of
regulatory affairs at the Biotechnology Industry Organization in Washington.

   How big is the biotech bulge in the FDA pipeline? The agency, which has
approved about 100 biotechnology products during the industry's 25-year history,
has about 350 more in some later stage of evaluation today.

   The FDA's more recent track record on new drug evaluations has turned more
cautious, though it is still much speedier than the pace of a decade ago.

   The time it took to pass judgment on a new drug application fell dramatically
in the 1990s, thanks largely to the Prescription Drug User Fee Act. The law,
passed in 1992, gave drug companies access to an accelerated process for a hefty
fee. Though controversial, the legislation was propelled by the potent political
force of the AIDS crisis and hopes that new drugs could save lives.

   The duration of a typical drug application shrank from about 30 months to
about 11 months, but has grown in the last year and a half (it's still roughly
half the average application duration of the early 1990s).

   Biotech stock analysts point to a string of cases in which the FDA has
delayed approvals and sought additional test data in the past year. The FDA
dealt a blow to Genentech Inc. this month when it delayed approval of Xolair,
the company's asthma treatment under development with Novartis AG.

   "I think the view on Wall Street is that things have slowed down and the
agency is somewhat paralyzed," said Linda Miller, who invests in biotechnology
stocks for John Hancock Funds Inc. in Boston.

   "There seems to be a redirection of agency [resources] from approval to
enforcement activities. There seems to be risk aversion going on," she said.

   The FDA may be more risk averse because consumer advocates and doctors have
grown increasingly vocal in their criticism of speedy drug approvals. They point
to the FDA's decision to withdraw at least seven drugs from the marketplace over
the last three years.

   The agency, lambasted for sitting on its hands amid the AIDS crisis a decade
ago, is taking heat for exactly the opposite policy. Meanwhile, the FDA has been
run by an acting commissioner since Jane Henney resigned the top job in January.

   "There's nobody in charge to clarify the situation," said Miller.

   Now the odds look a lot longer that an industry executive will become the one
who steps in to change that.

   Steven Syre (617-929-2918) and Charles Stein (617-929-2922) can be reached by
e-mail at boscap@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Michael J. Astrue

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                             1681 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                   July 15, 2001, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 80 END ZONE

LENGTH: 2736 words

SERIES: SUPPLEMENTS A game of risk   Part one or three

HEADLINE: BITTER PILLS SWALLOW SPORTS

BYLINE: By LUKE CYPHERS and MICHAEL O'KEEFFE   Researched by Scott Browne.

BODY:
As Barry Bonds chases baseball's single-season home run record, he faces the
daily question that drove Roger Maris and Mark McGwire crazy: Can you do it?
He's also hearing another, thoroughly modern query: What supplements are you on?

   Everyone in sports is assumed to be taking something, and for good reason. In
the past decade, dietary supplements have swallowed sports, filling lockers from
the pros to junior high schools and fueling profits for tiny firms run out of
garage labs to giant companies overseen by multinational conglomerates. Sports
products account for a quarter of the $16.7 billion dietary supplement industry,
says stock analyst Scott Van Winkle.

   "It plays right into an attitude in society that says, 'If you've got an ill,
we've got a pill,' and people discovered you can make millions of dollars off
it," says Mark Asanovich, Tampa Bay Bucs strength coach and a supplement critic.

   While many athletes credit supplements with enhancing performance, an
analysis by the Daily News finds these pill-popping jocks and the companies that
serve them are changing the culture of sports and creating, in the eyes of
experts, a public health menace.

   Leading physicians say some sports supplements, many of them wildly popular
among high-school athletes, pose risks for cancer, heart attack, stroke,
psychosis - even mad-cow disease - and have already claimed dozens of lives.

   On the field, supplements have changed the way games are played, as potions
like creatine create ever-larger athletes. "I started lifting with it and it has
made me stronger," says Lodrick Stewart, a basketball player at Rainier High in
Seattle, whose body-building father gave him creatine. "It's not a drug. My dad
is drug-free. He wouldn't let me use anything that's a drug."

   Meanwhile, substances banned by the Olympics and other sports show up in
legal supplements, causing failed drug tests and suspensions for elite athletes.

   More than that, top sports officials believe they act as "gateway drugs" into
illegal steroids and growth hormone. "If a kid takes something to build muscle
faster," says Larry Bowers of the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency, "there's always a guy
at the gym who's got something better."

   No one knows where the supplement feeding frenzy will lead. A 1994 federal
law, the Dietary Supplement Health & Education Act, known as DSHEA, leaves
consumers with no guarantees of a product's safety, ingredients or country of
origin. Dosage strengths can vary wildly from product to product and pill to
pill, and some companies' quality control is hardly better than that for street
drugs, say experts.

   University of Arkansas pharmaceutical professor Bill Gurley says many
products don't even contain the listed ingredients. When Gurley tried to measure
the amount of several ingredients, including ephedra, listed on a $40 bottle of
Exandra Lean, he found no trace. He called the manufacturer, Kutting Edge of
Corinth, Miss. "They pretty much fessed up," he says. "They said there was
nothing in it. They had gotten into a tiff with their supplier so the supplier
didn't put any ephedra in the pills."

   Major supplement makers blame the FDA for not policing the industry, but the
FDA has neither the authority nor the budget to catch wrongdoers: Just 21
full-time employees work in the dietary supplements program, and five of those
are devoted to regulatory and compliance issues.

   "The way our system is designed now," says John Tiedt, a California attorney
who represents plaintiffs in product-liability cases against supplement makers,
"we need a very big body count before the government does anything."

   NO SELF-CONTROL

   Sports supplement makers say many of the problems of the past decade are
overhyped and result from consumers' willful abuse of their products, and that
others are part of the growing pains of an exploding industry. Rik Deitsch,
director of science at Unicity, a sports supplement company, says fly-by-night
peddlers of dangerous products are hurting the entire industry.

   "As the industry consolidates, the bar is going to be raised," says Deitsch.
"Everyone is trying to validate their product with science."

   Adds Loren Israelsen, executive director of the Utah Natural Products
Alliance, of companies that don't police themselves: "When DSHEA was drafted and
passed, nobody ever envisioned this problem. Nobody in this industry wants to
sell products that are unsafe to boys in high school."

   Others, however, are doubtful that the industry can self-regulate, including
Dr. Gerard Weissmann, an NYU physician who has warned of the possibility of
mad-cow disease in popular supplements containing chondroitin. "These
supplements are basically unregulated," he says. "Taking them is like getting on
a plane with no metal detector, no FAA scrutiny, a pilot who may or may not be
licensed, and mechanics who may or may not be qualified to do the proper
maintenance. The plane may or may not fly. I wouldn't get on that airplane."

   COLLISION COURSE

   Several medical experts see potential for crashes everywhere and place blame
squarely on DSHEA. The law, passed by Congress and signed by President Clinton,
essentially freed any product that called itself a dietary supplement from
federal regulation before going on the market.

   It can take years and millions of dollars to get a drug approved by the FDA;
a supplement can make it to store shelves in the time it takes to bottle and
deliver it.

   Critics say the law has led to a series of health disasters, many involving
sports supplements. One example is GHB, a dangerous sedative marketed as a
muscle-building supplement and sleep aid from 1994 until 1999. Sold legally
under names such as Verve, Renewtrient and Invigorate, the drug was pulled off
shelves and listed as a controlled substance last year after it was linked with
several fatal overdoses and date rapes. More recently, GHB has been shown to be
as addictive as heroin, and its withdrawal symptoms have been linked to a
half-dozen suicides of body-builders.

   Ephedra products - used as energy boosters and for weight loss - have been
blamed for 80 deaths and more than 1,400 adverse reactions since 1994, according
to the FDA.

   The reason, says Barb Michals, who heads an anti-ephedra organization called
HEAT, is these products are alkaloids of ephedrine, which is the active chemical
in the illegal drug crystal meth. "It's legalized speed, and they're selling it
to kids," Michals says.

   Fifteen-year-old Rosanna Porras died in April 1998 after taking an ephedrine
product before soccer practice at Fillmore (Calif.) High. Coroners concluded she
died of a pre-existing heart condition, but her father believes ephedra caused
her death.

   "Ephedra needs to be regulated by the government," says Henry Porras, who
testified before the California legislature on the need for regulation, "but I
think it will take hundreds of thousands of deaths before anything is done.
Money is more important than human life to legislators."

   Federal regulators attempted to toughen laws on ephedra supplements last
year, but the efforts stalled in the face of a massive lobbying campaign from
the supplement industry. Ephedra manufacturers spent more than $4 million to
beat back stricter regulations in Texas in 1999-2000. In 1999, supplement
companies spent $1 million on federal lobbying alone. According to U.S. News &
World Report, nutritional product companies have contributed more than $10.9
million to Congressional and presidential candidates since 1995.

   With the purchase of companies such as GNC and MetRx by conglomerates with
big-tobacco-like financial and legal clout - and powerful backing in Congress
and the White House - the industry is becoming, if anything, more powerful.

   The lobbying money allows the industry to do a regulatory dance with the
government: The FDA has few resources to research products to see if they're
dangerous, so when regulators try to pull substances, the industry says there's
not enough science to justify it.

   The tangle has slowed efforts to rid stores of hormonal supplements like DHEA
and androstenedione, the so-called Mark McGwire pills.

   "I think andro is still the most dangerous product out there, on a par with
ephedrine," says Dr. Gary Wadler, a Long Island sports physician and expert on
doping."

   Wadler has long warned that andro presents health risks, especially to
teenagers, because it works on the body's endocrine system.

   "Studies show that when people take andro, it increases not only
testosterone, but estrogen," Wadler says. "If estrogen is seen as a cancer risk
that menopausal women should be cautious about when it's prescribed by a doctor,
how is it we accept this risk for teenagers buying something over the counter?"

   Perhaps more frightening is the potential risk for contamination of some
sports supplements with mad-cow disease. Weissmann, a past president of the
American College of Rheumatology, recently outlined the risk on the
Rheumatologyweb.com site, saying chondroitin supplements sold to promote joint
health, and widely used by athletes, may be derived from European cattle - and
potentially contaminated with mad-cow disease.

   A Spanish manufacturer of chondroitin disputed that, saying it uses American
beef and only cattle parts thought to be unable to transmit the disease.

   But Weissmann says under current U.S. laws, there is simply no way to verify
products' origins. "I'm not sure about this stuff, and I worry," says Weissmann.
"When hundreds of thousands are taking ground-up beef cartilage and there's no
certainty where it's from, there's cause for concern. The risk is there."

   PHARM TEAMS

   The huge growth in the sports-supplement industry has changed the face, and
the body, of competition. Supplement use - along with weight training and, many
believe, steroid use - is acknowledged to have contributed to the past decade's
increase in home runs in Major League Baseball.

   "It's enabled a lot of players to maintain fitness and stay in the game
longer," says former Yankee Jim Leyritz, who believes a fitness and supplement
regimen prolonged his big-league tenure.

   But the products have caused some athletes to test positive for banned
substances. A rash of track and field athletes has failed tests for the steroid
nandrolone in the past three years.

   A popular product, 19-norandrostenedione, converts to nandrolone in the human
body, and many sports officials suspect it is snuck into other supplements to
give them a kick. "The majority of nandrolone cases are coming out of
supplements," says the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency's Bowers.

   One such case was pudgy Jets tackle Jason Ferguson, who says a supplement
caused his positive test for steroids and resulted in a four-game suspension in
1999. "All you have to do is look at Jason's body to know he wasn't on them,"
says Jets spokesman Frank Ramos.

   What's legal over the counter and what's banned in sports don't always
overlap. "Our country has taken for granted that what's sold in stores is safe,
so people don't use any caution when they buy these products," Bowers says.

   A generation of athletes conditioned to take substances to improve
performance, says Wadler, will be more likely to misuse the next class of
performance-enhancers - gene-therapy drugs.

   By the 2020 Olympics, muses author John Hoberman, we may be cheering not for
athletes, but "creatures."

   NEW LAW, NO SHERIFF

   Until 1994, mass-market consumption of sports supplements was limited mostly
to skinny teenagers chugging protein shakes. That all changed with DSHEA. Pushed
through by Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah), whose state is a center of the supplement
industry, Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa) and Rep. Dan Burton (R-Ind.), it had massive
congressional support despite warnings by medical groups.

   Designed to get the government off the backs of American vitamin companies
and the budding herbal health business, DSHEA "created a large gap into which
the sports supplement industry jumped," says Bowers. "It really broadened what
could be sold, and it pretty much prohibited the FDA from doing any efficacy or
safety testing."

   Unshackled by FDA laws, hippie health-food gurus rejoiced for the first few
years after DSHEA's passage; then they began noticing a change at their
conventions. Sports supplement booths blared music and screamed claims about
products that could make you bigger and leaner and sexier all at once. The
industry was shifting from "health" to "enhancement," from vegan to Vegas.

   Some of these companies had shady beginnings. Colorado-based EAS was founded
by an admitted steroid user, Bill Phillips, and its magazines featured columns
by Dan Duchaine, the author of "The Underground Steroid Handbook." A felon who
did time for steroid and GHB distribution, Duchaine died last year at the age of
48 from kidney disease.

   MetRx's list of endorsers now includes the Yankees, the Jets' Wayne Chrebet
and the Giants' Jason Sehorn, but in past years they paid bodybuilders Craig
Titus, incarcerated for violating probation on a steroid possession charge, and
Paul DeMayo, given a 30-month sentence for firing a gun during an argument with
his wife.

   MetaboLife founder Michael J. Ellis is a former cop who pleaded guilty in
1990 to charges linking him to a San Diego methamphetamine lab, but he's become
a titan selling legal ephedrine alkaloids to dieters and workout buffs.
According to Salon.com, Ellis' company was projecting sales of about 20 million
bottles of Metabolife 356 last year, or about 225,000 pills every hour.

   Rexall Showcase, which has been absorbed into the giant Royal Numico
conglomerate, is being investigated by the Federal Trade Commission for its
marketing methods, which the government says may amount to a pyramid scheme.

   But consumers have stayed loyal to sports supplements; jock products are a
juggernaut, growing 12% annually.

   "This market is driven by gym participation, and that's increasing," says Van
Winkle, the industry analyst. "It's not strictly driven by marketing."

   Supplement suppliers are entrenched in big-time sports, cutting deals with
many pro teams and elite athletes. Cytodyne Technologies, a supplier of several
sports supplements, is endorsed by all-pro NFL back Marshall Faulk and Giants
wideout Joe Jurevicius. Unicity has consulting agreements with the Rangers,
Knicks and Islanders, and ex-Jet Keith Byars is a distributor. The company
forged a marketing agreement with the Toronto Blue Jays last year, until the
Jays found a more lucrative deal with CytoSport. Members of the Denver Broncos
and the Colorado Avalanche have prominent ties to EAS.

   It isn't just stars who get supplement bucks; the companies provide some of
the only outside endorsement opportunities for non-superstar pro athletes, now
that equipment and sneaker companies have scaled back, says sports agent Joseph
Linta.

   So sports supplements are here to stay. Athletes use them. Politicians and
big money protect them. But few safeguards exist for the average folks who buy
them.

   "At the end of the day, the law still requires that if you want to know if
this stuff is safe or if it works, you as the consumer have to analyze it - not
the government, and not the companies," Wadler says.

   And there's no change on the horizon. For the foreseeable future, the sports
supplement industry is likely to remain a mostly unsupervised experiment in what
the market, and the human body, will bear.

   ABOUT THIS SERIES

   The use of dietary supplements by athletes at all levels, from junior high
football players to major league sluggers, skyrocketed after passage of the
Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994, drastically changing the
way Americans play.

   A Daily News investigation examines the impact of the unregulated supplement
industry on sports.

   TODAY: Many say vitamins, protein shakes and herbal products help athletes
train harder and play better, but others worry that jocks are sacrificing
long-term health for success on the field.

   TOMORROW: The nutritional supplement industry says ephedra-based products are
effective tools to lose weight, boost energy and maximize workouts, but critics
say they cause insomnia, mood swings, heart ailments - even death.

   TUESDAY: A star New York athlete's good friend and personal trainer takes his
own life, and the victim's family blames it on addiction to a now-illegal
dietary supplement.






GRAPHIC: PHOTO ILLUSTRATION BY ED MURAWINSKI DAILY NEWS Barry Bonds   Jim
Leyritz    Orrin Hatch

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2001


                             1682 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JULY 15, 2001 Sunday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1420 words

HEADLINE: Debate rages over stem-cell research, value of human embryos

BYLINE: Marie McCullough INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   First of two articles

   Recently, Terasa and Salvatore Astarita of Lancaster confronted an ethical
dilemma that President Bush is no doubt wrestling with:

   What is the value of a surplus human embryo?

   The President's dilemma involves his review of whether taxpayer dollars
should fund research that destroys embryos in order to get their precious stem
cells.

   For him, these cells - the wellspring of all human tissue and a hope for
treating many diseases - are tangled in the politics of abortion.

   The promise of these embryonic stem cells comes from their seemingly magical
ability to transform themselves into any of the more than 100 kinds of tissue
that make up the human body.

   The Astaritas' dilemma came in the context of a more personal review. Like
thousands of other American couples seeking to have a child, they froze extra
embryos created through in vitro fertilization. After nearly four years, their
clinic sent a letter asking them to consider their options.

   The Astaritas, who now have two adopted children, were willing to donate
their two microscopic progeny to another infertile couple, but they didn't want
to arrange it and their clinic was not set up to do so. They also did not want
their few-day-old embryos - technically, pre-embryos, each with about eight
cells - to stay in frozen limbo or simply be thrown away.

   After some soul-searching, the couple decided to donate the embryos for
research.

   The letter "just brought up all the grieving you go through with
infertility," said Terasa Astarita, a nurse practitioner. "You don't lightly
make the decision of what to do with extra embryos. But I do not think it's a
child; it's not even a fetus. And if they are going to be destroyed anyway, I'd
rather they go to research and know they did some good."

   That reasoning holds moral sway. Polls show most Americans, including a
majority who say they oppose abortion and a majority of Catholics, support
embryo stem-cell research.

   As Boston University bioethicist George J. Annas put it last year in a New
England Journal of Medicine article: "The donation of spare embryos for
important medical research that cannot be conducted by other means is ethically
superior to either destroying them or keeping them perpetually cryopreserved."

   Pamela Madsen, head of the American Infertility Association, said last week:
"In my mind, the fundamental question is why we as a nation aren't doing more to
educate infertile couples" to encourage them to donate spare embryos for
research.

   Creating in vitro embryos solely for stem-cell research is another matter
entirely. There was widespread cringing over last week's news that Virginia
scientists with private funding were doing just that. Critics said it
trivialized and commercialized the use of procreative cells that, while not
human beings, deserve special respect.

   But with anywhere from 100,000 to 250,000 embryos already sitting in
freezers, most destined to die during thawing or to be discarded, President Bush
must figure out: What is their worth?

   To the Catholic Church, which opposes in vitro fertilization in the first
place, they are worth no less than a human being.

   "I find it distressing that many people continue to believe that obtaining
stem cells from living embryos is an acceptable method of research, even though
a living human being is destroyed in the process," wrote Karen Cahill, pro-life
activities administrator for the Archdiocese of Philadelphia, in a letter
published in The Inquirer.

   That view is shared by antiabortion Republican leaders such as Reps. Dick
Armey and Tom DeLay, both of Texas.

   Significantly, it is not shared by some other staunch Republican abortion
foes, notably Sen. Orrin G. Hatch of Utah and former Florida Sen. Connie Mack.
Both support embryo stem-cell research.

   President Bill Clinton's administration sought a middle ground, ruling that
federal money could be used for stem-cell research, but not for extracting the
cells from embryos. Bush suspended this compromise policy in February pending
his review.

   Leading bioethicists say the research should be disentangled from the
abortion debate, but that is not likely to happen.

   In fact, whether or not Bush approves federal support, scientists in
Pennsylvania are prohibited from doing research on in vitro embryos because of
the state's abortion-control law, which was written when embryonic stem cells
were still science fiction.

   Various research restrictions exist in 23 other states, according to Lori B.
Andrews, a law professor at Chicago-Kent College of Law. (Louisiana bans
disposal of a frozen embryo on the grounds that it is a "person.")

   Although some of the laws are so broad and vague that they could be
challenged in court, most researchers don't even realize the laws apply to them,
Andrews said.

   "Given the volatility of the abortion issue, if there is any possibility of
going after a researcher, some pro-life prosecutor in some state will do so,"
Andrews said.

   In many ways, the debate over stem cells echoes the battle over fetal-tissue
transplantation that stung Bush's father a decade ago.

   President George Bush blocked federal funding for the transplant research,
bowing to antiabortion influences but going against patients with Parkinson's
and other diseases, Congress, and even a White House-approved advisory panel.
Clinton lifted the ban after taking office.

   While the elder Bush was barring money for transplants of aborted fetal
tissue, federal dollars were funding other types of research that used aborted
fetal tissue, such as vaccine development.

   Similarly, while stem-cell research has thrown the spotlight on embryos,
taxpayers are now paying for other types of research using human embryonic
tissue. The embryos come from miscarriages or abortions, not IVF clinics,
according to a recent report to the National Institutes of Health by Elisa
Eiseman of the Rand Science and Technology Policy Institute.

   She found, for example, that embryonic tissue is being used for research on
an insulinlike growth factor, an egg follicle-stimulating hormone, and gene
therapy.

   To improve the muddle of what is allowed in public and private labs, the
government should fund all embryo research and develop uniform rules, University
of Pennsylvania bioethicist Arthur Caplan and others say.

   Abortion foes maintain that stem-cell researchers do not need embryos in the
first place. After all, they say, stem cells can be obtained from umbilical-cord
blood and adult tissue.

   "The Catholic Church sees great promise in adult stem-cell research, which
does no harm [and] takes no human life," Cahill wrote.

   She also contended that adult stem cells are often "more effective in
treating illness."

   But since it is anybody's guess which type of stem cells may ultimately help
in cases of incurable diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, scientists
and patients want to pursue all promising avenues.

   Abortion opponents also argue that surplus IVF embryos should be donated to
other infertile couples.

   "No human embryo is 'spare' or 'leftover,' " Republican Rep. Christopher H.
Smith of New Jersey wrote last month in a plea to President Bush. "Every human
embryo, even if he or she can no longer be cared for by their genetic parents,
is needed for implantation and the chance for a good life with an adoptive
couple."

   Nightlight Christian Adoption Agency in California and a few other centers
have begun arranging such "adoptions."

   But there are practical and emotional obstacles, not to mention legal
uncertainties about such high-tech parentage.

   A study at the University of Iowa College of Medicine's IVF clinic - one of
the few that arranges anonymous embryo donation - found that about 90 percent of
couples won't even consider it. Some are put off by required counseling and
health tests. Many find creepy the idea that they might have unknown genetic
offspring - children their own biological children might someday meet and even
marry.

   "Embryo donation is certainly one solution, but it's not going to be the
whole answer" to the surplus embryo problem, said Dr. Bradley Van Voorhis, who
set up the University of Iowa's program.

   No matter what Bush decides, there may be unintended consequences, as science
races on.

   Cautioned lawyer Andrews: "Writing policy is like writing science fiction:
You try to foresee what will happen."

   Marie McCullough's e-mail address is mmccullough@phillynews.com.

   Tomorrow: Are stem cells from adults just as good as those from embryos?

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
VICKI VALERIO, Inquirer Staff Photographer
"I'd rather they go to research and know they did some good," said Terasa
Astarita, with Adelina, of her and her husband's decision to donate their frozen
embryos. Salvatore Astarita plays with Sergio.
VICKI VALERIO, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Terasa and Salvatore Astarita donated their frozen embryos to research. They are
seen with their children, Sergio, 4, and Adelina, 2, in their Lancaster home.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1683 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 12, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 629 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH LEADER EYED FOR FDA BELMONT RESIDENT SAID TO BE FINALIST

BYLINE: By Anne E. Kornblut, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Boston biotechnology executive Michael J. Astrue, chair of the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council and a longtime supporter of the Republican
Party, is a leading contender to become the new head of the Food and Drug
Administration, sources familiar with the selection process said.

   Astrue, 44, a resident of Belmont, is one of three finalists for the federal
post, several sources said. Now a senior executive at a biopharmaceutical
company in Cambridge, Transkaryotic Therapies, Astrue previously worked for both
President Reagan and the former president Bush. In 1989, he began a three-year
stint as general counsel of the US Department of Health and Human Services.

      There he tried a battery of high-profile cases, including an early
government case against discrimination based on HIV status. He has worked at the
heart of the biotechnology industry since returning to Massachusetts in 1992,
spending six years as general counsel to Biogen.

   The private industry side of his resume could provide fodder for Democratic
opponents during confirmation hearings if Astrue is tapped to become FDA
commissioner, which oversees approval of new drugs. The hearings will be chaired
by Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who has made no public comments
on any of the candidates.

   But Astrue's associates in Boston yesterday said it would be difficult to
portray him as beholden to the drug industry, despite his work for Biogen, given
the years he spent as a government lawyer in Washington after graduating from
Harvard Law School.

   "He spent 10 years in the public sector," said Janice Bourque, CEO of the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council. "His knowledge of the drug discovery and
drug development process is as extensive as anyone I know. . . . And his general
understanding of how important it is to get products to patients makes him an
interesting candidate."

   Lee Rawls, vice president for government relations at Bio, the Biotechnology
Industry Organization based in Washington, said the group "would strongly
support him."

   "He's been confirmed before, he's a decent guy, and at Biogen he's done
nothing but make friends with [Democratic senators] Kennedy and (John) Kerry,"
said one Republican official. Asked to predict whether Astrue would get
confirmed, the official replied, "absolutely."

   Reached through his Cambridge firm, Astrue declined to comment. White House
officials did not return a call for comment.

   Sources said Astrue has not yet spoken with HHS Secretary Tommy Thompson, who
is leading the search, although he has been in "fairly intense" discussions with
others at HHS and with White House officials.  Thompson, whose first round of
interviewing FDA candidates led to a dead-end earlier this year, had not made a
decision as of Monday, one Republican source said.

   Astrue is, by several accounts, a devout Republican and supporter of the Bush
family. In addition to donating $1,000 to the George W. Bush campaign, as well
as $5,000 to the Massachusetts Republican Party last spring, Astrue helped with
two Bush fund-raisers and gave surrogate speeches during the campaign. He also
served on Governor Paul Cellucci's transition team in 1999.

   Since the Bush administration came to power in January, Astrue has been
considered for several other positions, at least one of them "very senior," an
official said. But the FDA job has progressed much further, several officials
said.

   Although one of the most controversial FDA decisions - about approving the
abortion-inducing pill RU-486 - has already been made, there are other sensitive
matters on the horizon for the new FDA chief, including the reauthorization of
prescription drug user fees, the 1992 law that helped speed up the approval
process.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2001


                             1684 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 12, 2001 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-9

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: PITT MAY FIGHT LUNG CANCER WITH GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Gene therapy that improves the treatment of lung cancer is one of several
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute projects that will be funded by a
special $12 million, five-year federal grant.

    The National Cancer Institute has awarded the grant, called a Specialized
Program of Research Excellence, only six times since 1992. Other recipients
include such leading research centers as Johns Hopkins University and the M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas.

    "The results of the research funded through this SPORE will have an
unparalleled impact on the way lung cancer is treated in the future," said Dr.
Ronald Herberman, UPCI director.

    The grant will help support a clinical trial using gene therapy that could
be recruiting participants by the start of next year. It will involve a gene
that produces an antioxidant protein that defends cells from destruction by
toxins, said Dr. Joel Greenberger, a director of the Lung Cancer Center,

    He speculated that with more protein, healthy cells might withstand the
rigors of standard lung cancer treatments, and side effects could be reduced. If
so, higher radiation doses could be used to kill a tumor without causing greater
harm to the patient.

    Radiation for lung cancer usually causes at least some inflammation of the
esophagus. Patients may have trouble swallowing, be unable to eat, or even
develop perforations in the esophagus. Up to a quarter of patients will develop
severe problems.

    In lab and animal tests, Greenberger inserted the gene that makes the
protective protein, called manganese superoxide dismutase, or MnSOD, into
esophagus cells. The gene was encased in a fatty coat, called a liposome, that
carries it into the cell.

    The inserted gene produces the protective protein for two or three days, and
then stops.

    The researchers found that treated cells were not harmed by doses of
radiation known to damage normal cells. Tumor cells, though, were still
vulnerable to radiation-induced destruction.

    "All of the toxicity studies and the animal studies suggest that this is
going to be a very good way to protect specific organs from radiation damage,"
Greenberger said.

    In the proposed clinical trial, which is currently under review by federal
and university watchdogs, lung cancer patients would swallow about a tablespoon
of gene therapy on Mondays and Wednesdays while undergoing standard,
five-times-a-week radiation therapy.

    "It's a sweet-tasting gelatinous type of material," Greenberger said.

    The research team initially will be checking to see if the therapy has toxic
effects, but they hope to see that patients have fewer side effects in the
esophagus.

    Under the SPORE grant, Greenberger is developing an inhaled version of the
MnSOD gene therapy with the goal of protecting healthy lung tissue from
radiation-induced scarring.

    Only 14 percent of lung cancer patients are alive five years after
treatment.

    Because of the side effects, "we are limited in how much radiation we can
give," Greenberger explained.

    "We're only able to give a dose that is likely to cure 20 to 30 percent of
patients. We're hopeful that this will allow us to increase the dose of
radiation so that this can cure a lot more patients."

    Jill Siegfried, another director of the Lung Cancer Center and the SPORE
principal investigator, will lead two studies under the grant that further her
exploration of gender differences in susceptibility to the disease.

    A gene linked to abnormal cell growth is more active in women than in men
and may make women more likely to develop the disease. She will also study the
effects of estrogen and its effect on tumor growth.

    Other researchers will be looking at the immunological aspects of lung
cancer and at CT imaging techniques to detect the disease in its earliest
stages.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2001


                             1685 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    July 11, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
GENZYME DIAGNOSTICS REACHES AGREEMENT WITH SYN-X PHARMA

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI and JEFFREY KRASNER

BODY:

   Genzyme Diagnostics yesterday said it has reached a new agreement with
Canada's SYN-X Pharma to continue developing a blood test to diagnose, manage,
and monitor stroke patients.

   Genzyme orginally licensed the testing technology in 1999 from Skye
PharmaTech Inc., which later changed its name to SYN-X.

      The new deal replaces an earlier agreement, Genzyme said, resolving "all
prior disputes" between the com-panies.

   Genzyme Diagnostics, a unit of Cambridge's Genzyme Corp., retains the right
to develop and market NeuroTrak and will pay SYN-X royalties on any sales.

   But Genzyme will not make additional investments in SYN-X, forfeiting the
right of first refusal to license other SYN-X technologies.

   The companies did not disclose additional details about the financial terms
of the agreement.

   Now that the deal is settled, however, Genzyme said, it can focus on
finishing the test's development. Known as the NeuroTrak stroke panel, the test
would help determine whether and what type of stroke a patient had suffered.

   Stroke is the third-leading cause of death in the United States, killing
nearly 160,000 people every year. Each year, more than 750,000 Americans have a
first or recurrent stroke, according to the National Stroke Association.

   TRANSKARYOTIC AWARDED PATENT FOR SEQUENCE OF GENETIC CODE

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge said it was awarded a US patent for
a sequence of genetic code that is responsible for a rare neurological disorder.
The discovery of the gene sequence responsible for Sanfilippo syndrome was made
at Women and Children's Hospital in North Adelaide, Australia, and licensed to
Transkaryotic.

   While only a small number of people are affected by the rare genetic
disorder, Transkaryotic officials said the patent is an important part of its
growing "niche protein" intellectual property portfolio.

   "Our experience in designing therapies for rare diseases to date will allow
us to develop molecules that we believe will appropriately target affected
organs," Michael J. Astrue, senior vice president, said in a statement.

   In January, the company lost a bitter court battle with Amgen Inc. of
California over rights to a drug that treats anemia. The company said it would
appeal. Last week, Transkaryotic said it had completed a secondary stock
offering, raising $100 million.

   Shares in Transkaryotic yesterday fell $1.92 to close at $30.05 on volume of
621,500 shares.

   ASPECT MEDICAL SHARES PLUMMET ON WARNING OF IMPENDING LOSS

   Blaming competition and reductions in spending by hospitals, Aspect Medical
Systems Inc., a developer of an anesthesia-monitoring systems, said its
second-quarter loss is likely to be wider than analysts expected.

   Shares in the Newton company, which had risen 61 percent this year, plummeted
$2.71, or 20 percent, to $11.19 on the news. Aspect said it expects a loss of 24
cents per share in the second quarter, wider than the 20-cent average estimated
loss from analysts polled by First Call/Thomson Financial.

   The company had forecast a loss of 19 cents to 24 cents per share. "The
second half of the year will clearly be challenging," chief executive Nassib
Chamoun said in a statement. Physiometrix Inc. and Baxter International Inc.
market a monitoring system that competes with Aspect's.

   The company said in June that the Food and Drug Administration had approved a
new version of its monitoring system. Aspect Medical is scheduled to report
second-quarter earnings July 18. (Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2001


                             1686 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Part 3; Financial Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: California;
IN BRIEF / Southland;
J&J, Amgen Settle Drug Patent Dispute

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Johnson & Johnson and its licensing partner, Amgen Inc., said they settled a
long-standing patent dispute with Roche Holding and an American Home Products
Corp. unit over their anemia drug, erythropoietin.

   Financial terms weren't disclosed.

   J&J and Amgen had sued Roche, which sells a version of the drug in Europe
called NeoRecormon. Roche licenses the drug from American Home Products'
Genetics Institute Inc.

   The settlement allows Roche to continue selling its product in Europe, said
J&J spokesman Marc Monseau. The agreement comes three months after Amgen won a
British court ruling that Roche, Aventis and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. had
infringed the biotechnology company's patent.

   All lawsuits, which were pending in about 30 countries, will be dropped, a
Roche spokesman said.

   A spokesman for AHP declined to comment.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen sells the drug as Epogen in the U.S. and J&J sells
it as Procrit in the U.S. and Eprex in Europe.

   Amgen shares fell $1.19 to $57.53 on Nasdaq, while J&J rose 38 cents to
$52.50 on the NYSE.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                             1687 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 11, 2001 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: FDA TO REGULATE FERTILITY PROCEDURE FOR FIRST TIME

BYLINE: RICK WEISS, THE WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration has informed doctors that a controversial
class of fertility treatments that until now has been performed without
government oversight can only be performed with the agency's approval, marking
the federal government's first significant foray into regulating the fertility
field.

    The FDA has long maintained that it has the authority to regulate fertility
practices -- a claim that some in the field doubt is legally assured -- and has
been edging toward doing so for many years. Until now, however, that oversight
has been essentially limited to fertility doctors' use of drugs and medical
devices, a level of regulation that has not raised alarms within the specialty
since the agency regulates those areas in medicine generally.

    The new assertion of authority, noted in a letter sent to fertility clinics
July 6 and posted Monday on the agency's Web site, differs in that it relates to
fertility procedures. Medical procedures generally fall under the category of
"the practice of medicine," which the FDA does not usually oversee out of
respect for doctors' freedom to treat their patients as they see fit.

    Specifically, the FDA is now demanding that fertility doctors fill out an
Investigational New Drug application, or IND -- the same form that
pharmaceutical companies fill out when they want to test a new drug in human
subjects -- if they want to conduct experimental fertility procedures that
involve the mixing of male and female genetic material in any way other than the
straightforward union of sperm and egg.

    Fertility clinics operate largely outside the purview of federal oversight,
in part because a ban on federal funding of embryo research has pushed such work
deep into the private sector. But regulators have been paying more attention in
recent years as sophisticated technologies have led the field into a gray area
of medicine that some consider to be nothing less than human experimentation,
which the FDA regulates no matter how it is funded.

    The new oversight will apply most immediately to a technique being offered
at a small but growing number of fertility clinics, in which fluids from a young
woman's egg are injected into an infertile woman's egg before that older woman's
egg is fertilized by her husband's sperm. In the course of that procedure,
largely pioneered at the St. Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J., a few
genes typically come along with the fluid from the young donor egg. As a result,
children born by the technique have been shown to contain genes from three
parents: the two primary parents and, to a much lesser extent, the woman who
donated fluids from her young egg.

    Although there is no proof that the genetic blend will be problematic for
children born with it, the FDA said it wants to be sure that proper precautions
are being taken to minimize risks and that long-term followup exams are part of
the treatment plan.

    "It may or may not lead to a disease, but it certainly is a condition that
is not normally found in humans. Really, we are saying, 'This is an experiment,'
" said Phil Noguchi, director of FDA's division of cellular and gene therapies.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                             1688 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            July 11, 2001 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: FDA to Regulate Certain Fertilization Procedures

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    The Food and Drug Administration has informed doctors that a controversial
class of fertility treatments that until now has been performed without
government oversight can only be performed with the agency's approval, marking
the federal government's first significant foray into regulating the fertility
field.

    The FDA has long maintained that it has the authority to regulate fertility
practices -- a claim that some in the field doubt is legally assured -- and has
been edging toward doing so for many years. Until now, however, that oversight
has been essentially limited to fertility doctors' use of drugs and medical
devices, a level of regulation that has not raised alarms within the specialty
since the agency regulates those areas in medicine generally.

    The new assertion of authority, noted in a letter sent to fertility clinics
July 6 and posted on the agency's Web site on Monday, differs in that it relates
to fertility procedures. Medical procedures generally fall under the category of
"the practice of medicine," which the FDA does not usually oversee out of
respect for doctors' freedom to treat their patients as they see fit.

    Specifically, the FDA is now demanding that fertility doctors fill out an
Investigational New Drug application, or IND -- the same form that
pharmaceutical companies fill out when they want to test a new drug in human
subjects -- if they want to conduct experimental fertility procedures that
involve the mixing of male and female genetic material in any way other than the
straightforward union of sperm and egg.

    Fertility clinics operate largely outside the purview of federal oversight,
in part because a ban on federal funding of embryo research has pushed such work
deep into the private sector. But regulators have been paying more attention in
recent years as sophisticated technologies have led the field into a gray area
of medicine that some consider to be nothing less than human experimentation,
which the FDA regulates no matter how it is funded.

    The new oversight will apply most immediately to a technique being offered
at a small but growing number of fertility clinics, in which fluids from a young
woman's egg are injected into an infertile woman's egg before that older woman's
egg is fertilized by her husband's sperm. In the course of that procedure,
largely pioneered at the St. Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston, N.J., a few
genes typically come along with the fluid from the young donor egg. As a result,
children born by the technique have been shown to contain genes from three
parents: the two primary parents and, to a much lesser extent, the woman who
donated fluids from her young egg.

    Although there is no proof that the genetic blend will be problematic for
children born with it, the FDA wants to be sure that proper precautions are
being taken to minimize risks and that long-term followup exams are part of the
treatment plan, agency officials said.

    "It may or may not lead to a disease, but it certainly is a condition that
is not normally found in humans. Really we are saying, 'This is an experiment,'
" said Phil Noguchi, director of FDA's division of cellular and gene therapies.

    Officials said the agency had sent the letter to the half-dozen or so
clinics known to be offering the procedure, with more letters likely to go out
as other clinics are identified. Reaction from doctors yesterday ranged from
accommodation to frustration.

    "We are evaluating the letter . . . and will do whatever the federal
government requires," wrote Robin Lally, director of public relations at Saint
Barnabas.

    "An investigational new drug application for a medical procedure is kind of
a stretch," said Jamie Grifo, a fertility doctor at New York University Medical
Center who gained FDA attention several years ago when he tried to enhance
pregnancy rates in women by transferring their genes into younger women's eggs.
"We make drugs called embryos, I guess, so now we have to be regulated by the
FDA as though we are Pfizer or something."

    Grifo said fertility doctors had done a good job of regulating themselves,
and he blamed exaggerated media reports for bringing the wrath of the FDA on the
field. "Is this really going to help people?" he asked. "Or is this just another
example of bigger government?"

    The FDA letter states that the agency gains the relevant authority in part
from an eight-year-old regulation governing the exchange of genetic material
between people. That regulation was written mostly to deal with genetic
treatments for diseases, such as gene therapy. But it is applicable to fertility
practices, officials said, when genes are exchanged in ways more novel than the
age-old method of sperm-meets-egg.

    Some experts yesterday said they were not convinced that the FDA was on
solid legal ground.

    "There are interesting questions looming," said Sean Tipton, a spokesman for
the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, the largest professional group
for fertility specialists. "You're tweaking eggs in these published cases, so
what is the product you're regulating? The egg? The child? I think there are
legal and scientific questions that need to be answered before we can say we
agree with the FDA completely on this."

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2001


                             1689 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 9, 2001, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: FIRM SETS UP IN CAMBRIDGE

BYLINE: BY ROSS KERBER, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   The intellectual property law firm of Finnegan, Henderson, Farabow, Garrett &
Dunner said it plans to open an office in Cambridge to serve clients, including
local biotechnology and pharmaceutical firms.

   With more than 250 attorneys, Washington, D.C.-based Finnegan Henderson bills
itself as the largest US firm specializing in intellectual property law.

      In Cambridge, Finnegan Henderson said it will have up to a dozen lawyers
in the office by this fall, at 245 First Street, and that it plans to have
around 25 attorneys there in coming years.

   Current local clients include Genetics Institute, Millennium Pharmaceuticals,
and TransKaryotic Therapies, as well as technology companies like Sun
Microsystems and Agilent, the law firm said.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2001


                             1690 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        July 9, 2001 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 02G

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: Researchers explore enzyme replacement

BYLINE:  Written and compiled by Kawanza L. Griffin

BODY:

   Replacing a missing enzyme in people with Fabry's disease reverses the damage
caused by the rare inherited disorder, according to a study in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   People with the disease lack an enzyme called alpha-galactosidase A, which
breaks down a fatty substance in the body. Without the enzyme, the substance
accumulates in blood vessels, leading to kidney failure, heart attack or stroke.

   Symptoms include pain in the feet and hands, a skin rash and the inability to
sweat.

   Researchers from Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York gave Fabry
patients intravenous infusions of genetically engineered alpha-galactosidase A
and found that it cleared deposits from the kidneys, heart and skin.

   Deposits of the fatty substance were cleared in 20 of the 29 patients,
compared to none in the control group.

   Deposits also were reduced significantly in the skin and heart, the
researchers reported.

   The biotech company Genzyme Corp., which paid for the study, is seeking
government approval to market the enzyme as Fabrazyme in the United States and
Europe.

   A second company, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., also has applied for approval
of its own enzyme replacement therapy, called Replagal.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2001


                             1691 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                              July 8, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1814 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell research debate heats up;
Congress divided over use of human embryos

BYLINE: By Bill Walsh; Washington bureau

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- It's been three years since scientists announced that
microscopic "stem cells" harvested from frozen human embryos could hold the
promise of cures for such illnesses as Parkinson's disease, diabetes, heart
disease and Alzheimer's.

   The breakthrough provided a ray of hope for millions of Americans suffering
from those debilitating and often fatal illnesses. But it was viewed very
differently by some right-to-life groups and the Catholic Church, which believe
that destroying embryos for research -- no matter how stunning the cures it
offers -- is nothing short of murder.

   President Bush is being tugged by those competing views as he considers
whether to authorize federal financing for embryonic stem cell research. In the
process, he must also contend with the political implications of what has
suddenly become a hot issue on Capitol Hill.

   The debate touches on basic questions about when life begins and the role of
the government in research. Already it has splintered the Republican Party, with
some of the staunchest anti-abortion lawmakers extolling the potential benefits
of stem cell research, while others have condemned it as "an industry of death."

   Members of Louisiana's generally conservative congressional delegation, most
of whom have anti-abortion voting records, face a similar quandary as they weigh
those issues against the potential for finding lifesaving medical cures. Some
simply refuse to say how they would vote.

   Congress already is on record as opposing scientific experiments on human
embryos. In 1995, it passed a law that prohibits research "in which human
embryos are destroyed."

Promising research

   But the ban has come to be seen in a new light as the promise of research
into embryonic stem cells has grown. Undeveloped "pluripotent stem cells" are
believed to have the ability to grow into virtually any other kind of cell in
the human body, replenishing those that have been diseased.

   Scientists theorize that the cells could be coaxed into becoming bone marrow
for the treatment of cancers and sickle cell anemia, pancreatic cells that could
help cure diabetes, and neuronal cells for the treatment of Parkinson's,
Alzheimer's and various brain and spinal cord injuries.

   A recent report by the National Institutes of Health, a medical research
center under the Department of Health and Human Services, concluded that stem
cells from human embryos offer a "dazzling array" of potential treatments.

   In August, President Clinton sidestepped the congressional ban by allowing
the NIH to finance the research as long as public money was not used to extract
the cells from the embryos. That, he said, would have to be paid for privately.
While there are no restrictions on privately financed labs, scientists would
like to tap into the huge reserves of federal tax dollars being directed at
disease research, and watchdogs would like the oversight that federally financed
research brings.

   Rep. David Vitter, R-Metairie, criticized the former president's
interpretation as "just Clintonian word manipulation" and believes the
congressional ban on embryo research is ironclad.

Bush grappling with issue

   On the campaign trail, Bush vowed to undo the Clinton policy. He reiterated
his views in a May 18 letter to the anti-abortion group Culture of Life
Foundation Inc., saying he opposes federal money for research "that involves
destroying living human embryos."

   But Bush has not yet acted on the Clinton policy, and even within his own
administration Bush finds competing views. Health Secretary Tommy Thompson
heartily supported embryonic stem cell research when he was governor of
Wisconsin, where some of the original discoveries were made. But Bush's chief
political adviser, Karl Rove, is opposed to the research and fears that a
Clinton-like compromise would alienate a key voting bloc: Catholics.

   A spokesman said Bush would make an announcement by the end of the month, but
he is not expected to say anything before his July 23 meeting with Pope John
Paul II.

   The church's opposition is rooted in the belief that life begins at
conception and that the embryos, even though frozen, are alive.

   "The embryos are human beings made in the image and likeness of God," said
the Rev. William Maestri, a professor of moral philosophy at Notre Dame Seminary
in New Orleans. "We believe it is an unjust attack on innocent human life that
we must defend and speak out against."

   Maestri said that the church is not "anti-science or anti-technology," but
that experimenting with cells derived from human embryos does not justify the
results, no matter how promising medically.

   "I don't know that the aim of medicine or science is to cure everyone of
every illness in every circumstance without looking at the means we are using to
achieve these goals," Maestri said.

   The embryos generally are housed at fertility clinics where couples
struggling to have children have preserved them for in-vitro fertilization.
Typically the embryos are frozen when they are a few days old and generally
consist of 100 to 200 cells. There are more embryos than can be implanted at one
time, so the extras are eventually thrown out or left frozen indefinitely.

   Instead of disposing of them, researchers would like to extract the stem
cells in their search for cures. The problem is that the embryos are destroyed
in the process.

   Some critics would like to see donor couples offered another choice: giving
them up for adoption. One Christian-affiliated adoption agency in California,
known as Snowflakes, has linked two dozen sets of genetic parents with adopting
families. Through the end of last year, of 14 women implanted with embryos, six
had become pregnant and eight babies had been born.

Some fear slippery slope

   Critics also predict that government support could legitimize experimentation
with embryos and give rise to a host of new ethical questions. Will couples
create embryos just for research? Could a market develop for them? Will they be
grown as replacement parts? Would the government be giving a boost to cloning
research that relies on stem-cell regeneration?

   "Science is an all-consuming fire, and the need to know is all-consuming,"
Dr. Anton-Lewis Usala, founder of a North Carolina biomedical company, told a
congressional committee last fall as he warned against financing for embryonic
research.

   The issue is a difficult balance for the Republican Party, which
traditionally has united under the anti-abortion banner. Last week, three House
leaders -- Majority Leader Dick Armey of Texas, Majority Whip Tom DeLay of
Texas, and Republican Conference Chairman J.C. Watts of Oklahoma -- called on
the Bush administration to block financing of embryonic stem-cell research,
saying, "It is not pro-life to rely on an industry of death, even if the
intention is to find cures for diseases."

   Rep. Billy Tauzin, R-Chackbay, agreed, saying that destroying an embryo is
the same as aborting it, which he opposes. A day after the leaders spoke out,
however, it became clear just how divided the Republican Party is on the issue.
Rep. Amo Houghton, R-N.Y., speaking on behalf of the 60-member Republican Main
Street Partnership, a moderate GOP group, urged the president to seize the
chance to find cures for diseases and push ahead with federal financing.

   Conservative Sens. Strom Thurmond, R-S.C., and Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, also have
come out strongly in favor.

   "I just cannot equate a child living in the womb, a child with moving toes
and fingers and a beating heart, with an embryo about to be taken from a freezer
and which will be lawfully discarded if we don't use it for the benefit of
mankind," Hatch said recently.

   That view is shared by Rep. John Cooksey, a Republican eye doctor from
Monroe. Despite his own anti-abortion voting record, Cooksey said that to ignore
potential life-saving research would be irresponsible and to delay risks lives
that might be saved.

   "If we had not done medical research over the years, some of which is
controversial at times, we would be in the dark ages of medicine," Cooksey said.
Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., who likely will be challenged by Cooksey next year,
declined to say what her position is. Sen. John Breaux, D-La., also refused.
Rep. Chris John, D-Crowley, did not respond to inquires, and Rep. William
Jefferson, D-New Orleans, said he favors all forms of stem cell research.

The polls speak

   The opposing sides have pointed to public opinion surveys to support their
positions. An NBC/Wall Street Journal poll found overwhelming support for the
research, including 72 percent of white Catholics. But a poll by the U.S.
Catholic Conference, which noted in its question that "live embryos would be
destroyed in their first week of development," found 70 percent opposition.

   Embryonic research isn't the only kind of stem cell experimentation that has
shown promise. Research on so-called adult stem cells, usually extracted from
bone marrow, has actually posted a more impressive clinical record than
embryonic stem cells. In experiments, adult stem cells have developed into bone,
cartilage, muscle, liver and brain tissue. One bill before Congress by Rep.
Chris Smith, R-N.J., would set up a stem cell donor bank that would encourage
research into other cells besides those from embryos.

   Embryonic stem cells are more alluring to scientists because they offer even
more variation than adult cells and regenerate more quickly. However, that
virtue has been found to be a vice in some cases as the speedy growth has made
them more likely to develop into tumors.

   Most scientists involved in genetic research would prefer to have federal
financing for research on both kinds of stem cells.

   "There are compelling reasons why both types of research needs to be
pursued," said Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of Tulane University Medical
School's Center for Gene Therapy, which specializes in adult stem cell research.


Debate is here to stay

   Regardless of what Bush does, the issue is not expected to go away anytime
soon. Both sides have vowed to press their cases in Congress.

   High-profile activists, such as actors Michael J. Fox, who was diagnosed with
Parkinson's in 1991, and Mary Tyler Moore, who has had juvenile diabetes for
more than 30 years, have stepped up the pressure on Congress to finance the
research.

   At the same time, the National Right to Life Committee is pressing
anti-abortion members to vote against it. In a June 6 letter to members, the
group warned that any votes in favor of embryonic cell research would be
tabulated in the group's annual congressional report cards.

   "We expect this will be a live issue in Congress for much of the rest of the
year," said Douglas Johnson, spokesman for the group.

   . . . . . . .

Bill Walsh can be reached at bill.walsh@newhouse.com or (202) 383-7817.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2001


                             1692 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                        July 6, 2001 Friday Late Edition

SECTION: SPT; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Golf for MD

BYLINE: Paul Daugherty

BODY:

   Take time to play for "little guy'

   By Paul Daugherty

   He is a golf pro who hasn't played nine holes in two years. The last time
Harry Alexander walked onto the 1st tee and off the 9th green, the little guy
was 5 and the world was perfect.

   That's what Harry calls his 7-year-old son, Grant. The little guy. The little
guy is a towhead who loves swimming, math and chicken nuggets from Burger King.
Grant made all A's in first grade this year and if he had a wish, it might be to
run up the steps to his room or ride his bike down the driveway.

   Until a year ago, Grant Alexander was a child getting physical therapy for
his weak muscles. Now, he is a victim of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, as
diagnosed last spring. This is a nasty disease for kids, as nasty as they come.

   Sometimes the world flies so off course, all you can do is hold on with
everything you've got. Harry's doing that now, with his wife, Terri. He is the
golf pro at Miami Whitewater, but his mind is almost never on golf.

   When it comes to Grant, Harry has learned never to say "tomorrow." As in,
"I'm too busy now, I'll take you to the zoo tomorrow. If you do that too much .
. ." Harry stops.

   Time is now

   The tomorrows run out.

   "Any free moment I've got, I'm spending it with the little guy," he says.

   It's awful knowing someone who is terribly sick. The despair is beyond
knowing when that person is a child.

   Here's what eases the pain. Here's what points a flashlight at the nightmare:
working for a cure. Working like there is nothing else, because when you think
about it, what else is there when a little boy's life is involved?

   "The researchers are very, very close," Harry says. He mentions stem cell and
genetic therapy advances and new drugs to extend life, "so the little guy can be
around when they find a cure."

   They need money. There is a bill in Congress now that would authorize $100
million for DMD research. In the meantime, there is a group called the Parent
Project Muscular Dystrophy, which raises money and hope.

   Golf benefit

   Harry's holding on to his spinning world and fighting the way he knows. He's
hosting the Parent Project golf outing in a couple weeks, proceeds to benefit
DMD research.

   What are you doing July 23? It's a Monday.

   Check your calendar. Do you play golf? Do you know three other people who
play?

   Would you, for a day, stop saying "tomorrow" and get your three buddies
together and go over to the Vineyard, one of the best public courses in
Cincinnati, and play 18 holes for Grant Alexander?

   It's $600 a foursome, for golf, a cart, lunch, dinner, prizes and help for a
little boy who didn't ask for any of this.

   In 18 years at Miami Whitewater, Harry figures he has taught 20,000 people to
play golf. What he needs now is a lesson in faith. What are you doing Monday,
July 23? Playing golf to help save a kid's life seems a fine way to spend a
summer afternoon.

   "In the next few years, it's going to be like science fiction." This is how
the doctors describe the progress they hope will be made against DMD. "All we're
trying to do is buy time," Harry says.

   Harry Alexander has dreams for his son. Here's the biggest: "I dream of the
day," he says, "when he can play nine holes with me."

   Contact Paul Daugherty at 768-8454; fax: 768-8550; e-mail:
pdaugherty@enquirer.com. Cincinnati.Com keyword: Daugherty.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             1693 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 6, 2001 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: PART A; Part 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1694 words

HEADLINE: THE WORLD;
;
Germany Mulls a Leap Across Genetics Threshold;
Science: The nation is struggling to find a proper role in advancing such
technology without appearing to disregard its dark past.

BYLINE: CAROL J. WILLIAMS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

   As befits a country in the global scientific vanguard, Germany is engaged in
weighty debate about what limits researchers should impose on themselves when
the possibilities of genetic engineering seem boundless.

   But divisive moral discussions about cloning, embryonic stem cell research
and screening eggs for genetic defects are ever more complicated in this nation
that once turned to eugenics in a quest to build a master race.

   The Third Reich and its deranged pursuits were defeated 56 years ago, and
Germany today is highly sensitive to the ethical quandaries that are the
byproducts of scientific progress. Still, the long shadow of the Nazi era is
darkening the already emotional discussions about how much humans should be
allowed to manipulate their own species.

   More so than in other leading genetic technology powers, doctors and
scientists in Germany are at odds about whether they have a right to impregnate
the infertile, abort the imperfect or harvest from embryos cells that could
generate healthy organs for adults whose own parts have failed them.

   From politicians to medical professionals, in laboratories and lecture halls
and church pulpits, Germans are struggling to find their proper role in
advancing genetic technology without stirring fears that they have failed to
heed history's lessons.

   The subject is so sensitive that a government decision on a funding request
by Bonn University researchers to produce replacement tissue for defective
organs was postponed this week until December. It was the third time this year
that the federal research funding agency, seemingly paralyzed by the divisive
debate about how much can ethically be done to improve the human condition,
stepped back from its stated support for the groundbreaking project.

   Research on human embryos is forbidden in Germany, as is their creation for
use other than in vitro fertilization for childless couples. A loophole allowing
the importation of fertilized eggs and a booming biotechnology industry are
driving sentiment in business quarters for change, but opponents warn of
"playing God."

   "I'm worried because the discussion right now is rather fundamentalist and
divided," said Ernst-Ludwig Winnacker, head of the German Research Society,
which functions like a cross between the U.S. National Institutes of Health and
the National Science Foundation. "Many people don't seem to listen. They already
have their opinions that don't permit any leeway."

   Each postponement of the decision by Winnacker's agency on the proposal by
Bonn genetics professor Oliver Bruestle has been made to accommodate the
ever-expanding debate and a newly appointed state ethics council.

   While government officials are taking a go-slow approach, German scientists
note that they are still recovering from a biotech brain drain in the 1980s and
need to keep pace with peers in the United States, Britain and Japan if they are
to be a leader in the life sciences field.

   The question of whether Nazi Germany's gross abuses with human
experimentation should now force this country into a less prominent role in
genetic engineering went unspoken until President Johannes Rau brought it
abruptly into the open this spring.

   Nation Seeks to Be Held to Universal Standard

   In a watershed speech May 18, Rau even called into question the
appropriateness of in vitro fertilization, contending, "There is no right to
children." But while opposing such technology, he defended Germany's right to be
held to the same standard as other countries.

   "Eugenics, euthanasia and selection: These are terms with terrible
connotations in Germany. They therefore--rightly--provoke emotional resistance,"
Rau said. "Nevertheless, I consider the argument that we Germans should not do
certain things because of our history quite wrong and misleading."

   Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, while praising Rau's assertion that the dignity
of the human being is inviolable, rebutted with the view that genetic
engineering is "the key technology of this century, without which we could
hardly secure the future well-being of our children and grandchildren."

   "It is also moral not to forget about people with serious illnesses who could
be healed or comforted with medications produced through genetic technology,"
Schroeder told the weekly Der Spiegel. "And it is also part of our moral
responsibility to foster the creation of jobs and prosperity."

   Heeding the widespread wariness over genetic engineering, however, Schroeder
applauded the latest delay in funding stem-cell research as "appropriate and
reasonable" given the work's sensitivity.

   Until his appointment to the nonpartisan presidency two years ago, Rau had
been a lifelong member of the left-of-center Social Democrats now headed by
Schroeder. That the head of state and the chancellor have such markedly
different perspectives on genetic research is telling of the deep rifts running
through German political, professional and religious circles.

   The opposition Christian Democrats are equally discordant in their views on
how to advance genetic technology without fostering an environment in which
prospective parents could pick and choose physical characteristics of their
children.

   Juergen Ruettgers, an education minister in former Chancellor Helmut Kohl's
Cabinet, drafted a position paper for the conservatives advocating changing the
current restrictions. But no sooner was his vision outlined for party colleagues
in May than fellow Christian Democrats were sounding the alarm against "clearing
the path to selection" and creating life for experimental purposes.

   In the worlds of business and science, the promise of longer, healthier lives
through gene therapy and organ replacement outweighs the fears of abuse.
Especially in eastern Germany, which has become a magnet for biotech start-ups
because of its highly skilled yet affordable work force and generous investment
subsidies, life sciences are seen as an important contribution to growth.

   "Biotech is not an industry where thousands of people are employed, but it's
important to the development of a whole range of other industries," said Hans
Christoph von Rohr, head of the Industrial Investment Council, which is charged
with drawing investment into the formerly Communist eastern states. "Biotech is
the little bit of spice in big industries like pharmaceuticals, plant genetics
and health care."

   Since Germany introduced a law in 1996 allowing human gene studies, many of
the native scientists who had moved to the United States in the 1980s have
returned to initiate a biotech boom in their homeland.

   Research centers in the east, namely Gatersleben, Rostock and the Berlin
suburb of Buch, have shot to the fore with the infusion of capital from state
and private investors, less constrained than their western colleagues by
religion or a feeling of collective guilt for World War II abuses.

   While popular resistance may be stronger in the west, many in the scientific
community are keenly interested in an easing of restrictions.

   Companies such as Schering recognize the need for broad public discussion of
the ethics of human engineering, said pharmacology spokeswoman Claudia Schmidt,
noting that the intensity of the debate here "has something to do with our
past."

   "But other European countries are able to do this research, and we believe
Germany should have the same standards as in the United States or the United
Kingdom," she said. "Otherwise we will be unable to develop the medications and
therapies that will become available elsewhere."

   Schmidt noted that German scientists need only a few embryos for developing
cell lines and generating tissue, and that thousands of fertilized eggs that
will never be used for implantation are already frozen and stored in the
country.

   "There's no need to produce more for at least 10 or 20 years," she said,
adding that the swift pace of advancement in genetic technology could well
overtake the need for human embryos in the laboratory by then.

   Opponents, however, argue that quantity is irrelevant to the moral issue. Any
interference with an embryo violates the sanctity of human life, defined in the
1990 law banning embryo research as beginning from the moment of fertilization.

   Both Evangelical and Roman Catholic clergymen used their Pentecost Sunday
sermons last month to urge parishioners to reject all forms of embryo research.
Cardinal Joachim Meisner of Cologne contended that production of human tissue
constitutes "a type of cannibalism."

   "The genetic heritage of mankind is common property and not trade goods," the
German Doctors Congress declared at its annual meeting in Ludwigshafen in late
May. The gathering urged the German Parliament to refrain from following
European Union legal moves to allow patenting of human gene, cell or organ
production.

   "Human life begins with the fusion of egg and sperm. Once that happens, we're
dealing with the early stages of a human being. And we say that no human being
should be slaughtered for the benefit of another," said Joerg-Dietrich Hoppe,
the president of the government's Federal Chamber of Physicians.

   Objections to Stem Cell Research

   The chamber's human rights monitor, Frank Ulrich Montgomery, likewise used
the congress to lobby for the restrictive status quo. He accused Schroeder of
putting economic interests ahead of ethical considerations and creating
"enormous political pressure" for allowing embryonic stem cell research and
pre-implantation diagnosis.

   "When one can destroy a human embryo on certain grounds, then it will be just
as simple to put down an ill person who has no chance of recovery," Montgomery
told the Frankfurter Rundschau daily during the doctors congress.

   The genetic ethics debate is shaping up to be as divisive as past discussions
on abortion rights, which remain highly restricted in Germany. But those who
watched German scientists flee to Britain and the U.S. 20 years ago to escape
the self-imposed biotech shackles say they hope another exodus can be averted.

   "Discussion of the Nazi abuses is always correct. We are living in a
democracy," Winnacker of the research society said. "But that shouldn't be the
deathblow to the issue."

GRAPHIC:  A scientist at work in a suburb of Berlin, Germany's capital. The
nation is engaged in weighty debate about the limits that its genetic
engineering researchers should impose on themselves. PHOTOGRAPHER: HUBERT LINK /
Deutsche Presse-Agentur

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2001


                             1694 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 6, 2001 Friday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1572 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers a family hope;
At Jefferson, experiments into a fatal disorder may have broad implications.

BYLINE: Faye Flam INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Ilyce and Michael Randell trade off holding and comforting their only child,
Max, 3 1/2, as they sit on a bed at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital. They
carefully support his shaved head, freshly scarred from a highly experimental
gene-therapy treatment he had two days earlier - a treatment they hope will slow
the relentless progression of his fatal disorder.

   Whether the gene therapy will help Max is unknown. But the Randells say it
was their only choice other than simply watching their son degenerate further
and die, probably before his 10th birthday.

   Max has Canavan disease, a rare condition in which defective genes do not
produce a substance that protects neurons in the brain, leaving them to erode
rapidly. He is mentally alert but unable to communicate, locked in a body he can
barely move. He is unlikely ever to speak or walk.

   Although gene therapy - the infusion of healthy genes into cells to replace
or supplement defective ones - has been studied for more than a decade, this
trial is among the first to introduce the new genetic material into the brain.

   "The implications of this go far beyond Canavan disease," said Andy Freese,
the Jefferson neurosurgeon who performed the gene-transfer operation. If the
experiments work, researchers may learn techniques they can apply to treating
Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's, and a number of lesser-known inherited
diseases of the brain and nervous system.

   In the next year, the Jefferson team will work with 15 children dying from
Canavan disease. Max was the second patient in the trial.

   Max was a beautiful, normal baby at birth, his parents said, but stopped
developing after about four months. He never learned to turn himself over,
crawl, or talk.

   Canavan disease, which can be hard to diagnose, was not confirmed until Max
was 11 months old. At first, his mother said, "I was in denial. . . . I thought
he would need special ed."

   Ilyce Randell, 34, imagined that Max would walk and talk - that perhaps he
would be mildly disabled. As reality set in, she and her husband, Michael, 38,
searched the Internet and found just one group doing human experiments for
Canavan disease - the Jefferson group, which was then at Yale University.

   Neurosurgeon Freese and gene-therapy researchers Matthew During and Paola
Leone, who heads the trial, had started a small-scale experiment to infuse new
genetic material into the brain cells of their patients. Once seen as a possible
miracle treatment for dozens of diseases, by 1998 gene therapy had not produced
any major successes among the several hundred experiments going on around the
country.

   Still, the Randells felt it was their only hope.

   "But we were told it was parent-funded," said Ilyce Randell, who traveled
from her home outside Chicago to New Haven, Conn., and, later, to Philadelphia
for Max's treatments. The researchers told the Randells they should try to raise
$50,000, she said, and even then they couldn't guarantee that Max would get into
the experimental trial.

   She got out their wedding-guest list and sent everyone a card with an old
picture of Max, who had curly blond hair, soft blue eyes, and an angelic smile.

   "We had gone on a crusade," she said. "This was the main focus of our lives."
They raised $65,000, and Max got into the early trial. The therapy was designed
to correct - not merely treat - the genetic defect that gave Max the disease.
About one in 37 people with Eastern European or Ashkenazi ancestry carry a
damaged, scrambled copy of this gene, but only when a child inherits a copy of
that defective gene from each parent does the condition lead to illness.

   Those born with two defective copies of the Canavan gene cannot produce a key
enzyme needed to break down an acid called NAA. The acid builds up in the brain
and destroys the substance that coats the neurons, called myelin, eventually
destroying the brain's ability to function.

   In theory, the gene therapy would deliver the correct version of the gene to
cells in the brain. Then the cells would make that key enzyme on their own.

   To get the gene into the cells, most gene-therapy experiments have used some
kind of modified virus. In nature, viruses reproduce by inserting their own
genes into the cells of other creatures. Genetic-engineering technology allowed
researchers to take out some of a virus' own genes and add strands of genetic
material carrying healthy versions of the damaged or defective genes they wanted
to replace for various diseases.

   This first Canavan experiment used a synthetic version of a virus, which
researcher Leone said would be safer but probably less effective. Max was
treated with this early form of gene therapy in November 1998.

   The Randells said they thought Max showed signs of improvement - he seemed
more alert and able to track people with his eyes - and they were looking
forward to the second treatment planned for a few months later. The researchers,
however, had decided to stop using synthetic virus and move to a real virus,
which they believed had more promise.

   Federal and university approvals for that change were expected to take about
a year. But in late 1999, an 18-year-old subject died during a gene-therapy
treatment at the University of Pennsylvania. His death made national news and
eventually led to the shutdown of all gene-therapy experiments at Penn, which
until then had been one of the leading centers of gene-therapy research in the
world.

   Jefferson's researchers - and Max - got caught up in the spotlight that the
federal government shined on gene-therapy experiments nationwide. A review board
in Washington told Leone that her group would have to do more animal experiments
before proceeding with the human trial using real viruses.

   Meanwhile, the Randells watched Max get worse. He used to be able to wave
hello and goodbye, his father said, but by then his motor control had
degenerated to the point that he could not raise his own arm.

   Tests show that if Max is allowed to answer questions by blinking or pointing
with his eyes, he can demonstrate that he recognizes colors and pictures of
objects as well as healthy children his age, his mother said. But he is having
increasing difficulty communicating anything.

   He still responds to words for his favorite foods - chocolate pudding and
McDonald's fish sandwiches - by blinking and smiling weakly.

   "It's not just that our children are dying," said Ilyce Randell, whose
fund-raising efforts spawned a foundation that involves other desperate parents
of children with Canavan. "Our children are getting worse by the hour. Their
brains are dissolving and turning into a spongy mass - their heads are
expanding. We don't have the luxury of time to wait for a review process.

   "Their prognosis is 100 percent death."

   The Food and Drug Administration finally gave its approval for the experiment
in March, and the university review board followed in May.

   The first patient, Lindsay Karlin, 7, traveled from Connecticut for the
therapy on June 5.

   The treatment was part of a protocol used in clinical trials of virtually all
new drugs, called Phase I, that is supposed to merely test the safety of the
therapy. In most Phase I studies, patients are given doses too small to have any
effect on their illness.

   In this case, however, Leone, who holds the title of associate director of
Jefferson's center for central nervous system gene therapy, said the researchers
chose a dose large enough to have a possible effect, although it was lower than
what they had given their animal subjects. They decided they needed to look at
the risk/benefit ratio, Leone said. To justify the risk of the brain surgery,
she said, the researchers believed they should give their patients enough of the
genetic material to deliver a benefit. The FDA agreed.

   On June 17, Ilyce and Michael Randell handed Max over to the surgeons. Though
he doesn't speak, Max can understand people and had picked up enough emotion
from his parents to know something scary was about to happen.

   "He was shaking like crazy when we took him in," Leone said.

   Max was put under general anesthesia and six holes were drilled into his
skull. The neurosurgeon used an optical fiber, thinner than a human hair, to
slowly pump a solution with the virus into his brain.

   About three hours later, when the doctors handed Max back to Ilyce Randell,
seeing him with his head shaved made her think of the day he was born. "I mean,
he's huge now," she said. "But in a way this does represent a new start."

   Later in the afternoon, Leone stopped by. She greeted Max by playfully
picking up a stuffed white rabbit - a new toy he had acquired on this trip. "I
didn't sleep for two nights before," she said. If Max had had a bad reaction, he
could have developed a fever that could lead to seizures, or he could have
suffered brain swelling or some other unexpected reaction could have cropped up
- as in the Penn research.

   Later this month, Leone's team will treat their third patient, age 4. They
also will evaluate the first two, Lindsay and Max. They will get a battery of
tests to measure Max's responsiveness, motor skills and cognitive function.

   Ilyce Randell said that since the procedure, she had seen subtle signs that
Max is improving incrementally. Any progress at all would make her happy, she
said. "If this is all it does, it's still worth it."

   Faye Flam's e-mail address is fflam@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
SCOTT OLSON, For The Inquirer
Ilyce Randell kisses her son, Max, who has Canavan disease. Doctors at Jefferson
performed brain surgery to try to slow the disease's progression.
SCOTT OLSON, For The Inquirer
Off to work, Michael Randell says goodbye to Max and his wife, Ilyce, at their
home outside Chicago. The Randells raised $65,000 from family and friends to pay
for Max's care in the gene-therapy trials.
APRIL SAUL, Inquirer Staff Photographer
Lead researcher Paola Leone and neurosurgeon Andy Freese, at Thomas Jefferson
University Hospital. Freese operated on Max.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1695 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      July 5, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 09A

LENGTH: 462 words

HEADLINE: Enzyme seen as key in battling Fabry's disease, researchers say

BYLINE:  Associated Press

BODY:

   Replacing a missing enzyme in people with Fabry's disease reverses the damage
caused by the rare, inherited disorder, according to a study on the first-ever
treatment for the disease.

   Researchers gave Fabry patients intravenous infusions of the enzyme, called
alpha-galactosidase A, which had been genetically engineered. The treatment
cleared deposits from the kidneys, heart and skin, the researchers reported in
today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   "For the many, many years that I've seen these patients -- and some I've
followed for 30 years -- I've only been able to give them hope," said Robert J.
Desnick of Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York, who led the research. "I
think we now have something to offer them, perhaps more than hope. And this is
to me a major accomplishment."

   An estimated one in 40,000 men has Fabry's disease.

   Desnick said scientists thought the treatment would work but couldn't get
enough of the enzyme before genetic engineering. The biotech company Genzyme
Corp., which paid for the study, is seeking government approval to market the
enzyme as Fabrazyme in the United States and Europe. Desnick is a consultant to
Genzyme and has received grants from the company.

   A second company, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., also has applied for approval
of its own enzyme replacement therapy, called Replagal.

   Last year, Genzyme sued Transkaryotic Therapies, accusing it of patent
infringements on the enzyme. Transkaryotic Therapies has denied the allegations,
and the lawsuit still is pending.

   In the study reported today, researchers enrolled 58 Fabry patients in
medical centers in the United States and Europe in 1999.

   Researchers focused on the treatment's effectiveness on the kidneys, since
kidney failure is a frequent and serious complication of the disease. Deposits
of the fatty substance -- globotriaosylceramide -- were cleared in 20 of the 29
patients or 69%, compared to none in the comparison group. Deposits also were
reduced significantly in the skin and heart, the researchers reported.

   William A. Gahl of the National Institutes of Health, who wrote an editorial
accompanying the study, said research was needed to determine whether the
treatment prevents some of the other complications such as the pain, skin rash
and eye problems.

   FABRY'S DISEASE

   -- An estimated one in 40,000 men has Fabry's disease, in which they lack an
enzyme, called alpha-galactosidase A, that breaks down a fatty substance in the
body. Without the enzyme, the substance accumulates in blood vessels, leading to
kidney failure, heart attack or stroke.

   -- Symptoms include pain in the feet and hands, a skin rash and the inability
to sweat.

   -- The average life span for those with Fabry's disease is about 40 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2001


                             1696 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             July 5, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:

    Replacing a missing enzyme in people with Fabry's disease reverses the
damage caused by the rare, inherited disorder, according to a study on the first
treatment for the disease.

    Those with Fabry's disease are lacking an enzyme that breaks down a fatty
substance in the body. Without the enzyme, the substance accumulates in blood
vessels, leading to kidney failure, heart attack or stroke. Symptoms include
pain in the feet and hands, a skin rash and the inability to sweat. The average
life span for those with Fabry's disease is about 40 years.

    An estimated 1 in 40,000 men have the disease.

    Researchers gave Fabry patients intravenous infusions of the enzyme, called
alpha-galactosidase A, which had been genetically engineered. The treatment
cleared deposits from the kidneys, heart and skin, the researchers reported in
today's New England Journal of Medicine.

    Genzyme Corp., which paid for the study, is seeking government approval to
market the enzyme as Fabrazyme in the United States and Europe.

    Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. also has applied for approval of its enzyme
replacement therapy, called Replagal.

    Mothers who have had a Caesarean section increase their chances of rupturing
their uterus if they attempt vaginal delivery during their next pregnancy,
especially if labor is induced, according to a study.

    For years, doctors advised women who had Caesarean sections to deliver all
their babies by C-section because of the scars left on their uterus. But more
recently, women have been encouraged to try to deliver vaginally after a
Caesarean, and approximately 60 percent of them try labor.

    From 1989 to 1996, the U.S. rate of vaginal births after a Caesarean
increased 50 percent, to 28 per 100 women. By 1999, it was down to 23 per 100
women.

    The rate of Caesarean births remained about 22 percent during the same
period.

    But questions persist about whether labor causes problems such as uterine
rupture, an uncommon but serious complication. A tear in the uterus can result
in a hysterectomy, blood transfusions or death for the mother, and brain damage
or death for the infant.

    Researchers at the University of Washington in Seattle studied 20,095 women
who delivered their first baby by Caesarean section and then had a second child.
There were 91 cases of uterine rupture, according to the findings reported in
today's New England Journal of Medicine.

    Compared with women in the group who had a repeat C-section without labor,
the researchers said those who went into labor spontaneously were three times as
likely to have a uterine rupture. Women whose labor was induced -- but not with
a class of drug known as prostaglandins -- were nearly five times as likely to
have a rupture. Those induced with a prostaglandin, which is more potent, were
15 times as likely.

    -- Compiled from reports by the Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2001


                             1697 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 4, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS;

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: IN THE PIPELINE / BIOTECHNOLOGY;
TKT RAISES $100M AHEAD OF REPLAGAL'S EUROPEAN LAUNCH

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it completed a follow-on offering this
week, selling more than 3.5 million shares at $28.50 apiece and raising $100
million.

   The offering adds to the $200 million the Cambridge company already had in
cash reserves as it prepares for the European launch of its first product,
Replagal, expected this month.

      It is also good news for the company, which has been embroiled in legal
battles over its two lead drugs. The company lost a patent fight in January
against Amgen, barring TKT from selling Dynepo, its version of top-selling
anemia drug Epogen.

   TKT is in a second patent battle with crosstown rival Genzyme Corp. over
Replagal. The firms are developing nearly identical drugs to treat a rare
inherited disorder known as Fabry's disease, and sought approval within weeks of
each other.

   Although TKT declined to comment on the case, Daniel E. Geffken, its senior
vice president and chief financial officer, said the company is in a "strong
position." He said TKT is also proceeding with the development of Dynepo as it
appeals the court's earlier decision.

   The money will help the company build its marketing and sales capabilities,
as well as advance its earlier-stage drugs through clinical testing. In Europe
alone, Geffken said, Replagal is expected to reach $100 million in annual sales.

   "Once you have a product about to be approved, you attract a different set of
investors," Geffken said. "There is real excitement about Replagal. Part of the
point is that this is not a single product, this is part of a technology
platform."

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2001


                             1698 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      July 4, 2001 Wednesday Finl Edition

SECTION: NEW; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: Blood researcher joining Children's

BYLINE: Tim Bonfield, The Cincinnati Enquirer

BODY:

   By Tim Bonfield

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   An acclaimed expert in childhood cancer is coming to Cincinnati to lead a
multimillion-dollar research expansion at Children's Hospital Medical Center.

   The recruitment of Dr. David Williams, a blood disease expert from Indiana
University, is the first step in a five-year effort to recruit 15 to 20
researchers to create a division of experimental hematology at Children's.

   Counting support staff, the division is expected to employ more than 100
people who will delve into the genetic roots of leukemia, hemophilia, sickle
cell anemia and other blood-related maladies.

   Dr. Williams, who was a resident at Children's Hospital in the late '70s, is
best known for his lab's work in discovering Interleukin-11, a drug that can
treat blood cell damage from chemotherapy, and for his work in genetic therapy
for children with immune-deficiency diseases.

   The recruitment of Dr. Williams is one of the biggest coups in years for the
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, the research arm of Children's
Hospital, said Dr. Thomas Boat, chairman of the hospital's department of
pediatrics.

   "This is a huge investment in the area of childhood blood disorders and
cancer," Dr. Boat said. "This is the kind of commitment that will mean a
cultural change for the institution."

   In addition to serving as chairman of the hematology division, Dr. Williams
will direct a new translational research institute, which seeks to speed up
converting laboratory discoveries into human clinical trials of new treatments.

   Dr. Williams, 47, has been a researcher at Indiana University's Riley
Hospital for Children since 1991. Previously, he held posts at the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, the Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Harvard Medical
School. Dr. Williams is a native of Terre Haute, Ind.

   Dr. Williams is an expert in blood diseases who directly holds four patents
and indirectly holds two other patents, mostly related to genetic therapy
methods for treating leukemia and immune system disorders.

   Interleukin-11 is now used in a drug called Neumega to treat low platelet
counts after leukemia patients receive chemotherapy.

   His work in using retroviruses to carry genetic modifications into stem cells
also was involved last year in France, where doctors reported reversing two
cases of "bubble boy disease," a fatal disease scientists call severe combined
immunodeficiency disease.

   Dr. Williams said Tuesday that he started looking about a year and a half ago
for a new challenge and was attracted by the ambitious research plans at
Children's.

   "Children's Hospital Medical Center has a terrific research program," Dr.
Williams said. "There are only a few pediatric institutions in United States
that have the science base, the patient base and the resources to do this kind
of work."

   In fact, research funding at Children's Hospital has jumped more than 30
percent in one year, from $48 million in fiscal 2000 (ended June 30) to about
$64 million in fiscal 2001, Dr. Boat said. In fiscal 2002, the research budget
is expected to grow another 23 percent.

   Those figures do not count $160 million recently pumped into construction at
Children's Hospital. A new research wing, education and conference center and
parking garage have recently been completed. A new clinical care tower at Burnet
and Erkenbrecher is scheduled for completion in fall 2002.

   "This is a process that will play out over the next 10 to 20 years," Dr. Boat
said. "But I believe Children's Hospital will be one of, if not THE place where
genetic therapies will be applied to a wide array of pediatric diseases."

   Dr. Williams is expected to move to Cincinnati next month. He plans to have
his lab completely moved by the end of the year.

   Research developments at Children's

   Since 1990, research space has tripled with lab additions built in 1991, 1996
and 2000.

   Grants from the National Institutes of Health have increased from $8 million
a year to more than $40 million.

   Several top-flight researchers have recently come to Cincinnati, including:

   Dr. Chris Wylie, recruited last year to become chief of developmental
biology. He has brought six other researchers to study the processes involved in
forming tissues and organs as animals and people grow.

   Dr. Marsha Wills-Karp, recruited several months ago to lead a program in
immunobiology, which explores how the body protects itself from viruses,
bacteria and cancer.

   Dr. Phil Walson, recruited last June to run a new Office of Clinical Trials.

   Dr. Richard Lang, an expert in hearing development who is expected to join
the hospital staff this summer.

   Source: Children's Hospital Research Foundation

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             1699 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                   July 2, 2001, Monday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 1392 words

HEADLINE: FUTURE FIGHTERS   How military technology is advancing medical scienc
e

BYLINE: BY SUSAN FERRARO DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
Don't worry: The American war machine hasn't gone all soft and cuddly, fussing
over day-care centers and coed dorms. Startling new science is going to remake
G.I. Joe and Jane - and change civilian health care - by the year 2025.

   Driven in part by scientific code breakers who cracked the human genome and
opened worlds of possibility, researchers envision an extraordinary biological
future coming soon to a battlefield (or hospital, or drugstore) near you.

   The Army's interest in keeping soldiers alive in extreme conditions can
underwrite good science, experts say.

   "A lot of these things have positive benefits for society," says Michael
Ladisch, a chemical and biomedical engineer at Purdue University who has been
working on the future of human biology for 20 years.

   Ladisch led 16 scientists in compiling scores of cell- and
environment-warping options detailed in the just-published (but clunkily titled)
"Opportunities in Biotechnology for Future Army Applications."

   "The Army represents democracy in a good way - it's a cross section of
society, it promotes diversity, provides opportunities like education to people
who otherwise could not afford it and it is a leader in trying to be a good
employer," says Ladisch, a civilian.

   The new, it's-not-your-daddy's battlefield will have modern ninjas whose C
rations may help camouflage them from enemy radar. Special biological materials
will hurry wound healing, spur cartilage growth and speed-knit bones.

   Soldiers will carry lightweight personal computers - scientists think a
natural protein called bacteriorhodopsin will store data on holograms, offering
memory up to 10 gigabits (enough for a few encyclopedias) in the size of a sugar
cube. Cheap, individual DNA scans - carried on credit-card-style ID - will sort
out which combatants are most vulnerable to allergens or germs, respond well to
particular treatments, or are at risk for a bad reaction to vaccines.

   Fighters will be stronger, their ability to shrug off fear, fatigue and sleep
deprivation greater - just the kind of thing that, in the peacetime world,
workaholics, parents of newborns and other stressed citizens could use.

   Highlights in the brave new world of biotech:

   SPEED HEALING

   Bleeding and shock lead to 55% of in-combat deaths, says Ladisch. Bones get
broken, knees pulverized. Solutions may include:

   * Tissue engineering. Scientists are manipulating tissue to replace
cartilage, grow human skin (for burns) and bone and promote blood-vessel growth.
Artificial retinas made of protein material are heading toward commercial
markets now.

   * Superbandages will not only protect wounds but promote growth in cells and
blood vessels. They'll be made of biological scaffolding and contain strong
adhesives, perhaps from barnacles or clotting protein, to attach fast. Applied
directly to wounds, such bandages will - like good generals - know when to
surrender and be absorbed, so that the body doesn't fight back by rejecting,
encapsulating or breaking them up with growing connective tissue.

   * Bone-marrow labs. Cultured bone marrow may one day aid catastrophically
injured soldiers with systems that replicate and repair themselves; in theory,
the body's own supercells, stem cells, could make compatible replacement organs
for individual soldiers.

   * Transplants. The insertion of specific cells could provide a person with a
portable "factory" for sustaining life and enhancing performance - providing
blood-clotting factors, for example, or controlling panic or sleep response.

   MATERIAL ISSUES

   The idea is to imagine "the future of where advanced materials might go," and
then build it, says Dr. Eric Baer at Case Western University, who puzzles out
basic biology in complex materials - such as material that can cover the body
and, not incidentally, also deflect laser beams.

   * Camouflage. Naturalists may identify the biological process that lets birds
and some fruits diffract light to hide their presence, then apply that knowledge
to uniforms. They may also find out how a chameleon blends into scenery.

   (A scientist familiar with the study suggested that a civilian use of such
technology would be a dress made of chameleon cloth; if a woman wearing it
attracted unwanted attention, she could "push a button and blend into a wall.")

   * Paint that hides. The bacteriorhodopsin protein absorbs microwaves and,
painted on planes, deflects radar. To elude infrared scanners, scientists may
also be able to disguise, on the molecular level, troops and tanks as plants.

   NEW DRUGS AND VACCINES

   * Small-molecule drugs. Such compounds, like aspirin, treat minor ills;
scientists think other simple drugs (compared with complex proteins) might one
day treat traumas, such as the lethal shock that can follow extensive bleeding.

   * New drug-delivery systems. Implanted antidotes to dangerous chemicals and
germs may be programmed to rush to the rescue if a sensor determines the need.
Several computer-chip-size, gold-plated models are in development.

   * Vaccines may be edible. Or, says Roger Brent, a West Coast computer
scientist and biochemist who worked on the report, they may contain injectable,
genetically manipulated material that makes cells ward off invaders at the
molecular level.

   * Fast production of vaccines and antibodies. The military will have
equipment that can sense and identify a biological threat, manufacture medicine
and ship it back to the field - all within a day or two, says Brent.

   SENSORS

   Knowing the enemy - and the enemy's location - matters. Among the
supersensors that could benefit battle:

   * Biological scanners. Equipment every soldier carries may have sensors to
recognize threatening complex proteins, and could signal the presence of
undetectable harmful organisms in the air, water or food.

   * Biochips. Soldiers may be fitted with sensor chips that give readouts on
vital signs like blood pressure, blood sugar, respiration and temperature. If
needed, the chips could signal headquarters or other implanted medical devices
to deliver antidotes.

   * Personal diagnostic chips. Some implants could recognize proteins and help
diagnose sickness or environmental toxins - similar to the PSA test, which scans
for prostate specific antigen, which can help detect early prostate cancer.

   * The "No, it's not garlic" additive. Scientists may one day engineer food to
produce volatile molecules that depart in sweat and breath, then build sensors
to track those molecules - a clever way to tell friend from foe.

   ELECTRONIC BRIDGES

   * Implants that couple electronics and the nervous system. The ability to
enhance normal senses interests the Army: It would like to see real Supermen
soldiers. Research focuses on cell implants to bridge neural damage that affects
hearing and eyesight; it could lead to neuromuscular stimulation in paralysis.

   FUNCTIONAL FOODS

   If you eat yogurt, you eat a functional food: It provides calories that
convert into energy, and it is "alive" if it contains active lactobacillus
acidophilus bacteria, which, in the gut, aid digestion.

   Newer functional foods may include:

   * Food that fights back. Peptides minimize bacteria, and if included in food
they could help "preserve food without refrigeration," says Ladisch. Other foods
might be engineered to fight microorganisms, such as those that cause dysentery.

   * High-energy, compact food packs.

   * Medicinal foods. Genetically engineered food might deliver medicines to the
body that could be absorbed through the intestines.

   BIOTECH TIME LINE

   Almost all of the biotech wonders discussed in the new NRC report for the
Army will come about sooner or later, says the study's chairman, Michael
Ladisch. A time line:

   5 to 10 years:

   * Speed healing using tissue scaffolds that the body absorbs (tissue
engineering)

   * Cartilage replacement, bone growth enhancers

   * Artificial retinas

   * Functional foods to provide higher density of energy

   5 to 15 years:

   * Self-replicating systems to help repair bodies in the field (relying on
stem-cell research)

   * Health profiling with personal DNA cards

   * Implanted antidotes and vaccine "factories"

   * Holograph memory systems for computers

   15 to 25 years:

   * Foods that help sort out friends from foes

   * Edible vaccines (though very iffy)

   * Gene-therapy injections

   * Neural bridges for hearing, blindness, paralysis


GRAPHIC: REUTERS AP NO MORE NEEDLES: implants will take the sting out of
vaccines of the future.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2001


                             1700 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              July 2, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1349 words

HEADLINE: Death of Healthy Research Subject Raises Questions

BYLINE: SUSAN LEVINE, WASHINGTON POST

BODY:

   She noticed the cough almost immediately, began feeling short of breath and
achy. Two days after her visit for a research study at the Johns Hopkins Asthma
and Allergy Center--two days after inhaling the chemical hexamethonium during
what was assumed to be a low-risk test for a healthy young woman--Ellen Roche
called back, obviously concerned.

   Her symptoms were troubling enough that the staff quickly started monitoring
her condition. That was May 7, and Roche's lungs already were functioning at
two-thirds capacity. By May 9, doctors admitted her to Johns Hopkins Bayview
Medical Center in East Baltimore for observation.

   The 24-year-old lab technician died there June 2--the university's first
death of a research volunteer since 1986 and its first death ever of a healthy
volunteer.

   The tragedy, an "adverse event" that officials did not report publicly until
mid-June, has raised anew questions about how adequately medical research
participants are informed and protected during experiments. It has triggered an
internal investigation, a special university review committee and probes by the
federal Office for Human Research Protections and the Food and Drug
Administration.

   All parties will try to determine whether asthma researchers did anything
wrong as they studied the physiological mechanics of a normal lung: whether they
cut corners during the testing, for instance, or failed to fully disclose
important details to Roche and other participants, or endangered their subjects
from the start by using a substance that is not FDA-approved, possibly without
the required permission.

   Or the inquiries could find that, no matter the circumstances, the death
could not have been foreseen.

   "In the field of clinical investigations, the worst thing that can happen is
the death, the unanticipated death, of a normal volunteer," said John Fletcher,
professor emeritus of biomedical ethics at the University of Virginia's medical
school and founder of the bioethics program at the National Institutes of
Health.

   "Where there's culpability, it's a life-changing and a career-changing thing.
It's at least a nine on a moral Richter scale. But we know in the total universe
of human studies, these deaths are extremely rare."

   Medical ethicists say the country has made great strides in the last three
decades in its oversight of medical research. Institutional review boards must
approve a project in advance. Scientists are expected to provide truthful,
clearly worded information about risk, which should be minimized as much as
possible. And participants must be allowed voluntary consent that they can
withdraw any time.

   Yet since 1998, a number of serious incidents have shown continuing
weaknesses in the system. Concerns about patient safety stopped clinical trials
at university medical schools in Oklahoma, Alabama, North Carolina and
Massachusetts. After glaring breakdowns in its gene therapy studies, which
surfaced only after a teenage participant died, the University of Pennsylvania
announced last year that its genetic research would no longer use human
subjects.

   Just last month, as Roche lay in intensive care, a president-appointed panel
recommended major changes in the protections afforded participants in a range of
scientific studies. Review boards often are overwhelmed by the volume and
technical demands of the work they judge, the panel said; guidelines about
researchers' potential conflicts of interest need strengthening, as do
provisions for especially vulnerable populations such as children and mentally
incompetent elderly.

   Though the scale of biomedical research has exploded since 1980, the National
Bioethics Advisory Commission noted there are no statistics on how many people
are involved in clinical trials or the number of adverse events. It urged that a
system be created for reporting those incidents. Some members also advocated
establishing a fund to compensate individuals harmed because of their
participation.

   "It's a matter of simple justice that we cover them if they end up injured,"
said commission member James Childress, who teaches bioethics at the University
of Virginia. They are, he pointed out, "putting their bodies on the line for
research."

   Roche did so understanding that she would receive no therapeutic benefit from
whatever the Hopkins scientists learned. Theirs was a baseline investigation
looking at how a normally functioning lung helps keep airways open even when
they are exposed to irritants and allergens. If researchers can discover that,
they can better grasp how the airways of someone with asthma begin to constrict
and possibly develop a drug to prevent it.

   Ten million Americans suffer from this potentially life-threatening
condition. Roche did not.

   Her family has not broken its silence in the weeks since she died. Perhaps
she never told them why she decided to sign up for the study. Compared to the
generally clear-cut motivation of a sick volunteer, a healthy person's reasons
for taking part in a clinical trial can vary tremendously.

   A commitment to advancing an area of research or the need to make some extra
money? Had Roche completed the seven-to nine-visit schedule specified in the
research protocol that Hopkins posted on its Web site after her death, she would
have been paid $365. Medical ethicists say that amount does not seem enough to
coerce or unduly influence a volunteer's decision.

   In keeping with her family's wishes, university officials have released no
personal information about Roche, a 1998 graduate of Frostburg State University
in Frostburg, Md.

   The two-page "clinical investigation consent form" that Roche and eight other
people signed explained the project's purpose, procedures and risks. During
their first several half-hour visits, according to the form, they would inhale
methacholine, a substance that usually causes mild coughing, shortness of breath
and tightness in the chest. It is commonly used in doctors' offices to determine
if a patient has asthma.

   By a sixth visit, lasting up to four hours, study subjects would receive two
substances, methacholine and either hexamethonium or a placebo. Hexamethonium
was commonly prescribed during the 1950s for hypertension and to minimize
bleeding during surgery. It later was supplanted by other drugs and taken off
the market in the 1970s.

   The protocol application submitted to Hopkins' review board last summer by
Alkis Togias, an associate professor, specified that participants would inhale
up to 1,000 mg of the chemical during each of four visits. Based on published
research from the 1980s, Togias wrote, "This dose ... has been shown to be both
safe and efficacious." He explained that a laboratory preparation would make the
compound 99.6% pure.

   In the wake of Roche's death, Solbert Permutt, the pulmonary specialist
overseeing this project, alerted asthma specialists nationwide to research from
the late-'50s linking hexamethonium--albeit in higher doses over longer time--to
dramatic lung changes leading to individuals' deaths.

   And recently, the director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
suggested that lung investigators temporarily curtail research using the
compound.

   Hopkins suspended its experiment after Roche fell ill. For three desperate
weeks, doctors struggled to save Roche as her failing lungs precipitated a
cascade of critical events, ending with the shutdown of her kidneys.

   Results of Roche's autopsy, conducted at Hopkins, have not been released. In
a statement last month, the university announced that the findings of its
special review committee will be sent to federal officials by July 13. Its
statement disclosed that "some problems" relating to procedural issues and the
review board have been discovered.

   The impact of this case ultimately may be felt far beyond Baltimore.

   "I worry about many people in clinical trials or other human research hearing
about this and panicking," said Ruth Faden, executive director of the Phoebe R.
Berman Bioethics Institute at Johns Hopkins. "Biomedical research, to succeed,
really does depend on the confidence of the public."

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2001


                             1701 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     June 27, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY, Pg. 1E TV/RADIO COLUMN

LENGTH: 1057 words

HEADLINE: Stossel criticized for youths' interviews;
 TV: Parents of some students the ABC reporter talked to about environmental
concerns say their children were manipulated.

BYLINE: David Folkenflik

SOURCE: SUN TELEVISION WRITER

BODY:

   Once a consumer crusader as a local television reporter, John Stossel has
made a name for himself in recent years at ABC News as a contrarian challenging
conventional wisdom.

   He finds society to be populated by nettlesome critics of corporate America,
especially those ideologues he says are masquerading as environmental or health
advocates. In ABC's "Tampering With Nature," a one-hour special to be aired
Friday, Stossel says some of those ideologues are busy brainwashing
schoolchildren to believe that the world is a very scary place.

   "What sad distortions to feed children," Stossel remarks, in an early version
of the program sent to reviewers. "It's all part of the environmental doomsday
message that's all over America."

   But angered parents of six of the California children interviewed by Stossel
on Earth Day (April 22) say it is he who is doing the distorting. On Monday,
they sent a letter accusing the network of sandbagging their kids and withdrew
their consent for the young children - second- and third-graders - to appear on
the prime-time show.

   Two parents who watched Stossel talk with the children said the network
correspondent's questions, and even his very presence, made them uneasy.
Teachers interviewed the next day also found him confrontational.

   "They were manipulated by Stossel," said Brad Neal, the parent of two
children who took part. "If they were adults, OK. But these are little kids. The
truth is scary. We're not trying to indoctrinate them."

   Late yesterday afternoon, ABC News retreated, defending Stossel but saying he
would remove all the footage with the children's voices and faces. Instead, said
ABC spokesman Todd Polkes, Stossel will paraphrase their responses.

   In a statement released by the network late yesterday, ABC noted no parents
objected during the April interview and said a review showed it had been
"conducted in a professional and responsible manner according to the highest
journalistic standards." Nonetheless, ABC News stated it would "respect the
belated decision of a number of parents to withdraw their consent."

   This is not simply a tussle over the exploitation of children. The parents'
initial indignation was harnessed into action by officials at the Environmental
Working Group, a Washington-based advocacy organization. The group exquisitely
timed the parents' strike to undermine Stossel, who is not a new target for the
group.

   In February 2000, ABC News' "20/20" aired a segment by Stossel that argued
that organic food, despite claims, was no safer than regular food because
neither had pesticide residues. In fact, Stossel said, organic food could pose
additional health risks from bacteria. He referred to a scientific study
commissioned by ABC News to prove that claim. But the EWG, which backs a
reduction in pesticide use, interviewed the clinical scientists who conducted
the studies. They said they did not carry out any tests for pesticides.

   As a result of EWG's persistence, Stossel later backed off his contention
during a lengthy on-air apology. He was also reprimanded by the network.

   Stossel functions almost as a conservative essayist for ABC, with his
reporting serving to support his contentions. Indeed, he is called a commentator
rather than a reporter during his regular reports on "20/20." Some may watch
Friday's show and see the indoctrination in the assemblies and field trips that
his producers caught on camera, and a society gone astray with overheated fears
about global warming.

   Others, however, may be warier. He touches on such wide-ranging topics in
"Tampering With Nature" - from human cloning to gene therapy to environmental
education to Kevin Costner's "Waterworld" - that he can't plunge very deep.

   In just one instance, he asks, how bad can things be nowadays, when there are
now more forests than there were in 1920? Yet a fuller picture might prove more
complicated.

   "Today's forested habitats may not be as suitable for some native species as
forested habitats of presettlement times," states a 1998 report by the U.S.
Geological Survey, a government agency. "For example, the extensive deciduous
forest that covered the southeastern Piedmont has been replaced by pine forests,
which do not provide the conditions needed by various species," such as certain
wildflowers and birds.

   Besides, many of the trees planted by forest companies are destined to be
felled for lumber anyhow.

   When networks broadcast reported commentaries, they shouldn't be surprised
they'll spur the wrath of interest groups. All the more reason to make sure
those reports bear up under scrutiny.

   Local Emmys awarded

   Two Baltimore channels -Maryland Public Television and WBFF - won multiple
prizes in the local Emmys handed out earlier this month. If you look at the
results one way, the awards validated the sights-and-sounds approach practiced
by WBFF (Channel 45) and by a reporter-producer team at WJZ (Channel 13).

   If you look another way, however, Baltimore's stations failed to cast a long
shadow. In the key areas of news anchor, evening newscasts and sports anchor,
Baltimore's stations did not once achieve the rank of finalist. Charm City
channels won or shared awards in just 15 of 47 categories, many of which listed
up to three winners.

   MPT (Channels 22 and 67) claimed 11 statuettes, as it was recognized for two
documentaries, two children's programs and a jazz show, as well as editing and
photography.

   WBFF reporter Jeff Abell shared top honors in two categories, news writing
and soft feature stories, while his station's weather forecaster, Kirk Clyatt,
shared an award with two peers from D.C. as well. WBFF also won other awards in
editing and photography.

   Two Baltimore stations split the Emmy for general news: WJZ reporter Mike
Schuh and producer Joel Eagle were honored for a tribute to two city police
officers killed by a drunk driver, while WBFF's Craig Demchak was recognized for
his story on "Eastern Shore Snow."

   WJZ reporter Katie Leahan was also given an award for her interview with
Joseph Palczynski after he called into the newsroom during his hostage standoff
with police last year.

   The full list of awards can be found at www.natasdc.org.

   Questions? Comments? Story ideas? David Folkenflik can be reached by e-mail
at david.folken- flik@baltsun.com or by phone at 410-332-6923.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), John Stossel removed interviews with students whose parents,
complained.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             1702 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2001 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    June 27, 2001 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. D12

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH NOTEBOOK SLEEP DEFICIT A RISK FACTOR FOR DIABETES,RESEARCHERS
REPORT

SOURCE: Compiled by RICHARD L. HILL - of The Oregonian staff

BODY:

   Sleep researchers at the University of Chicago have found evidence that
inadequate sleep might prompt development of insulin resistance, a risk factor
for diabetes.

   "We have shown that failure to get the slightly more than eight hours sleep
per night that clinical experts recommend may contribute to the rising incidence
of diabetes," researcher Bryce A. Mander said, noting that sleep debt disrupts
body functions.

   The researchers studied 27 healthy, nonobese adults. Fourteen were "normal"
eight-hour-a-day sleepers and 13 were "short" sleepers who slept an average of
6-1/2 hours. They found that insulin sensitivity in the short sleepers was
almost 40 percent lower than in the normal sleepers

   Mander reported the findings Monday at the American Diabetes Association's
61st Annual Scientific Sessions.

   Altering mice feeding behavior offers insights into Parkinson's Researchers
have used gene therapy to rejuvenate feeding behavior in starving mice. The
genetically engineered mice had avoided eating because their brains contained a
low level of dopamine.

   The study, reported in the June issue of the journal Neuron, provides new
information about a brain region that helps integrate internal hunger signals
and external sensory information about food to trigger feeding behavior.

   A research team led by Richard D. Palmiter, a Howard Hughes Medical Institute
investigator at the University of Washington, demonstrated that gene therapy
restored dopamine production in specific areas of the brains of the mutant mice.
These mice lack the motivation to feed, and they die of starvation a few weeks
after birth unless they are given the drug L-dopa.

   The research may offer insight into nutritional problems in Parkinson's
disease patients, Palmiter said. "It's known that people with Parkinson's have
eating difficulties, which have been ascribed to difficulties in manipulating
utensils, chewing and swallowing, as well as depression. Our mouse studies
suggest that there is an underlying motivational deficit in Parkinson's disease
as well."

   'On,' 'off' switch in molecule hints at an advance for computers Your future
computer may have components that function based on the action of single
molecules. Scientists have shown that single molecules can switch between "on"
and "off" states, then hold in a state for hours at a time.

   Researchers at Pennsylvania State and Rice universities reported in the
current issue of the journal Science that specially designed single molecules
can switch in that manner. Because switching provides the basis of logic and
memory in computer systems, the discovery of what causes such switching in
single molecules may help researchers move closer to making molecular computers
a reality.

   "We essentially tightened the noose around the molecule and showed that once
its motion was reduced, switching went way down," said Paul Weiss, associate
professor of chemistry at Penn State. "Our next step is figuring out how to
control the molecules' movement between 'on' and 'off.' "

   Study of genes in fruit fly finds counterparts to human diseases Biologists
at the University of California at San Diego have identified genes in the common
fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, that appear to be counterparts of genes
responsible for more than 700 genetic diseases in humans.

   Their discovery, detailed in the June issue of the journal Genome Research,
provides medical geneticists a powerful new tool to identify and study the many
genes that may be responsible for a particular human genetic disease.

   "Scientists have long known that humans share many similar genes with fruit
flies," said Ethan Bier, a biology professor who headed the research. "The
surprise is how deep these similarities really are. Basically, every category of
human genetic disease is well-represented with a counterpart in the fly."

   The UCSD scientists screened the genes involved in 929 human genetic diseases
in their database against the fruit fly genes in the complete Drosophila genome,
published in March in Science. Their comparison of the amino acid sequences
identified 548 fruit fly genes that are similar to genes involved in 714 human
genetic disorders.  -- Compiled by Richard L. Hill

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2001


                             1703 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 27, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: Drugmaker looks to expand S.D. presence

BYLINE: Mike Freeman and Thomas Kupper; STAFF WRITERS

BODY:
 Irish drugmaker Elan Corp. came to the Bio2001 convention yesterday bearing
gifts for San Diego -- between 300 and 500 of them.

   That's the number of jobs the company intends to add to San Diego in the next
two years as it moves its North American biopharmaceutical division to Sorrento
Valley, according to a company official.

   Daniel Welch, president of worldwide biopharmaceuticals for Elan, said the
company is negotiating with local government officials to get the necessary
permits to expand the former Dura Pharmaceuticals research campus.  Elan bought
Dura last November.

   Though Elan trimmed Dura's 400 employees to 215 as it consolidated
operations, Welch said that Elan might "double what we took away." The company
intends to employ between 500 and 700 in clinical development, regulatory and
administrative positions in San Diego.

   Elan announced earlier this month that it will relocate most of its North
American biopharmaceutical unit from New Jersey to San Diego, but at the time
did not discuss the potential job impact.

   Welch said the company wants to be closer to its San Francisco research unit
and the collaborations it has with several California biotechs.  Elan has made
investments in 10 San Diego biotech companies.

   o o o

   o o o The boom in knowledge about human genes could have an unexpected side
effect: large numbers of drugs failing in clinical trials.

   Analyst Rachel Leheny of Lehman Brothers said in a Bio2001 presentation that
the huge numbers of new genes discovered in recent years has allowed drug
companies to put more compounds into testing than ever before.

   But the very speed with which these drugs get into testing means that less
research is done on many of them beforehand.  Additionally, more drugs in
testing are truly new, as opposed to variations on drugs already on the market.

   But as with all experimental drugs, Leheny said, many of these new drugs
probably won't work.  She said those setbacks could start to hit drug companies
-- especially big pharmaceutical companies with many drugs in testing -- in the
next few years.

   "When you get to phase II (of testing), you actually decrease your chances of
success pretty dramatically," Leheny said.

   The good news for biotechs: Fewer of them have rushed large numbers of
genomics-driven drugs into testing than have large pharmaceutical companies.
Leheny said that means "Big Pharma" will feel more of the pain if these projects
don't produce results right away.

   o o o

   o o o In Africa, farm productivity is half of what it is in the rest of the
world, and 60 percent of female agricultural labor involves weeding crops.

   Biotech holds promise to break the cycle of poverty and hunger in rural
Africa, according to Florence Wambugu, director of the Afri-Center chapter of
the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications.

   Speaking at Bio2001 yesterday, Wambugu urged biotech leaders not to dismiss
Africa in their business models.  She said biotech companies such as Monsanto
are working in Africa, but "there is a lot more that can be done."

   Wambugu has long been a friend of the industry, speaking at international
conferences in support of biotech's role in developing countries.  While working
for Monsanto, she used gene therapy to develop a sweet potato variety that is
resistant to viral diseases that were devastating harvests in Africa.

   In her speech yesterday, she described how other biotech advances in cotton,
corn and bananas were working in Kenya.  For example, bioengineered cotton
improves yields and allows Africa's small farmers to make a better living, she
said.

   "Cotton is moneymaking.  It is doing very well," she said.  "Banana is
moneymaking.  Maize is moneymaking."

   Wambugu is the author of "Modifying Africa: How Biotechnology Can Benefit the
Poor and Hungry -- a case study from Kenya." One of nine children growing up in
Kenya's highlands, Wambugu saw how her family struggled to grow enough food.
Her mother sold a cow so Wambugu would have the money to attend secondary
school.

   "Seeing the results for myself has strengthened my passionate belief in the
power of biotechnology to boost food production in Africa," she said.

   o o o

   o o o Can biotechnology help save forests?

   In a broad-ranging session Monday focusing on biotech's fledgling steps in
forestry, industry officials spelled out how they are working to make trees grow
faster and larger.

   "Forestry in the future will increasingly rely on the plantation formula
because it's sustainable and uses less land," said Maud Hinchee, chief
technology officer at ArborGen, a New Zealand-based partnership.  "If you can
harvest sooner and produce larger trees, you're reducing demand on natural
forests."

   Hinchee acknowledged that it could take eight to 10 years before biotech
gains a foothold in forestry.  Managing the release of pollen from
bio-engineered trees is a key concern.

   However, the industry believes it can use science to develop and enhance a
sustainable wood product supply -- thus reducing the demand to log natural
forests.  Hinchee noted that between 1995 and 1999, logging cleared 140 million
acres of forest in developing countries, in part because wood is still used for
cooking and heating.  In contrast, developed countries such as the U.S. and
those in Europe increased the amount of forested land by 22 million acres during
the same time period.

   The writers can be reached by e-mail at financial@uniontrib.com or by phone
at (619) 299-3131.


GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; 1,2,3. John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune; 1. Janella Gatchalian
(far left) of Chatsworth looked at the display for Pharmagene, which specializes
in the use of human tissue for drug discovery and development. 2. Networking was
fast and furious yesterday among attendees of Bio2001 at the San Diego
Convention Center. 3. There's no shortage of business talk among recruiters and
biotech industry workers at the Bio2001 convention, which ends today. (C-2)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2001


                             1704 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 27, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1788 words

HEADLINE: Life Changes; Good, bad or both, biotechnology is redefining our
future

BYLINE: Scott LaFee; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 When the Flavr Savr tomato -- genetically modified to stay ripe longer on store
shelves -- debuted in 1994, it provoked immediate reaction.  Supporters lauded
the wintertime fruit as the first in what would surely be a parade of edibles
made more nutritious, tastier and abundant through biotechnology.

   Opponents decried the Flavr Savr as a genetic monstrosity, the first -- and
hopefully last -- Frankenfood.

   When Dolly the cloned sheep said hello two years later, responses were, not
surprisingly, quicker and louder.  In Chicago, a physicist named Richard Seed
announced plans to open a clinic for human cloning.  In Washington, D.C.,
then-House Majority Leader Dick Armey declared his plans to seek an immediate
ban on human cloning.

   "I for one don't want to live in a Brave New World of sidewalk cloning
clinics.  Congress should pass a human cloning ban quickly and stop this risky
experimentation before it starts.  Human cloning should remain the province of
the mad scientists of science fiction," Armey said.

   In the end, sluggish sales doomed the Flavr Savr tomato, which was pulled
from the market, though other genetically modified foods (some identified as
such, some not) have followed with more success.  Seed's clinic has yet to
materialize, but the same can be said of Armey's total ban on human cloning.

   And so it goes: Each week, somewhere in the world, critics of biotechnology
call for a new ban, funding cuts or some sort of restrictive legislation.  They
organize and protest, as they have done this week at the Bio2001 convention in
San Diego.

   Yet science marches on.  Even discounting the persistent hype, the promise of
biotechnology is breathtaking.  To wit:

   In the next decades, scientists reasonably expect to begin applying knowledge
gleaned from the Human Genome Project -- the mapping of our DNA -- to real-world
problems, such as uncovering the genetic bases of various diseases and traits
and developing potent medicines that would be "personalized" to an individual's
genetic makeup.

   Genetic advances in medicine could eventually conquer cancer, allow doctors
to grow new organs from stem cells or induce ailing organs to repair themselves.
Science may even learn to reset the coding that causes cells -- and ourselves --
to age.

   The next green revolution, say others, will be biotechnical.  Phil Pardey, a
senior research fellow at the International Food Policy Research Institute, a
non-partisan think tank, said new studies estimate the world will need 35
percent more cereal grains, 60 percent more meat and 40 percent more root and
tuber crops to accommodate global population growth over the next 20 years.

   "Biotech opponents say world hunger is an issue of food distribution and to a
degree, it is right now.  But the fact is, the world has very little room left
to move.  In most places, particularly in the developing world where most
population growth occurs, all of the good agricultural land is already being
used, so any food increase has to come in terms of boosted crop yields.  The
collective wisdom around here is that biotechnology is a promising avenue, one
that we would be foolish not to pursue."

   Even the staunchest opponents of genetic engineering concede that something
profound is happening.  "Our way of life is likely to be more fundamentally
transformed in the next several decades than in the previous one thousand
years," wrote Jeremy Rifkin in "The Biotech Century."

   Rifkin believes biotechnology is dangerous and short-sighted.  He thinks it
should be stopped, that society should step back.  Others say it's too late.

   "Biotechnology is inevitable.  That horse is out of the barn," said David
Weir, director of the Delaware Biotechnology Institute at the University of
Delaware.  "I mean, how do you stop people from trying to improve something --
whether it's a medical procedure or a food -- if they have the technology to do
so?  You can't. You can't go backward.

   "So the better question is, How do you manage inevitable change?  How do you
minimize the risks of biotechnology while maximizing the potential?  That's what
many people don't understand, mostly because science has done a really poor job
of educating them about the issues of biotechnology."

   Fear factor

   It's hard to say exactly what people think about biotechnology.  When asked
their general opinion of cloning, embryonic stem cell research or genetically
engineered food, most polls show a strong majority in opposition.  But asked
specifically if they support the elimination of fatal birth defects through gene
therapy or genetically modified foods that prevent disease, most people answer
yes.

   "The reason isn't hard to figure out," said Greg Pence, a professor of
philosophy and author of "Who's Afraid of Human Cloning?"

   "People tend to fear anything new and unknown.  Technologies like (the
prenatal test) amniocentesis and in vitro fertilization (IVF) were hugely
opposed when they first appeared.  Most people get their science from Hollywood,
so in the case of IVF, everybody imagined that test-tube babies meant kids
actually coming out of test tubes, popping out like little scaly monsters.
Biotechnology has always had this tremendous yuck factor."

   Advocates of biotechnology say these false or imperfect notions play into the
hands of critics, who portray science, particularly commercial science, as
moving too quickly and irresponsibly toward new technologies without adequate
safeguards, long-term health data or proper respect for existing cultural and
moral values.

   "We consider genetically engineered food to be unnecessary and a form of
living pollution," said Jeanie Merrill, a spokeswoman for the environmental
group Greenpeace.  "People want safe, sustainable food, not a system that
produces toxins and can't predict exactly where or what will happen next."

   But are such predictions even possible?  No, responds Greg Stock, director of
the Program on Medicine, Technology and Society at UCLA.  "When people talk
about banning something, it lulls people into thinking that something isn't
going to happen.  But calling for a ban on genetically engineered foods won't
work.  There are too many people working on it.  There's too much promise.  I
think what you'd really want to do is explore the situation as best you can, to
identify any risks as early as possible.

   "We should pursue genetic research carefully but diligently, as far as it
will take us.  There are two principal risks in biotechnology.  The first is
that there will be some kind of mistake.  That's what everybody focuses on, the
potential for disaster.  The second risk is that by implementing bans or
restrictive funding, you slow down the advance of technology and any resulting
benefit.  How many people, for example, will die of cancer or some other disease
because a treatment is not being pursued as aggressively as it could be?  The
danger is nebulous, hard to imagine, but the consequences, I think, are
greater."

   You again

   Nowhere is the future of biotechnology more divisive than in the debate over
human cloning.  In the years since Dolly debuted in 1996, scientists have cloned
mice, cows, goats, pigs with mixed results.  Others are attempting to clone
cats, dogs and primates.  In this context, human cloning appears inevitable.
Indeed, it may already have happened.

   "A lot of people besides Richard Seed have publicly said they are interested
in human cloning, particularly as a way to help infertile couples," said Randy
Wicker, co-founder of the Human Cloning Foundation, an advocacy group.  "There
may be a clinic or lab out there, somewhere in the world, that has already
cloned a human.  For obvious reasons, they haven't publicized it."

   Wicker vociferously believes that opposition to biotechnology, whether
cloning or gene therapy, is wrong-headed.  "How can you stop or outlaw
knowledge?  How do you stop progress?" he asks.  "Is it right for some people to
decide others cannot use science to have a child or replace a dead loved one?
Is it right for them to tell farmers in some destitute Third World country that
they cannot use a genetically modified rice that would feed them and maybe
eliminate a chronic disease like river blindness?"

   Wicker's answer is obvious, but some biotech critics say it's also didactic
and simplistic -- charges that are often directed against them.

   "I don't think we're against biotechnology per se," said Rebecca Goldburg, a
senior scientist with Environmental Defense, an environmental group.  "We've
been critical over the years, at least concerning agriculture.  We believe there
are some risks that haven't received enough consideration from governing
agencies and industry."

   For example, Monsanto has produced a variety of food crops genetically
modified to resist the effects of the powerful herbicide, Roundup.  Such crops,
says the agrichemical giant, are more environmentally friendly because farmers
can employ a single dose of Roundup to kill unwanted weeds rather than resort to
multiple sprayings of multiple herbicides over the course of a growing season.
Critics counter, however, that there is evidence that farmers do just the
opposite, spraying Roundup more frequently because they do not have to worry
about inadvertently killing their crop.

   Then there are those foods, such as corn or soybeans, that have been modified
to incorporate the genes of bacteria that are deadly to crop pests.  Skeptics
wonder whether the same bacterial genes might not eventually prove harmful to
humans as well.

   "Science has not adequately answered these questions and existing laws have
not been up to snuff," said Goldburg.  "We've tended to promote industry at the
expense of consumers.  We need to look harder."

   Food for thought

   And so it comes back to consumers.  If science, as Weir at the University of
Delaware says, has failed to adequately provide answers, the public has failed
to ask enough questions, said Greg Fowler, executive director of Gene Forum, a
non-profit organization based in Portland, Ore. that promotes discussion of
biotechnology issues.

   "Obviously there's no way for society to keep up with what science is doing.
There's always going to be a lag between discovery and the law," said Fowler.
"But it's imperative that we talk about this more and better than we are now.

   "We need to know what roads exist so that we can decide which one to go down.
Some people argue that biotechnology is like playing God. Some people say we're
already in God's hands, that we should simply proceed and see where he leads us.
What I know is that we need a better dialogue about not whether we will change,
but how.  We should ask ourselves what the next generation would like."


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC | 2 CHARTS | 1 ILLUSTRATION; 3. Anita L. Arambula / Union-Tribune
4. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune; 1. WHAT IS BIOTECH? 2. SAN DIEGO'S ROLE 4.
Protesters, including one dressed as a genetically distressed ear of corn, used
a large biotechnology conference in San Diego as a forum last weekend to address
their fears of biotechnology. (F-4)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2001


                             1705 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 27, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 905 words

HEADLINE: Drugmaker looks to expand S.D. presence

BYLINE: Mike Freeman and Thomas Kupper, STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Irish drugmaker Elan Corp. came to the Bio2001 convention yesterday bearing
gifts for San Diego -- between 300 and 500 of them. That's the number of jobs
the company intends to add to San Diego in the next two years as it moves its
North American biopharmaceutical division to Sorrento Valley, according to a
company official. Daniel Welch, president of worldwide biopharmaceuticals for
Elan, said the company is negotiating with local government officials to get the
necessary permits to expand the former Dura Pharmaceuticals research campus.

   Elan bought Dura last November. Though Elan trimmed Dura's 400 employees to
215 as it consolidated operations, Welch said that Elan might "double what we
took away."

   The company intends to employ between 500 and 700 in clinical development,
regulatory and administrative positions in San Diego. Elan announced earlier
this month that it will relocate most of its North American biopharmaceutical
unit from New Jersey to San Diego, but at the time did not discuss the potential
job impact. Welch said the company wants to be closer to its San Francisco
research unit and the collaborations it has with several California biotechs.

   Elan has made investments in 10 San Diego biotech companies. o o o o o o The
boom in knowledge about human genes could have an unexpected side effect: large
numbers of drugs failing in clinical trials. Analyst Rachel Leheny of Lehman
Brothers said in a Bio2001 presentation that the huge numbers of new genes
discovered in recent years has allowed drug companies to put more compounds into
testing than ever before. But the very speed with which these drugs get into
testing means that less research is done on many of them beforehand.

   Additionally, more drugs in testing are truly new, as opposed to variations
on drugs already on the market. But as with all experimental drugs, Leheny said,
many of these new drugs probably won't work.

   She said those setbacks could start to hit drug companies -- especially big
pharmaceutical companies with many drugs in testing -- in the next few years.
"When you get to phase II (of testing), you actually decrease your chances of
success pretty dramatically," Leheny said. The good news for biotechs: Fewer of
them have rushed large numbers of genomics-driven drugs into testing than have
large pharmaceutical companies.

   Leheny said that means "Big Pharma" will feel more of the pain if these
projects don't produce results right away. o o o o o o In Africa, farm
productivity is half of what it is in the rest of the world, and 60 percent of
female agricultural labor involves weeding crops. Biotech holds promise to break
the cycle of poverty and hunger in rural Africa, according to Florence Wambugu,
director of the Afri-Center chapter of the International Service for the
Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications. Speaking at Bio2001 yesterday, Wambugu
urged biotech leaders not to dismiss Africa in their business models.

   She said biotech companies such as Monsanto are working in Africa, but "there
is a lot more that can be done." Wambugu has long been a friend of the industry,
speaking at international conferences in support of biotech's role in developing
countries.

   While working for Monsanto, she used gene therapy to develop a sweet potato
variety that is resistant to viral diseases that were devastating harvests in
Africa. In her speech yesterday, she described how other biotech advances in
cotton, corn and bananas were working in Kenya.

   For example, bioengineered cotton improves yields and allows Africa's small
farmers to make a better living, she said. "Cotton is moneymaking.

   It is doing very well," she said.

   "Banana is moneymaking.

   Maize is moneymaking." Wambugu is the author of "Modifying Africa: How
Biotechnology Can Benefit the Poor and Hungry -- a case study from Kenya."

   One of nine children growing up in Kenya's highlands, Wambugu saw how her
family struggled to grow enough food.

   Her mother sold a cow so Wambugu would have the money to attend secondary
school. "Seeing the results for myself has strengthened my passionate belief in
the power of biotechnology to boost food production in Africa," she said. o o o
o o o Can biotechnology help save forests? In a broad-ranging session Monday
focusing on biotech's fledgling steps in forestry, industry officials spelled
out how they are working to make trees grow faster and larger. "Forestry in the
future will increasingly rely on the plantation formula because it's sustainable
and uses less land," said Maud Hinchee, chief technology officer at ArborGen, a
New Zealand-based partnership.

   "If you can harvest sooner and produce larger trees, you're reducing demand
on natural forests." Hinchee acknowledged that it could take eight to 10 years
before biotech gains a foothold in forestry.

   Managing the release of pollen from bio-engineered trees is a key concern.
However, the industry believes it can use science to develop and enhance a
sustainable wood product supply -- thus reducing the demand to log natural
forests.

   Hinchee noted that between 1995 and 1999, logging cleared 140 million acres
of forest in developing countries, in part because wood is still used for
cooking and heating.

   In contrast, developed countries such as the U.S. and those in Europe
increased the amount of forested land by 22 million acres during the same time
period. The writers can be reached by e-mail at financial@uniontrib.com or by
phone at (619) 299-3131.

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Janella Gatchalian (far left) of Chatsworth looked
at the display for Pharmagene, which specializes in the use of human tissue for
drug discovery and development. 2. Networking was fast and furious yesterday
among attendees of Bio2001 at the San Diego Convention Center. 3. There's no
shortage of business talk among recruiters and biotech industry workers at the
Bio2001 convention, which ends today. (C-2); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3. John Gastaldo /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1706 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 27, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1759 words

HEADLINE: Life Changes;
Good, bad or both, biotechnology is redefining our future

SERIES: Quest; Bio2001; BIOTECH;  Under the microscope. One in a series.

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   When the Flavr Savr tomato -- genetically modified to stay ripe longer on
store shelves -- debuted in 1994, it provoked immediate reaction. Supporters
lauded the wintertime fruit as the first in what would surely be a parade of
edibles made more nutritious, tastier and abundant through biotechnology.
Opponents decried the Flavr Savr as a genetic monstrosity, the first -- and
hopefully last -- Frankenfood. When Dolly the cloned sheep said hello two years
later, responses were, not surprisingly, quicker and louder.

   In Chicago, a physicist named Richard Seed announced plans to open a clinic
for human cloning.

   In Washington, D.C., then-House Majority Leader Dick Armey declared his plans
to seek an immediate ban on human cloning. "I for one don't want to live in a
Brave New World of sidewalk cloning clinics.

   Congress should pass a human cloning ban quickly and stop this risky
experimentation before it starts.

   Human cloning should remain the province of the mad scientists of science
fiction," Armey said. In the end, sluggish sales doomed the Flavr Savr tomato,
which was pulled from the market, though other genetically modified foods (some
identified as such, some not) have followed with more success.

   Seed's clinic has yet to materialize, but the same can be said of Armey's
total ban on human cloning. And so it goes: Each week, somewhere in the world,
critics of biotechnology call for a new ban, funding cuts or some sort of
restrictive legislation. They organize and protest, as they have done this week
at the Bio2001 convention in San Diego. Yet science marches on.

   Even discounting the persistent hype, the promise of biotechnology is
breathtaking.

   To wit: In the next decades, scientists reasonably expect to begin applying
knowledge gleaned from the Human Genome Project -- the mapping of our DNA -- to
real-world problems, such as uncovering the genetic bases of various diseases
and traits and developing potent medicines that would be "personalized" to an
individual's genetic makeup. Genetic advances in medicine could eventually
conquer cancer, allow doctors to grow new organs from stem cells or induce
ailing organs to repair themselves.

   Science may even learn to reset the coding that causes cells -- and ourselves
-- to age. The next green revolution, say others, will be biotechnical.

   Phil Pardey, a senior research fellow at the International Food Policy
Research Institute, a non-partisan think tank, said new studies estimate the
world will need 35 percent more cereal grains, 60 percent more meat and 40
percent more root and tuber crops to accommodate global population growth over
the next 20 years. "Biotech opponents say world hunger is an issue of food
distribution and to a degree, it is right now.

   But the fact is, the world has very little room left to move.

   In most places, particularly in the developing world where most population
growth occurs, all of the good agricultural land is already being used, so any
food increase has to come in terms of boosted crop yields.

   The collective wisdom around here is that biotechnology is a promising
avenue, one that we would be foolish not to pursue." Even the staunchest
opponents of genetic engineering concede that something profound is happening.

   "Our way of life is likely to be more fundamentally transformed in the next
several decades than in the previous one thousand years," wrote Jeremy Rifkin in
"The Biotech Century." Rifkin believes biotechnology is dangerous and
short-sighted.

   He thinks it should be stopped, that society should step back.

   Others say it's too late. "Biotechnology is inevitable.

   That horse is out of the barn," said David Weir, director of the Delaware
Biotechnology Institute at the University of Delaware.

   "I mean, how do you stop people from trying to improve something -- whether
it's a medical procedure or a food -- if they have the technology to do so?

   You can't. You can't go backward. "So the better question is, How do you
manage inevitable change?

   How do you minimize the risks of biotechnology while maximizing the
potential?

   That's what many people don't understand, mostly because science has done a
really poor job of educating them about the issues of biotechnology." Fear
factor It's hard to say exactly what people think about biotechnology.

   When asked their general opinion of cloning, embryonic stem cell research or
genetically engineered food, most polls show a strong majority in opposition.

   But asked specifically if they support the elimination of fatal birth defects
through gene therapy or genetically modified foods that prevent disease, most
people answer yes. "The reason isn't hard to figure out," said Greg Pence, a
professor of philosophy and author of "Who's Afraid of Human Cloning?" "People
tend to fear anything new and unknown.

   Technologies like (the prenatal test) amniocentesis and in vitro
fertilization (IVF) were hugely opposed when they first appeared.

   Most people get their science from Hollywood, so in the case of IVF,
everybody imagined that test-tube babies meant kids actually coming out of test
tubes, popping out like little scaly monsters.

   Biotechnology has always had this tremendous yuck factor." Advocates of
biotechnology say these false or imperfect notions play into the hands of
critics, who portray science, particularly commercial science, as moving too
quickly and irresponsibly toward new technologies without adequate safeguards,
long-term health data or proper respect for existing cultural and moral values.
"We consider genetically engineered food to be unnecessary and a form of living
pollution," said Jeanie Merrill, a spokeswoman for the environmental group
Greenpeace.

   "People want safe, sustainable food, not a system that produces toxins and
can't predict exactly where or what will happen next." But are such predictions
even possible?

   No, responds Greg Stock, director of the Program on Medicine, Technology and
Society at UCLA.

   "When people talk about banning something, it lulls people into thinking that
something isn't going to happen.

   But calling for a ban on genetically engineered foods won't work.

   There are too many people working on it.

   There's too much promise.

   I think what you'd really want to do is explore the situation as best you
can, to identify any risks as early as possible. "We should pursue genetic
research carefully but diligently, as far as it will take us.

   There are two principal risks in biotechnology.

   The first is that there will be some kind of mistake.

   That's what everybody focuses on, the potential for disaster.

   The second risk is that by implementing bans or restrictive funding, you slow
down the advance of technology and any resulting benefit.

   How many people, for example, will die of cancer or some other disease
because a treatment is not being pursued as aggressively as it could be?

   The danger is nebulous, hard to imagine, but the consequences, I think, are
greater." You again Nowhere is the future of biotechnology more divisive than in
the debate over human cloning.

   In the years since Dolly debuted in 1996, scientists have cloned mice, cows,
goats, pigs with mixed results.

   Others are attempting to clone cats, dogs and primates.

   In this context, human cloning appears inevitable.

   Indeed, it may already have happened. "A lot of people besides Richard Seed
have publicly said they are interested in human cloning, particularly as a way
to help infertile couples," said Randy Wicker, co-founder of the Human Cloning
Foundation, an advocacy group.

   "There may be a clinic or lab out there, somewhere in the world, that has
already cloned a human.

   For obvious reasons, they haven't publicized it." Wicker vociferously
believes that opposition to biotechnology, whether cloning or gene therapy, is
wrong-headed.

   "How can you stop or outlaw knowledge?

   How do you stop progress?" he asks.

   "Is it right for some people to decide others cannot use science to have a
child or replace a dead loved one?

   Is it right for them to tell farmers in some destitute Third World country
that they cannot use a genetically modified rice that would feed them and maybe
eliminate a chronic disease like river blindness?" Wicker's answer is obvious,
but some biotech critics say it's also didactic and simplistic -- charges that
are often directed against them. "I don't think we're against biotechnology per
se," said Rebecca Goldburg, a senior scientist with Environmental Defense, an
environmental group. "We've been critical over the years, at least concerning
agriculture.

   We believe there are some risks that haven't received enough consideration
from governing agencies and industry." For example, Monsanto has produced a
variety of food crops genetically modified to resist the effects of the powerful
herbicide, Roundup.

   Such crops, says the agrichemical giant, are more environmentally friendly
because farmers can employ a single dose of Roundup to kill unwanted weeds
rather than resort to multiple sprayings of multiple herbicides over the course
of a growing season.

   Critics counter, however, that there is evidence that farmers do just the
opposite, spraying Roundup more frequently because they do not have to worry
about inadvertently killing their crop. Then there are those foods, such as corn
or soybeans, that have been modified to incorporate the genes of bacteria that
are deadly to crop pests.

   Skeptics wonder whether the same bacterial genes might not eventually prove
harmful to humans as well. "Science has not adequately answered these questions
and existing laws have not been up to snuff," said Goldburg.

   "We've tended to promote industry at the expense of consumers.

   We need to look harder." Food for thought And so it comes back to consumers.

   If science, as Weir at the University of Delaware says, has failed to
adequately provide answers, the public has failed to ask enough questions, said
Greg Fowler, executive director of Gene Forum, a non-profit organization based
in Portland, Ore. that promotes discussion of biotechnology issues. "Obviously
there's no way for society to keep up with what science is doing.

   There's always going to be a lag between discovery and the law," said Fowler.

   "But it's imperative that we talk about this more and better than we are now.
"We need to know what roads exist so that we can decide which one to go down.

   Some people argue that biotechnology is like playing God. Some people say
we're already in God's hands, that we should simply proceed and see where he
leads us.

   What I know is that we need a better dialogue about not whether we will
change, but how.

   We should ask ourselves what the next generation would like."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 2 CHARTS; 1 ILLUSTRATION; CAPTIONS: 1. WHAT IS BIOTECH? 2. SAN
DIEGO'S ROLE 4. Protesters, including one dressed as a genetically distressed
ear of corn, used a large biotechnology conference in San Diego as a forum last
weekend to address their fears of biotechnology. (F-4); PHOTOBY: 3. Anita L.
Arambula / Union-Tribune 4. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1707 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 26, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: BUILDING THE BODIES OF A NEW MACHINE INGENIOUS CHIPS MERGE HUMAN CELLS
AND SILICON TO MODEL HUMAN ORGAN

BYLINE: By Gareth Cook, Globe Staff

BODY:

   In her MIT laboratory, Linda Griffith has built a machine with the pulse of
life.

   Inside a circular box just larger than a watch face, she has built what she
hopes will be tomorrow's poison detector: a teeming colony of liver cells on a
tiny wafer of silicon.

      The liver chip, patented this spring, has already drawn the attention of
the US Department of Defense for its potential on the battlefield of the future,
where it could detect a surprise biological attack.

   In other hands, it could also be a major weapon in the battle to test the
toxicity of new drugs.

   Eventually, researchers and a swarm of interested pharmaceutical companies
are expected to try to adapt the same technique to create tiny models of human
body parts, such as the heart, muscles, and even the brain.

   "We hope to someday build the human body on a chip," said Griffith, associate
professor of bioengineering and chemical engineering at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.

   The liver chip, which combines advances in miniaturized manufacturing with
breakthroughs in cell biology, is part of an engineering revolution: the
mingling of cells and electronics to create machines with living components.

   In laboratories across the country, innovations such as toxin-tracking
bacteria mounted on chips and a robotic arm directed by monkey brain waves are
blurring the line between what is alive and what is a machine.

   Though some might see this as the stuff of nightmares, researchers see
promise for dramatic advances in medicine. Deciphering the communications of
nerve cells, for instance, would help in building better prosthetic limbs.

   The liver chip was made possible by new techniques of growing cells, which
have also brought artificial skin and cartilage and could one day make it
possible to grow replacement organs.

   The groundbreaking insight behind the liver chip was a way to grow what its
creator calls 3-D liver cells. On the flat terrain of a petri dish, liver cells
don't behave as they do in the body, making it hard to use them for research.

   The liver chip has a three-dimensional architecture that channels a
nutrient-rich liquid through tiny chimneys that hold and protect the cells,
allowing them to form colonies and creating an environment in which they behave
more naturally.

   That could be tremendously useful for drug companies. The liver is the body's
gatekeeper, breaking down dangerous substances in the bloodstream. Many drugs
fail because they are toxic to the liver or because the liver breaks them down
before they can act. To know whether a drug will work in humans, researchers
must know how the liver will respond to it.

   "I'm pretty excited about this," said Ronald White, a scientist with the
Schering-Plough Research Institute. "The promise is that the results you get
from this will be much more like the results you would get from real human
beings."

   The chip's preliminary results have been promising, said White and others in
the biotech industry, but the team will need to test its response to a wider
range of substances before it will be used for medical research.

   The chip could have other applications. It could be used to test new methods
of delivering gene therapies into the body, said Simon Eastman, a senior
scientist at Genzyme. And it could also be used to follow how liver cancer moves
through healthy cells.

   One challenge facing the team that built the liver chip, Griffith said, was
designing the channels so that the fluid flows well. Cells need a constant flow,
not just for food, but also as a signal that all is well and that they should
continue with their business.

   In the liver, "the constant flow of blood creates forces like patting a
kitten on the back," Griffith said.

   Another central problem is finding building materials that don't interfere
with biological processes. Griffith said that the silicon is chemically treated
to minimize interference and make it more biocompatible.

   Roberta Brinton, a scientist at the University of Southern California, is
part of a team that is building neurochips, devices that mimic the way neurons
fire in the brain or spinal cord.

   She has faced many of the same challenges that Griffith has faced with her
liver chip at MIT and said that seemingly mundane considerations like building
materials have proved vital to getting neurons to attach themselves to
electrodes.

   In the long term, Brinton said she hopes to use neurochips to repair damage
to the brain or spine.

   Scientist have already made remarkable strides in their ability to decode the
language of neurons, she said. In November, a team from Duke University and MIT
announced that they had made an arm stretch under the control of a monkey's
brain.

   Yet as the boundary between humans and machines erodes, ethicists and some of
the scientists involved warn that new, difficult ethical territory lies ahead.

   As scientists learn to grow and control entire organs, the same technology
that could improve millions of lives could also make possible things like
superhuman bionics and even "mind control," Brinton said. The time has come, he
added, to begin a public debate about the possibilities.

   Gareth Cook can be reached by e-mail at cook@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Linda Griffith displaying a newly patented liver chip, which
could be used to test the toxicity of new drugs. / GLOBE PHOTO / AMY NEWMAN

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2001


                             1708 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      JUNE 26, 2001 Tuesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Medical center tries to cope with losses;
In Texas, Tropical Storm Allison destroyed years of research on major illnesses.

BYLINE: Pam Easton ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:

   Microscopes and computers are covered with mud. Walls are caved in from the
force of water. Wires dangle from the ceiling.

   In the basements of some of the world's premier medical institutions,
scientists are scrambling to figure out what they lost and what they can salvage
after floods from the torrential rains of Tropical Storm Allison more than two
weeks ago destroyed or left in doubt years of research on cancer, AIDS,
childhood illnesses, heart disease and gene therapy.

   The flooding that hit Houston devastated the Texas Medical Center, a vast
complex that includes the University of Texas' M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, the
university's Health Science Center, Texas Children's Hospital, Methodist
Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, and the Texas Heart Institute at St.
Luke's Episcopal Hospital.

   "We've lost blood and urine samples from patients that were being used to
identify genes and protein abnormalities involved in major human diseases -
diseases that we can't cure presently," Dr. James Willerson, president of the
Health Science Center, said yesterday. "Research records and animal models that
have been engineered to mimic human disease that have been five, 10 years or
more in creation have also been lost."

   Willerson, leading a congressional delegation on a tour through his damaged
research center, said the biggest losses were 4,000 laboratory animals,
including monkeys and rabbits. About 400 researchers at the medical school are
trying to pick up the pieces of their life's work.

   Researchers are working to replace the animals and are considering using
records that were not lost in the flood to contact patients and ask them to
submit new tissue samples.

   "It may be inconvenient for the patients, but it may be one way to do it,"
Willerson said.

   Dr. Ralph Feigin, president of Baylor College of Medicine, said there was at
least $300 million of damage at Baylor alone.

   "We do not yet have a good detailed assessment of everything we have or every
thing that we have lost," he said. "We just know what we have been able to
catalog to date."

   "The research that has been lost or impacted here is of national scientific
interest," Rep. Kevin Brady (R., Texas) said after visiting the labs that had
been totally submerged. "In fact, I'll say it is of worldwide scientific
interest."

   He added: "As disheartening as it has been for us to see this damage, think
of a family whose mom is counting on this medical breakthrough or whose child is
counting on this medical breakthrough."

   At the flood's height, nine of the city's 30 hospitals were closed to new
patients. Memorial Hermann Hospital sustained $433 million in damage and will
remain closed for at least three more weeks. The hospital's pharmacy, labs and
cardiac catheterization unit were destroyed.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
DAVID J. PHILLIP, Associated Press
Miguel Reyes cleans up the basement floor of the Texas Medical Center. A group
of elected officials toured the flooded center, seeing where the waters
destroyed samples and killed research animals.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1709 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 26, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Women First shares up 33%

   San Diego-based Women First HealthCare Inc. signed a manufacturing agreement
for its Ortho-Est estrogen replacement pill with Pharmaceutics International
Inc. Terms of the agreement were not disclosed.  Women First acquired the rights
for Ortho-Est from Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceutical starting Jan. 1. Under the terms
of the sale, Women First would have to payOrtho-McNeil a 20 percent increase in
the transfer price plus a premium on net sales if a new manufacturing
partnership was not reached by April 2002. Shares of Women First's stock closed
at $7.71, up $1.91 or 33 percent.

   Alliance buys Metracor stake

   Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp. announced it has acquired a 5 percent ownership
in Metracor Technologies Inc. Alliance will pay $500,000 in cash to Metracor and
transfer to the company ownership of a cardiovascular and oxygenation monitoring
device for which a marketing application was recently submitted to the Food and
Drug Administration.  Alliance has the option to acquire 35 percent ownership in
Metracor by paying $14.1 million or issuing 1.97 million shares of Alliance
common stock by December 2002. The company can acquire an additional 10 percent
of Metracor by purchasing 666,000 shares of Alliance common stock for $4.7
million, also by December 2002. Alliance may be required to exercise these
options under circumstances that the company declined to reveal.  Metracor, a
San Diego-based medical device maker, also announced existing investors are
buying $6 million of Metracor stock, bringing the amount of venture capital
investment to more than $36 million.

   Zubkis ordered to repay funds

   A New York federal judge yesterday barred Steven (Vladislav) Zubkis, a target
of law enforcement for many years, from serving as an officer or director of a
public company, and ordered him to repay $21.6 million in ill-gotten gains.  The
court found that Zubkis made numerous misrepresentations in trying to hype the
stock of a San Diego company now named International Brands.  Zubkis argued
futilely that as a Ukrainian citizen, he was not subject to U.S. securities
laws.

   SureBeam, Saudi firm link

   San Diego-based SureBeam Corp. said yesterday it has a established a
strategic relationship with a Saudi firm to build a network of SureBeam
pasteurization facilities within Saudi Arabia.  SureBeam is a publicly traded
food irradiation technology company owned mostly by Titan.  In addition to the
$50 million, SureBeam said it will receive recurring royalty fees through
continuing operations of its equipment, which kills food-borne germs on food.

   Rickard is new BakBone CEO

   BakBone Software, a San Diego firm specializing in data storage management
software, yesterday named Keith Rickard as president and chief executive
officer.  Rickard recently served as president of Sterling Software's storage
management division, prior to Computer Associates' purchase of Sterling.

   Power plant pact awarded

   Fluor Corp. and Empresas ICA Sociedad Controladora have won a $159 million
contract to build the Sempra Energy Baja California power plant that will sell
power to California.  The plant will produce 600 megawatts, enough power for
450,000 California homes.  Construction is expected to take 26 months.  The work
includes a 230,000-volt transmission line to the U.S. border.

   Invitrogen sheds unit

   Carlsbad-based Invitrogen Corp. has sold its BioSepra chromatography business
to Ciphergen Biosystems for $12 million in cash.  The sale is expected to close
within 60 days.  The two companies also announced yesterday they have formed an
alliance to create biological products to accelerate discovery and development
research in the field of gene therapy.  The two companies will do a feasibility
study of integrating the technologies and product platforms fo both companies.
Following the study, the companies will negotiate terms to market research tools
and applications.

   MusicMatch players lure users

   San Diego's MusicMatch is beating competitors like Microsoft and RealNetworks
in the use of stand-alone media players, according to a report by Jupiter Media
Metrix.  The company's music player software, called MusicMatch Jukebox, had
4.15 million users in April -- more than any competitor.  Nearly 925,000 people
began using the software between January and April.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2001


                             1710 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 26, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-6

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: Bio2001 scientists urged to reach out to industry's critics

BYLINE: Mike Freeman; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 The leader of the Biotechnology Industry Organization yesterday urged
scientists to reach out to critics, suggesting a schism in ethical viewpoints
may not be as wide as they believe.

   Carl Feldbaum told delegates at Bio2001 that some criticism should be
expected, particularly over the industry's more-controversial sciences.  Debate
has focused on stem cell research using embryos, gene therapy, human and animal
cloning, bioengineered food and xenotransplantation -- the process of
genetically modifying animals to grow donor organs for humans.

   "Now we're in the middle of our own revolution, an extension of Darwin's and
as profound as Galileo's," Feldbaum said.  "We ought to expect a certain amount
of opposition and suspicion from defenders of the established social and
religious doctrines."

   Noting that 95 percent of Americans say they believe in God, Feldbaum advised
the industry to be tolerant of diverse religious views that could lead some to
question biotech's practices.

   Science and faith

   "It would be foolish and arrogant of us to say that people must abandon the
positions dictated by their faith," he said.  "When people understand what's at
stake, even deeply religious individuals will frequently be on the side of
scientific inquiry and discussion, and so will the United States Constitution."

   His remarks reflected increasing concern among biotech leaders over
opposition to the technology in the United States and particularly in Europe,
where many countries are refusing to accept bioengineered food.

   In past years, there has been little discussion of biotech's critics at the
annual industry conferences.  But that changed last year when more than 1,500
protesters showed up at the gathering in Boston.

   Since then, the industry has attempted to counter criticism in part through a
media campaign around the theme, "Biotechnology -- a big word that means hope."

   Meeting objections

   Feldbaum said the industry must be sensitive to religious objections to some
of its developments, though he said those objections should not stop worthwhile
research from going forward.  "No one in biotech risks being burned at the stake
for cloning a sheep or mapping a human chromosome," he said.

   In an effort to reach out to critics, the Biotechnology Industry Association
has been meeting with religious leaders and others who describe themselves as
deeply religious, Feldbaum said.

   Many religious leaders cheered the mapping of the human genome, he said, and
many deeply religious people applaud biotech's efforts to improve medicine.
Feldbaum said the discussion must continue.

   "I know from years of experience that a lot of people in this industry and in
this room enjoy a good argument," he said.  "Just as religious leaders recognize
their responsibility to learn about biotechnology, we have a responsibility to
work with them, to educate them and to learn from them."

   Mike Freeman's e-mail address is mike.freeman@uniontrib.com. His phone number
is (760) 476-8209.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2001


                             1711 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 26, 2001 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS ; Pg. C-6

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: Bio2001 scientists urged to reach out to industry's critics

BYLINE: Mike Freeman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The leader of the Biotechnology Industry Organization yesterday urged
scientists to reach out to critics, suggesting a schism in ethical viewpoints
may not be as wide as they believe. Carl Feldbaum told delegates at Bio2001 that
some criticism should be expected, particularly over the industry's
more-controversial sciences. Debate has focused on stem cell research using
embryos, gene therapy, human and animal cloning, bioengineered food and
xenotransplantation -- the process of genetically modifying animals to grow
donor organs for humans. "Now we're in the middle of our own revolution, an
extension of Darwin's and as profound as Galileo's," Feldbaum said.

   "We ought to expect a certain amount of opposition and suspicion from
defenders of the established social and religious doctrines." Noting that 95
percent of Americans say they believe in God, Feldbaum advised the industry to
be tolerant of diverse religious views that could lead some to question
biotech's practices. Science and faith "It would be foolish and arrogant of us
to say that people must abandon the positions dictated by their faith," he said.

   "When people understand what's at stake, even deeply religious individuals
will frequently be on the side of scientific inquiry and discussion, and so will
the United States Constitution." His remarks reflected increasing concern among
biotech leaders over opposition to the technology in the United States and
particularly in Europe, where many countries are refusing to accept
bioengineered food. In past years, there has been little discussion of biotech's
critics at the annual industry conferences.

   But that changed last year when more than 1,500 protesters showed up at the
gathering in Boston. Since then, the industry has attempted to counter criticism
in part through a media campaign around the theme, "Biotechnology -- a big word
that means hope." Meeting objections Feldbaum said the industry must be
sensitive to religious objections to some of its developments, though he said
those objections should not stop worthwhile research from going forward.

   "No one in biotech risks being burned at the stake for cloning a sheep or
mapping a human chromosome," he said. In an effort to reach out to critics, the
Biotechnology Industry Association has been meeting with religious leaders and
others who describe themselves as deeply religious, Feldbaum said. Many
religious leaders cheered the mapping of the human genome, he said, and many
deeply religious people applaud biotech's efforts to improve medicine.

   Feldbaum said the discussion must continue. "I know from years of experience
that a lot of people in this industry and in this room enjoy a good argument,"
he said.

   "Just as religious leaders recognize their responsibility to learn about
biotechnology, we have a responsibility to work with them, to educate them and
to learn from them." Mike Freeman's e-mail address is
mike.freeman@uniontrib.com. His phone number is (760) 476-8209.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1712 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       June 25, 2001 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 5007 words

HEADLINE: The changing creed of Hopkins science;
 What once was heresy is now the mission: a partnership with business to advance
research.

BYLINE: Douglas M. Birch and Gary Cohn

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Venture capitalist Steve Gorlin planted himself in a classroom at the Johns
Hopkins University's medical school and listened for two days as, one after
another, nearly a dozen top researchers pitched ideas and promoted discoveries.
Gorlin quickly cut deals to launch two companies to exploit the most promising
work.

   The Florida investor routinely scouts academic labs, seeking new medical
technology or products that could be turned into money. But Hopkins particularly
impressed him. Its scientists were world class; its administrators could not
have been more obliging. Eager to do business, they arranged those marathon
meetings three years ago and a party months later at the president's mansion.

   "I've done a lot of deals over the years," Gorlin said. At Hopkins, "it was
total cooperation."

   Not so long ago, Gorlin's experience would have been unthinkable at most
medical research centers and especially at Hopkins, which had long been hostile
to industry. But its culture is being transformed as it embraces business
opportunities. Today, the nation's first university dedicated to pure research
is fast becoming one of its most entrepreneurial schools.

   Scientists at Hopkins serve as consultants and paid scientific advisers to
corporations. The university filed more patent applications in 1999 than all but
two other major research centers. It has helped launch 18 companies in recent
years, and corporate-sponsored research at the medical school has nearly
quadrupled in the past decade.

   By commercializing its medical research, Hopkins hopes to tap new sources of
revenue, advance the search for lifesaving treatments and promote economic
development in Baltimore. If it hesitates, Hopkins could drift behind in the
competition for research money and top-notch faculty and students.

   "Ten or 15 years ago, a lot of what we're doing would have been heresy," says
William P. Tew, head of business development at the medical school. "Now there
is a greater understanding that business licensing and development are part of
the university mission."

   But this new mission carries risks: for the integrity of research, for the
safety of patients participating in experiments and for the university's most
valuable asset - its reputation. President William R. Brody, a major force
behind Hopkins' new enterprising spirit, recognizes the perils, saying that
academia's alliance with industry has created a "minefield of potential
conflicts."

   The Baltimore institution has not been tainted by scandals like those that
have embarrassed other top schools. While Hopkins was painfully reminded of the
risks involved in medical experiments when a healthy young woman died June 2
after participating in an asthma study, there is no evidence that the doctors
involved had any financial interest in the outcome - and therefore no suggestion
that their judgment might have been clouded by financial incentives.

   But elsewhere at the medical school, officials have given their blessing to
the kinds of financial deals that have caused trouble at other universities.

   Hopkins recently allowed a senior scientist to inoculate volunteers with an
experimental vaccine developed by a company he co-founded. It permitted
physicians to do human testing of tiny Magnetic Resonance Imaging devices that
they had invented - instruments being developed by a company that the doctors
and Hopkins partly own. A Hopkins neurologist recently tested a drug that could
earn millions for Hopkins, some of its leading scientists and a company closely
tied to both.

   According to Brody, the benefits of academia's new partnership with
corporations outweigh the risks. "To move your research forward, you've got to
do partnerships with industry," he says.

   Some administrators even say the lure of money can help focus scientists on
important work. As former Hopkins Vice Dean David Blake often told colleagues:
"No conflict, no interest."

   Unlike Harvard University, its chief rival, Hopkins does not bar scientists
from conducting certain research - when, for example, they have more than
$20,000 invested in the company sponsoring the work. Instead, Hopkins officials
say they "manage" financial conflicts of interest by taking steps to discourage
abuses - requiring scientists to place stock in escrow and to disclose to
patients and publications their financial ties in drug trials.

   Many medical researchers indignantly insist that the prospect of wealth would
never lead them to cut corners or take unnecessary risks with patients. But many
experts are unconvinced.

   "It's the kind of arrogance you see in no other field," says Dr. Marcia
Angell, former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine. "What would be
considered a grotesque conflict of interest if a politician or judge did it is
somehow not in a physician."

   Publicly, Hopkins describes itself as moving cautiously into what Brody calls
the "no man's land" between universities and corporations. But privately, school
officials at times have adopted a bolder tone.

   Dr. Bart Chernow, then vice dean of research at the medical school, strode
into a corporate boardroom in Rockville in September 1998 and pumped the hand of
J. Craig Venter, who had just launched a company to decipher the human genome.

   Proposing a business partnership, Chernow boasted that Hopkins was "one of
the biggest biotech companies in the world." Perhaps the school could supply
Venter with blood and tissue samples from some of the 100,000 patients Hopkins
sees each year, he suggested. The material is a treasure-trove of
disease-related genes, ripe for discovery and patenting.

   "There is this supposed immorality in trying to patent genes and develop new
medicines," Chernow said, shaking his head. But Hopkins, he said, had finally
recognized that industry was not its adversary but its greatest ally.

   "We as a university have become very entrepreneurial," he said. "We as an
institution have taken our heads out of the sand."

   The new entrepreneur

   No one better embodies the new Hopkins culture than Dr. Solomon H. Snyder.

   He is one of Hopkins' marquee names, an authority on how brain cells
communicate with one another. At 31, he became the youngest full professor in
the school's history. His work has helped revolutionize drug research; he's won
dozens of major prizes and is considered a contender for the Nobel.

   Snyder's discoveries have earned 37 U.S. patents. He co-founded two biotech
companies, including Baltimore's most successful - Guilford Pharmaceuticals
Inc., where Snyder is on the board of directors, chairman of the science
committee and a $213,000-a- year consultant. Genetic Engineering News recently
listed him among the nation's top 100 "molecular millionaires," with biotech
stocks worth $24.6 million.

   Back when he was a medical student at Georgetown University, Snyder says,
future surgeons and anesthesiologists asked why he wanted to go into research.
How do you make money doing that? Today, he says, "I do a lot better than they
do."

   Snyder, 62, is slight, pale and, as a former collaborator calls him, "scary
smart." His business success has drawn praise, envy and whispered criticism from
colleagues.

   "The thing that I find distressing is that because I engage in that process,
people say, 'Oh, well, Snyder must be a crook because he makes money,'" he says.
But there's nothing wrong with pursuing wealth, he says. "Enlightened
self-interest is not a bad thing."

   As Guilford's chief scientific adviser, Snyder sets the company's research
agenda. He often writes papers with company scientists. Two top Guilford
researchers were once his students, and eight other employees had worked at
Hopkins.

   Sometimes, Snyder helps guide work on a daily basis. "If something
interesting is happening, e-mail can fly back and forth," said Joseph P.
Steiner, chief of neurobiology at Guilford. Much of the work by researchers in
Snyder's Hopkins lab parallels that at Guilford. A scientist in Snyder's lab,
for example, is studying how a Guilford drug promotes nerve cell growth.

   Snyder insists, though, that Guilford's commercial goals don't steer his
academic research, which is funded by $1.5 million in annual grants from the
National Institutes of Health. "I make discoveries and I publish them in the
public interest," he says. "Everything I do is available to every scientist on
Earth."

   For most of this century, medical researchers prided themselves on working
for the advancement of science, with little prospect of financial riches. Most
schools discouraged scientists from seeking patents, the main method by which
ideas are turned into money.

   Two University of Toronto researchers who learned how to collect human
insulin in 1922 patented the process, but only to prevent industry from
monopolizing it. After a Rutgers University scientist discovered the antibiotic
streptomycin in the 1940s, he patented the drug so he could give the
manufacturing rights to several companies and keep prices low.

   The Johns Hopkins University, founded by a well-to-do Quaker in 1876, was
dedicated to research. From the start, the institution disdained business.

   After Professor Ira Remsen and a student discovered saccharin in 1879, the
student patented the sweetener and built an industrial empire. But Remsen, who
became Hopkins' second president, wanted no part of it; he feared that the
pursuit of profits could divert the school from the pursuit of knowledge. He
said he would never "sully" his hands with corporate money.

   For more than a century, Remsen's stern ideals defined Hopkins. Scientists
there discovered adrenaline in 1897, the anticoagulant heparin in 1916 and the
antiseptic mercurochrome in 1919. Not one, apparently, was patented by Hopkins.

   The faculty voted in 1933 to bar the medical school from owning patents and
to discourage professors from seeking them. In 1949, Hopkins' medical school
dean, Alan M. Chesney, icily declined an invitation to a conference on
academic-industry relations. There had been "no change in the attitude of the
faculty" about patents, he wrote.

   A few schools, including Stanford University and the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, sought commercial ties. Both were competing against established
rivals - the University of California at Berkeley and Harvard, respectively. But
most elite universities were not interested. After Hopkins physician Hugh J.
Davis co-invented a contraceptive device called the Dalkon Shield in the late
1960s, he offered to let the school patent it. When the dean turned him down,
Davis sold it himself, earning more than $500,000.

   But the device was flawed. Terrible infections caused many women to become
sterile, miscarry or die; victims eventually collected $3 billion in damage
awards. Hopkins was not liable, but the school was embarrassed. Maryann Feldman,
an economist studying Hopkins' ties to industry, says the episode cemented the
institution's distrust of commerce.

   Then came the biotech revolution, which opened up novel ways to discover and
manufacture drugs. It was spurred by the discovery at Hopkins of the first
chemicals for cutting and splicing genetic material. The breakthrough would earn
two Hopkins scientists, Daniel Nathans and Hamilton O. Smith, a Nobel Prize in
1978 and create a $300 million-a-year industry. Yet neither the scientists nor
the school considered patenting the work.

   Down from the ivory tower

   Hopkins remained a spectator as other schools plunged into the commercial
world. Genentech, a biotech company tied to Stanford and the University of
California at San Francisco, went public in early 1980. Within hours, its stock
price leapt from $35 to $89. Daniel Kevles, a Yale historian, said scientists
and investors were dazzled by "the expectation of medical miracles and profit
spectaculars." That year, Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act, allowing schools to
patent taxpayer-subsidized research.

   Snyder didn't pay much attention until 1982, when David and Isaac Blech, two
biotech promoters, called him. Over lunch at Danny's, an expensive Charles
Street restaurant, they struck a deal. Snyder and the Blechs co-founded Nova
Pharmaceuticals in 1983. The brothers quickly sold $6.2 million worth of stock
in the new company. "I was just amazed that out of thin air you could raise
money," Snyder says.

   Some at Hopkins disapproved. "You either saw Sol as a prolific scientist who
was greedy and therefore had a company or you saw him as a terrific scientist
who was a trailblazer in making commercial success out of his discoveries,"
recalls Blake, the former Hopkins administrator.

   Blake and Snyder, friends and tennis partners, believed the medical school
needed to encourage business ties. They gained a powerful ally in 1987, when
William Brody became head of Hopkins' radiology department. An MIT-trained
electrical engineer and Stanford-educated physician, Brody had co-founded three
medical device companies while on Stanford's faculty and taken a leave of
absence to run one of them. Stanford was a commercial hothouse, planting the
seeds of the companies that today form Silicon Valley.

   When he arrived in Baltimore, Brody says, "Hopkins was a cloistered
environment in which almost none of this was being done." He launched seminars
to sell entrepreneurship and asked Snyder to be a featured speaker.

   They found a ready audience. A new generation of scientists was coming to
Hopkins. And as senior faculty members watched colleagues elsewhere earn
millions, their anti-business attitudes softened. They talked wistfully about
discoveries they hadn't patented, fortunes they hadn't made.

   In 1992, the medical school dean encouraged more business activity by
faculty. Hopkins changed its rules so it could accept stock instead of cash in
return for rights to its patents. Finally, Brody became president in 1997. The
school's trustees, seeking to steer Hopkins in a different direction, wanted
someone who understood industry.

   "There was a feeling," says Feldman, "that the time had come."

   'The Big White Pill'

   One of the most promising discoveries to come out of Hopkins' expanding
alliance with industry is nicknamed "The Big White Pill."

   The drug, created through research at Snyder's Hopkins lab and Guilford
Pharmaceuticals, could stop the memory loss of Alzheimer's victims, halt the
shaking brought by Parkinson's disease, reverse the paralysis caused by strokes.
It might do what nature can't - significantly repair or regrow damaged brain
cells.

   "That's the end of the rainbow for all neuroscience research," Snyder says.

   Stock analysts call the pill a potential "blockbuster," a drug that earns $1
billion or more in annual sales. The biotech giant Amgen has licensed it from
Guilford in a deal worth up to $427 million. Hopkins holds patents on the drug,
called NIL-A, as well as about $839,000 worth of Guilford stock. "That could be
a huge benefit to JHU," says Dr. Craig Smith, Guilford's chief executive
officer.

   Amgen launched the first large-scale study of the drug last year, testing it
on 300 patients, but the trial is not yet completed. Hopkins was one of 40
testing centers. Dr. Stephen G. Reich, a neurologist, enrolled seven patients at
the hospital.

   Reich says he doesn't have a financial stake in the work. Hopkins obviously
does. Critics such as Angell, the former medical journal editor, argue that
institutions should not test drugs in which they have an investment. They are
"no longer able to act as watchdogs," she says.

   Hopkins' chief shield against bias in corporate-sponsored research is
disclosure. University policy, officials say, is to tell volunteers in drug
studies when Hopkins has a financial interest. But patients in the Parkinson's
study were not told.

   Why not?

   "I was not aware of the university's licensing agreement until after all
participants had enrolled in the study," Reich said in a written statement.

   Hopkins' Committee on Conflict of Interest, which oversees research projects
in which faculty members or the institution have a financial stake, did not
learn about the tests until reporters asked about them.

   The tests were no secret within the medical school, though. Neurologist Ted
Dawson, who holds patent rights with Snyder on the drug, said he was following
Reich's work. (Dawson did not participate, he added, because of his financial
interest.)

   Corporate-sponsored drug studies are increasingly important to Hopkins.
Pressure from regulators and insurers to curb costs has hurt teaching hospitals,
forcing them to seek new sources of income. While federal grants pay for most of
Hopkins' medical research - $297.8 million - corporate money nearly quadrupled
over the past decade, from $12.5 million to $49.5 million.

   But research paid for by industry often is controlled by the sponsor. A 1996
article in the journal Annals of Internal Medicine found that 98 percent of
scientific papers on corporate-sponsored drug trials favored the company's drug.

   "The company often keeps the data tapes, does the analysis - they decide if
and when a paper is published," says Angell. "What does that do for an
investigator? It makes him a tool of the drug company."

   Last year, Amgen asked a University of Rochester neurologist if his
Parkinson's Study Group, a network of academics, would run the NIL-A drug study.
However, the talks broke off and Amgen is now running the trial itself.

   Dr. Ira Shoulson, the Rochester physician, declined to discuss the talks, but
said his group demands unrestricted freedom to publish data and prohibits
consulting contracts for researchers. "One of the reasons commercial companies
decide not to work with the Parkinson's Study Group is we are unyielding on
these principles," Shoulson says.

   Cash and conflict

   The prickliest ethical issues arise when doctors test drugs on patients for
companies they partly own.

   A new biotech company may own the rights to promising compounds but have no
actual products. Good news can send a stock soaring and attract fresh capital.
Bad news can wipe out the company. Scientist-entrepreneurs have powerful
incentives to get favorable results and may be tempted to spin, squelch or hype
data. Worse, they might allow their investments to compromise the safety of
patients in drug trials.

   Many researchers point out that they already face pressure to produce
impressive work so they can win federal grants, promotions and recognition; they
say money is no greater a temptation. Hopkins officials are confident that they
have adequate safeguards, but they acknowledge that as physicians start business
ventures and test their products, more conflicts arise.

   Dr. Lawrence M. Lichtenstein, director of Hopkins' allergy and asthma
division, served as co-investigator in a test of a ragweed vaccine made by
Dynavax Technologies Corp., a California company he co-founded. The study was
led by Dr. Peter Creticos, an associate professor working under Lichtenstein and
a paid consultant to Dynavax.

   The two scientists tested the vaccine on 20 volunteers. Creticos declined to
be interviewed; Lichtenstein acknowledges that he had a conflict of interest,
but said it was not a problem because he discloses his investments and Hopkins
holds his stock in escrow.

   Why not let others test the vaccine?

   "I'm the best-skilled person in the country to study this," he says.
"Moreover, I want to study it."

   Hopkins officials asked Dr. Charles W. Flexner, a pharmacology professor, to
monitor the Dynavax study. Flexner reviewed the study plan, he says, and toned
down an overly enthusiastic press release. But he says his role was mostly to
address the "false perception" that there was a risk of bias or wrongdoing.

   "An investigator with a financial conflict is often the most qualified
scientist to study the intervention," says Flexner, a consultant to several drug
companies.

   Dr. David Blumenthal, a health policy expert at Harvard, says his
university's rules would not have permitted the Dynavax trial.

   "It's a bad idea," he says. "It's important (that) the public perceive the
research enterprise as free of commercial taint, especially where the lives of
individual patients are involved."

   In another venture, a group of Hopkins scientists co-founded Surgi-Vision, a
company that makes wirelike antennas that can be inserted into the body and
enable Magnetic Resonance Imaging devices to take high-resolution pictures of
diseased tissue. Hopkins owns an undisclosed amount of the company's stock,
along with Steve Gorlin, the venture capitalist who helped start the business.

   Researchers have tested three of the company's products on Hopkins patients.
It makes sense for the people who best understand the inventions to do the
testing, said Dr. Elias Zerhouni, chairman of the radiology department and
Surgi-Vision's co-founder.

   "You can't really take a technology like this and throw it in somebody's lap
and say, 'Do it,'" he says.

   Dr. Joao Lima, a co-inventor of the devices, tested one on more than 20
healthy volunteers and patients at Hopkins. He says he has qualms about his
investment and plans to donate his Surgi-Vision stock - held in escrow - to
Hopkins.

   "My involvement with the effort has forced me to think very clearly, very
intensively about this," he wrote in an e-mail to The Sun. "If all of us start
working for companies, no one's going to be left to do independent research. And
in the end, it's bad for business, it's bad for everybody."

   Dr. Drew Pardoll, a top Hopkins cancer researcher, also has misgivings about
pocketing corporate money. He is working with a biotech firm to develop a
genetically engineered cancer vaccine. He earns about $100,000 a year from the
collaboration but says he plows it all back into his research. If his stock
options are ever worth anything, he says, he'll donate them to Hopkins.

   "I consider it an obligation for the science and medical community to gain
and maintain the public trust," he says. And he could lose that trust, he fears,
if he had a fortune riding on the outcome of his work.

   Fighting off piranhas

   As universities become more entrepreneurial, they sometimes act aggressively
in protecting their business interests.

   Last year, Columbia University tried to get Congress to extend the school's
patent on a drugmaking process that would have generated at least $70 million a
year - and cost consumers millions.

   Hopkins officials decided in the early 1990s that the university could cash
in on a heart researcher's automated cardiopulmonary resuscitation machine,
which could save thousands of lives. The school took a 22.5 percent stake in
CardioLogic Systems Inc. in exchange for patent rights. But the company's plans
were thwarted by new FDA restrictions. The agency barred CardioLogic and other
trauma researchers from testing new treatments on unconscious patients, who
could not give consent.

   Hopkins lobbied to relax the informed-consent rule, the cornerstone of modern
medical ethics. Blake, then Hopkins' dean of research, wrote letters to members
of Congress. He insisted recently that his goal was to advance lifesaving
technology, not to protect Hopkins' investment.

   "I would argue that it was unethical not to pursue that with vigor," he says.

   The FDA eventually agreed to allow testing of patients without their consent
under certain conditions. Ethics experts were dismayed.

   "I don't think you should do research without consent, period," says George
Annas of Boston University. "Just because someone is lying down on the street
with a heart attack, they did not consent to be a research subject."

   After limited testing, the company gave up. Dr. Henry R. Halperin of Hopkins,
the inventor, says the machine was probably too big and expensive to be
practical. The company shut its doors in 1998 after investors lost about $25
million, one insider said.

   Medical schools pride themselves on generating research that leads to
breakthroughs in treatment of disease. Yet, driven by its commercial concerns,
Hopkins forced an effective cancer therapy off the market.

   Dr. Curt I. Civin, a pediatric cancer specialist at Hopkins, developed a
method for purifying stem cells, a discovery that helps restore blood and immune
systems of cancer patients.

   Hopkins patented the discovery and licensed it to Baxter Healthcare, a
medical products company. But a Seattle biotech firm called CellPro beat Baxter
to market with a suspiciously similar machine.

   Hopkins sued, alleging that the Seattle company had stolen Civin's research.
After six years, the university and two co-plaintiffs won a $15 million judgment
and CellPro shut down. Some doctors using the device said leukemia patients were
denied an effective treatment for a time. Hopkins insists that never happened.
Still, the school and Civin endured an acid bath of bad publicity.

   "It was horrible," he says. "They were implying that I was doing things that
might hurt patients."

   As chairman of the medical school's Committee on Conflict of Interest, Civin
plays a key role in monitoring researchers' corporate ties and reviewing
commitments to ensure that they do not compromise their independence. Every
year, Hopkins scientists with financial ties to their work propose about 110
research projects involving human subjects, according to the university.

   The panel generally provides sympathetic oversight. Hopkins does not prohibit
such conflicts; instead, it requires researchers to put stock in escrow and
disclose their financial ties to the university, to patients and in
publications. Rarely, it appoints overseers such as Flexner. Hopkins says it has
disciplined two scientists in recent years for violating rules on conflict of
interest.

   Some at Hopkins jokingly refer to the 12-member panel as "the committee of
people with conflicts." That's because several high-profile panelists have
patented inventions, started companies or served as consultants to industry.
Snyder, its longest-serving member, says one of the committee's unofficial jobs
is to protect Hopkins faculty against lawsuits. "We're concerned about the
piranhas, the lawyers," he said.

   Hopkins only recently started looking at the school's own conflicts of
interest, partly as a result of questions raised by the Guilford study. But some
key people remain skeptical that a problem exists.

   "I tend to fall asleep during these discussions, because it doesn't seem to
be for real," Snyder says.

   "I haven't really thought about institutional conflicts of interest," Brody
says. "We rely on the principal investigator for the integrity of the research."

   Brody said Hopkins' purpose in investing in biotech companies and forming
other partnerships is to advance medicine and science. "The public view is that
you do these commercial deals and they're very lucrative," he says. Few, he
points out, make money.

   True, patents are like lottery tickets: It's hard to predict which will pay
off. But if one does, profits can be staggering.

   Some of Hopkins' best bets to hit it big? Dr. Francis P. Kuhajda and others
founded FASgen Inc. last year to exploit a compound that could cure obesity and
earn billions. VIRxSYS Corp., founded by Boro Dropulic, a former Hopkins
professor, has found a way to control gene replication that could lead to new
treatments for AIDS and cancer. A public health professor is trying to make a
breath analyzer that can diagnose injury and disease.

   And Dr. Bert Vogelstein, a world-renowned cancer researcher whose work has
earned 78 patents and attracted generous corporate support, has developed a more
accurate method of detecting disease-causing mutations in a patient's DNA.

   Eyeing new standards

   The integrity of medical experiments has become a matter of intense public
concern since the death two years ago of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene
therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. The physician overseeing that
trial and the medical center had a financial stake in the therapy being tested.
Government regulators cited the Penn researchers for numerous safety violations.

   That incident and other lapses prompted calls for closer government
monitoring of experiments and better self-policing by medical centers. At a
Baltimore conference last November, Dr. Greg Koski, director of the federal
Office for Human Research Protections, warned university officials that "we
better clean up our act or the bottom will fall out" of public support for
medical research.

   Research at Hopkins and other academic medical centers is governed by a
patchwork of rules and guidelines enforced by numerous federal agencies. Mostly,
schools are expected to police themselves. Even the minimal rules that exist are
rarely enforced, according to Michael J. Malinowski, a law professor at Widener
University in Delaware. "It's like having a tax code without having an IRS," he
says.

   Last month, a presidential commission called for creation of a new federal
office to oversee all research involving human subjects. A congressional
subcommittee is planning hearings on clinical trials and conflicts of interest.
Sens. Edward M. Kennedy, a Massachusetts Democrat, and Bill Frist, a Tennessee
Republican, are working on legislation that would strengthen protections for
participants in clinical trials.

   Meanwhile, universities are scrambling to find solutions that preserve their
historic autonomy. Harvard fears that its strict conflict-of-interest rules
could make it difficult to compete for top faculty against schools with less
stringent standards, such as Stanford and Hopkins, and is leading an effort to
persuade other universities to tighten their rules. That could take at least two
years while a task force that includes industry officials, patient advocates and
university leaders reviews guidelines.

   But Hopkins, convinced that collaborating with industry is the best way to
advance medicine and save lives, is unlikely to turn back.

   "The days of being able to live in the ivory tower are really gone," says
Tew.

NOTES:
SEE HARD COPY FOR CHART AND GRAPH

GRAPHIC: PHOTO(S) / GRAPH(S) / CHART(S), 1. A new vision: President William R.
Brody, a force behind, Hopkins' new enterprising spirit, says the benefits of
alliance with, industry outweigh the risks. "To move research forward, you've
got to, do partnerships with industry."; , 2. Close ties: Work by Hopkins
researchers parallels that at Guilford, Pharmaceuticals Inc. (above), co-founded
by Dr. Solomon H. Snyder, a, top Hopkins scientist.; , 3. The new Hopkins: Dr.
Solomon H. Snyder (right), talking with, graduate student Adam Resnick, has
helped revolutionize drug, research. He co-founded two biotech companies,
including Guilford, Pharmaceuticals in Baltimore, and is among the nation's top
100, "molecular millionaires," with biotech stocks worth $24.6 million.; , 4.
Unconvinced: "What would be considered a grotesque conflict of, interest if a
politician or judge did it is somehow not in a, physician," says Dr. Marcia
Angell, former editor of the New England, Journal of Medicine.; , 5. Lawsuit:
Hopkins sued when a Seattle firm stole the work of cancer, specialist Dr. Curt
I. Civin. Hopkins won, the company folded and a, device that filtered stem cells
was pulled from the market.; , 6. Uneasy alliance: Dr. Drew Pardoll of Hopkins,
with postdoctoral, candidate Firouzeh Korangy, has misgivings about the $100,000
a year, he earns working with a biotech firm. He says he plows the money into,
his effort to develop a cancer vaccine.; , 7. Entrepreneur: Dr. Elias Zerhouni,
head of Hopkins radiology and, Surgi-Vision co-founder, says those who best
understand inventions, should do testing. "You can't really take a technology
like this and, throw it in somebody's lap and say, 'Do it.'"; , 8. Corporate
funding at Johns Hopkins; , 9. Top 10 patent-producing universities; , 1-4 & 6 &
7.  PHOTOS BY KENNETH K. LAM : SUN STAFF , 5. SUN STAFF : 1999 , 8. SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                             1713 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              June 25, 2001 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1675 words

HEADLINE: Death Heightens Scrutiny of Clinical Tests;
Concern About Volunteers' Safety Has Prompted Calls for New Rules, Expanded
Protections

BYLINE: Susan Levine, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    She noticed the cough almost immediately, began feeling short of breath and
achy. Two days after her visit for a research study at the Johns Hopkins Asthma
and Allergy Center -- two days after inhaling the chemical hexamethonium during
what was assumed to be a low-risk test for a healthy young woman -- Ellen Roche
called back, obviously concerned.

    Her symptoms were troubling enough that the staff quickly started monitoring
her condition. That was May 7, and Roche's lungs already were functioning at
two-thirds capacity. She was no better by May 9, when doctors admitted her to
Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center in East Baltimore for observation.

    The 24-year-old lab technician died there June 2, the university's first
death of a research volunteer since 1986 and its first death ever of a healthy
volunteer.

    The tragedy, an "adverse event" that officials did not report publicly until
mid-June, has raised anew questions about how adequately medical research
participants are informed and protected during experiments. It has triggered an
internal investigation, a special university review committee and probes by the
federal Office for Human Research Protections and the Food and Drug
Administration.

    All will try to determine whether asthma researchers did anything wrong as
they studied the physiological mechanics of a normal lung: whether they cut
corners during the testing, for instance, or failed to fully disclose important
details to Roche and other participants, or endangered their subjects from the
start by using a substance that is not FDA-approved, possibly without the
required permission.

    Or the inquiries could find that, no matter the circumstances, the death
could not have been foreseen.

    "In the field of clinical investigations, the worst thing that can happen is
the death, the unanticipated death, of a normal volunteer," said John Fletcher,
professor emeritus of biomedical ethics at the University of Virginia's medical
school and founder of the bioethics program at the National Institutes of
Health.

    "Where there's culpability, it's a life-changing and a career-changing
thing. It's at least a 9 on a moral Richter scale. But we know in the total
universe of human studies, these deaths are extremely rare."

    Medical ethicists say the country has made great strides in the past three
decades in its oversight of medical research. Institutional review boards must
approve a project in advance. Scientists are expected to give research subjects
truthful, clearly worded information about risk, which should be minimized as
much as possible. And participants must be allowed voluntary consent that they
can withdraw at any time.

    Yet since 1998, a number of serious incidents have shown continuing
weaknesses in the system. Concerns about patient safety stopped clinical trials
at university medical schools in Oklahoma, Alabama, North Carolina and
Massachusetts. After glaring breakdowns in its gene therapy studies, which only
surfaced after a teenage participant died, the University of Pennsylvania
announced last year that its genetic research would no longer use human
subjects.

    Just last month, as Roche lay in intensive care in Baltimore, a
presidentially appointed panel recommended major changes in the protections
afforded participants in a range of scientific studies. Review boards often are
overwhelmed by the volume and technical demands of the work they judge, the
panel said; guidelines about researchers' potential conflicts of interest need
strengthening, as do provisions for especially vulnerable populations such as
children and mentally incompetent elderly.

    Though the scale of biomedical research has exploded since 1980, the
National Bioethics Advisory Commission noted that there are no statistics on how
many people are involved in clinical trials or the number of adverse events. It
urged that a system be created for reporting those incidents. Some members also
advocated that a fund be established to compensate individuals who are hurt
because of their participation.

    "It's a matter of simple justice that we cover them if they end up injured,"
said commission member James F. Childress, who teaches bioethics at the
University of Virginia. They are, he pointed out, "putting their bodies on the
line for research."

    Ellen Roche did so understanding that she would receive no therapeutic
benefit from whatever the Hopkins scientists learned. Theirs was a baseline
investigation looking at how a normally functioning lung helps keep airways open
even when they are exposed to irritants and allergens. If researchers can
discover that, they can better grasp how the airways of someone with asthma
begin to constrict and possibly develop a drug to prevent it.

    Ten million Americans suffer from this potentially life-threatening
condition. Roche did not.

    Her family has not broken its silence in the weeks since she died. Perhaps
she never told them why she decided to sign up for the study. Compared with the
generally clear-cut motivation of a sick volunteer, a healthy person's reasons
for taking part in a clinical trial can vary tremendously.

    Scientific curiosity or simple altruism? A commitment to advancing an area
of research or the need to make some extra money? Had Roche completed the seven-
to nine-visit schedule specified in the research protocol that Hopkins posted on
its Web site after her death, she would have been paid $ 365. Medical ethicists
say that amount does not seem enough to coerce or unduly influence a volunteer's
decision.

    In keeping with her family's wishes, university officials have released no
personal information about the young woman, a 1998 graduate of Frostburg State
University. She lived in Reisterstown, northwest of Baltimore, in a two-story
town house only a few miles from her father and stepmother. Just up from their
house is Franklin High School, where a counselor remembers Roche as a quiet,
involved student who was honored her senior year for academic accomplishments.

    Roche worked at the university's allergy and asthma center. But she did not
report directly to the principal investigators on the study, which is part of a
$ 1.55 million grant from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. Hopkins
officials would not detail her employment or any other involvement in research
projects. Workers and students are never solicited directly, they said; instead,
fliers advertising a research trial are posted on campus.

    The two-page "clinical investigation consent form" that Roche and eight
other people signed explained the purpose of the project, its procedures and
risks. During their first several half-hour visits, according to the form, they
would inhale methacholine, a substance that usually causes mild coughing,
shortness of breath and tightness in the chest. It is commonly used in doctors'
offices to determine if a patient has asthma.

    By a sixth visit, lasting up to four hours, study subjects would receive two
substances, methacholine and either hexamethonium or a placebo. Hexamethonium
was commonly prescribed during the 1950s for hypertension and to minimize
bleeding during surgery. It later was supplanted by other drugs and taken off
the market in the 1970s.

    "This is capable of stopping some nerves in your airways from functioning
for a short period," the consent form explains. It may reduce blood pressure
"and make you feel dizzy, especially when you stand up. This effect may last up
to three hours. During the visit you receive hexamethonium, you will be
connected to a heart monitor and we will measure your blood pressure very often.
You will also have an IV . . . placed only as a precaution."

    The protocol application submitted to Hopkins' review board last summer by
Alkis G. Togias, an associate professor, specified that participants would
inhale up to 1,000 mg of the chemical during each of four visits. Based on
published research from the 1980s, Togias wrote, "This dose . . . has been shown
to be both safe and efficacious." He explained that a laboratory preparation
would make the compound 99.6 percent pure.

    Records show that the university is checking whether the chemical or the
equipment used for Roche's test became contaminated. Two other volunteers who
inhaled hexamethonium experienced little or no adverse reaction.

    In the wake of Roche's death, Solbert Permutt, the pulmonary specialist
overseeing this project alerted asthma specialists across the country to
research from the late '50s linking hexamethonium -- albeit in higher doses over
longer time -- to dramatic lung changes leading to individuals' deaths.

    And last Tuesday, the director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute suggested that lung investigators temporarily curtail research using
the compound.

    Hopkins suspended its experiment after Roche fell ill. In his warning
letter, Permutt described how her symptoms "rapidly progressed" to acute
respiratory distress syndrome, a dangerous medical enigma caused by acute injury
to the lung. For three desperate weeks, doctors struggled to save Roche as her
failing lungs precipitated a cascade of critical events ending with the shutdown
of her kidneys.

    "It is with deep regret that I report the death of the subject," Chi Van
Dang, Hopkins' vice dean for research, informed the U.S. Office for Human
Research Protection on June 6.

    Results of Roche's autopsy, conducted at Hopkins, have not been released. In
a statement Friday, the university announced that the findings of its special
review committee will be sent to federal officials by July 13. Its statement
disclosed that "some problems" relating to procedural issues and the review
board have been discovered.

    The impact of this case ultimately may be felt far beyond Baltimore.

    "I worry about many people in clinical trials or other human research
hearing about this and panicking," said Ruth Faden, executive director of the
Phoebe R. Berman Bioethics Institute at Johns Hopkins. "Biomedical research, to
succeed, really does depend on the confidence of the public."

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                             1714 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       June 24, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 4803 words

HEADLINE: How a cancer trial ended in betrayal;
 With billions at stake, research universities become partners in commerce - and
medicine pays a price.

BYLINE: Douglas M. Birch and Gary Cohn

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, ALA.

BODY:

   BIRMINGHAM, Ala. - After Bob Lange spent eight weeks rubbing an experimental
cream on the fiery patches on his body, researchers at the University of Alabama
at Birmingham told him the drug was defeating the killer inside him. He felt
grateful. "I believed it," he recalls. "I actually thought I might be cured."

   But it was a lie. The drug had no effect on Lange's rare and potentially
fatal skin cancer. And the two key people testing the drug knew it. Lange and 21
other patients were victims of fraud - a scheme made possible by the close ties
between the university and the state's most prominent biotech company.

   Though promoted as a cure for an incurable disease, the drug in the end
produced only disgrace. Two people were convicted last year of defrauding the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. A university physician, one of the nation's
leading dermatologists, was banned from testing drugs for the FDA. Investors
lost an estimated $34 million in the company, BioCryst Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
after the bogus data were discovered. The National Institutes of Health accused
the university of poor oversight and suspended enrollment of patients in 550
studies.

   Lange, a 55-year-old factory manager, worries that the judgment of those in
charge was clouded by their financial stake in the outcome.

   "If you can't trust the medical profession or the people creating these
things to benefit humanity - if they're going to sell out for profits, who is
there left to trust?" he asks.

   Today, Lange's question echoes in the halls of Congress, in the pages of top
medical journals and in university laboratories across the nation.

   The public relies on America's medical research centers, subsidized by tax
dollars, to serve as independent authorities on drugs and therapies. Like the
Birmingham school, many institutions have become business partners in recent
years with pharmaceutical and biotech companies, forming what critics call the
"academic-industrial complex."

   For patients, these alliances can speed development of lifesaving treatments.
For schools hungry for research money, the payoff can be enormous: Stanford
University and the University of California, San Francisco split $270 million in
income from one genetics invention, while Michigan State University earned more
than $160 million from sales of two anti-cancer drugs. The Johns Hopkins
University realized how much money is at stake after it passed up a chance to
patent a DNA-testing method and then watched a Bethesda company turn it into a
$100 million product.

   But moving into the marketplace is radically changing American medical
centers. Increasingly, they're committed both to advancing science and making
money. This dual mission can threaten the integrity of medical research and the
safety of patients, even at elite institutions.

   Doctors at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center let a blood-cancer
experiment drag on for years, even though patients were dying at a higher rate
than with standard therapy. At least 20 patients died from causes directly
attributable to the treatment, the Seattle Times reported this year. The center
and some of its physicians had a financial stake in the treatment.

   At the University of Pennsylvania, doctors ignored danger signals in a 1999
gene therapy trial that caused the death of an 18-year-old study volunteer from
Tucson, Ariz. Both the physician overseeing the trial and the university held
stock worth millions in a company trying to develop the therapy.

   A University of Pittsburgh scientist whose research was funded by several
drug companies has been accused in a lawsuit of manipulating a study of
children's ear infections - contributing to the dangerous overuse of
antibiotics.

   And the FDA reprimanded a Tufts University researcher for improperly treating
a cancer patient with a gene therapy that may have caused his tumor to double in
size. Both the scientist and a Boston medical center held a large stake in the
company developing the treatment.

   "The market obviously is corrupting," says Dr. Steven Piantadosi, a professor
at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. "It's corrupting at every level."

   Experimenting with people is always risky and sometimes tragic. This month, a
healthy young woman died after participating in an asthma experiment at Hopkins.
There is no evidence, though, that the school or physicians involved had any
financial interest in the study.

   But the BioCryst fraud shows how research can be skewed when scientists and
schools have a major stake in the outcome. It raises the question of whether the
current haphazard collection of federal rules governing such conflicts of
interest is sufficient to protect patients. And it demonstrates how the cozy
relationship between money and academic medicine can threaten public health. If
a conspirator hadn't blundered, federal officials say, a worthless cancer
treatment could have slipped onto the market.

   Like Lange, Marcia Houchens was told that her cancer was getting better when
it wasn't. She says she was told that the experimental drug was her only hope,
though there were proven alternatives. When she complained to university
officials, she was told that her protests were being sent to the university
president. Soon after, Houchens learned that he had resigned to become president
of BioCryst.

   She trusted her life to the researchers, the company and the Birmingham
school, but she says all three violated that trust.

   "They didn't have a right to do this to cancer patients," she says. "I am
angry. I will always be angry."

   Trial of BCX-34

   Courtly, white-haired and professorial, Dr. W. Mitchell Sams Jr. inspired
confidence. Chairman of the dermatology department at the University of Alabama
at Birmingham, Sams was co-author of a popular textbook and would later serve as
president of the American Academy of Dermatology. He prided himself on taking
time to carefully explain diseases and their treatment. Patients said he made
them feel that they were in good hands.

   Sams was an expert on cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, a disease that develops when
a type of white blood cell turns cancerous and pools under the skin.

   Blotches on the skin blush red, inflict a fierce itch, and turn as dry and
flaky as cigarette paper. If the cancer advances, the blotches become raised
islands and then mushroom-shaped tumors. Finally, the cancer can spread inward
to the bone and vital organs, dooming the victim.

   Bob Lange, a bearish man with a deliberate manner, was in his late 40s when
he first saw Sams. The physician confirmed that the itchy red splotches blooming
on his skin were lymphoma.

   For a few years, Lange had received the standard treatment - phototherapy
drugs that work in combination with exposure to ultraviolet light. It eases the
pain and itching but may only hold the cancer in check. While the cancer
progresses slowly in most people, there is no cure.

   When Sams asked Lange to test a new cancer treatment in 1994, he was eager to
try it.

   The drug, called BCX-34, was the first product developed by BioCryst, a young
biotech company with close ties to the university. BioCryst was co-founded in
1986 by Dr. Charles E. Bugg, a biochemist at the Birmingham school. Company
officials had traded 5 percent of BioCryst's stock to the UAB Research
Foundation in return for rights to university patents. Within a decade, the
company was paying the university more than $500,000 a year for research.
Faculty members moved between the school and the company.

   Birmingham welcomed the biotech industry. Smoke from the steel mills once
choked the valley beneath the city's Red Mountain, named for its rust-colored,
iron-rich soil. But U.S. Steel cut production in the 1960s as a result of
tougher pollution laws and rising labor costs. The city staggered. In 1969,
UAB's first president set out to turn the university into a major research
center by aggressively seeking federal money and recruiting star faculty.

   Just as Hopkins has come to dominate Baltimore's rusting economy, the Alabama
school is credited by many with rescuing this city of 243,000.

   Today, the school receives $140 million annually in National Institutes of
Health awards - 17th highest in the nation. One magazine survey ranked UAB among
the top 25 universities in the country in "technological strength," a measure of
the commercial impact of its work. (The nine-campus University of California
system was first, Hopkins sixth.) In the 1980s and early 1990s, the Alabama
school had a reputation as freewheeling and entrepreneurial.

   "It wasn't a school overly burdened with strictures or rules and
regulations," says David T. Curiel, now director of the gene therapy program at
the university.

   BioCryst regarded BCX-34 as a potential cure for a common skin disease,
psoriasis, as well as the rare skin cancer. Bugg persuaded Sams, a friend, to
conduct two company-funded studies - one on 22 cancer patients at the Birmingham
school, the other on 40 psoriasis sufferers. He agreed to pay Sams $2,000 a
month as a consultant.

   As with many drug studies sponsored by the manufacturer, the company would
retain significant control. Sams provided the patients and oversaw tests. But
the company designed the study and analyzed the results.

   In an interview with a Montgomery newspaper, Bugg explained the difference
between academic and corporate research. "University scientists find a negative
result interesting," he said. "A negative result in company research can lead to
a press release which drops your stock price."

   A lot was riding on BCX-34. BioCryst's losses had risen from $1.3 million in
1991 to almost $7 million in 1994. The drug was the closest thing the company
had to a product. Because cutaneous T-cell lymphoma is rare, the FDA could waive
expensive large-scale tests if early studies produced striking results.

   "This study was absolutely critical," Sams would later testify.

   'Miracle' results

   That summer, Bugg asked Sams to hire Renee Peugeot, a 35-year-old nurse and
the wife of Harry W. Snyder Jr., the scientist running the study for the
company. Sams agreed, assigning her to help him with the study. Neither Bugg nor
Sams seemed concerned that the husband and wife had a financial interest in
seeing the trial succeed.

   "At the time, I really didn't think anything about it," Bugg says.

   When Lange arrived at the Birmingham research center that fall, he was
greeted by Peugeot. She was upbeat and buoyant, Lange says, but also someone to
be reckoned with, someone who gave the impression of being in charge.

   Lange and 21 other T-cell lymphoma patients at Birmingham were given two
number-coded tubes of cream and told to use one on a cancerous patch on the left
side of their body, the other on a patch on their right. Every few weeks, the
patients would come to the hospital for examinations, including measurement of
their patches and other tests.

   The FDA required so-called double-blind studies of BCX-34. Neither patients
nor investigators were supposed to know which tubes held the drug, which the
placebo. That information was recorded on "randomization schedules" that were
drafted before the trial and locked up at BioCryst.

   Those documents served as the keys to secret codes. No one was supposed to
use those keys to see any results before the end of the trial, to guard against
bias - conscious or not - in evaluating the drug's effects.

   Unnerving doubts

   Lange sheepishly walked down hospital corridors in a drafty gown, carrying a
jug filled with urine for testing. He let Sams take pictures of his thighs and
buttocks to illustrate talks at scientific meetings. At one point, Sams summoned
Lange to say that a test indicated he might have the virus that causes AIDS.
Lange spent a terrifying night before Peugeot reported that it was a false
alarm.

   Lange now shrugs it off. "It was worth it to me if I could help find a cure
for the disease," he says.

   Marcia Houchens also signed up for the trial. Her first husband died of
cancer in his 40s. Her sister died of cancer. So, when Houchens received a
diagnosis of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, she was frantic. She was referred to
Sams, who she said steered her into the BCX-34 study without offering the
standard treatments.

   "They had me believing this was my only hope," she says.

   During examinations, Peugeot and Sams had what some patients thought was the
unnerving habit of disagreeing about the size and redness of cancerous patches,
or lesions. Peugeot often saw substantial improvement in the lesions where the
physician saw little or none.

   "She said that my lesions were gone," Lange recalls, though he could still
see them. Houchens, too, was told she was cured. She didn't believe it, either.

   Sams was dubious as well. But it was Peugeot's assessments that wound up on
patients' charts. She even recommended BioCryst stock to Sams and others at the
hospital. Sams said he didn't follow her advice.

   "There was no way I would own stock in a company in which I was doing the
studies," he later testified. Still, he liked Peugeot's optimistic nature. "She
was always enthusiastic and always very positive. It was a breath of fresh air.
It was wonderful."

   Sams acknowledged that he gave his assistant "total responsibility" for the
study. It was a serious breach: The principal investigator in a drug study is
the person who must ultimately answer for its conduct.

   If Sams trusted Peugeot, others learned not to. Dr. William J. Cook was hired
from the university in September as BioCryst's medical director and Snyder's
boss. Peugeot overheard Cook ask another BioCryst executive about a missing
number in a patient's chart. Peugeot immediately wrote a number in. When Cook
asked what she was doing, Peugeot said she recalled the figure from an
examination more than a week earlier.

   "Did you see what she just did?" the astonished executive asked after Peugeot
left the room.

   "Anybody knows you can't do that," Cook replied.

   Peugeot's husband, Harry Snyder, was a respected scientist who taught at
Cornell University's medical school before working in the biotech industry in
Seattle. He joined BioCryst in 1993 to help run clinical trials.

   More than a month before the BCX-34 studies ended in January 1995, Snyder
wrote to colleagues, claiming that the drug was working, even though it was a
blind study and he had no legitimate way of knowing the results. In early
January, Peugeot and Snyder bought BioCryst stock, adding to their shares and
options. At one point, they owned BioCryst stock and options worth $600,000,
court records show.

   When Snyder's data were analyzed at the end of the trial, BCX-34 seemed to
have had impressive results. The company issued a news release in early February
1995, announcing that the drug had proven highly effective in treating psoriasis
and, more important, the skin cancer.

   About a week later, BioCryst told the FDA that the drug had reduced or
eliminated the cancer in 59 percent of the patients. The company, it appeared,
had found a cure for an incurable disease.

   As word spread, the stock surged - from less than $6 a share at the beginning
of February 1995 to nearly $13 months later. One investor snapped up $5.5
million worth of newly issued BioCryst stock.

   The news about the seeming miracle drug cheered many residents of the
Birmingham suburb of Mountain Brook. Birmingham's official nickname is "the
Magic City," conferred when it was a 19th-century boomtown. Mountain Brook is
sometimes called "the Magic Kingdom," because so many of the city's rich and
powerful live there. Some were BioCryst investors.

   Despite his initial skepticism, Sams boasted about the study results at a
dermatology meeting in Chicago in May. That month, he urged his cancer patients
to keep using the drug through the end of the year. On consent forms, Sams wrote
that most patients were nearly cured and that "it would be considered medically
unethical to withdraw therapy with BCX-34."

   Lange, Houchens and most others lined up to get tubes of the white cream.

   The crooked key

   In June, Cook began writing a scientific paper on the psoriasis trial and
asked Snyder for the key to the results. Snyder printed out a copy of the
randomization schedule from his computer. Cook sat down and did the
calculations. He was stunned.

   The results didn't match those announced in February.

   Suspicious, Cook went to the study coordinator, who worked for Snyder, and
asked for the original document, which was kept in a locked cabinet.

   When Cook redid the calculations using that document, the results again were
different from the February numbers. They also did not match the results from
the schedule that Snyder had handed him the day before.

   Cook's heart sank when he examined the cancer study numbers as well. Again,
the results didn't match.

   The documents combined the results from Sams' tests on 22 cancer patients in
Birmingham with those from eight patients being treated by a researcher at
Washington University in St. Louis.

   According to the decoding document Snyder had originally provided, almost 60
percent of the skin cancer patients saw their drug-treated patches improve.
About 40 percent saw no improvement, or more improvement in their
placebo-treated lesions.

   Cook's double-checking showed that the drug-treated lesions got better in
only about 30 percent of the cases. In almost 70 percent, the placebo beat the
drug or results were the same.

   Cook compared the two schedules, noting the pattern of changes. In every
case, the changes made the drug look better. None made it look worse.

   The next day, Cook confronted Snyder, who assured him that it was all a
misunderstanding. Cook kept recalculating the numbers. But they told the same
story, and Snyder failed to give a satisfactory explanation.

   Three days later - Father's Day, June 18 - dawned hot and sunny in
Birmingham. Bugg convened a Sunday meeting of glum executives at BioCryst.

   "We knew the stock was going to take a dive," Cook recalls. "We knew we'd
lose credibility. It was just a devastating blow to the company."

   Bugg muttered about how investors, many of them friends and colleagues, were
going to get "creamed."

   Snyder told the company officials he'd suspected that some patients had mixed
up their tubes of ointment, so he had scribbled several randomization schedules
to see how inadvertently switching tubes might affect the study. He called these
handwritten documents "what-if scenarios." Snyder said his study coordinator
must have typed up his notes by accident. She would later deny it.

   As Snyder talked, the BioCryst executives sat stone-faced. "It strained
credibility," Bugg said later.

   After Snyder left the room, Bugg turned to the group. "This guy's out of
here," he said. "There's no way this guy's coming back."

   The next day, BioCryst notified the FDA and the Nasdaq stock market, and
issued a carefully worded news release saying that scientists had "reanalyzed
the data" from the studies and concluded that there was no "statistically
significant ... drug effect." The stock price, which had been nearly $13, fell
to $8.75.

   Why didn't BioCryst executives tell the FDA or the public of the fraud?
Executives said they were afraid Snyder might sue.

   "To accuse this guy publicly of a felony has all kinds of downsides and no
upside," Bugg says.

   The scheme, prosecutors said, was simple.

   Peugeot and Snyder, they said, wanted to make sure BCX-34 succeeded
spectacularly - possibly to get quick FDA approval, certainly to raise the value
of their stock. Peugeot's job was to make sure one lesion on each patient
appeared to be getting better. For example, she was supposed to outline the
patches on tracing paper to record their size. At the start of the study,
Peugeot traced some lesions loosely - making them appear larger. Toward the end,
she drew the patches tightly, making them seem to shrink.

   Afterward, Snyder's role was to forge a randomization schedule that purported
to show that "shrinking" lesions had been treated with the drug.

   The scheme was nearly foolproof. Adolph "Buddy" Dean, the assistant U.S.
attorney who prosecuted the case, said that if Snyder hadn't blundered by giving
Cook the wrong document, the fraud would never have been discovered.

   "If Dr. Cook hadn't figured this out, would somebody at FDA have figured it
out? I don't think so," Dean says.

   Robert West, an FDA criminal investigator, says there was a real chance the
drug could have been approved - with devastating effects for cancer patients.
"To me, that drug did nothing more than what cold cream does."

   After learning of the falsified results, Cook met with Bugg and Sams. "Do we
or do we not have a drug here?" Bugg asked.

   Sams said he was convinced that patients who had continued using the cream
after the study were improving. He wrote a letter to the university's
Institutional Review Board - the panel in charge of protecting patients taking
part in drug studies - notifying it that "errors in the statistical analysis"
showed a "reduction" of the drug's effect. He did not tell the board the drug's
effect was zero. Neither, evidently, did the university demand further
explanation of the "errors."

   A company audit of the cancer and psoriasis studies, completed by October
1995, found gaping holes in the records. Vital data, including biopsy records,
was missing. Blood, urine and pregnancy tests were never performed. Over Cook's
objections, Sams had left Peugeot in charge of the BioCryst studies until a
month before, when he finally moved her to the hospital staff. Now she was
fired.

   "I trusted her," Sams later testified. "I delegated the responsibility to
her."

   Bugg, the BioCryst chief executive, acknowledges that the company failed to
closely supervise the drug trial, in part because of his relationship to Sams.

   "It's a little awkward when dealing with friends to go in like a police force
and do all the things that need to be done," he said. "We did a poor job down at
UAB really monitoring all the day-to-day activities."

   It would take five years and investigations by two federal agencies to
straighten out the mess.

   Songs of sirens

   The FDA heard hints of serious problems with the cancer cream during a
routine visit to BioCryst in late 1995. The fraud began to unravel after three
agency officials showed up a few months later at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham to review its records.

   Later, the university's Institutional Review Board was presented with FDA
audits detailing major flaws in the BCX-34 studies. It reacted timidly. It never
took action against Sams and never removed him from follow-up studies. Neither
did the panel notify patients of the problems.

   After the initial study, Houchens stuck with the drug. Her body broke out in
angry red blotches, leaving her in agony. While using BCX-34, she wasn't to take
medicine to control itching.

   "That's the main symptom of this disease, this horrendous itching down toward
the bone," she says. "You go crazy. People just tear themselves to pieces."

   After hearing about "errors" in the BioCryst trial, Houchens finally worked
up the courage to ask Sams about it. He reacted angrily, she says, and told her
that only the psoriasis study was flawed, not the cancer study. Later, he sent
her a letter suggesting the same thing. She begged the university to guarantee
her a supply of the cream.

   Still, Houchens was increasingly uneasy about the conduct of the trial,
especially Sams' supervision. When she called the university's Institutional
Review Board, she was told that her complaint would be forwarded to UAB
President J. Claude Bennett. Three months later, in December 1996, he became
president of BioCryst.

   The FDA's investigation escalated into a criminal inquiry. But no one looked
into the failure of the university to safeguard patients in the drug trial.

   That's because oversight of drug research was fragmented among government
agencies with different agendas. The FDA approved new drugs, and the National
Institutes of Health was charged with protecting patients' rights and safety in
government-sponsored drug trials.

   The two agencies have long regarded each other as rivals. The Food and Drug
Administration, officials say, felt no need to share information with the
National Institutes of Health. The FDA was also under pressure from Congress to
speed the approval of new drugs, not bog down the process by helping launch
ethics inquiries.

   Eventually, Houchens alerted the NIH's Office of Protection from Research
Risks about the problems in Birmingham.

   "We were always told that the BCX-34 was doing an amazing job and helping
everyone," she wrote the agency. The university "has been silent on all of this
disaster; not only with the 'errors' that happened during the study ... but also
the blatant conflict of interest with the employees conducting the study."

   At first, university officials told NIH that it was Sams' job, not the
school's, to notify patients about the failed trials. But in a July 1999 letter,
university officials acknowledged that they had "overlooked" doing so.

   Citing a lack of oversight in the BioCryst trial and other "fundamental
shortcomings," the NIH took the drastic step last year of suspending enrollment
of new patients in 550 drug studies at the university. The school was forced to
increase staff and take other steps that cost more than $400,000 a year.

   W. Ann Reynolds, the university's president, testified that the suspension
was "one of the most incredible and most searing" incidents of her career. One
of her biggest worries? She said the bad publicity had cost her school
critically needed business - the testing of new drugs such as BCX-34 for
industry.

   Reynolds declined to be interviewed for this article. Joan F. Lorden, the
associate provost for research, blamed the BCX-34 fiasco on Peugeot. "There was
nothing that the university did in that case that was inappropriate," she says.

   At their trial last year, Snyder and Peugeot testified that the charges
against them stemmed from an innocent mix-up of the randomization schedules. But
a federal jury was not convinced. It found the couple guilty of conspiracy, mail
fraud and making false statements to the FDA. In August, a judge sentenced
Snyder to three years in prison, Peugeot to 2 1/2 years and ordered them to pay
$26,000 in restitution. They now live near San Antonio, Texas, and have filed
appeals. They did not respond to requests for interviews.

   For the volunteers, the drug fraud brought false hopes and bitter
disappointment. Later large-scale trials confirmed that the cream didn't work.
While prosecutors say that none of the patients' cancers progressed to a more
serious stage, several people suffered painful flare-ups. Lange and Houchens
said they felt better after returning to standard treatments. By using an
experimental treatment, they had risked letting their cancer get out of control.
And they did it all for nothing.

   "It was worth it to me if I could help find a cure for the disease," Lange
says. "But was it worth it for me to go through that embarrassment and
humiliation so Renee and her husband could get richer? No, it wasn't."

   For Sams, the episode ended his career. In October 1997, the FDA concluded
that Sams had failed to properly supervise the studies. It cited numerous
instances of missing data, records and forms. Saying that the physician
repeatedly violated FDA regulations, the agency barred him for life from testing
drugs. Sams did not contest the allegations. "I felt they were all correct," he
later testified. "I didn't feel I had a challenge." Sams, then 64, retired from
the university.

   Sams now lives on a farm near Charlottesville, Va. Friends say he was
devastated by the FDA's action and has been snubbed by former colleagues. He
declined to be interviewed for this article.

   "I do not wish to relive" the BioCryst scandal, he wrote in an e-mail. "I
hope you understand."

   After he left the university, Sams wrote an article for the Journal of the
American Academy of Dermatology. While he did not mention BioCryst, Sams warned
that "the very soul of medicine is corroding and eroding at an unprecedented
pace." He lamented the medical profession's "convenient and sometimes
excessively cozy relationship to ... industry."

   How did medicine go wrong?

   "We let it happen. It happened slowly, by a sort of progressive creep," he
wrote. "We succumbed to the siren songs of scientific advances, political power
and, worst of all, financial success."

   About this series

   Today: How greed corrupted a cancer drug study.

   Tomorrow: Once disdainful of industry, Hopkins now embraces business
opportunities.

   Tuesday: Industry influence and scientists' struggle for independence.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s), 1. Duped: Bob Lange tried an experimental drug for his rare,
skin cancer. Researchers said he was cured, but it was a lie., Eventually, he
went back to standard treatment - phototherapy drugs, and ultraviolet light
(above).; , 2. BCX-34: Two key people testing the experimental drug tampered
with, data to falsely show benefits. They had a financial stake in the,
research.; , 3. Dissatisfied: Marcia Houchens, with husband, Rich, was frantic,
when she received a diagnosis of lymphoma and eager to try BCX-34., "They had me
believing this was my only hope," she says. She would, later complain to the
university and the National Institutes of, Health about the study.; , 4.
Lesions: Dr. W. Mitchell Sams Jr. checks blotches of cuta-neous, T-cell lymphoma
in a photo from a 1995 issue of M.D. News: A Business, and Lifestyle Magazine
for Physicians.; , 5. Turnaround: Emphasizing research, the University of
Alabama at, Birmingham (foreground) helped spark a resurgence in a city
staggered, by U.S. Steel cutbacks.; , 6. Whistleblower: Dr. William J. Cook,
then BioCryst's medical, director, uncovered the BCX-34 fraud during a review of
researchers', findings. He would later return to medical research at the
University, of Alabama at Birmingham.; , 7. Prosecutor: "If Dr. Cook hadn't
figured this out, would somebody, at FDA have figured it out? I don't think so,"
says Assistant U.S., Attorney Adolph "Buddy" Dean., PHOTOS BY KENNETH K. LAM :
SUN STAFF

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2001


                             1715 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       June 24, 2001 Sunday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE, Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1417 words

HEADLINE: Management of crisis key to public trust;
 Approach: Johns Hopkins says the family's wishes came first in its decision to
initially reveal few details about the death of a woman in a research project.
Other institutions choose to be more open.

BYLINE: Eric Siegel and Diana K. Sugg

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, N.Y.

BODY:

   IN ROCHESTER, N.Y., a healthy college sophomore dies a few days after
volunteering to be part of a medical experiment. Within three days, the
University of Rochester Medical School holds two news conferences, lining up
several of the school's top medical officials to explain in detail what they
know about the tragedy.

   In Baltimore, a healthy 24-year-old woman dies a month after participating in
a research study. Eleven days later, the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine faxes
a four-paragraph statement to the media and doesn't make anyone available for
interviews.

   Both institutions faced a crisis. Both had to consider the competing,
complicated and sometimes emotional concerns of families, scientists and
lawyers, as well as the need to keep the public trust. Each took a different
approach.

   "It's not black and white," said Peter Himler, managing director of
Burson-Marsteller, an international public relations firm known for its crisis
management. "You have to balance the wishes of all the parties who have a stake
in the way this news unfolds."

   Among legal, medical and public relations experts, a spectrum of opinion
exists on how an institution should respond. In Rochester in 1996, doctors
disclosed as many details as they could, at the risk of embarrassing themselves
and complicating their legal position.

   "We really wanted to ... have the public understand," said Dr. Jay Stein,
chief executive officer of University of Rochester Medical Center. "Public
confidence is important."

   In Baltimore in the past few weeks, Hopkins leaders initially chose to reveal
little, at the risk of appearing to have something to hide. It was not until
Friday that they put an update on their Web site, providing for the first time
some details about the investigation and saying they wanted to commemorate the
life of the volunteer.

   But Hopkins spokespeople said repeatedly that they were limited in what they
could disclose because of the family.

   "We're always willing to take the hit," said Elaine Freeman, executive
director of public affairs and communications for Johns Hopkins Medicine. "We're
always willing to be perceived as the bad guys when a patient is involved and
expresses a clear wish."

   In other cases, faculty have asked why Hopkins hasn't been more forthcoming,
she said, but added that public relations wasn't the primary concern. "The
family, the patient, comes first," Freeman said.

   The Hopkins and Rochester cases unfolded in a highly charged environment in
which concerns are growing about the safety of research involving human
subjects.

   More money than ever is being poured into biomedical research -- including
increasing funds from drug and biotech companies. At the same time, some abuses
-- including the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene therapy trial at
the University of Pennsylvania -- and systemwide investigations have revealed
serious deficiencies in the protection of human subjects. Experiments have been
suspended at several academic medical centers, spurring calls for reform from
Congress and raising concerns that the public may become too wary to
participate.

   In the Hopkins case, it's still unclear what happened. Officials have not
released a cause of death for Ellen Marie Roche, a lab technician at the Johns
Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center, where the study was conducted. And the
university, as well as federal agencies, is still investigating.

   While Hopkins' spokeswomen have stressed that officials aren't disclosing
more because of the wishes of Roche's family, neither Hopkins nor Roche's
attorney, Craig Schoenfeld, will specify what restrictions the family requested.

   Roche was involved in a federally funded experiment designed to determine how
healthy people keep their airways from shutting down. A day after inhaling a
chemical as part of the experiment, the Reisterstown woman developed coughing
and shortness of breath. She died a month later, June 2, at Johns Hopkins
Bayview Medical Center.

   On June 6, Hopkins notified the federal agency that oversees experiments on
humans of the death. But it was not until June 13 that Hopkins informed the
public of Roche's death, in the four-paragraph news release that the New York
Times characterized as "sketchy."

   The news release omitted several key facts, including the date and the
circumstances of the death, the fact that the volunteer worked at the
university's asthma center, and details about how the experiment was conducted.

   On June 14, additional information was made available but not by Hopkins.

   After Freedom of Information Act requests by newspapers, the Office for Human
Research Protections released letters Hopkins had sent to the agency notifying
it of Roche's case.

   The next day, Hopkins issued another four-paragraph news release and posted
selected documents on its Web site, including a consent form for the experiment
that revealed volunteers would be paid $365, but made no mention of
life-threatening complications.

   Just Friday, officials posted on its Web site a two-page update of the case,
including the appointment of an independent panel to review the findings of
Hopkins' investigators. Hopkins also announced that its preliminary review found
a violation of internal procedures.

   Roche's death is an unusual situation for Hopkins to deal with -- and not
just because it was, according to the hospital, the first death of a research
subject in about 15 years.

   Coverage of the university typically focuses on its cutting edge research and
patient care. When it feels it can serve its interests, Hopkins has been more
than open to requests from the media. That was the case during the filming of
the ABC-TV series "Hopkins 24/7" that began airing last summer.

   In explaining in a commentary in October for The Sun why he allowed the
network what he described as "extraordinary access" to the hospital, Dr. Edward
Miller, chief executive officer of Johns Hopkins Medicine, wrote, "I believed
some good must come from allowing the public an unvarnished view of the problems
constantly confronting our patients and our staff, from struggling with HMOs to
patching up the victims of inner-city drug wars."

   Legal constraints

   In the Roche case, Hopkins may have been constrained by legal issues.

   Karen Rothenberg, dean of the University of Maryland School of Law and an
expert in health care and law, said Roche's case poses potentially thorny legal
concerns because, unlike most subjects, Roche was healthy and worked at the
center doing the study.

   Although there could be potential legal problems in talking before all the
facts are in, she said, "What can bite you even more is the way the press covers
you."

   Public relations experts, stressing that they have no direct knowledge of the
Hopkins case, say one cardinal rule of crisis communication is to put a human
face on the problem, bringing out top leaders to explain the situation and
express regret.

   Some experts in health issues argue that following the family's wishes is
reasonable and appropriate. They say there's little compelling scientific need
to immediately release all the details the media might want.

   "The public has no absolute right to know everything about everything," said
Dr. Miles F. Shore, a scholar-in-residence at Harvard University's John F.
Kennedy School of Government and a former faculty member at Harvard Medical
School. "Family has a perfect right to say, 'We feel such and such a way, and we
feel this should be kept private.'"

   Information issue

   But some bioethicists say that, given the climate and the fact that a
healthy, young volunteer died, Hopkins should have given out more information
much faster.

   "I would expect a leading institution like Johns Hopkins to provide more
information within a reasonable time than the four-paragraph press release that
it had provided at that point," said Dr. LeRoy Walters, a bioethicist and
professor at Georgetown University, who studies research involving human
subjects.

   But despite varying opinions on how Hopkins has handled the disclosure of the
death, most experts agree that with lives and public money at stake, once the
investigations are completed, there should be no secrets.

   "I could not more strongly support the position that the public needs to know
exactly what happened," said Ruth Faden, professor of biomedical ethics at the
Johns Hopkins University. "The question becomes a matter of timing."

   Eric Siegel and Diana K. Sugg are staff writers for The Sun.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2001


                             1716 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 24, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. G-5

LENGTH: 2173 words

HEADLINE: David E. Robinson; CEO, LIGAND PHARMACEUTICALS

BODY:
 Robinson has been in biotech for 10 years.  Ligand, based in San Diego, has
more than 400 employees and is a development stage company pursuing drugs that
address cancer, cardiovascular, inflammatory and other diseases.  Bio2001, a
four-day conference that opens today at the San Diego Convention Center, is
expected to draw 12,000 to 15,000 biotech executives and perhaps 5,000
demonstrators.

   Question: What do you see as the significance of this national conference in
San Diego and what do you hope to accomplish?

   Answer: Bio2001 is really our annual celebration of science and of life for
our industry.  Its significance in San Diego is in recognition of the important
missions we have in front of us and the importance of San Diego as the third
largest biotech center in the world, the first two being probably the East Coast
complex, Boston, New York and New Jersey and the second being San Francisco.

   Our industry has made dramatic progress bringing, in its first two decades,
more than 100 drugs to market to benefit patients and improve the lives of U.S.
citizens.  The pace has accelerated to where today we have 350 drugs in
development that promise to virtually revolutionize the treatment of disease and
the quality of life for our aging population.

   So, what we hope to accomplish here in San Diego is to bring the science,
business, all the leadership of our great industry together and to share ideas
and come away with concrete ways to better finance, better develop, better
understand our technology.

   How do you assuage the concerns of opponents, who seem to run the gamut
politically, about bio-engineered foods and such?

   I believe that the foundation for understanding our industry is to celebrate
the diversity of opinion and share that opinion in a peaceful exchange of views.
That requires, on the part of our opponents, the willingness to listen, to
examine facts in a non-emotional setting and environment.  And, if that is what
occurs around our conference, we welcome that.  We believe in diversity of
opinion.  The only thing we ask is that that diversity of opinion be based on
some fact because if it is all emotion, it is a dialogue that is very difficult
to hold.

   What about fears that a bio-engineered strawberry, say, could somehow wreak
environmental havoc or cause health problems?

   I think the fears are often held, principally, in an emotional setting.  I
believe that examination of the facts shows many of those fears to be not well
founded.  Addressing each and every one of them can really only be done in the
context of the regulatory bodies that oversee this.  All of the
biotechnologically altered foods are subject to FDA, USDA, EPA, scientific and
regulatory oversight.  We believe -- and so do the National Academy of Sciences
and the American Medical Association which have examined this in the last
several years -- that tripartite oversight provides a lot of safety and security
for all citizens, including those who are concerned.

   We shouldn't lose sight of the fact that this protest movement really
represents a very small group, that what our industry is really all about is
improving the lives or saving the lives of patients who desperately need these
inventions and innovations.

   Would you sketch out what the future may hold?

   I'll try to sketch it out in a businessman's microcosm.  If I can use my own
company as an example, we are involved in designing small organic molecules.
Our technology originated in the Salk Institute.  We focus on the selective
regulation of genes, so we design small molecules that turn on and turn off
genes by acting through a class of receptors that reside inside the cell.  This
is a whole new field of human biology, it is a platform technology.  Our first
generation of drugs showed that we could, through designing small organic
molecules that people take once a day by pill, turn on and turn off genes that
allows more selective interventions in human disease.  Our first drugs out are
cancer drugs.  We're able to deliver more therapeutic effect with substantially
less toxicity for patients who have cancer.

   That first generation of applying our technology now has been accelerated
dramatically through the information from the human genome.  We have our first
drugs in development.  We have FDA approval for lymphomas.  We're working right
now on large scale trials for non-small-cell lung cancer.  These are
therapeutics that offer the promise of extending the survival of patients who
very rapidly die otherwise.

   You are all acquainted with some of the more recent drugs that have been
approved by the FDA in record time, biologics to treat cancer.  They come very
close to qualifying as cures for cancer because they are selectively targeted to
biologic targets that really wouldn't have been possible 10 years ago.

   The very first 10 years for this industry was therapeutic proteins.  The
great first generation companies, Genentec, Amgen, came out with therapeutic
proteins.  The second decade was a more diverse, science driven revolution and
it produced monoclonal antibodies, a number of small molecule drugs.  The third
decade is going to produce a diversity of drugs that cover the whole waterfront,
therapeutic proteins, monoclonal antibodies, small targeted molecules that can
be taken once a day.  They'll treat a range of diseases that virtually are the
major afflictions of our generation, Alzheimer's, the aging process, cancer,
diabetes, heart disease.

   What is the format for the conference?

   We have, within Bio2001, an investor conference where companies will actually
present and investors can assess the science and the companies as investment
vehicles.  We have a portion that is more science and patient driven and so
there'll be major segments on patients who have been substantially impacted by
the biotech products.  We'll have presentations on key components of the
science, from genomics to gene therapy to all of the scientific advances of our
time.  We'll have outside speakers coming in to present major speeches on our
industry.

   Is government regulation of your industry sufficient?  Conversely, does it go
too far and get in the way?

   Consistent with any revolution in science and in technology, where new
frontiers are being pushed out or created, there is going to be a need for
selective, additional oversight and regulation.  We acknowledge that.  So, do we
welcome that dialogue that produces intelligent regulation?  Yes. We hope that
it will be, in fact, science based, fact based and not emotional or emotive
reactions to pushing the frontiers of science and technology.  We have concerns
ranging from price controls or stalking horses for price controls, reference
prices, that could be devastating to our industry.  The plethora of small
companies -- the 1,300 plus biotech companies in America spend and lose a lot of
money and we raise capital to help fund those losses.  Any suggestions of price
controls or reference pricing systems have a dramatic ability to drive our
capital away.  We're concerned about legislation that would focus in on limiting
cell cloning as opposed to human cloning.  We in bio support the moratorium on
human cloning.  We do feel the need to continue with cell cloning which is vital
to many of the biotech processes that we use in research.

   A few years ago the FDA was horribly backed up on product examination.  Has
that improved with added resources, some of it financed by the industry itself?

   Yes, the PDUFA (Prescription Drug User Fee Act) regulations with user fees
contributed substantially to a reduction of FDA review times that took place
virtually through the latter part of the '90s. It appears that in the last year
to year and a half things have slowed down again and we're not sure exactly why.

   You mentioned biotherapies to address the aging process.  Would you
elaborate?

   There are a number of new therapies, in fact an explosion in the area of
Alzheimer's, that are coming out of the biotech labs.  Some of them now well
into phase two of human development.  In addition to some of the therapeutics,
we believe there are some products that hold promise for prevention of
Alzheimer's. Companies like my own are working on therapies that would allow
both for male and female a continuation of hormone replacement therapy that
plays such a vital role in the aging process, that could be given in what we
would call the mature years without the negative side effects that perhaps the
hormone has been postulated to have.

   Of the 1,300 or so biotech companies in the United States, how many are
making money at this point?

   Probably 90 to 95 percent of the companies in biotech are not making money.
We spend somewhere around $10 billion a year in research and we lose somewhere
around $5 billion.  While we have been improving those numbers lately, the truth
is about 90 percent of our members have fewer than 75 employees so we're small,
focused, money losing, research and development committed companies.  Many of
those companies will never go commercial, they will either sell their products
to other marketing companies and earn royalties or perhaps there'll be a few
which will market their own products and do expect to be profitable.  My company
has worked about 12 years now to get to where we are, we've lost somewhere in
the neighborhood of $550 million, raised about $600 million plus.  It'll be
probably 13 years (from the start of the company) before we're profitable.  That
is a long time for investors to support the technology and the initiatives.

   So, we do believe that vital to this industry is our ability to raise
capital.  We raise capital from the public capital markets, from private venture
capitalists, we raise it from pharmaceutical companies whom we do collaborative
research with.

   Do you also need additional scientists?

   Yes, as a small company for the diverse fields that we go into, we never have
enough expertise in-house.  We have one of the larger research efforts in the
industry but we are pursuing drugs in inflammatory diseases, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, multiple types of cancers, male and female sexual
dysfunction.  The list goes into 15 or 20 different fields.  So we need partners
and my company's case we have 10 major pharmaceutical companies that we've
partnered with, we've partnered with major research institutes like the Salk,
Scripps, UCSD.

   Stem cell research is a very contentious issue that the Bush administration
and Congress are beginning to try to sort out.  What should the proper policy on
stem cell research be?

   There are two or three sources for stem cells that don't involve fetuses.  As
the technology improves and research continues, we'll probably have more.  We
believe that early, premature restrictions on stem cell research are not in the
best interest of patients or of our industry.  Stem cells are vital to the
potential to intervene in some fairly important bone tissue and other
replacement programs that are under way that virtually millions of patients can
benefit from.  So we believe the government should proceed with extreme caution.

   Would your industry support a law banning any attempt in the United States to
clone a human being?

   Bio currently, and our member companies, universally support the moratorium
on human cloning.  I think the issue of how soon and is it necessary to go to a
law is a whole other separate question.  A lot of science is going to move
forward and a lot more knowledge is going to come.  Our concern is about
translating a moratorium into a law.

   San Diego has blossomed as a research and development center.  What do you
think the future holds in bringing in either manufacturing or sales and
distribution here?

   San Diego as an R&D and, increasingly, commercial entrepreneurial center, I
believe, has a bright future.  The challenge on manufacturing is much larger and
it gets down to some other major issues that San Diego needs to address, from
the cost of labor and incentives to help deal with that to the availability of
water and energy -- manufacturing tends to be water and energy intense.  Land
availability in San Diego for large manufacturing is problematical.  And it is
not clear that the community is that supportive of manufacturing.  Those are
issues that have to be dealt with adequately before San Diego can have an
equally promising future as a manufacturing center.  Some progress is being
made, IDEC's commitment here is important.  Hopefully that will start an
evolution toward biotech companies thinking seriously about that integration.
My own company right now manufactures through a network of contractors.  We've
gone through research development, now we're commercializing our own products.
Our next logical step would be manufacturing which we don't expect to have to
address for at least two or three years.  As we we move toward that we would
look at San Diego seriously.

   Robinson was interviewed June 18 by the Union-Tribune's editorial board.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune; David E. Robinson

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2001


                             1717 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2001 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 24, 2001 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1316 words

HEADLINE: Making babies, rattling nerves

BYLINE: CAROL ANN CAMPBELL, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   The headlines ran from St. Louis to London. They told of three-parent babies
and kids with two moms.

    The news followed a fertility technique pioneered by a team of New Jersey
researchers, who have inadvertently touched off a debate about the very essence
of human life.

    Researchers at Saint Barnabas Medical Center in Livingston used material
from donor eggs to "boost" the eggs of infertile women.

    The result?

    Sixteen apparently healthy babies.

    No problem so far. But recently a scientific paper by the Saint Barnabas
team said two of the babies now have some genetic material from the donor mother
- along with the mother and father. They are the first babies ever with genes
from three people in their cells.

   Jacques Cohen, the top embryologist at the Institute for Reproductive
Medicine and Science at Saint Barnabas, has said the tiny amount of added genes
is of no consequence, and merely regulates energy. The added genes don't
determine human characteristics, such as height, eye color or intelligence.

    Still, the very idea of adding any third-party genes to human beings sent
critics into a fury. They stumbled over each other to condemn the procedure.
Some called it the first step toward "designer babies," even cloning. They saw
genetically altered humans. They saw Brave New Babies.

    But this storm of protest misses a key fact: Saint Barnabas has not cloned
anyone. They have not manipulated genes to create babies who are smarter,
taller, blonder. The couples actually went to great lengths to promulgate their
own presumably ordinary genes.

    "I think it's totally disingenuous to claim this is so horrible when babies
are being born healthy, and are being loved by their parents," said Lee Silver,
professor of microbiology and public affairs at Princeton University.

    "The ethicists are barking up the wrong tree. They claim the researchers
crossed the line into genetic engineering. What they don't say is what is
specifically unethical about what Dr. Cohen has done. I have yet to see
precisely why this is wrong," he said.

    Indeed, the criticism, if you listen carefully, focuses less on what Saint
Barnabas has already done, and more on how others may build on this technique in
the future. Ultimately, the furor highlights the anxiety and fears about the
future of baby-making technology.

    Just where will it take us?

    First, some facts about the process used at Saint Barnabus, known as
cytoplasmic transfer.

    The technique is only used to help women with a rare form of infertility.
They develop eggs, but the resulting embryos - created by the union of egg and
sperm - fall apart before they can be implanted in the womb.

    Cohen reasoned that injecting donor cytoplasm into the infertile woman's egg
would rejuvenate the egg - while leaving the woman's genes intact.

    The genes that give us human characteristics - that basically determine who
we are - reside in the nucleus of the human egg, not the cytoplasm. Cytoplasm is
the jelly-like substance that surrounds the nucleus.

    The first child created through cytoplasmic transfer was born to a western
Pennsylvania couple in 1997. The couple had tried six years to have a baby.

    Since then, Saint Barnabas has used the technique on 30 women, resulting in
16 babies. About 30 babies worldwide have been born through the procedure.

    Cytoplasm contains mitochondria, tiny structures that act like batteries and
provide energy. Mitochondria have their own genetic material, some of which was
found in two of the 16 babies.

    "Mitochondria is important, yes. Without it you're dead," said Eric Schon,
professor of genetics and development at Columbia University in New York. "But
does it determine to any great extent who we are? It doesn't impact hardly at
all. Everybody's mitochondria is just slightly different."

    Schon said 30,000 genes have been identified in the nucleus; only 37 in
mitochondria. He thinks cytoplasmic transfer can help women with specific
problems to have healthy babies.

    "That's not bad. The benefit may outweigh the risk," he said.

    But, like others, he sees larger issues down the road.

    "This is the camel's nose under the tent. If we can do this for cytoplasmic
disease, why can't we do this for hair color, and all the other things? What Dr.
Cohen has done is not particularly worrisome to me, but I'm concerned if people
use this work as a precedent for performing nuclear germ-line gene therapy," he
said.

    Germ-line therapy is altering genes that will be handed down to future
generations, and the phrase was used to attack cytoplasmic transfer.

    Writing in a recent issue of Science, Mark S. Frankel, director of Freedom,
Responsibility, and Law at the American Association for the Advancement of
Science in Washington, D.C., called for a moratorium on any technology that
could modify the genes inherited by future generations. He also called for
regulation of the fertility industry.

    "This procedure absolutely highlights the need for oversight," he said in a
recent interview. "We don't think we should go forward in the private or public
sector without stopping and thinking carefully."

    Cytoplasmic transfer highlights another aspect of fertility research: it's
done almost entirely by private fertility researchers who answer to no one but
their own local ethics review boards.

    "You need more than that. There's too much potential for conflict of
interest," said Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the
University of Pennsylvania.

    Should there be some kind of government oversight of fertility research?

    Cloning, for instance, so worries the public that President Bush and
lawmakers are pushing for legislation to outlaw it, even by scientists who use
no public funds.

    Federal policy already prohibits the use of public funds for research that
could harm embryos, so most fertility research is funded by infertile couples
paying high prices for assisted reproduction.

    Sean Tipton, a spokesman for the American Society of Reproductive Medicine,
based in Birmingham, Ala., said if the government wants a say in what goes on,
then the government should put up some money.

    Moreover, he fears that any kind of federal oversight would quickly become
marred in abortion politics that could shut any fertility research involving
embryos.

    Maybe so, argues Caplan. But fertility researchers should still accept some
oversight, come what may.

    "Do you want a political discussion, abortion politics and all, or do you
want to let reproductive technology respond to the forces of the marketplace?"
he asked.

    He is seeking a sensible compromise. He would not stop cytoplasmic transfer.

    "But I would want a registry, and limits set on who could do this. There
needs to be independent assessment and follow-up. If these two babies drop dead
at the age of 5, this technique moves from promising to disaster very fast," he
said.

    Most ethicists agree that scientists should not manipulate genes to design
"perfect" children. But what about changing genetic codes to protect a
generation of children from various cancers, or other life-threatening diseases
like Parkinson's?

    Says Silver: "Some of this criticism is coming from people who say we
shouldn't tamper with nature. But nature can be nasty and mean. Nature gives us
Tay-Sachs disease and sickle cell anemia. Nature is women who can't have
babies."

    Saint Barnabas, stunned by the press calls from around the world, has
stopped talking to the media. They did provide a written statement.

    The statement said the center will continue to offer the procedure to a
limited number of couples who are closely counseled "while carefully monitoring
outcomes."

    Couples will undoubtedly keep seeking help.

    Theresa Grant, president of the International Center on Infertility
Information Dissemination, says the controversy at Saint Barnabus is not scaring
them away.

    "Based on the phone calls we're getting, the bigger concern is, "How do I
get to Saint Barnabas?'"

GRAPHIC: Jacques Cohen, an embryologist at Saint Barnabas, says a tiny amount of
added genes means little in determining characteristics.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             1718 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 23, 2001 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: Hopkins panel to study death of volunteer;
 School's physicians, outside experts to seek tragedy's cause;
 Final report by July 13;
 Web site statement first detailed account of action on incident

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   In the first detailed account of how it is responding to the death of a
research subject, the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine revealed yesterday that
it has convened a panel of Hopkins physicians and outside experts to determine
what might have caused the tragedy.

   The panel will examine substances used in the asthma experiment, the consent
form signed by volunteers and the actions of the internal Hopkins review board
that approved the study, according to a statement posted on a Hopkins Web site.
It will try to find out "whether there is a way to establish the most likely
cause of the volunteer's death in light of the best clinical evidence," the
institution said.

   A final report will be submitted to federal authorities by July 13, Hopkins
said.

   Ellen Roche, a 24-year-old lab technician, died June 2 at the Johns Hopkins
Bayview Medical Center, about a month after inhaling a chemical in an experiment
that was designed to help doctors understand how healthy lungs protect against
asthma attacks. The federally funded study was performed at the Johns Hopkins
Asthma and Allergy Center, where Roche worked.

   A preliminary investigation has turned up "some problems" relating to how
closely scientists adhered to procedures approved by the Hopkins Institutional
Review Board, the internal committee that must approve and monitor all
experiments involving human subjects.

   In the only example mentioned, Hopkins said the scientists changed the manner
in which they prepared the chemical, hexamethonium, before it was given to
volunteers.

   In the proposal approved by the review board, scientists said they would
dissolve the chemical in a saline solution that would then be inhaled by the
volunteers. Instead, the principal investigator dissolved the chemical in
buffered distilled water.

   "While he believed this modification is consistent with past practices as
reflected in the scientific literature and was intended to enhance the comfort
of the patients, such modifications should have been presented to the IRB for
approval," according to the Hopkins statement.

   Although Hopkins did not name the scientist in its statement yesterday,
internal documents list the principal investigator as Dr. Alkis Togias, an
asthma researcher.

   Hopkins did not indicate whether using buffered water rather than saline
might have compromised patient safety, or whether it was merely a technical
violation of the protocol.

   Dr. Gary Smith, a professor at the University of Maryland School of Pharmacy,
said yesterday that scientists commonly use either saline or distilled buffered
water to prepare drugs and chemicals given to people.

   "It sounds like a really minor thing, a procedural thing that shouldn't cause
any harm," Smith said.

   Both are used to produce a solution that has the same acidity as the body's
fluids, preventing unwanted side effects, he said.

   Buffered water contains small amounts of a chemical, such as phosphate, that
causes the solution to be less acidic than pure water. Saline does much the same
thing, he said.

   In its statement yesterday, Hopkins indicated that it convened the panel
after authorities conducting a preliminary investigation turned up
irregularities including the way the chemical was prepared. Joann Rodgers, a
Hopkins spokeswoman, said the panel was convened after Roche died, but she
declined to say precisely when.

   The panel will submit its final report to the federal Office for Human
Research Protection. Hopkins is also in the process of naming an "independent
outside group of experts" that will review the findings.

   The independent group's report will be sent to government agencies, Johns
Hopkins President William R. Brody and the university's board of trustees,
Hopkins said.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, who heads the bioethics program at the University of
Pennsylvania, said the steps by Hopkins in the wake of the tragedy are
appropriate.

   "That's pretty much what the standard would be for responding to this
situation," Caplan said. "It's sort of going inside, going outside, reporting to
the relevant groups and authorities. I think it's a reasonable and commendable
approach."

   The University of Pennsylvania took a similar approach after an 18-year-old
volunteer died in a gene therapy experiment two years ago, Caplan said.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2001


                             1719 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     June 23, 2001 Saturday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.D-2

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY RESEARCH SHOWS PROMISE FOR PATIENTS

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It looked too easy to work, but it did.

    Gene therapy expert Leaf Huang and his colleagues at the University of
Pittsburgh were astonished to find that a simple, intravenous injection of the
gene that produces dystrophin, a crucial protein missing in people with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, strengthened the diaphragm muscles in mice with the disease.

    The progressive destruction of the breathing muscle causes death in many
human Duchenne patients, usually by their early 20s. Scientists have long known
that prolonging lifespans requires effective treatment of the diaphragm.

    Huang yesterday told the audience at the annual conference of the Parent
Project Muscular Dystrophy that funding is needed to pursue the research in
large animals before it can be taken to human trials.

    In most gene therapy experiments, beneficial genes are introduced into cells
with the help of viruses or other so-called vectors. Remarkably, no vector was
needed in Huang's experiments to get the gene into the muscle cells, so the
strategy doesn't provoke an immune response.

    In the experiments, the so-called naked DNA that makes up the dystrophin
gene was injected into the tail vein of the diseased mice. Then, a large blood
vessel that allows blood to flow away from the diaphragm was clamped for several
seconds, so the muscle had a chance to soak up the treatment gene.

    When the researchers later microscopically examined the diaphragmatic
tissue, they found that 40 percent of the muscle fibers were making dystrophin,
a protein needed by the cells to maintain stability. Other tests showed that the
new dystrophin did in fact make the cells more stable.

    The technique does not work in limb muscles because the naked gene is unable
to get into those cells, Huang said.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2001


                             1720 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       June 22, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1047 words

HEADLINE: Hopkins study was exempt from FDA;
 Asthma project tested function of lungs, wasn't a drug trial

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor and Tom Pelton

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   The Johns Hopkins asthma experiment in which a previously healthy volunteer
died did not require prior approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration -
exempting it from the intensive safety review given to studies of experimental
drugs.

   Some critics say the lack of FDA oversight is a deficiency in federal laws
governing medical experiments, leaving volunteers without protections needed to
ensure that studies are safe.

   Dr. Peter Lurie, deputy director of Public Citizen's Health Research Group,
said the Hopkins incident points to a significant "loophole" in the laws. "There
is no ethical justification for having one kind of chemical get substantial
government review and the other kind get very little," he said. "It's a
senseless double standard. We think there should be some government agency,
perhaps not the FDA, that has jurisdiction."

   Because of its enormous responsibility to regulate foods and drugs, the FDA
might not be the best agency for that role, Lurie said.

   Researchers who conducted the Hopkins experiment received the approval of
Hopkins' Institutional Review Board. They also submitted safety data to the
National Institutes of Health, which approved the study and issued a $384,000
grant.

   But the experiment, in which scientists exposed healthy volunteers to a
chemical to learn more about the lungs' functioning, fell into what some
scholars call a "gray area" in federal rules.

   Jason Brodsky, a spokesman for the FDA, declined to discuss the Hopkins case.
But scientists and lawyers familiar with FDA regulations say the use of the
chemical in the Hopkins experiment would not have required FDA approval.
Researchers who are not testing compounds as possible therapeutics are not
required to obtain prior approval from the FDA, which conducts exhaustive safety
reviews of drug trials involving human subjects.

   "If this were a drug trial, the FDA would be looking at everything they did,"
said Dr. Francis Palumbo, a professor of pharmacy law at the University of
Maryland who said he had no direct knowledge of the Hopkins study.

   Experiments that explore how the body works do not require federal approval,
he said.

   "There certainly is a huge gap in the protection of human subjects," said
Alan Millstein, a Camden, N.J., lawyer who represented the family of a teen-ager
who died in 1999 in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   But some ethicists say injecting more bureaucracy into medical research would
be wasteful.

   "It would cost a fortune to have a Washington bureaucrat go out and look at
every challenge study, every bit of pesticide research, every placebo
investigation, every surgical innovation," said Dr. Arthur Caplan, who heads the
bioethics center at the University of Pennsylvania. A challenge study, the type
done by the Hopkins asthma researchers, is one in which volunteers are given a
substance to provoke a reaction.

   "What we need is better local review" by university review boards, Caplan
said. "You're not going to get better review from a Washington conference room."

   The volunteer, Ellen Roche of Reisterstown, died June 2 - about a month after
inhaling a chemical, hexamethonium, in the trial. She started feeling ill a day
after the experiment and was later hospitalized with severe lung complications.
She died after her lungs and kidneys shut down, according to one of the
researchers. Roche was a lab technician at the Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy
Center, where the study was done.

   Last week, the federal Office for Human Research Protection opened an
investigation into the death. In its search for clues, Hopkins performed an
autopsy and analyzed medical equipment used in the experiment.

   Hopkins has not released results of its investigation.

   Hexamethonium was an FDA approved drug that was widely used in the 1940s and
1950s to treat hypertension. The drug, however, fell out of favor as
more-effective treatments were developed. The FDA withdrew its approval in the
1970s, according to an agency spokesman, who declined to discuss the reasons.

   Documents pertaining to the study indicate that the Hopkins review board
asked the researchers questions about human safety before approving the study.

   "If the hexamethonium is not an FDA approved product, the protocol should
describe the source of the (chemical) and how it will be made safe for human
use," Dr. Gary Briefel, the board chairman, said in a letter.

   Dr. Alkis Togias, the asthma specialist who ran the experiment, answered that
the compound would be obtained from a chemical company in a form that was 99.6
percent pure. Hopkins scientists would then pass the substance through a filter
to ensure that it is sterile and would test it for the presence of a toxin, he
said.

   The researchers also gave the review board copies of five studies done
outside Hopkins in which researchers gave hexamethonium to volunteers. Those
studies mentioned only temporary side effects.

   After Roche became ill, the Hopkins scientists told the review board that
they were aware of earlier cases in which patients treated with hexamethonium
suffered severe lung disease. After Roche died, one of the researchers sent a
letter to colleagues across the country warning that the chemical had also been
linked to several cases of respiratory failure in the 1950s. He noted, however,
that the patients had received larger doses over an extended period of time.

   It is not clear when the asthma researchers learned of those cases.

   In the consent form that Roche signed, she was not warned about the risk of
lung disease.

   George Annas, a bioethicist at Boston University, said the researchers should
have been aware of published reports of severe side effects before they began
the experiment. "They had an ethical responsibility to not use (the chemical) if
it's risky, and they had a legal obligation to inform the subject of the risk,"
said Annas.

   Karen Rothenberg, dean of the University of Maryland School of Law, said the
case will prompt a reappraisal of how studies are reviewed for safety. "We have
to instill trust in the public that when they participate in research, there are
individuals who are really evaluating the risks and benefits for each
individual," said Rothenberg, a professor of health law.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2001


                             1721 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             June 21, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   * Magnet Interactive, a 13-year-old, 100-employee Web consulting and design
firm based in Washington, has completed its merger with three other technology
and marketing companies to form Akqa San Francisco advertising agency Citron
Haligman Bedecarre acquired Magnet Interactive earlier this year and has
combined it with Singapore-based online marketing firm AdInc and Akqa, a London
Internet consulting firm. Venture capital firm Francisco Partners led a $ 71
million round of funding for the new company and was joined by consulting firm
Accenture. The new company will be based in New York, with offices in
Washington, San Francisco and Los Angeles. Magnet's Georgetown employees will
remain in the District; they will make up about a quarter of the new firm's
staff.

   * Human Genome Sciences broke ground on the $ 250 million first phase of its
new corporate campus in Rockville at an event attended by company and government
officials. When completed, the 55-acre campus will hold several buildings,
totaling more than 1 million square feet, that will house its corporate, and
research and development staff. The campus is less than a mile from the
biotechnology company's current research campus and next to the 18-acre site the
company purchased from Invitrogen, which acquired Life Technologies last year,
in the Shady Grove Life Sciences Park in Montgomery County.

   * GenVec, a Gaithersburg biotechnology company, said it has extended its
collaborative agreement until 2004 with Varian Medical Systems of Palo Alto,
Calif., to develop cancer treatments. In February, the two companies started
early human tests of a combined treatment of GenVec's gene therapy and Varian's
radiation therapy in 30 cancer patients. The two companies signed their initial
agreement to work together in 1998. GenVec's gene therapy product, TNFerade,
delivers a gene that helps produce a protein that destroys cancer cells and cuts
off the blood supply needed for tumor growth.

   * Igen International is to announce today that the British government's
veterinary laboratories agency is evaluating three of the Gaithersburg company's
diagnostic tests for possible use in a program to detect disease-causing germs
in livestock. The tests, to be completed within a year, will study the use of
Igen's PathIgen tests to monitor the bacteria Salmonella, E. coli and
Campylobacter in animal feces samples. Igen hopes the British government's
evaluation will encourage other government and private veterinary diagnostic
laboratories to adopt its PathIgen tests.

   * NetDecide, a Tysons Corner provider of wealth-management software and
services for the financial services industries, announced the release of an
enhanced version of its software. New features include better features for
wealthy customers and new financial-planning modules.

   LCC International, a McLean company that provides wireless voice and data
technical consulting services, announced that Susan Ness, a former commissioner
at the Federal Communications Commission, has joined its board of directors.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2001


                             1722 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 20, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-1

LENGTH: 1025 words

HEADLINE: Scientists look for ways to heal the heart

BYLINE: Lawrence K. Altman; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 Medical dogma holds that damage to the heart is irreversible and that the body
cannot grow new cells to replace those that die from a heart attack or other
heart ailment.

   But new findings published in the New England Journal of Medicine provide
what experts said is the strongest evidence reported that some human heart
muscle cells do regenerate after a heart attack, though generally too few to
repair all the damage.

   Using a high resolution microscope and a new laboratory technique, a team
headed by Dr. Piero Anversa of the New York Medical College in Valhalla, N.Y.,
has found evidence that the human heart does grow new muscle cells after a heart
attack.

   The next main stage of research is to find ways to tap the heart's growth
reserve to better repair damage from a heart attack and many other heart
conditions, Anversa said.

   Heart cell regeneration research has been controversial.  But Anversa had
support for his views from some leading experts not involved with his research
who called the report "a landmark study." The experts said that the findings
have important implications for treating heart disease, the nation's leading
cause of death.

   "This is a breakthrough, at least for a new way of thinking about the heart's
recuperative power and ways to repair a damaged heart," said Dr. Valentin
Fuster, a former president of the American Heart Association.

   With more research "you might have a new therapeutic weapon" for heart
disease and "the implications are incredible," said Fuster, who is chief of
cardiology at Mt. Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.

   Dr. Claude J. Lenfant, the director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute said that Anversa's findings "provide the most dramatic and clear-cut
demonstration to date of heart cell regeneration after cardiac injury." The
findings, Lenfant said, add to those from studies on animals that show the dogma
that the heart cannot regenerate "is no longer true."

   The institute helped pay for the research by Anversa's group in Valhalla and
at the University of Udine and the University of Trieste in Italy.  Lenfant said
the findings eventually could have "enormous public health value" if they led to
new therapies that delayed the onset of heart failure and prolonged life.
Lenfant also said that he believed Anversa's research holds greater promise for
heart disease than gene therapy, which many experts consider a highly promising
route to new therapies.

   But, Lenfant cautioned, the new therapies are "not going to be here
tomorrow."

   Old and new

   Anversa said he never believed that the heart was an exception to the rule
that cell regeneration is essential to life.  Nor did he believe, as the dogma
held, that scarring after heart attacks was evidence against the heart's ability
to make new cells.  Other organs, like the skin, constantly grow new cells to
replace old and damaged ones and still leave scars, Anversa said.

   Anversa said "it made no sense" to him that humans were born with a set
number of heart cells "that were able to contract 70 times a minute for more
than 100 years without the capacity for regeneration."

   Until recently, medical dogma also held that the brain could not grow new
cells.  But a flurry of recent research activity has upset that belief.

   New research by his and other teams shows that, with respect to its ability
to make new cells, "the heart is no different than any other organ," Anversa
said.  "The paradigm has to change."

   Anversa began this line of research 20 years ago.  In its latest version his
team compared muscle cells in the hearts of 13 patients who died four to 12 days
after a large heart attack with those in the hearts of 10 patients who died from
other causes.  Anversa's team focused attention on two areas -- the zone of
tissue bordering the site of a heart attack and from a more distant area of the
heart.

   Anversa attributed his success chiefly to use of an old tool and a new
technique.

   The old tool is a high resolution, confocal microscope that can provide
resolution for up to 0.5 micrometers (less than 1/200,000th of an inch). The new
technique involves measuring the activity of a protein, known as Ki-67, that is
present in the nucleus of cells and is essential for cell division.

   Using the two methods and other standard ones such as fluorescence staining,
Anversa's team found that the number of muscle cells, or myocytes, multiplying
in diseased hearts was 4 percent in the border areas and 1 percent in distant
areas, many times higher than in normal hearts.

   The technique is "solid," Fuster, the Mt. Sinai expert, said.

   Further calculations suggest that rapid growth of even a small number of new
heart cells could regenerate a large number of cells in three weeks.

   The findings still leave researchers seeking answers to a number of crucial
questions about the origin of the new heart muscle cells Anversa identified.
Were they cells in the heart that had been awakened after sleeping for years,
even decades, only by the crisis of a heart attack?  Or were the cells recruited
from another site in the body in response to the heart attack?

   Anversa said that his team has a good idea because it has identified
"pockets" of primitive cells with the characteristics of stem cells in the
heart.  But he declined to disclose their precise location because he has not
published the findings.

   "We want to use what is in the heart to repair the heart" by promoting
migration of large numbers of new cells to repair the damaged tissue before it
dies, Anversa said.

   Such repair could extend beyond damage from heart attacks to that resulting
from other chronic conditions like untreated high blood pressure or
cardiomyopathy, Anversa said.

   David Finkelstein, who directs basic heart research at the National Institute
of Aging, which helped pay for the research, said the new findings "may begin to
clarify how hearts respond to the normal insults of aging through previously
undetected repair mechanisms."

   Anversa added that "We have new hope to intervene in heart disease and repair
what was considered an irreparable problem -- but I don't know how close we are
to that."


LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2001


                             1723 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 19, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 784 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS Stephen Reucroft and John Swain are experimental
particle physicists who teach at Northeastern University.;
BOOZE SENSOR

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN

BODY:

   A novel device to detect alcohol is based on a plastic that swells when
exposed to the stuff. Morisawa Masayuki and his colleagues at the University of
Yamanashi and the TRI Chemical Laboratory Inc. in Japan used an optical fiber
coated with a polymer called Novolac. When exposed to alcohol, the Novolac
expands and affects the propagation of light in the fiber. The device is simple
to fabricate and it, or similar sensors that can detect other organic substances
using the same principle, should find applications in gas-leak detection,
atmospheric monitoring, breweries, and breathalyzers.

      ref: Measurement Science and Technology, July 2001.

   Help for hemophiliacs

   A new gene therapy offers hope for hemophiliacs - people whose blood fails to
clot properly and who can bleed to death from minor abrasions. Richard F. Selden
of Transkaryotic Therapies in Cambridge and his colleagues at Harvard Medical
School inserted bacterial DNA with a gene for factor VIII, which hemophilia A
patients lack, into human cells. The implanted human cells then produced small
amounts of the factor, which were enough to help several patients. This is the
first genetic treatment for hemophilia A.

   ref: New England Journal of Medicine, June 7, 2001.

   Ulcer bugs and stomach acid

   The human stomach is a hostile environment for bacteria, so how do the
ulcer-producing bacteria Heliobacter pylori manage to survive? Byung-Ha Oh and
his colleagues at Pohang University in Korea have found new evidence that a
urease enzyme makes a protective coating that helps the bacteria cope with
stomach acid. Using X-ray crystallography, the group has argued that the
Heliobacter pylori urease has more active sites that can convert urea into
acid-neutralizing ammonia than other ureases. Not everyone is convinced by the
evidence so far, but if this turns out to be correct, urease may be an excellent
target for anti-ulcer therapies, making bacteria open to being killed by stomach
acid.

   ref: Nature Structural Biology, June 2001.

   Super wired

   With the discovery that a cheap chemical, magnesium diboride, can become
superconducting and lose all its resistance to the flow of electricity at
relatively high temperatures (39 Celsius above absolute zero - still pretty
chilly), the race is on to develop this into a real technology. Now three groups
have all reported remarkable progress in three back-to-back articles published
in Nature. One group with collaborators from the University of Wisconsin in
Madison and Princeton University in New Jersey have found excellent results in
thin films of the material carrying high currents. Another group from Imperial
College in London, and the University of Surrey, both in England, the General
Physics Institute in Moscow, the University of Salerno in Italy, have found the
surprising result that the material is better able to carry high currents after
being irradiated by protons. Finally, a group from Agere Systems-Lucent
Technologies in Murray Hill, N.J., has managed to make iron-clad superconducting
wires out of the material.

   ref: Nature, May 31, 2001.

   Autoimmunity to the rescue

   Autoimmunity is usually thought of as a sort of terrible error when the body
attacks its own cells, but it may have a positive role as well. Michael Schwartz
of the Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, and colleagues at
Proneuron in Ness-Ziona, Israel, and at the Harvard Medical School have shown
that rats with optic-nerve injuries that have had spinal-cord injuries a few
days before, recover from the latter injury better than rats who had no earlier
spinal-cord damage. What seems to be happening in this, and other, related
experiments, is that T-cells activated in the first injury actually help
minimize damage in subsequent injuries. The details are still not clear, but
this research could point the way to a much better understanding of both the
immune system and how nerves heal.

   ref: Journal of Neuroscience, June 2001.

   Sound makes solids

   Scientists have managed to use sound to make a liquid turn solid. X.
Chavanne, S. Balibar, and F. Caupin at the Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris
used sound at a frequency of a million cycles per second with an intensity
100,000 times that made by a jet engine to force liquid helium to become a
solid. The intense pressure from the sound wave alternatively crystallized and
melted the material, which is able to grow crystals 10 billion times faster than
materials like ice. Not only should the work improve our understanding of the
nature of liquids and solids under extreme pressures, but it may lead to novel
techniques for fabricating new materials.

   ref: Physical Review Letters, June 4, 2001.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2001


                             1724 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                             June 19, 2001, Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; LEARNING; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1773 words

HEADLINE: Corporate cash & campus labs

BYLINE: Mark Clayton Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

HIGHLIGHT:
The credibility of university research is on the line as industry steps up its
funding

BODY:

   It was to be a landmark university-corporate research partnership: Novartis,
a Swiss-based pharmaceutical conglomerate, would pay $ 25 million over five
years to the University of California at Berkeley.

But what the company was to get in return shocked faculty, students, and
outsiders alike.

In exchange for funding, Novartis would be allowed to sift through the research
of the department of plant and microbial biology at Berkeley's College of
Natural Resources - licensing up to about one-third of the researchers' output.

Students declared it a sellout. Legislators scheduled hearings.  Professors
protested the secrecy of the negotiations. One professor decried the deal for
creating an "apartheid" of have and have-not faculty. Outside observers were no
less impassioned.

"What if the [Novartis-Berkeley] experiment were to succeed?" wrote Robert
Rosenzweig, former president of the Association of American Universities, in
response to the deal. "What would be the next part of the university to be sold
to a corporation?"

Portending the turmoil to come, company and university officials announcing the
November 1998 deal at a press conference had to duck to avoid being hit by a
pie. Despite protests, the deal went through, and administrators report that it
is working.

Yet misgivings persist. "This is a public university that is supposed to work
for all sectors of society," says Miguel Altieri, associate professor at
Berkeley. "Obviously the sectors we're going to be working for in the future are
the ones that bring in the money."

Such comments only hint at the vortexes created by university-corporate
partnerships. Critics cite fears over limits on academic freedom, conflicts of
interest among researchers, and bias creeping into scientific research.

Over the long run, observers also worry that research priorities might shift
away from breaking scientific ground to more short-term, product-related
efforts. And there is the possibility, too, that the public will lose confidence
in higher-education research.

Nelson Kiang, professor emeritus at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
has watched the changes during his long career. What's different today is that
"the sheer number of corporations involved in sponsoring research has exploded,"
he says. "The ethos of the university is the free exchange of ideas. Now we're
running into two sets of ideas from two cultures. When they start to interact
intimately, accommodations have to be made. At the moment, there's no agreed
upon way to do that."

Acknowledging a deep divide between corporate America and American universities,
a two-year study issued last week by the Business-Higher Education Forum - a
partnership between the American Council on Education and the National Alliance
of Business - outlined problems and recommendations for smoothing the rocky road
between the two worlds.

"Some research collaborations have experienced serious, high-profile
difficulties," stated Hank McKinell, chairman of the board of the New York-based
pharmaceutical company Pfizer and co-chair of the report task force. "The report
is intended to help clarify the issues."


   Bullies in the lab?

One such issue is academic freedom. Corporate and academic priorities clash when
scientists want to share research discoveries, but contracts often require
secrecy for 30 to 90 days or longer while patents are weighed.

Betty Dong at the University of California, San Francisco, discovered data that
led her to question the effectiveness of a medication being used daily by
millions of people. But when she went to report it, she was blocked for seven
years by the company that paid for the study.

David Kahn, another researcher at the same school, was sued last November for $
10 million by the company that sponsored his study, after he published a report
that the AIDS drug he was testing was ineffective.

"They're like bullies in a sandbox who take away their toys when you don't agree
with them," Dr. Kahn told The Chronicle of Higher Education.

Few foresaw these clashes two decades ago. Such research partnerships had long
been a staple of American higher education, going all the way back to the 1862
federal legislation that created the land-grant university.

But university research started melding with the business world at a much faster
pace with the 1980 passage of the Bayh-Dole Act. Bayh-Dole sped up the patenting
process for university research, supercharging university-corporate partnerships
with profits and competition.

In the 1970s, just a few hundred patents resulted from university research each
year. But in fiscal 1999, more than 120 US research universities filed a total
of 7,612 patent applications, according to the Association of University
Technology Managers. Licenses to industry generated $ 641 million in gross
income for the universities - and about $ 40 billion in economic activity
overall.

"You used to have big corporations with labs that would do their own basic
research," Mr. Kiang says. "But ... it's much more effective to turn the
universities into R&D labs for them. By sprinkling money around ... they don't
have to compete for the best brains in the academic world, they simply buy them
at low cost."

The federal government is still by far the dominant funding source for
university research. In 1998, corporations were responsible for less than 8
percent of the funding.

That may not sound like much, but it represents a seven-fold growth since 1970.
According to the new report, the flood of patents has been a big boost to
America's increasingly knowledge-based economy.

Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan told governors last year: "The payoffs,
in terms of the flow of expertise, new products, and startup companies ... have
been impressive."

Indeed, for every challenged program like the Novartis-Berkeley union, the
Business-Higher Education Forum report documents other collaborations that are
working well. At Washington University in St.  Louis, for instance, a funding
deal with Monsanto (now Pharmacia) has been harmoniously in place for two
decades.

Smaller companies have prospered, too. Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals gave the
University of Colorado a five-year, $ 500,000 unrestricted research grant. In
return, the university shared research that helped the company grow.

Despite this robust productivity, some fear that a key product of universities -
unbiased research - is at risk.

In some fields, especially medical research, scientists complain that corporate
cash appears to be undermining the credibility of research results.

In 1996, Tufts researcher Sheldon Krimsky studied nearly 800 scientific papers
published in prominent biology and medical journals. In 1 out of 3 cases, he
found that a chief author of the paper had a financial interest in the company
for which research was being done. In most cases, the connections were not
disclosed to readers.

Mildred Cho, a senior research scholar at the Center for Biomedical Ethics at
Stanford University, took a different tack. Her 1996 study found that 98 percent
of university studies of new drug therapies funded by the pharmaceutical
industry reported that those new therapies were more effective than standard
drugs. By comparison, just 79 percent of studies without industry financing
found the new drugs to be more effective.

Other researchers are disquieted, too.

"There has been in some fields a substantial, industrial-commercial influence,"
says David Blumenthal, director of Massachusetts General Hospital's Institute
for Health Policy and a professor at Harvard Medical School. In a 1998 study, he
and colleagues found that 43 percent of scientists - many of them at university
medical centers or schools - had received at least one research-related gift.
About two-thirds said the gift had been important to their research.

Such conflicts are hardly confined to the medical field. In his 1997 book, "The
Heat Is On," Ross Gelbspan cites professors for not disclosing that coal and oil
companies had funded their studies, which were used to undercut arguments in
favor of reducing greenhouse gases.

Meanwhile, back at Berkeley, the Novartis funding is winning converts.  Despite
what one university official described as "lingering resentment," only two of 31
faculty members in the Berkeley department have declined to seek grants ranging
from $ 60,000 to $ 200,000 to fund their research, according to the just-issued
report.


   A need for more disclosure

Will the scientists who do accept corporate funding disclose that information
when they publish their research?

Pressure has been building at the federal level for tough new disclosure
requirements since the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, a teenage volunteer in the
clinical trial of a gene-therapy drug at the University of Pennsylvania. In that
case, a researcher had a financial interest in the drug's success. (The death
this month of a volunteer in a Johns Hopkins University asthma study is being
investigated, but no information has surfaced suggesting any conflict of
interest in that federally funded study).

At a meeting last fall, scientists debated whether and how much to disclose
about such interests to potential patient volunteers, but could not agree.
Researchers receiving federal grants must disclose any income greater than $
10,000 from a corporation. But that rule does not apply when companies do all
the funding. And even when scientists do report, it is usually only to the
university itself, which often does not disclose such financial ties. One ray of
hope: The New England Journal of Medicine recently admitted that it had failed
to disclose 19 authors' conflicts of interest - and toughened its disclosure
policy.

More disclosure at all levels is needed, Dr. Blumenthal argues. The long-term
risk, he says, is nothing less than a loss of public confidence that could
permanently undermine support for universities.

"There is a need for guidelines and protections to assure the public that
commercial motives are not excessive," he says. "It won't be hard to do that if
we could get the universities to take the long view...  But in the heat of
battle, it's hard to do."


   E-mail claytonm@csps.com.

   (c) Copyright 2001. The Christian Science Monitor


LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2001


                             1725 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

              Copyright 2001 The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)
                             All Rights Reserved
                      The Courier-Journal (Louisville, KY)

                     June 17, 2001 Sunday metro Met Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 1392 words

HEADLINE: Medical visions;
Biotech miracles may grow from Louisville firms latest research

BYLINE: HAROLD J. ADAMS

BODY:

   Byline: HAROLD J. ADAMS

   Source: The Courier-Journal

   hey are among the most sought-after goals in medicine: cures for cancer or
blindness; a way to reverse heart disease without surgery; a system for
pinpointing the individual genes involved in each illness.

   What if one of those goals is achieved in Louisville?

   Since the beginning of last year, four companies, each believing it's on
track to solve one of those vexing medical puzzles, have been formed in the
city. They're among the first seedlings of an effort to grow a major center of
biomedical industry in downtown Louisville.

   That lofty goal was set four years ago by a panel of business, educational,
medical and political leaders. Now, thanks to a series of initiatives launched
by members of that Visioning Task Force, this economic field of dreams is
beginning to produce.

   The young companies are benefiting from a fertile environment for local
biomedical researchers and entrepreneurs.

   One of the companies, ApoImmune Inc., was organized just this month. Its work
is based on the gene therapy research of Haval Shirwan, an associate professor
at the University of Louisville School of Medicine. Shirwan believes he has
found a way to turn specific bits of the human immune system on or off as needed
to cure diseases ranging from cancer to diabetes.

   Another company is Advance Genetic Sys-tems Inc., which is based on the
research of Eugenia Wang, a biochemistry professor at the medical school. AGS
has designed a device that detects which genes are turned on or off in
particular diseases and could lead to customized medicines based on each
patient's genetic makeup, according to David Macway, chief operating officer.

   Drs. Robert Aramant and Magdalene Seiler, also at the medical school, have
developed a procedure and instrument for transplanting cells into damaged or
defective retinas to prevent blindness and restore sight. They are joined by
retinal surgeon Norman Radtke, who is performing clinical trials at Jewish and
Norton Audubon hospitals. Their company is called Ocular Transplan-tation Inc.
The procedure and the instrument have been patented.

   The fourth company is Sheltowee LLC Pharmaceuticals. Its work is based on the
research of U of L-trained scientist Charles Day.

   He has developed a product that his son, company president and chief
ex-ecutive Alex Day, calls "the Holy Grail of pharmaceutical science'' because
it addresses the No. 1 killer of Americans: heart disease.

   Sheltowee's product is intended to dissolve artery-clogging plaque without
surgery or angioplasty. It's called Novasive, as in "noninvasive.''

   The presence of these potentially groundbreaking companies can be traced to a
1996 report commissioned by the Greater Louisville Chamber of Commerce, now
Greater Louisville Inc., to help forge an economic strategy for the city. That
study by consultant Ross Boyle made 10 recommendations.

   The Boyle report formed the starting point for the 1997 Visioning Task Force,
which ultimately selected biomedicine and logistics from its list as economic
niches to pursue.

   Nancy Martin, U of L's vice president for research, said, "I think that was
probably the first time that there was widespread appreciation in the community
that a research university was a major piece of the puzzle in successful
economic developments in other cities to which we compare ourselves.''

   That led to the formation of the Louisville Medical Center Development Corp.,
seeded with a $5 million line of credit from Jewish Hospital HealthCare
Services, Norton Healthcare and the U of L School of Medicine. The development
corporation went to work right away with efforts to develop a health-related
business park near the downtown medical center.

   The seed money was used to hire consultants, buy property and remodel
buildings. Additional money was provided by the city. The physical results so
far are three buildings staking out the south, east and west boundaries of the
targeted development area on the eastern edge of downtown. Developments there
will house incu-bators for the new companies as well as space for established
firms attracted to the area.

   Under executive director Steven Spalding, the development organization is in
discussions with 19 bioscience companies, more than half of which have a
connection to the university.

   The development corporation "helped pull the leadership of the medical center
together, which allowed us to focus on a vision,'' said Hank Wagner, chief
executive officer of Jewish Hospital HealthCare. Stephen Williams, Norton chief
executive, said the partners felt "a responsibility to make some of this
happen.''

   Wagner said the development corporation was the first step in a three-part
strategy. At the urging of Wagner and Jewish Hospital HealthCare senior vice
president Ronald Greenberg, Gov. Paul Patton asked the Kentucky General Assembly
to create what came to be known as the Bucks for Brains program.

   Money from the program, with a required dollar-for-dollar match in private
fund raising, was to be used to lift the level of research at the state's
universities. The first award to U of L in 1998 was $33 million, which doubled
to $66 million with the match.

   "And we agreed to only spend that money,'' Wagner said, "on recruiting
leading-edge research professionals if they could bring with them National
Institutes of Health research money worth five times our initial funding.'' The
medical partners are now working to match a second $33 million state
appropriation awarded last year.

   "The sum of all of that creates an economic force of some $660 million'' over
about six years, Wagner said.

   Meanwhile the new researchers are expected to produce ideas that can generate
companies to fill the budding business park.

   That's precisely what's happening in the case of ApoImmune's Shirwan. He came
to the university in 1999 as part of the research team of Suzanne Ildstad, a
Bucks for Brains recruit.

   The Ildstad team is housed in the university's new Baxter Research Building
with funds supplied in part by Jewish Hospital HealthCare and Norton. A second
research building under construction, Baxter II, is also receiving $5 million
from Jewish.

   Shirwan has invested $5 million worth of grants in developing ProtEx, a
patented mechanism for getting immune cells to produce the proteins that fight
disease. He was recently awarded a $600,000 grant by the Juvenile Diabetes
Foundation in the hope that ApoImmune's work can contribute to a cure for that
disease.

   All of the companies spun off from university research will turn money back
to the university through royalties on the patents generated by the research or
through ownership stakes in the companies themselves.

   In the case of Ocular Transplantation, "it took special action of the
(university) board to approve us accepting equity in the company in lieu of
royalties,'' because the company didn't have any money, said Martin, the U of L
vice president. Since then Martin has convinced the board to make such
arrangements university policy in cases where the university development office
thinks it's a good idea.

   The university also created an office of technology development and, for the
first time, hired a full-time director for technology development. "We took very
seriously the desires from the visioning report to create a research university
with an entrepreneurial culture,'' Martin said.

   That spirit has taken hold with Wang's AGS. She has spent $3 million in grant
money developing her gene chip technology. Macway, the company's COO, said AGS
is working to raise $10 million from institutional investors and an additional
$1 million from individuals to launch the company.

   Macway expects the company to employ about 33 people to produce the gene
devices. He said the devices will be sold initially to other researchers who
can't afford to do genetic experiments with current technology that is far more
expensive than the method AGS will offer.

   Sheltowee and ApoImmune are conducting business from what the development
corporation calls Med Center II, the facility at 1044 E. Chestnut St. that is
anchored by MedVenture Technology Corp.

   BY KEITH WILLIAMS, THE COURIER-JOURNAL

   U of L PHOTO

   BY PAM SPAULDING, THE COURIER-JOURNAL

   BY PAM SPAULDING, THE COURIER-JOURNAL

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION BY MIKE COVINGTON, THE COURIER-JOURNAL (SEE LIBRARY
MICROFILM); Dr. Norman Radtke, left, and Dr. Magdalene Seiler, right, watched as
Dr. Robert Aramant displayed a tool that might help some blind people regain
sight. Their company is called Ocular Transplantation Inc.; Research by Eugenia
Wang, a U of L biochemistry professor, led Advance Genetic Systems Inc. to
design a device that detects which genes are turned on or off in particular
diseases.; Dr. Haval Shirwan, left, an associate professor at the U of L medical
school and gene-therapy researcher, with Bill Pearse of ApoImmune Inc.;
Sheltowee LLC Pharmaceuticals President Alex Day said research by his U of
L-trained father, Charles Day, represents an important advance in treating heart
disease.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2002


                             1726 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 17, 2001, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1131 words

HEADLINE: San Diego to be center stage for biotechnology conference

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In a week, San Diego will be center stage for the world's largest gathering of
biotechnology leaders and for a growing global battle between the industry and
its critics.

   About 15,000 biotech executives are expected to attend Bio2001, a four-day
conference that will showcase developments ranging from the breakthrough mapping
of the human genome to the latest in lifesaving therapies.

   Many of the nation's estimated 1,280 biotech companies -- 216 of them based
in San Diego, home to the third-largest cluster of U.S. biotech firms -- will
strive to present their best corporate face during the eighth annual event.  It
begins June 24 at the San Diego Convention Center.

   Their message?  A golden age of biotechnology has arrived, fueled by new
research tools and a wealth of information gleaned from the recent mapping of
our roughly 35,000 human genes, the chemical building blocks of life.

   "There is a real revolution in the understanding of life that may change how
we look at ourselves, and biotech is the corporate face of that," said Hank
Greely, co-director of Stanford University's program in genomics, ethics and
society.

   But it's a face that frightens some opponents.

   San Diego police are planning for between 4,000 and 8,000 demonstrators,
including environmentalists and anti-globalization activists who hope to grab
the spotlight with rallies, acts of civil disobedience and a multiday
counterevent called BioDevastation.

   Their vision of biotech is decidedly dark: a science-run-amok world of
"Frankenfood," human cloning and corporations that seek to own and manipulate
the world's genetic resources.

   "The whole natural world is at their disposal," said Doreen Stabinsky, a
spokeswoman for Greenpeace.  "Genes are the oil of the Information Age, another
resource for corporations to make money off of."

   Industry leaders defend their science as both sound and sufficiently
regulated by government.  The goal, they say, is to find solutions to the
world's food and medical needs while turning a profit for shareholders.

   "Science has not run amok, but public education about the science has
certainly not kept pace.  That's the warp we are in now," said Carl Feldbaum,
president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization.  The BIO, a national trade
organization representing more than 950 of the nation's biotech companies,
sponsors the industry conference.

   Such disparate stances are likely to spark heated debate, if not constructive
dialogue, when the two sides are in San Diego June 24-27. But a bewildered
public may be the better for the verbal sparring, Greely said.

   "For major social changes, some level of debate is a good thing," he said,
"and biotechnology is likely to lead to major social changes."

   As protesters take their concerns to the streets, Bio2001 conference
participants will tackle some of the same issues in sessions and workshops
inside the convention center -- though from an industry perspective.

   Among the subjects to be discussed:

   Efforts to develop new drugs and vaccines to treat the worldwide AIDS
epidemic.  The drug industry took a public-relations beating this year over the
cost of such treatments and the inability of many developing countries to afford
them.

   The recent mapping of the human genome, and the staggering amount of data
that biotech researchers are exploring.  New insights into genes raise some
thorny issues, including ownership of gene patents and how to safeguard the
genetic privacy rights of individuals.

   Efforts to genetically engineer crops and ways to ensure that bioengineered
corn, soybeans and other gene-altered products that haven't been approved for
human consumption stay out of the food supply.

   Issues surrounding patient rights and the ethical conduct of experimental
drug studies.  Since the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who
suffered a fatal reaction to an experimental gene therapy, a number of sanctions
and guidelines have been imposed by regulators.

   These and other issues affecting biotech companies come at a time when the
industry is moving rapidly from gawky adolescence to adulthood.  Born just a few
decades ago, biotech is coming into its own with a slew of new products, from
monoclonal antibodies that specifically target cancer cells to gene-altered
seeds that resist pests and weeds.

   Last year, U.S. biotechnology companies generated $22.3 billion in revenue
and won government approval for 32 new drugs or existing drugs with new uses,
according to BIO.

   Biotech has also become a force -- though a high-risk one -- on Wall Street.
Last year the industry raised about $35 billion in investor dollars, despite the
fact that a vast majority of companies do not make a profit and have not won
federal approval for their products.

   Yet for all of the gee-whiz scientific glamour, there continues to be growing
pains.

   In the industry's early years, biotechnology was mostly about science and
business -- how to take an idea out of a research laboratory and put enough
capital behind it to bring a product to market.

   Now it's also about politics and ethics.  New research technologies, coupled
with powerful computing tools, have advanced scientific knowledge by leaps.  But
with the knowledge come questions about how the science gets used and who
profits.

   Those questions are increasingly the stuff of banner headlines and
congressional debate.  As in January, when an international team of doctors
announced its intention to clone a human.  Or with last year's contamination of
taco shells and other foods with a bioengineered corn not approved for human
consumption.

   Such controversy is fodder for a relatively small but vocal international
protest movement that is targeting gatherings like Bio2001. Last year, when the
industry held its annual gathering in Boston, about 2,500 protesters took part
in a largely peaceful anti-biotech demonstration.

   In 1999, another loose-knit coalition of protesters with similar
anti-globalization aims disrupted the World Trade Organization meeting in
Seattle and rioting resulted in numerous arrests.

   San Diego police are taking security precautions, planning for a WTO-like
melee but hoping the protests will prove uneventful.  The price tag for San
Diego taxpayers is expected to be about $2.5 million for additional police
training, overtime and special equipment, said John Welter, assistant police
chief.

   Welter said police are communicating with protest organizers and biotech
industry leaders and both sides are working to ensure a peaceful gathering.

   "The unfortunate part is we aren't sure the people who might be violent will
be the ones talking to us," he said.  "It would be nice to have a crystal ball,
but since we don't, we will prepare for the worst-case scenario."


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1,2. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune; 1. RUCKUS, which is
opposed to biotechnology, trained people how to scale buildings to hang protest
banners. 2. RUCKUS members, who teach this protesting class, plan to be at the
biotech conference. (A-19)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2001


                             1727 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 17, 2001 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1116 words

HEADLINE: San Diego to be center stage for biotechnology conference

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In a week, San Diego will be center stage for the world's largest gathering
of biotechnology leaders and for a growing global battle between the industry
and its critics. About 15,000 biotech executives are expected to attend Bio2001,
a four-day conference that will showcase developments ranging from the
breakthrough mapping of the human genome to the latest in lifesaving therapies.
Many of the nation's estimated 1,280 biotech companies -- 216 of them based in
San Diego, home to the third-largest cluster of U.S. biotech firms -- will
strive to present their best corporate face during the eighth annual event.

   It begins June 24 at the San Diego Convention Center. Their message?

   A golden age of biotechnology has arrived, fueled by new research tools and a
wealth of information gleaned from the recent mapping of our roughly 35,000
human genes, the chemical building blocks of life. "There is a real revolution
in the understanding of life that may change how we look at ourselves, and
biotech is the corporate face of that," said Hank Greely, co-director of
Stanford University's program in genomics, ethics and society. But it's a face
that frightens some opponents. San Diego police are planning for between 4,000
and 8,000 demonstrators, including environmentalists and anti-globalization
activists who hope to grab the spotlight with rallies, acts of civil
disobedience and a multiday counterevent called BioDevastation. Their vision of
biotech is decidedly dark: a science-run-amok world of "Frankenfood," human
cloning and corporations that seek to own and manipulate the world's genetic
resources. "The whole natural world is at their disposal," said Doreen
Stabinsky, a spokeswoman for Greenpeace.

   "Genes are the oil of the Information Age, another resource for corporations
to make money off of." Industry leaders defend their science as both sound and
sufficiently regulated by government.

   The goal, they say, is to find solutions to the world's food and medical
needs while turning a profit for shareholders. "Science has not run amok, but
public education about the science has certainly not kept pace.

   That's the warp we are in now," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization.

   The BIO, a national trade organization representing more than 950 of the
nation's biotech companies, sponsors the industry conference. Such disparate
stances are likely to spark heated debate, if not constructive dialogue, when
the two sides are in San Diego June 24-27. But a bewildered public may be the
better for the verbal sparring, Greely said. "For major social changes, some
level of debate is a good thing," he said, "and biotechnology is likely to lead
to major social changes." As protesters take their concerns to the streets,
Bio2001 conference participants will tackle some of the same issues in sessions
and workshops inside the convention center -- though from an industry
perspective. Among the subjects to be discussed: Efforts to develop new drugs
and vaccines to treat the worldwide AIDS epidemic.

   The drug industry took a public-relations beating this year over the cost of
such treatments and the inability of many developing countries to afford them.
The recent mapping of the human genome, and the staggering amount of data that
biotech researchers are exploring.

   New insights into genes raise some thorny issues, including ownership of gene
patents and how to safeguard the genetic privacy rights of individuals. Efforts
to genetically engineer crops and ways to ensure that bioengineered corn,
soybeans and other gene-altered products that haven't been approved for human
consumption stay out of the food supply. Issues surrounding patient rights and
the ethical conduct of experimental drug studies.

   Since the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who suffered a fatal
reaction to an experimental gene therapy, a number of sanctions and guidelines
have been imposed by regulators. These and other issues affecting biotech
companies come at a time when the industry is moving rapidly from gawky
adolescence to adulthood.

   Born just a few decades ago, biotech is coming into its own with a slew of
new products, from monoclonal antibodies that specifically target cancer cells
to gene-altered seeds that resist pests and weeds. Last year, U.S. biotechnology
companies generated $22.3 billion in revenue and won government approval for 32
new drugs or existing drugs with new uses, according to BIO. Biotech has also
become a force -- though a high-risk one -- on Wall Street.

   Last year the industry raised about $35 billion in investor dollars, despite
the fact that a vast majority of companies do not make a profit and have not won
federal approval for their products. Yet for all of the gee-whiz scientific
glamour, there continues to be growing pains. In the industry's early years,
biotechnology was mostly about science and business -- how to take an idea out
of a research laboratory and put enough capital behind it to bring a product to
market. Now it's also about politics and ethics.

   New research technologies, coupled with powerful computing tools, have
advanced scientific knowledge by leaps. But with the knowledge come questions
about how the science gets used and who profits. Those questions are
increasingly the stuff of banner headlines and congressional debate.

   As in January, when an international team of doctors announced its intention
to clone a human.

   Or with last year's contamination of taco shells and other foods with a
bioengineered corn not approved for human consumption. Such controversy is
fodder for a relatively small but vocal international protest movement that is
targeting gatherings like Bio2001. Last year, when the industry held its annual
gathering in Boston, about 2,500 protesters took part in a largely peaceful
anti-biotech demonstration. In 1999, another loose-knit coalition of protesters
with similar anti-globalization aims disrupted the World Trade Organization
meeting in Seattle and rioting resulted in numerous arrests. San Diego police
are taking security precautions, planning for a WTO-like melee but hoping the
protests will prove uneventful.

   The price tag for San Diego taxpayers is expected to be about $2.5 million
for additional police training, overtime and special equipment, said John
Welter, assistant police chief. Welter said police are communicating with
protest organizers and biotech industry leaders and both sides are working to
ensure a peaceful gathering. "The unfortunate part is we aren't sure the people
who might be violent will be the ones talking to us," he said.

   "It would be nice to have a crystal ball, but since we don't, we will prepare
for the worst-case scenario."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. RUCKUS, which is opposed to biotechnology, trained
people how to scale buildings to hang protest banners. 2. RUCKUS members, who
teach this protesting class, plan to be at the biotech conference. (A-19);
PHOTOBY: 1,2. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1728 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 16, 2001 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1572 words

HEADLINE: Asthma study patient worked at Hopkins lab;
 Reisterstown woman was to be paid $365 for participating

BYLINE: Tom Pelton, Jonathan Bor and Gary Cohn

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   The woman who died after inhaling a drug in an experiment at the Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine was a 24-year-old lab technician who worked for the
university's asthma center, which conducted the study.

   Ellen M. Roche of Reisterstown, whom friends described as a bubbly, vivacious
person who loved horses and had just bought her first house, was to have been
paid $365 at the completion of the experiment, according to interviews and
documents.

   "She was perfectly healthy and a wonderful person. It's just a tragedy to
have something like this happen. She volunteered for the study to try to help
others," said Charles Noel, a retired railroad supervisor from Reisterstown and
longtime family friend.

   Roche died June 2 at the Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, about a month
after taking part in an experiment designed to help doctors understand a healthy
person's natural defenses against asthma.

   She developed a cough and flu-like symptoms a day after the test and was
admitted to the hospital after X-rays showed a lung inflammation.

   Roche's death was the first time in more than a decade that a research
subject died at Hopkins from complications directly related to an experiment -
not from an underlying illness.

   The death was announced Wednesday by the medical school in a sparsely worded
statement that did not identify the volunteer. The Office for Human Research
Protections, which oversees the safety of federally funded research studies,
launched an investigation the next day.

   Yesterday, Hopkins released a detailed description of the study and a consent
form shown to volunteers before they were accepted.

   In the consent form, doctors warned of possible side effects including a
cough, dizziness and a tight chest - but nothing life-threatening.

   Medications and fluids would be given, they said, to reverse any side
effects. A doctor would be present to treat the patient if problems arose.

   Researchers planned to recruit 10 people, some of them staff at the Johns
Hopkins Hospital and the Bayview Medical Center. While it is a common practice
for medical centers to recruit employees and students as research subjects, some
ethicists say it raises questions about whether they feel subtle pressure to
volunteer.

   In their description of the study, researchers said they were attempting to
discover the natural mechanisms that protect healthy people from having asthma
attacks. Asthma, which strikes 10 million Americans, is a disease in which the
airways close down when patients breathe allergens, irritants or other
substances.

   The experiment, funded by the National Institutes of Health, was directed by
Dr. Alkis Togias. It was part of a larger body of research overseen by Dr.
Solbert Permutt.

   In studies that began several years ago, Hopkins scientists discovered that
healthy airways tend to close down, too. But people compensate by taking deep
breaths that stretch the airways and cause them to reopen.

   The experiment in which Roche died was designed to identify the exact reflex
- the neurological pathway - that causes this response.

   Volunteers were told that they would visit the center seven to nine times.
During the first four visits, they would inhale a drug, methacholine, to induce
"a mild asthma attack" that would produce a tight chest, some coughing and mild
shortness of breath, according to the consent form.

   "These go away on their own within a short period of time," the form says.
"If you do not want to wait until the symptoms go away on their own, a lung
spray will be given to you which will take the symptoms away within a few
minutes."

   Experts outside Hopkins said methacholine is commonly used in research and in
clinical settings and is regarded as safe.

   During the fifth visit, volunteers would be asked to take deep breaths before
or after inhaling the drug, the form says. This would help doctors observe
whether the breaths prevented the mild attack by opening the airways.

   Roche apparently died in a subsequent phase of testing that began with the
sixth visit. Some volunteers would take another drug - hexamethonium - before
taking methacholine and breathing deeply.

   Doctors had theorized that that drug would counteract the beneficial effects
of deep breathing. If doctors could interfere with the body's defenses, they
might better understand how those worked.

   Hexamethonium could have side effects, the volunteers were warned. It could
reduce blood pressure and make them feel dizzy when they stood up.

   As a safeguard, volunteers would be hooked up to a heart monitor and have
their blood pressure monitored. Doctors could also provide fluids through an
intravenous tube if blood pressure sank dangerously low, the form said.

   What sparked Roche's medical crisis remains a mystery. One question is
whether the drug was to blame. Once widely given to treat high blood pressure
and to reduce bleeding during surgery, hexamethonium has not been used
clinically for many years.

   A hypertension expert who was unfamiliar with the Hopkins case said the
drug's benefits -and its side effects - were almost always short-lived.

   "Whatever happened to the patient was probably unrelated," said Dr. Edward D.
Frolich, a hypertension expert at the Ochsner Institute in New Orleans.

   In letters sent to federal oversight agencies, Hopkins indicated that it was
analyzing the hexamethonium for possible contamination but was considering other
causes, too. Scientists were studying a spirometer - a device that measures lung
capacity - and other medical equipment as possible sources of infection.

   Doctors performed an autopsy and were testing tissues to see whether Roche
had developed an infection.

   "There are no results at this time," said Joann Rodgers, a Hopkins
spokeswoman. "We are cooperating with these agencies and trying to find out
(what happened). That process is continuing."

   The safety of medical experiments has become a matter of public concern since
the death two years ago of an 18-year-old man in a gene therapy trial at the
University of Pennsylvania. That incident provoked calls for closer government
monitoring of experiments ands better self-policing by medical centers.

   Roche was one of seven children and stepchildren of a photographer, Bernard
J. Roche Jr., and his wife, Carolyn, who have lived for years in a wood-frame
home in Reisterstown that also serves as the photo business.

   More than almost anything, Ellen Roche took great joy in caring for animals,
friends said. She owned two horses, keeping one - called Clown - for a while in
her family's back yard. She had enjoyed the Carroll County Rabbit Club and 4-H
Club, according to an obituary in the Carroll County Times.

   "She was a very nice girl, very outgoing, very helpful to others - and, boy,
did she love her horses," said Betty Noel, a longtime family friend.

   Ellen Roche graduated from Franklin High School in 1994 and Frostburg State
University in 1998. She worked in the labs at the Asthma and Allergy Center at
Hopkins' Bayview Campus. And she was proud to have bought her own place last
June - a $83,000 townhouse not far from her parents' Reisterstown home, friends
said.

   "She was such a healthy person - that's what really gets me," said Betty
Noel. "When I heard she was hospitalized, I just couldn't believe it."

   Hundreds of people packed her funeral June 7 at the Eckhardt Funeral Chapel
on Reisterstown Road.

   Craig Schoenfeld, an attorney who said he is acting as the Roche family's
spokesman, said the family did not want to comment. "They are trying to grieve.
When the time comes and they want to speak, they will speak," Schoenfeld said.
"But right now they are just trying to grieve."

   The Hopkins study was suspended after Roche became ill. She was the third
volunteer to be tested, according to documents filed with federal agencies.

   Hopkins employees say researchers often post fliers around the Bayview center
cafeteria and elsewhere seeking recruits - fellow doctors, lab techs, students -
for the center's experiments. That's because it's easier to find subjects on
their East Baltimore campus than to find volunteers in the community.

   Recruiting within an institution is common at academic medical centers, said
Ruth Faden, director of the Hopkins bioethics institute. She said, however, that
it is important to ensure that participation is voluntary.

   "You certainly want to guard against a situation in which someone who is an
underling feels manipulated or coerced," Faden said. The practice at Hopkins is
to post notices and advertise rather than directly ask employees to participate.

   Outside Hopkins, ethicists were divided on whether academic medical centers
should recruit employees for studies.

   George Annas, chairman of the health law department at Boston University's
School of Public Health, said he didn't see anything wrong with allowing an
institution's employees to serve as research subjects - provided they feel free
to refuse.

   But Dr. Michael Grodin, director of medical ethics at that university's
School of Medicine, disagreed. He said employees might be reluctant to say no,
fearing they would not be seen as team players.

   "The fact that it's convenient doesn't justify it," Grodin said. "The bottom
line is you shouldn't use people employed by the institution doing the research
because there's potential conflict and coercion."

   Sun staff writer Michael Stroh contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2001


                             1729 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       June 15, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1462 words

HEADLINE: Testing fatality at Hopkins was healthy subject;
 Federal agency opens probe into death in asthma experiment;
 'Everybody's distressed'

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor, Gary Cohn and Tom Pelton

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A federal agency launched an investigation yesterday into the death of a
volunteer in an asthma experiment at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. The
research subject became ill a day after participating in the study, was
hospitalized and died about a month later, according to interviews and documents
filed with federal authorities.

   Two faculty members said the volunteer was a healthy woman, probably in her
20s, who enrolled in an experiment designed to help doctors understand the
body's natural defenses against asthma. It was performed at the Johns Hopkins
Asthma and Allergy Center, on the Bayview campus in East Baltimore. Hopkins
suspended the study when the person became ill in May.

   The investigation will be conducted by the U.S. Office for Human Research
Protections, which oversees the safety of federally funded research studies.

   "Once we open an investigation, we don't comment on it until it's over," said
Bill Hall, a spokesman for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the
parent agency.

   The last time a research subject died at Hopkins from complications directly
related to an experiment - not from an underlying illness - was about 15 years
ago, according to Hopkins spokeswoman Joann Rodgers.

   The medical school has declined to provide many details about the incident
and says it has not determined what caused the volunteer's death. Doctors have
performed an autopsy and are investigating whether a drug used in the experiment
could have been contaminated. They are also examining equipment involved in the
test.

   Hopkins reported the death in a June 6 letter to the Office for Human
Research Protections. "It is with deep regret that I report the death of the
subject," wrote Dr. Chi Van Dang, vice dean for research. "This disturbing turn
of events has reinforced for all concerned our commitment to the ethical conduct
of human subjects research."

   Although Hopkins officials have refused to say when the patient died,
interviews and documents suggest that the death occurred June 3 or 4. It was
discussed June 4 at a meeting of a Hopkins board that monitors the safety of
medical experiments.

   One member of the panel - the Bayview Institutional Review Board - said the
death shocked and saddened everyone involved.

   "Everybody's really concerned and distressed," said Dr. George Bigelow, an
addictions researcher who sits on the review board. "The whole thing is
baffling. We don't know if we'll ever know why this happened."

   On May 7, the volunteer reported a dry cough and muscle aches a day after
participating in the experiment, according to a letter Dr. Alkis Togias, who was
conducting the study, wrote to the review board chairman. The volunteer had
inhaled a drug in an experiment to observe lung function.

   Two days later, doctors found that the volunteer had developed a fever and
was suffering from flu-like symptoms and inflammation in the right lung.

   "Because of this picture, we have decided to admit the volunteer to the
hospital for observation," Togias wrote. "This obviously qualifies as a serious
adverse event."

   The volunteer was the third person to undergo testing, Togias wrote. The
first reported coughing the day after the study, but the cough soon cleared up.
The second did not report any ill effects.

   Dang later reported to the Office for Human Research Protections that the
volunteer who died was medically screened before enrolling in the study and was
found to be healthy. The exam included tests of lung function, he said.

   The Hopkins experiment was not a clinical trial designed to test a potential
therapy. Instead, it was what researchers call a "baseline physiological test"
to help doctors understand how the body functions and how it fights disease. In
this case, doctors were trying to understand natural defenses that protect
healthy people from asthma attacks.

   The experiment was directed by Togias, 43, an asthma specialist who has
published at least 75 articles on the lungs in scholarly journals. The test was
part of a larger body of work overseen by Dr. Solbert Permutt, 76, a pulmonary
specialist who has published more than 100 articles going back to the 1950s.

   Togias could not be reached for comment. Permutt, who had obtained a $384,000
grant from the National Institutes of Health, said he was instructed to refer
all questions to Hopkins' public affairs office.

   Asthma, which strikes 10 million Americans, is a disease in which airways of
the lungs close down when exposed to allergens, irritants and other substances.

   In previous tests, the Hopkins researchers found that healthy people
experience much the same narrowing - but compensate by taking deep breaths. The
breaths cause the airways to open and relax.

   They learned this by giving volunteers an airway-constricting drug called
methacholine, then watched what happened when the people took deep breaths.

   In the latest experiment, they took the work a step further. They added a
drug, hexamethonium, once widely used to treat high blood pressure and to reduce
bleeding during surgery. Replaced by other medication, it is no longer used in
therapy.

   Asthma experts outside Hopkins said they had never heard of hexamethonium
being used in a research study. But they said it was apparently given to
identify the particular reflex - a neural pathway - that protected healthy
airways.

   Left open to question is whether the drug, hexamethonium, triggered the
death. The drug has been linked in medical literature to cases of pneumonia,
Togias wrote in a letter to Dr. Gary Briefel, the Bayview review board chairman.

   But documents filed by Hopkins with the federal oversight agency suggest that
the medical center is investigating other causes, too - particularly a lung
infection that might have been acquired from some other source. In its search
for clues, Hopkins is testing a spirometer - a device used in the experiment
that measures lung capacity. It is also testing autopsy samples for a possible
viral infection.

   Once it opens an investigation, the Office for Human Research Protections has
a range of options. If it finds a problem, it can suspend a particular study or
an entire research program until corrections are made.

   The safety of medical experiments has become a matter of intense public
concern since the death two years ago of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene
therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. The physician overseeing that
trial and the medical center had a financial stake in the therapy being tested.
Government regulators cited the Penn researchers for numerous safety violations.

   That incident and other lapses prompted calls for closer government
monitoring of experiments and better self-policing by medical centers.

   Sheldon Krimsky, an expert on the ethics of scientific experiments at Tufts
University in Massachusetts, said the death at Hopkins was potentially more
problematic than the Gelsinger case.

   That's because the research subject in Baltimore was healthy before the test,
while Gelsinger had a mild form of a liver ailment for which a cure was being
sought. He volunteered to help find a cure for infants born with a more serious
form that can be quickly fatal.

   The Hopkins subject apparently did not have asthma or lung disease and could
have received no benefit from the experiment, Krimsky said. "A very conservative
interpretation of bioethics would say you should not participate in human trials
if you yourself will have no benefit from them. Why should you be a guinea pig?"
he said.

   But Ruth Faden, director of the Hopkins bioethics institute, said experiments
involving healthy volunteers are an accepted part of medical research and are
usually safe.

   "There is an inherent moral tension here, in that some of us have to bear a
risk so that all of us - society in general - will benefit," said Faden.

   In explaining why Hopkins has provided so little information about the death
in the experiment, Rodgers, the spokeswoman, said the medical center is
respecting the family's wishes.

   George Annas, chairman of the health law department at Boston University
School of Public Health, said it was wrong for Hopkins to keep secret the
circumstances surrounding the incident.

   Annas said the public should know how much the subject knew about the risks
involved, whether the person was paid or might have felt pressured to
participate. At the least, Annas said, Hopkins should release the consent form
and provide a full description of the study.

   "Human experimentation is not a private affair - it is not something that can
be done in secret," said Annas. "You are recruiting people from the public, and
the public is funding the research. So, there is no justification to not letting
the public know what happened."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                             1730 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2001 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                                  CITY Edition

SECTION: METRO SOUTH; Pg. S3

LENGTH: 372 words

HEADLINE: THIS WEEKEND

BODY:

   Discussion about dolphins

   The Greenwood Public Library and the Indianapolis Zoo will hook up today at 2
p.m. through distance-learning technology. The interactive, live discussion will
be called "Dolphin Dynamics." Those participating will see Atlantic bottle-nosed
dolphins up close and be able to discuss them with zookeepers.

   The free event is at the library, 310 S. Meridian St.

   For more information, call 1-317-881- 1953 .

   Family fun at library

   "Friday Family Fun at 2" will be at 2 p.m. today at the Johnson County Public
Library, Break-O-Day Branch.

   Stories and activities will be available for all family members. There is no
charge to attend.

   The branch is at 700 Sawmill Road, New Whiteland.

   For more information, call 1-317-535- 6206 .

   Singles dance tonight

   Ballroom, Latin, cha cha, swing, waltz, line, country and other dances may be
enjoyed at 8 p.m. today at a singles dance at Valle Vista Golf and Conference
Center.

   Dance lessons will be offered from 7:30 p.m. until the dance begins.

   Admission is $8 per person.

   Valle Vista is at 755 E. Main St., Greenwood.

   For more information, call 1-317-736- 5544 .

   Nathan's Battle fund-raiser

   A Rock 'n' Roll-a-thon will be conducted at Village Oaks Assisted Living by
Marriott from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday. Proceeds will go to Nathan's Battle
Foundation to help research for Batten's Disease.

   Donations will be used to help fund gene therapy treatments for Greenwood
residents Nathan and P.J. Milto, who are afflicted with the disease. The
family's goal is to raise $2 million by August.

   Members of the Oaks will participate in a rocking chair marathon to raise
funds. In addition, there will be a carnival for the kids, music, food and an
exhibit featuring autos from the Central Indiana Corvette Club.

   Shirrell  Richey , an Oaks resident, who helped engineer the 1953 Corvette,
will discuss his experiences with the design program at 11 a.m.

   Village Oaks is at 7212 S. U.S. 31, Indianapolis.

   For more information, call 1-317-889- 9822 .

   If your organization has a weekend event that is open to the public, please
send the time, date, place and other necessary information to The  Star  Metro
South Bureau, 3115 Meridian Parke Drive, Suite O, Greenwood, Ind. 46142. The fax
number is 1-317-865-4923.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2009


                             1731 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: Volunteer in Asthma Study Dies After Inhaling Drug

BYLINE:  By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

BODY:

   A healthy volunteer died recently after inhaling a drug in a federally
financed asthma study conducted by Johns Hopkins University, officials said
yesterday. The volunteer's hospitalization after inhaling the drug led the
institution to suspend the research.

        Officials at Johns Hopkins declined to identify the volunteer or the
date of death, or to release anything more than sketchy information about the
study and the circumstances surrounding the fatality.  They cited not only
confidentiality for the volunteer but also the family's request that they not
publicly discuss the study itself.

    An autopsy was performed. But in its brief statement, Hopkins said, "The
exact cause of death has not been determined."

   University officials said that as required, they had notified three federal
agencies involved in the research, which was conducted at Johns Hopkins Bayview
Medical Center in Baltimore. Officials of those agencies said they would look
into the death and the circumstances surrounding it, and referred all questions
to Johns Hopkins.

   Risk is inherent in research, although experiments on humans vary widely in
their danger, and in design.

   Clinical trials, for example, are intended to test the safety and
effectiveness of an experimental drug that may benefit the volunteers. But the
Hopkins study was apparently of a type known as a challenge experiment, testing
a theory about how the body responds to various stimuli.

   In such studies, a volunteer usually does not stand to benefit directly,
though the findings could ultimately contribute to development of a new therapy
that the participant might then use. Given the usual lack of direct benefit,
ethicists say, these studies require particularly close monitoring, because they
can pose a risk to a volunteer's health or life.

   In recruiting volunteers for asthma and allergy studies, Hopkins says on its
Web site that it will compensate participants for their time.

   Before they are started, all federally financed experiments on humans require
ethical review by a committee generally known as an institutional review board,
maintained by the researching university.  Johns Hopkins said a review board had
approved the study in which the volunteer died.

   The university described the study at issue as a baseline physiologic test
using an inhaled drug, hexamethonium, to determine how the lung protects the
airways from narrowing, a development that plays a critical role in asthma.

   Ethicists and asthma experts not affiliated with Hopkins expressed hope in
interviews last night that the university would quickly make public full details
of the study. The experts said that protecting the confidentiality of one
affected individual was understandable, but that citing such a reason to
withhold other public discussion of a federally financed study was
extraordinary.

   Providing full disclosure "is what you would expect a leading research
institution to do," said Dr. LeRoy Walters, an ethicist at the Kennedy Institute
at Georgetown University. He said Johns Hopkins's brief statement "is just the
beginning of the disclosure I would hope for."

   In response to a request filed by The New York Times under the Freedom of
Information Act, the Office for Human Research Protections released three
letters it had received from Hopkins. The office is a unit of the Department of
Health and Human Services charged with protecting the safety of volunteers in
experiments.

   The letters sketch a picture of an experiment that went amiss, beginning 24
hours after the volunteer inhaled hexamethonium. On May 7, the volunteer
reported dry cough, shortness of breath on exertion, muscular aches and fever.
Two days later, the volunteer was admitted to the hospital, and doctors were
concerned about a possible reaction to the drug. "This obviously qualifies as a
serious adverse event," Dr. Alkis Togias, one of the study researchers, wrote in
a letter dated May 9.

   In a letter to the federal office dated May 17, Dr. Chi V. Dang, vice dean
for research at Hopkins, said that the study had been suspended and that the
volunteer remained hospitalized. Dr. Dang noted that before entering the
experiment, the volunteer had undergone extensive tests, including those for
lung function, and had been found healthy.

   In a letter dated June 6, Dr. Dang wrote, "It is with deep regret that I
report the death of the subject."

   Dr. Dang wrote that Hopkins was asking a laboratory to test the
hexamethonium, which, he wrote, the manufacturer had said was 99.6 percent pure.
(The letter did not identify the manufacturer.) Dr. Dang also said tests were
being conducted on equipment used in the experiment and to determine whether the
volunteer had come down with a a viral infection.

   Researchers say the death of study volunteers, particularly healthy ones, is
rare, though official registries of the number of humans involved in experiments
are not kept.

   The Hopkins death is one of a small number that have come to public attention
in recent years.

   Two years ago, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died in a gene therapy trial at the
University of Pennsylvania. Federal officials later cited Penn researchers for
numerous violations of safety standards in the experiment.

   In research in 1996, Nicole Wan, a healthy college student, died shortly
after a bronchoscopy, an examination of the breathing tubes in the lung, at the
University of Rochester in New York.

   In 1993, 5 of 15 participants died in a drug trial at the National Institutes
of Health that was testing a promising drug for hepatitis B.

   And in 1999, federal officials temporarily suspended human experimentation at
Duke University because of shortcomings in the university's system for
protecting volunteers.

   Such episodes have led critics to demand that the government strengthen the
budgets and roles of review boards to monitor clinical trials, and that academic
medical centers police their researchers more strictly.

   For the study at Johns Hopkins, the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
said, it awarded a $1,553,462 grant to the principal investigator, Dr. Solbert
Permutt, to test up to 290 volunteers from Dec. 15, 1998, to Nov. 30, 2002.

   The volunteers were asked to inhale hexamethonium as part of deep breathing
tests so the researchers could observe the effect on relaxing the airways,
officials said. "By offering an in-depth understanding of the way in which
airway mechanics lead to the manifestations of asthma, the project should answer
many questions behind this disease," Dr. Permutt's team wrote in its request for
financing.

   The Food and Drug Administration licensed hexamethonium pills in the 1950's
to treat high blood pressure and decrease bleeding during surgery. But because
the manufacturer withdrew the drug from the market in the 1970's, its use today
is considered experimental.

   Hexamethonium has been used in several studies involving lung physiology at
leading academic medical centers without any unexpected adverse events, Johns
Hopkins said.

   All three federal agencies notified of the death -- the Food and Drug
Administration, the Office for Human Research Protections, and the heart, lung
and blood institute -- said they would investigate the safety of the drug and
whether the volunteers had been adequately protected.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                             1732 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                      JUNE 15, 2001, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. E2; OLYMPIC BEAT

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: Johnson says he'll find plenty to do in Bay Area

BYLINE: John Crumpacker

BODY:
WHEN HE'S through with his Golden Victory Lap Tour of relay races in September,
Michael Johnson will transition into retirement with his wife and son at their
new home in Marin County, near the junction of Mill Valley and Tiburon.

    It might seem odd for a lifelong Texan like Johnson to relocate to Marin;
but then again, he's spent his life in Texas, for God's sake. He's entitled to a
little Marin.

    "My wife and I have vacationed here a lot, down in Carmel and up in Napa.
I've always loved the San Francisco area," Johnson said yesterday in a
conference call. "We were waiting for the right time (to move). At the moment,
we're still back and forth between the Bay Area and Dallas. After this year,
we'll be permanently here in the Bay Area."

    As an intelligent and worldly man, Johnson likes what the Bay Area has to
offer. At the moment, he and his family (wife Kerry and son Sebastian) are
leasing a house with plans to buy elsewhere in the area.

    "Knowing I was going to retire and not be tied to Dallas, we wanted to move
somewhere where there are a lot of things to do," Johnson said. "San Francisco
is a good place to do that."

    Johnson's last race will be on Sept. 7 in Brisbane, Australia, when he
anchors the 4x400 relay for the United States in the Goodwill Games, which is
compensating history's greatest quarter-miler well for his one lap of work. A
series of relay races in Europe lead up to the Goodwill Games. Recall that in
1998 at the Goodwill Games in New York, Johnson anchored the United States to a
world-record 2 minutes, 54.20 seconds.

    Along with his farewell tour of races, Johnson is conducting youth clinics
in a number of cities. He said he's "having a blast" showing kids how it's done.

    "It's important to me to keep kids interested in track and field,
particularly in the United States," he said. "We've lost a lot of those track
and field kids to other sports."

    Most track experts expect Johnson's two world records -- 19.32 for 200
meters, 43.18 for 400 -- to last quite a while, the 200 in particular. Johnson,
however, has no interest in speculating on the longevity of his records.

    "Who would believe me if I did?" he asked. "Maybe I'd say something crazy
and it would make for some good print. It's not something I concern myself with.
I'm sure they'll be broken some day."

    Sure, like the years 2049 for the 400 and, oh, 2147 for the 200.

    NEW FRONTIER IN SPORTS: At International Olympic Committee headquarters in
Lausanne, Switzerland, last week, the IOC's Medical Commission formed the Gene
Therapy Working Group to study "gene therapy and its future impact on sport."

    According to the IOC, "gene therapy holds great promise for all people,
including athletes competing in Olympic sports. We endorse the development and
application of gene therapy for the prevention and treatment of human disease."

    As always, the potential for cheating is great. In fact, gene therapy could
one day supplant performance-enhancing drugs as the advantage of choice for
unscrupulous athletes.

    "We are aware that there is the potential for abuse of gene therapy
medicines and we shall begin to establish procedures and state-of-the-art
testing methods for identifying athletes who might misuse such technology," the
IOC said.

    That shouldn't be too difficult. Just look for the swimmer with the third
arm or the wrestler wearing the same kind of hair shirt as a gorilla or the
9-foot basketball player or the sprinter with cheetah spots on his hindquarters.

    AFRICA HEARD FROM: Of 123 members in the IOC, 16 are from Africa. That's not
enough, according to the continent's Olympic leaders.

    "We are the continent with the most number of national Olympic committees
and I think, with South America, we have the least number of IOC members," said
Sam Ramsamy, a South African member of the IOC. "Some balance has to be created.
I hope the new president will do this."

    There is some talk that Africa's 16 IOC members will vote as a bloc next
month when the host city for the 2008 Olympics is chosen. Of course, it's only
coincidental that officials of Toronto's bid for '08 attended an African IOC
Congress and promised support for that continent's developing nations.

    THE WORLD AT LARGE: The Reno-Tahoe area has let it be known it would like to
be host for the Winter Olympics in 2014 or 2018. . . . For turning an industrial
wasteland into an Olympic showcase, Sydney's Olympic Games recently won a United
Nations award for environmental excellence. Our favorite environmental story
from Sydney concerned the 1 million worms beneath the Main Press Center busy at
work munching biodegradable waste. Way to go, worms!

   E-mail John Crumpacker at jcrumpacker@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2001


                             1733 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 14, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH, Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 845 words

HEADLINE: Research volunteer dies in Hopkins asthma study;
 Medical school experiment focused on how lungs work

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor and Gary Cohn

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A volunteer died in an experiment at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine
that was designed to help doctors better understand asthma attacks, the medical
school disclosed yesterday.

   Hopkins suspended the study after the death and notified three federal
agencies that oversee medical experiments involving human subjects.

   In the experiment, volunteers were given a drug that is known to cause
airways of the lung to constrict, according to a brief Hopkins statement. They
were then asked to take deep breaths so physicians could observe whether this
relaxed the airways and caused them to reopen.

   "The exact cause of death has not been determined," Hopkins spokeswoman Joann
Rodgers said.

   Medical school officials refused to discuss many key facts, including the
volunteer's identity. They would not describe the circumstances of the death or
even when it occurred, though a faculty member said the accident happened about
10 days ago.

   Officials also declined to say whether the person was a healthy volunteer or
someone with asthma. People in both groups have been involved in phases of this
research at the Johns Hopkins Asthma and Allergy Center. The center is located
on the Bayview campus in East Baltimore. A pool of volunteers regularly
participates in related research studies there.

   "The family asked that we not make any further comment or say anything else,"
said Rodgers. "I can only tell you that the family was very, very clear about
what we could release, and we felt an obligation to accommodate them at this
time."

   The death was discussed at a meeting last week of the Johns Hopkins Bayview
Medical Center's Institutional Review Board, according to the faculty member.
The panel oversees the safety of medical experiments and takes steps to ensure
that patients have been adequately informed of the risks of participating in
such research.

   Concern about the safety of medical experiments mounted two years ago
following the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene therapy trial at
the University of Pennsylvania. Federal officials cited Penn researchers for
numerous violations of safety standards. That incident and other lapses have
prompted calls for more government monitoring of clinical trials, better
self-policing by academic medical centers and creation of an agency to oversee
medical experiments.

   The Hopkins study, called Lung Inflation and Airways Hyperresponsiveness, was
directed by Dr. Solbert Permutt, a professor of pulmonary medicine and asthma
expert. The $384,000 study was funded by the National Institutes of Health. That
agency was informed of the volunteer's death, along with the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and the federal Office of Human Research Protections, according
to Hopkins.

   Reached yesterday in his office, Permutt said he was not permitted to discuss
the matter. "I can't say anything right now, except to refer you to public
relations," he said.

   His study was not a clinical trial, in which a potential therapy or drug is
tested for safety and effectiveness. Instead, it was a "baseline physiological
study," one designed to observe lung function.

   In its statement, Hopkins said that volunteers inhaled a drug, hexamethonium,
which has been used safely to look at lung function in several clinical studies
at leading academic medical centers. The drug was long used to lower blood
pressure and decrease bleeding during surgery, according to the statement.

   Though the medical school provided scant details of the experi-     ment, a
description of the research is available in past press releases and on the
hospital's Web site.

   Doctors were investigating a theory that asthmatics lack a protective
mechanism that keeps their airways from closing down - causing coughing and, in
extreme cases, choking - when they inhale certain irritants.

   Healthy people have this mechanism. When their airways begin to close, they
take a few deep breaths and the airways open.

   In what appears to be an earlier phase of the experiment, nine healthy and
eight asthmatic volunteers were asked to take several deep breaths and then to
inhale hexamethonium. In the healthy volunteers, the breaths appeared to relieve
the effects of the constricting drug by 85 percent. But it produced no benefits
for those with asthma.

   Dr. Arthur Caplan, a medical ethicist at the University of Pennsylvania, said
"challenge studies" - experiments in which people are given a substance that
provokes symptoms - are among the most controversial in medicine.

   "In my view, the studies can be ethically done," he said. Researchers must be
extremely careful in gaining consent, use the smallest doses possible and have
people standing by who can rescue volunteers in distress. Review boards must
also monitor studies as they unfold, and prepare to stop them at the slightest
hint of danger.

   "It's very difficult to justify these studies, and we want to do as few of
these as possible," he said. "But without a baseline understanding of certain
mechanisms, it's hard to know what is going on with a disease."

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2001


                             1734 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2001 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             June 14, 2001 Thursday
                                  CITY Edition

SECTION: METRO SOUTH; Pg. S1

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: What's Up

BODY:

   Rock 'n' Roll-a-thon held to benefit Nathan's Battle

   Indianapolis -- A Rock 'n' Roll-a-thon will be held at Village Oaks Assisted
Living by Marriott from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday. Proceeds will go to the
Nathan's Battle Foundation to help fund research for Batten's Disease, which
afflicts Greenwood children Nathan and P.J. Milto.

   Members of the Oaks will participate in a rocking chair marathon to raise
funds. In addition, there will be a carnival for the kids, music, food and an
exhibit featuring autos from the Central Indiana Corvette Club.

   At 11 a.m., Shirrell Richey, an Oaks resident who helped engineer the 1953
Corvette, will speak of his experiences with the design program.

   Donations will be used to help fund gene therapy treatments for the Milto
brothers. To begin their therapy in August, $2 million is needed.

   Village Oaks is at 7212 S. U.S. 31. For more information, call
1-317-889-9822.

   Feet to Beat Diabetes set for Johnson County Park

   Edinburgh -- The first Feet to Beat Diabetes Walk will be June 23 at Johnson
County Park. Preregistration deadline is June 19, but participants also may
enter the day of the race.

   Registration for the 5K walk will begin at 8 a.m. at the Maples Building on
Schoolhouse Road, with the race starting at 9 a.m. There is no registration fee,
but walkers are asked to get pledges from friends, co-workers and neighbors.

   In addition to the race, there will be activities for all ages. Music, face
painting, dance demonstrations, free massages, a scavenger hunt and a Healthy
Living Fair will entertain participants.

   The walk will raise money to help the American Diabetes Association reach its
goal of preventing and curing diabetes and improving the lives of all people
affected by diabetes. Locally, the money will provide funds for scholarships
used by local children attending Camp John Warvel, a summer camp for kids with
diabetes. It also will go toward diabetes education programs and events in
Johnson County and surrounding communities.

   To pre-register, call the American Diabetes Association at 1-800-228-2897,
Ext. 6727.

   VFW post hosts open house with chicken dinner Sunday

   Shelbyville -- VFW Post 2695 will have an open house and chicken dinner
Sunday at its facility at 1622 E. Ind. 44, behind the Osco Drug Store.

   Doors open at noon, and serving will begin at 12:30 p.m., until all the food
is gone. The menu will include fried chicken, mashed potatoes, gravy, green
beans and dessert for $5.

   Visitors also are invited to play euchre, rook and other card games.

   For more information, call 1-317-398-0812.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2009


                             1735 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                        June 12, 2001 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL FRONTIERS

BYLINE: William Hathaway

BODY:

   Hope For Hemophilia

   A gene therapy technique to treat hemophilia appears to be safe -- and at
least some patients showed evidence that a key disease-fighting gene was still
active months after therapy was given, researchers reported last week.

      Six patients with hemophilia A received an injection of their own cells,
which had been modified to contain a gene that codes for a blood-clotting
protein known as factor VIII.
   Researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston reported the
results of the first phase of the therapy trial in last week's New England
Journal of Medicine.
   No patient reacted adversely to the treatment and four of the six patients
were found to have elevated levels of factor VIII, the lack of which can cause
uncontrolled bleeding in victims.
   Two of the patients reported no episodes of bleeding in 10 months following
the trial.
   Hemophilia A affects approximately 15,000 men in the United States and
traditional treatment with factor VIII can exceed $100,000 annually, the
researchers noted.

   Don't Blame The Keyboard
   Using a computer at work does not increase your chance of developing carpal
tunnel syndrome (compression and irritation of a nerve in the wrist),
according to a study published today in the journal Neurology.
   "We wanted to do this study because conventional wisdom says that using a
computer increases your risk of developing carpal tunnel, but few studies have
been done to see how often carpal tunnel actually occurs in computer users,"
said Dr. J. Clarke Stevens, a study author and neurologist at the Mayo Clinic
in Rochester, Minn.
   The study examined 257 employees of the Mayo Clinic at Scottsdale, Ariz.,
who used computers frequently.
   Although 30 percent reported numbness or a pins-and-needles sensation in
their hands, just 10.5 percent met the clinical definition of carpal tunnel,
based on answers to questionnaires. Laboratory tests on nerves of those
subjects confirmed the diagnosis in nine people, or 3.5 percent of those
studied.
   "These percentages are similar to percentages found in other studies
looking at how often carpal tunnel occurs in the general population -- not
just computer users," Stevens said.
   He added that most of the studies that have shown repetitive motion as a
cause of carpal tunnel involved workers in meatpacking plants or other
industrial jobs, not people who work with computers.

   Measles Vaccine Fights Lymphoma In Mice
   The measles vaccine virus may do more than protect children from a
potentially dangerous disease -- it also may help fight lymphoma.
    The cancer in mice, which had been injected with human lymphoma cells,
went into remission after the mice were given the measles vaccine, scientists
at the Mayo Clinic report in this Friday's issue of Blood, Journal of the
American Society of Hematology.
   The measles vaccine also seemed effective at combating both aggressive and
slow-growing B-cell lymphoma, said Dr. Adele Fielding, lead researcher on the
project.
   "Our study therefore proves the principle that the measles vaccine virus
destroys lymphoma cells," Fielding said.
   She stressed the research was only a preliminary step in developing new
treatments for lymphoma, which kills about 27,000 Americans annually.



LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2001


                             1736 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 11, 2001 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Part S; View Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Capsules;
Gene Therapy Helpful for Hemophiliacs--at Least in Theory

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Hemophilia would appear to be one of the best candidates among genetic
diseases for gene therapy. Victims are missing one of two enzymes, called Factor
VIII and Factor IX, that are crucial for the clotting of blood. Various studies
have shown that inducing production of as little as 5% of the normal amount of
either enzyme is sufficient to reduce bleeding and other symptoms and greatly
improve the quality of life.

   But attempts at gene therapy have had little overall success. Researchers
have been able to use viruses to insert the gene for either of the proteins into
hemophilia patients, but the results have been modest at best. Even when the
gene is present, it has been difficult to turn it on to produce the protein. But
safety trials with an alternative approach look quite promising and have even
shown some therapeutic benefit.

   A team led by Dr. David A. Roth of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
in Boston has tested the technique in six patients with severe hemophilia A, in
which the subjects are missing the gene for Factor VIII. Using a technique
developed by Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., the researchers
removed skin cells from each of the patients' arms and used an electrical
current to insert a segment of DNA containing the Factor VIII gene into the
cells.

   After growing the cells in the laboratory, they injected them into fatty
tissue in the abdomens of the six patients. The researchers reported in the June
7 New England Journal of Medicine (http://content.nejm.org) that they observed
no adverse effects from the injections, which was the primary aim of the trial.
But they also observed increased production of Factor VIII in four of the six
patients. That increased production was accompanied by reduced episodes of
bleeding and a decreased need for externally administered Factor VIII. The
researchers plan eventually to inject larger numbers of cells to see if they can
eliminate the need for external Factor VIII.

   Iron Deficiency Might Affect Math Scores

   A team of researchers from the University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry in New York may have an important clue about why adolescent girls
typically score lower on standardized tests of aptitude in mathematics.

   Dr. Jill S. Halterman and her colleagues studied 5,398 children, ages 6 to
16, who had participated in the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
III conducted between 1988 and 1994. As part of that study, the children's blood
iron levels were measured, as was their performance on standardized tests.

   The team reported in the June 6 issue of Pediatrics
(http://www.pediatrics.org) that 3% of the children overall were iron-deficient.
But 8.7% of the girls were iron-deficient, a state generally attributed to loss
of blood during menstruation. They found, moreover, that children who were
iron-deficient were 2.3 times as likely to score below average on the
mathematics test as those who had normal levels. They did not score lower on
reading tests, however.

   Researchers have offered a variety of theories about the causes of girls'
poor performance on math tests, ranging from poor instruction to lack of
attention paid to female students by math instructors.

   The current researchers did not recommend that parents give iron supplements
to children. They did call, however, for further studies to confirm their
findings. And if they are confirmed, Halterman said, then controlled trials of
iron supplements should be undertaken to see if they provide a benefit.

   Heart Cells Have Ability to Replicate After Attack

   Contradicting a long-standing belief, New York researchers have found that
heart cells have the ability to replicate after a heart attack. Although that
spontaneous replication is clearly not sufficient to overcome the effects of a
heart attack, cardiologists hope that they can now find ways to stimulate
further replication.

   Studies in animals have shown that new cells--particularly stem cells from a
donor--can restore heart muscle after a heart attack. The new study suggests
that it may not be necessary to add cells to the heart if the heart's own cells
can be stimulated to divide.

   Dr. Piero Anversa and his colleagues from New York Medical College in
Valhalla studied heart tissue from 13 patients who had died within four to 12
days after a heart attack, as well as from 10 patients who died from other
causes. They reported in the June 7 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine
(http://content.nejm.org) that they found clear evidence of cellular replication
in the heart attack victims--both in tissues immediately adjacent to the damaged
heart muscle and at sites further removed. In contrast, they found virtually no
evidence of replication in the patients without cardiovascular disease.

   "With this landmark study, we have a new understanding of the heart that
opens up the possibility of repairing heart muscle damage after a heart attack,"
said Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute.

   *

   Medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II can be reached at thomas.maugh@latimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2001


                             1737 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       June 11, 2001 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 02G

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy treatment could help hemophiliacs

BYLINE:  Compiled by Kawanza L. Griffin

BODY:

   An experimental new gene-therapy technique can safely deliver a healthy gene
and might be used to treat hemophilia, according to a study in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   Researchers at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center tested the
gene-transfer technology using a technique developed by the Cambridge, Mass.
-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.  on six men with severe hemophilia A -- the
most common type of the inherited disorder that afflicts about 15,000 men in the
United States.

   They removed a small piece of skin from the patient's arm and then used a
brief electric pulse to insert the blood clotting factor VIII gene into the
cells. The genetically modified cells were then injected into fatty tissue in
the patient's belly.

   The researchers said the non-viral technique has potential advantages over
gene therapy that uses viruses because the new technique minimizes the risk of
immune reactions, infections and genetic mutations that may be associated with
the use of viruses.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2001


                             1738 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 10, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Column 1; Style Desk; Pg. 5

HEADLINE: EVENING HOURS;
Alfresco Angels

BYLINE:  By Bill Cunningham

BODY:

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: June 7: The Fresh Air Fund gave its annual awards dinner-dance,
attended by 890 guests, which raised $900,000 for free summer vacation programs
for New York City children. The party was held in a tent in the parking lot at
Tavern on the Green. 1. 10:15: TIKI BARBER, right, of the New York Giants was
among the honored guests. With him, his teammate HOWARD CROSS. 2. 10:20: MARIAH
CAREY with Fresh Air Fund children.; June 4: The Whitney Museum of American Art
held its 10th annual American Art Award benefit dinner at the museum, attended
by 330 guests. The event raised over $2 million. The award, a steel music box,
was created by Lorna Simpson. 3. 8:15: From left, FAITH GEIER and her husband,
PHILIP H. GEIER JR., who received the award; and EVELYN LAUDER and her husband,
LEONARD A. LAUDER, the chairman of the museum.; June 6: The Y.M.C.A. of Greater
New York gave its annual awards dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria. The event,
attended by 800, raised $1 million. 4. 6:25: BOB ANNUNZIATA, the chairman of the
Y.M.C.A. of Greater New York, and CASSANDRA ST. VIL, who was honored as teenager
of the year. 5. 6:40: DAVID H. KOMANSKY, left, chairman of Merrill Lynch, who
was honored, and YOUSSEF A. NASR, president of HSBC Bank.; June 6: Phoenix
House, which fights drug and alcohol abuse and provides treatment programs, held
an awards dinner at the Plaza, attended by 400 guests and raising $1 million. 6.
7:20: From left, C. MICHAEL ARMSTRONG, chairman of AT&T, who was honored; DEBRA
WALCOTT, a Phoenix House graduate; and Dr. MITCHELL S. ROSENTHAL, its
president.; June 7: Gail Buckley, the daughter of Lena Horne and Sidney Lumet,
has written a book, "American Patriots: The Story of Blacks in the Military From
the Revolution to Desert Storm" (Random House), and was saluted at a book
signing at the Madison Avenue Bookshop. 7. 5:45: From left, GAIL BUCKLEY, ST.
CLAIR PUGH and RUTH WOOLARD.; June 7: The Foundation Fighting Blindness, which
finances research to combat degenerative eye diseases, held a benefit dinner at
the Waldorf-Astoria. A film was shown about a blind Briard dog that has gained
sight and retained it for 11 months through what seems a breakthrough in gene
therapy research. The evening, attended by 963 guests, raised over $1.8 million.
8. 6:25: From left, GORDON GUND, the group's chairman, who is blind; HARRIET
FINKELSTEIN; and YVONNE CHESTER, who is also blind.; June 5: Carmen
Dell'Orefice, the model, celebrated her 70th birthday with 70 friends at Cafe
Nicholson, long a fixture near the Queensboro Bridge. 9. 8:05: NORMAN F. LEVY,
one of two hosts of the party, and CARMEN DELL'OREFICE. 10. 8:35: JANE POWELL
and DALLAS W. BOESENDAHL, the other host.; June 4: The Collegiate Chorale,
founded in 1941 by Robert Shaw, held a benefit recital attended by 300 guests at
the Union Club. Aprile Millo, the Metropolitan Opera soprano, was the soloist.
The evening raised $200,000. 11. 6:25: CHARLES PETSCHEK and MARLENE STRAUSS.;
June 4: Designer's Saturday, a nonprofit interior design organization, held a
maypole party (rained out on May 23) on the lawn of the Cooper-Hewitt National
Design Museum. The event was attended by 650 and raised over $75,000 for New
York design schools. 12. 7:45: Architects, designers and artists created the
maypole banners, which were auctioned. 13. 7:52: N.Y.U./Tisch School dancers and
volunteers performed in Mari O'Connor costumes.; June 7: The New York Botanical
Garden in the Bronx gave its annual benefit ball in a tent decorated by Philip
Baloun, set up in front of the Enid A. Haupt Conservatory. The evening, attended
by 760 guests and raising $2 million, began with cocktails in the gardens. 14.
8:47: ELIZABETH STRIBLING. 15. 8:35: FRIEDERIKE BIGGS, left, and JEANNE JONES
with GREGORY LONG, the garden's president. 16. 8:32: From left, JENNIFER J. RAAB
and LYNDEN MILLER. 17. 8:42: MARTHA BAKER. 18. 8:15: GAIL HILSON, left, and
HONORE WAMSLER. 19. 8:45: BROOKE DE OCAMPO, left, and RENA SINDI. 20. 8:50:
SUSAN BURKE, left, and KATHIE MOORE. 21. 8:52: SOMERS WHITE.; June 6: The
Central Park Conservancy held its annual Taste of Summer benefit on the terrace
of Bethesda Fountain. Twenty New York City restaurants offered tastings of their
specialties. The event raised $300,000. 22. 8:40: Over 1,000 guests attended the
event, presided over by the Angel of the Waters sculpture. 23. 8:50: MARCO
MACCIONI, of Osteria del Circo, giving his 165-pound bull mastiff a morsel for
the tasting.; June 5: The Bronx Museum of the Arts held a reception at the
Doubles Club to begin the 30th year of the museum, which shows African-American,
Hispanic and Asian art. 24. 6:40: From left, SIMRAN BROWN and CHARLES STONE III
were among the 300 guests. 25. 6:50: MICHELE GERBER KLEIN, the evening's
chairwoman, and LARS NILSSON, a designer at Bill Blass.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2001


                             1739 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    June 10, 2001 Sunday Three Star Edition

SECTION: IMAGINE ST. LOUIS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENTAL GENE TREATMENT HELPS HEMOPHILIACS IN STUDY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy technique shows promise as a treatment for
hemophilia, researchers report.

   Hemophilia patients do not have enough of a blood clotting-protein because of
a defect in a gene. The goal of gene therapy is to get the body to produce the
protein by putting normal genes into the patient.

   Until now, viruses have been used to ferry genes into the body. But this
carries some risk. The new method avoids those hazards by putting the gene into
cells taken from the patient.

   Researchers at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center tested the gene
transfer technology and reported their findings in the most recent New England
Journal of Medicine. The technique was developed by the Cambridge, Mass.-based
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which funded the study.

   "I think it is extremely exciting for those who live with hemophilia," said
Mark Skinner, who has the disorder and is president of the National Hemophilia
Foundation. "As the field of gene therapy develops, it will offer a vastly
improved treatment and hopefully, ultimately a cure for those with a bleeding
disorder."

   Researchers tested the method on six men with severe hemophilia A, the most
common type of the inherited disorder that afflicts about 15,000 U.S. men.

   Dr. David A. Roth, who led the study, said the method proved to be safe and
without side effects. While designed to look at safety issues, the study also
showed promising signs that the treatment can work, Roth said.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2001


                             1740 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                         June 9, 2001, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: Disease research comes long way ; But the cure for Alzheimer'sremains
elusive

BYLINE: Cindy Tumiel


BODY: Marian Martinello Robinson follows the news about Alzheimer's disease
research closely, with a mixture of optimism and anguish.

    By scientific standards, progress on understanding the disease is coming at
a good pace, with millions of research dollars flowing from federal and private
sources and thousands of scientists probing everything from risk factors to drug
treatments to the evolutionary roots of the disease.

    But progress isn't coming quickly enough to offer hope of a cure to
Robinson's 90-year-old mother, Helena Martinello, who suffers memory loss and
confusion - hallmarks of this devastating brain disease.

    "On the positive side, I see the benefits from the work that has already
been done. But there's still such a long way to go," said Robinson, a retired
University of Texas at San Antonio instructor.

    Her mother is responding to a new drug that boosts acetylcholine, a brain
chemical that helps deliver messages between brain cells. It has slowed
progression of the disease, but Robinson knows it isn't a cure.

    Research has come a long way since the late 1970s, when no federal money was
earmarked for the disease, said Zaven Khachaturian, who in 1986 became the
National Institute on Aging's first director of Alzheimer's research. Last year,
the government put up about $466 million, to which millions more was added by
private groups such as the Alzheimer's Association.

    But it is a complex illness, and there is no clear understanding yet of how
Alzheimer's occurs or how to stop it, Khachaturian said.

    "To answer the question, 'Will there ever be a cure?' - the answer is
'Yes,'" he said. "But it will happen incrementally."

    In Alzheimer's, brain cells become clogged with plaques and tangles that
slowly destroy cognitive functions. Memory and reasoning ability slowly
deteriorate, and patients eventually forget their loved ones.

    One of the biggest research successes of the past decade has been in
identifying risk factors for the disease, said Caleb Finch, a neurobiologist at
the University of Southern California, who spoke earlier this week at a
conference of aging research specialists in New Braunfels.

    Alzheimer's researchers are finding connections to heart disease, high blood
cholesterol, and head injuries, and several genes have been identified that
appear to have a role in a small percentage of families with a history of
Alzheimer's.

    Several studies have shown that the incidence of Alzheimer's is less in
people taking statins, or cholesterol-lowering drugs, and anti-inflammatory
drugs like aspirin, Finch noted.

    Research into treatments is progressing along two fronts, Khachaturian said.
The first-generation drugs, like those Robinson's mother takes, work by
interfering with the progressive death of cells. But these only slow down the
disease; they do not stop it.

    Now, scientists are studying the use of stem cells and gene therapy to
improve the brain's ability to fight back. A possible vaccine for the disease is
in early stages of human testing, and earlier this year researchers at the
University of California San Diego performed the first procedure to graft a new
nerve growth factor into the brain of a patient.

    ctumiel@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: Express-News Graphic - fact box - Alzheimer's disease

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2001


                             1741 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Features; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: SPEED READS

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   Occupational change

   Add another chapter to the history of William Faulkner's hometown. Square
Books owner Richard Howorth (left), who campaigned against the
over-commercialization of Oxford, Miss., is the town's new mayor after defeating
Republican incumbent Pat Lamar 1,301 to 1,182 in Tuesday's election.

   Howorth, a friend of former Oxford resident John Grisham, will let his staff
and wife Lisa run the bookstore while he works to deal with a booming
population. "The reason Oxford has been growing so rapidly is because it is
perceived as a small, charming, livable town," Howorth said. "If you have
high-impact growth without careful planning, you endanger the very thing that is
the catalyst for that growth."

   Oxford's lack of strong zoning ordinances is blamed for Grisham's move to
Charlottesville, Va., a few years ago. The author of best-selling legal
thrillers became incensed when a mobile home lot opened next to his upscale
estate. --- Don O'Briant

TELEVISION: Big numbers for 'Six,"Sex'

   The premiere of Alan Ball's "Six Feet Under" and the return of "Sex and the
City" Sunday night have HBO downright giddy. Ball's "Six" set a record for a
series premiere on the premium cable channel while "Sex" charted its best
numbers ever.

   Some 5.1 million people saw "Six Feet Under," the latest from Marietta's Ball
who also wrote the Oscar-winning "American Beauty." Another 6.2 million watched
the back-to-back episodes of "Sex." Neither brought in "Sopranos"-like numbers
(11.3 million for the mob hit's season premiere and 9.5 million for the finale)
but both are attracting the kind of stats HBO wants. --- John Druckenmiller

HEALTH: Help for hemophiliacs?

   A small, early-stage trial of gene therapy shows promise for treating
hemophilia A, an inherited disorder in which blood doesn't clot. It affects one
man out of 10,000. Researchers from Harvard Medical School say in today's New
England Journal of Medicine that four of the six patients in the trial produced
their own factor VIII, a blood-clotting protein hemophiliacs cannot manufacture
as a result of a genetic defect, for up to 10 months.

   The trial was a phase I study, designed chiefly to test the safety of a
treatment; it ended without adverse effects for any of the patients. The
therapy, developed by a company called Transkaryotic Therapies that is owned by
two of the researchers, uses connective tissue cells harvested from a patient,
augmented with a segment of the missing gene and reimplanted in the abdomen. It
does not use viruses, a common mechanism in gene therapy that has not worked
well for hemophilia and has been accused of causing unwanted immune reactions in
other trials. --- M.A.J. McKenna

THEATER: Alliance books director

   Jon Jory, one of the most celebrated names in regional theater, will make his
Alliance Theatre directing debut next season. A drama professor at the
University of Washington in Seattle, Jory, the former producing director of the
Actors Theatre of Louisville, Ky., and its influential Humana Festival of New
American Plays, will direct "The Game of Love and Chance" Feb. 14-March 10 at
the Alliance.

   He leads an interesting roster of guest directors assembled by new Alliance
chief Susan V. Booth. She's also hired Kent Gash, a staff member at the Alabama
Shakespeare Festival, to guide Tennessee Williams' "A Lovely Sunday for Creve
Coeur" (Oct. 11-Nov. 4). --- Tom Sabulis

GRAPHIC: Photo:
Richard Howorth

LOAD-DATE: June 07, 2001


                             1742 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 The Atlanta Constitution
                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Sports; Pg. 6G

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY: Little League pitcher gives his fielders a day off

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:

   Little Leaguer Robert Knight didn't just pitch a perfect game Monday in
Harper Woods, Mich. He also struck out all 18 batters.

   "I could tell the other team didn't really want to come up to bat anymore
after awhile," said the 5-foot-3, 100-pound 12-year-old, who also got three
hits.

COLLEGE BASKETBALL: Heels' Curry, Peppers to stick to football North Carolina's
Ronald Curry and Julius Peppers say they'll stick to football and not play
basketball next season. . . . Guard Trey Guidry has transferred from North
Carolina State to Illinois State.

PRO FOOTBALL: Moss seeks $100 million In a radio talk show, Vikings receiver
Randy Moss, entering the last year of his contract, said he expects his next
contract to be worth about $100 million. . . . The Carolina Panthers signed
free-agent running back Richard Huntley.

ETC.: Gene therapy a concern for Olympics Representatives of the International
Olympic Committee's medical commission met with leading genetic experts to
consider the potential problem of athletes some day using gene therapy to gain a
competitive advantage. . . . Ronald Siler, Juan McPherson and Anthony Thompson
reached the quarterfinals of the World Amateur Boxing Championships in Belfast,
Northern Ireland, joining fellow American Jason Estrada. . . . In sectional
qualifying in Tampa, NBC golf commentator Gary Koch won a playoff to secure a
spot in next week's U.S. Open. . . . In the MLS, the visiting Dallas Burn beat
the Tampa Bay Mutiny 1-0 on Jason Kreis' goal.

LOAD-DATE: June 07, 2001


                             1743 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       June 7, 2001 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 004

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gives hope to hemophiliacs

BYLINE: By Michael Lasalandra

BODY:

   A gene therapy treatment for hemophilia has been shown to be safe, raising
hopes that the controversial field of genetic manipulation may come out of the
shadows following the death of a patient two years ago.

   Beyond the safety issue, the experiment at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center also showed indications that the technique may benefit patients with the
bleeding disorder, according to a study published in today's New England Journal
of Medicine.

   "The main focus was safety, and everybody did fine, with no side effects,"
said Dr. David A. Roth, director of hemophilia clinical research at the hospital
and the study's lead author.

   But four of the six subjects reported on in the study also showed an increase
in their levels of factor VIII activity, indicating a potential benefit in the
patients' struggle to prevent bleeding.

   In addition, two patients saw no spontaneous bleeds for 10 months of the
study.

   "We were thrilled to see these clinical effects," Roth said.

   Patients with hemophilia have a shortage of factor VIII, a protein that helps
the blood to clot. Most take a bioengineered version of the protein to prevent
or stop bleeding, but it is very expensive, costing about $ 100,000 per year.
The disease afflicts about 15,000 Americans.

   Gene therapy has so far had few successes and has been under the gun since a
young volunteer died in a gene therapy experiment in Pennsylvania in 1999. In
fact, Roth's study was briefly shut down by Beth Israel officials last year
while debate raged. The study, however, resumed after only two weeks of being on
hold.

   In the Pennsylvania case, the volunteer's death was triggered by an injection
of genes carried by a virus - the usual approach for getting genes into
patients' cells to correct diseases that are caused by flawed genes.

   But Roth's experiment did not use a virus to deliver the gene. Instead, he
used a technique developed by Transkaryotic Therapies of Cambridge, in which a
small number of skin cells were taken from the patients and taken to a
laboratory, where the normal blood clotting genes were inserted by a process
that uses an electric shock.

   The gene therapy technique, if proven effective, would allow patients with
hemophilia to make their own factor VIII.

   The six patients in the study all had severe hemophilia A.

   Despite the encouraging findings, Roth said much work remains to be done.

   "But we are optimistic based on the clinical responses we observed,
especially in light of the modest increases in factor VIII activity achieved at
this early stage," he said.

   The study was funded by TKT.

   In an editorial, doctors from the University of Washington called the results
"promising," but said the improved clinical outcomes observed cannot be
attributed to the gene therapy, "given the patients' personal and emotional
investments in the study."


LOAD-DATE: June 07, 2001


                             1744 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 7, 2001, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: NEW METHOD OF GENE THERAPY FOR HEMOPHILIA SEEN AS SAFE

BYLINE: By Anne Barnard, Globe Staff

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy method has safely introduced new genes into six
men with hemophilia, and shows signs it may help them fight the disease by
producing the blood-clotting protein they lack, researchers at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center reported in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   Four of the six patients showed increased levels of clotting protein, and
none suffered side-effects after a year of the treatment developed by
Cambridge-based Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which funded the study.

      However, the study was designed only to test safety, not the effectiveness
of the treatment aimed at the 13,500 Americans who have severe hemophilia A, a
form of the genetic disease that causes excessive bleeding. But the researchers
called it a hopeful sign for the broader field of gene therapy, which has
struggled with safety concerns after a few publicized deaths.

   Most gene therapy experiments have used viruses to carry new genes into the
body, a method that has sometimes caused inflammations and other immune
reactions. In Transkaryotic's method, new genes are inserted into the patient's
own skin cells in the laboratory. The cells then multiply and are inserted in a
clump into the lining of the belly, where they act almost as a new gland, or
"miniature factory," said the company's CEO, Dr. Richard Selden.

   "We believe this nonviral approach is inherently safer," said Dr. David Roth,
director of hemophilia clinical research at Beth Israel Deaconess and the
study's principal investigator.

   An accompanying editorial, by Drs. Daniel G. Miller and George
Stamatoyannopoulos of the University of Washington, called the method promising,
but urged more examination to make sure the inserted cells do not cause a
reaction or turn malignant.

   The next step is a Phase II study of effectiveness, which would look for ways
to produce more clotting factor more consistently. While two patients went for
10 months without any spontaneous bleeding, levels of the clotting factor
decreased over time in most patients. Roth said the researchers may increase the
number of cells inserted or modify the location.

   He noted that for patients who spend up to $300,000 on artificial clotting
factor each year, even an incremental improvement is meaningful. "Anything that
would decrease their use of this factor would make them more independent," he
said.

   The study was shut down last year as Beth Israel Deaconess reviewed its gene
therapy oversight procedures after 17-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died in a
University of Pennsylvania trial.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                             1745 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        June 7, 2001 Thursday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 620 words

HEADLINE: Heart can regenerate after attack, study finds

BYLINE: By Lawrence K. Altman, The New York Times,

BODY:

   Medical dogma holds that damage to the heart is irreversible  and that the
body cannot grow new cells to replace those that die  from a heart attack or
other heart ailment.

   But new findings being published today provide what experts  said is the
strongest evidence ever reported that some human heart  muscle cells do
regenerate after a heart attack, although  generally too few to repair all the
damage.

   Using a high resolution microscope and a new laboratory  technique, a team
headed by Dr. Piero Anversa of New York Medical  College in Valhalla, N.Y., has
found evidence that the human heart  does grow new muscle cells after a heart
attack.

   The next main research step is to find ways to tap the  heart's growth
reserve to better repair damage from a heart attack  and many other heart
conditions, Anversa said in a telephone  interview from Naples, Italy, where he
lectured Wednesday on his  findings.

   The area of heart cell regeneration research has been  controversial. But
Anversa had support for his views from some  leading experts not involved with
his research who called the  report in today's New England Journal of Medicine
'a landmark  study.' The experts said that the findings have important
implications for treating heart disease, the nation's leading  cause of death.

   'This is a breakthrough, at least for a new way of thinking  about the
heart's recuperative power and ways to repair a damaged  heart,' said Dr.
Valentin Fuster, chief of cardiology at Mount  Sinai Hospital in Manhattan and a
former president of the American  Heart Association.

   With more research 'you might have a new therapeutic weapon'  for heart
disease, said Fuster. 'The implications are incredible.'

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart Lung and  Blood Institute
said that Anversa's findings 'provide the most  dramatic and clear-cut
demonstration to date of heart-cell  regeneration after cardiac injury.'
Anversa's findings add to  those from studies on animals that show the dogma
that the heart  cannot regenerate 'is no longer true,' said Lenfant whose
federal  agency in Bethesda, Md., paid for the research that was conducted  in
Vallhala, at the University of Udine and University of Trieste  in Italy.

   Lenfant said the findings eventually could have 'enormous  public health
value' if it led to new therapies that delayed the  onset of heart failure and
prolonged life. Lenfant also said that  he believed Anversa's research holds
greater promise for heart  disease than gene therapy, which many experts
consider a highly  promising route to new therapies.

   But, Lenfant cautioned, the new therapies are 'not going to  be here
tomorrow.'

   Anversa said he never believed that the heart was an  exception to the rule
that cell regeneration is essential to life.  Nor did he believe, as the dogma
held, that scarring after heart  attacks was evidence against the heart's
ability to make new  cells. Other organs, like the skin, constantly grow new
cells to  replace old and damaged ones and still leave scars, Anversa said.

   Anversa said 'it made no sense' to him that humans were born  with a set
number of heart cells 'that were able to contract 70  times a minute for more
than 100 years without the capacity for  regeneration.'

   Until recently, medical dogma also held that the brain could  not grow new
cells. But a flurry of recent research activity has  upset that belief.

   New research by his and other teams shows that, with respect  to its ability
to make new cells, 'the heart is no different than  any other organ,' Anversa
said. 'The paradigm has to change.'

LOAD-DATE: June 07, 2001


                             1746 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 07, 2001, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy process benefits hemophiliacs

SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY:

   An experimental new gene-therapy technique has proved it can safely deliver a
healthy gene and shows promise as a treatment for hemophilia, researchers
report.

   Hemophilia patients do not have enough of a blood-clotting protein because of
a defect in a gene. The goal of gene therapy is to get the body to produce the
protein by putting normal genes back into the patient.

   Until now, viruses have been used to ferry genes into the body. But this
carries some risk. The new method avoids these hazards by putting the gene into
cells taken from the patient.

   Researchers at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center tested the
gene-transfer technology and reported their findings in today's New England
Journal of Medicine. The technique was developed by the Cambridge, Mass.-based
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which funded the study.

   "I think it is extremely exciting for those who live with hemophilia," said
Mark Skinner, who has the disorder and is president of the National Hemophilia
Foundation. "As the field of gene therapy develops, it will offer a vastly
improved treatment and hopefully ultimately a cure for those with a bleeding
disorder."

   Researchers tested the method on six men with severe hemophilia A, the most
common type of the inherited disorder that afflicts about 15,000 men in the
United States.

   They removed a small piece of skin from the patient's arm and used a brief
electric pulse to put the blood clotting factor VIII gene into the cells. The
genetically modified cells were screened and later injected into fatty tissue in
the patient's belly.

   Dr. David A. Roth, who led the study, said the method proved to be safe and
there were no side effects. While designed to look at safety issues, the study
also showed promising signs that the treatment can work, Roth said.

   Four of the six patients had modest increases of blood-clotting protein. They
also had less bleeding or used less supplemental protein to control bleeding.
Two of the patients had no episodes of spontaneous bleeding in their joints for
10 months; such bleeding was a frequent occurrence for them before treatment.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2001


                             1747 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 08A

LENGTH: 401 words

HEADLINE: Method uses genes to treat hemophilia

BYLINE: STEPHANIE NANO Associated Press

BODY:

   An experimental new gene-therapy technique has proved that it can safely
deliver a healthy gene and shows promise as a treatment for hemophilia,
according to researchers.

   Because of a defective gene, hemophilia patients do not have enough of a
blood clotting protein. The goal of gene therapy is to get the body to produce
the protein by putting normal genes back into the patient.

   Until now, viruses have been used to ferry genes into the body. But this
carries some risk. The new method avoids these hazards by putting the gene into
cells taken from the patient.

   Researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston tested the
gene-transfer technology and reported their findings today in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., the company that funded the study, developed
the technique.

   " I think it is extremely exciting for those who live with hemophilia," said
Mark Skinner, who has the disorder and is president of the National Hemophilia
Foundation. "As the field of gene therapy develops, it will offer a vastly
improved treatment and, hopefully, ultimately a cure for those with a bleeding
disorder."

   Researchers tested the method on six men with severe hemophilia A, the most
common type of the inherited disorder that afflicts about 15,000 men in the
United States. They removed a small piece of skin from the patient's arm and
used a brief electric pulse to put the blood clotting factor VIII gene into the
cells. The genetically modified cells were screened and later injected into
fatty tissue in the patient's belly.

   David A. Roth, who led the study, said the method was safe, with no side
effects. Although designed to look at safety, the study also showed promising
signs that the treatment can work, he said.

   Four of the patients had modest increases of blood clotting protein. They
also had less bleeding or used less supplemental protein to control bleeding.
Two patients had no episodes of spontaneous bleeding in their joints for 10
months; such bleeding was a frequent occurrence for them before treatment.

   The researchers said the non- viral technique minimizes the risk of immune
reactions, infections and genetic mutations that might be associated with the
use of viruses. Doing the transfer outside the body also allows researchers to
screen the genetically modified cells before putting them into patients, Roth
said.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                             1748 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1078 words

HEADLINE: STUDY FINDS HEART REGENERATES CELLS

BYLINE:  By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

BODY:

   Medical dogma holds that damage to the heart is irreversible and that the
body cannot grow new cells to replace those that die from a heart attack or
other heart ailment.

        But new findings to be published today in the New England Journal of
Medicine provide what experts said was the strongest evidence reported that some
human heart muscle cells did regenerate after a heart attack, though generally
too few to repair all the damage.

    Using a high-resolution microscope and a new laboratory technique, a team
led by Dr. Piero Anversa of the New York Medical College in Valhalla has found
evidence that the human heart did grow new muscle cells after a heart attack.

   The next stage of research is to find ways to tap the heart's growth reserve
to better repair damage from a heart attack and many other heart conditions, Dr.
Anversa said in a telephone interview from Naples, Italy, where he lectured on
his findings yesterday.

   Heart-cell regeneration research has been controversial. Because researchers
had never found evidence of heart-cell regeneration before, they came to believe
that it did not occur. Scarring that followed heart attacks suggested that the
heart was unable to make new cells.

   But Dr. Anversa had support for his views from some leading experts not
involved with his research who called the report "a landmark study." The experts
said that the findings have important implications for treating heart disease,
the nation's leading cause of death.

   "This is a breakthrough, at least for a new way of thinking about the heart's
recuperative power and ways to repair a damaged heart," said Dr. Valentin
Fuster, a former president of the American Heart Association.

   With years of more research "you might have a new therapeutic weapon" for
heart disease and "the implications are incredible," said Dr. Fuster, who is
chief of cardiology at Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan.

   Dr. Claude J. Lenfant, the director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., said that Dr. Anversa's findings "provide the most
dramatic and clear-cut demonstration to date of heart-cell regeneration after
cardiac injury."

   The findings, Dr. Lenfant said, add to those from studies on animals that
show the dogma that the heart cannot regenerate "is no longer true."

   The institute, a federal agency, helped pay for the research by Dr. Anversa's
group in Valhalla and at the University of Udine and the University of Trieste
in Italy.

   Dr. Lenfant said the findings eventually could have "enormous public health
value" if they led to new therapies that delayed the onset of heart failure and
prolonged life. Dr. Lenfant also said he believed the research held greater hope
for heart disease than gene therapy, which many experts consider a highly
promising route to new therapies. But, he warned, the therapies were "not going
to be here tomorrow."

   Dr. Anversa said he never believed that the heart was an exception to the
rule that cell regeneration was essential to life. Nor did he believe, as the
dogma held, that scarring after heart attacks was evidence against the heart's
ability to make new cells. Other organs, like the skin, constantly grow new
cells to replace old and damaged ones and still leave scars, Dr. Anversa said.

   He added that "it made no sense" to him that humans were born with a set
number of heart cells "that were able to contract 70 times a minute for more
than 100 years without the capacity for regeneration."

   Until recently, medical dogma also held that the brain could not grow new
cells. But recent research activity has upset that belief.

   New research by his and other teams shows that, with respect to its ability
to make new cells, "the heart is no different than any other organ," Dr. Anversa
said. "The paradigm has to change."

   Dr. Anversa began this line of research 20 years ago. In its latest version,
his team compared muscle cells in the hearts of 13 patients who died 4 to 12
days after a large heart attack with those in the hearts of 10 patients who died
from other causes. Dr. Anversa's team focused on two areas -- the zone of tissue
bordering the site of a heart attack and a more distant area of the heart.

   Dr. Anversa attributed his success chiefly to use of an old tool and a new
technique. The old tool is the use of a high-resolution confocal microscope that
can provide resolution for up to 0.5 micrometers -- less than 1/200,000 of an
inch. The new technique involves measuring the activity of a protein, known as
Ki-67, that is present in the nucleus of cells and is essential for cell
division.

   Using the two methods and other standard ones like fluorescence staining, Dr.
Anversa's team found that the number of muscle cells, or myocytes, multiplying
in diseased hearts was 4 percent in the border areas and 1 percent in distant
areas, much higher than in normal hearts.

   The technique is "solid," Dr. Fuster of Mount Sinai said.

   Further calculations suggest that rapid growth of even a small number of new
heart cells could regenerate a large number of cells in three weeks.

   The findings still leave researchers seeking answers to a number of crucial
questions about the origin of the new heart muscle cells Dr. Anversa identified.
Were they cells in the heart that had been awakened after sleeping for years,
even decades, only by the crisis of a heart attack? Or were the cells recruited
from another site in the body in response to the heart attack?

   Dr. Anversa said that his team had a good idea of where the new cells came
from because it had identified "pockets" of primitive cells with the
characteristics of stem cells in the heart. But he declined to disclose their
precise location because he has not published the findings.

   "We want to use what is in the heart to repair the heart" by promoting
migration of large numbers of new cells to repair the damaged tissue before it
dies, Dr. Anversa said.

   Such repair could extend beyond damage from heart attacks to that resulting
from other chronic conditions like untreated high blood pressure or
cardiomyopathy, he said.

   Dr. David Finkelstein, who directs basic heart research at the National
Institute of Aging, which helped pay for the research, said the new findings
"may begin to clarify how hearts respond to the normal insults of aging through
previously undetected repair mechanisms."

   Dr. Anversa added that "We have new hope to intervene in heart disease and
repair what was considered an irreparable problem -- but I don't know how close
we are to that."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Piero Anversa, of the New York Medical College in Valhalla,
led research that suggests the heart grows new muscle cells after an attack.
(Susan B. Markisz)(pg. A22)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                             1749 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 490 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Could Relieve Hemophilia, Scientists Say

BYLINE:  By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   A small and preliminary study of gene therapy for hemophilia indicates that
the treatment appears safe and that the added genes can function for months in
some patients.

        The study, by Dr. David A. Roth and his colleagues at the Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, is described in today's issue of The New
England Journal of Medicine. It involved six patients with severe hemophilia A,
a disorder caused when the gene for a blood-clotting protein, Factor VIII, fails
to function. The usual treatment, using intravenous infusions of the missing
protein made by cells grown in the laboratory, can cost hemophilia patients
$100,000 or more each year.

    The investigators removed skin cells from the patients' upper arms and grew
the modified cells in the laboratory, adding the gene for Factor VIII obtained
from healthy humans. Then they implanted anywhere from 100 million to 400
million of these genetically modified cells into the patients' abdomens, under
general anesthesia.

   Four months later, four patients had more Factor VIII in their blood than
before treatment, although not enough to forgo more therapy. Ten months after
the treatment began, the investigators could no longer detect any Factor VIII in
the patients' blood. It is unclear whether the implanted cells died or whether
the added genes just stopped working.

   Dr. Roth said the findings suggested "that gene therapy has a major potential
to transform the way we care for patients with hemophilia." But other
researchers were guarded.

   Dr. Inder Verma, a gene therapy expert at the Salk Institute in San Diego,
noted that two of the six patients had no response to the treatment and that
injecting more cells did not make the treatment more effective. One patient had
400 million cells injected but made less protein than another patient who had
100 million cells injected.

   Dr. Verma said he wondered whether hemophilia patients were supposed to get
injections of masses of laboratory-grown cells every few months. He said he
worried about long-term effects, noting that normal cells became cancerous in a
manner similar to the way these cells were grown in the laboratory.

   "It's not a cure," Dr. Verma said. "It's not a therapy."

   Dr. Mark Kay of Stanford University said he was encouraged because some
patients had increased levels of Factor VIII. But Dr. Kay, who is testing a
different method of gene therapy for hemophilia, was concerned that the effect
was temporary. If patients had to undergo frequent surgery, he said, they might
develop scar tissue.

   Dr. Daniel G. Miller of the University of Washington, an author of an
accompanying editorial, said, "It is the first hemophilia study that has
resulted in any therapeutic benefit to patients."

   But "the authors suggest that all they need to do is use more cells and get
higher gene expression," Dr. Miller added. "That question remains unanswered."

   Dr. Roth said he was well aware of the study's limitations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                             1750 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 7, 2001 Thursday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 937 words

HEADLINE: DAMAGED HEART CELLS CAN REGENERATE, STUDY FINDS

BYLINE: LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, THE NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   Medical dogma holds that damage to the heart is irreversible and that the
body cannot grow new cells to replace those that die from a heart attack or
other heart ailment.

    But new findings being published today provide what experts said is the
strongest evidence ever reported that some human heart muscle cells do
regenerate after a heart attack, although generally too few to repair all the
damage.

    Using a high resolution microscope and a new laboratory technique, a team
headed by Dr. Piero Anversa of the New York Medical College in Valhalla has
found evidence that the human heart does grow new muscle cells after a heart
attack.

    The next main research step is to find ways to tap the heart's growth
reserve to better repair damage from a heart attack and many other heart
conditions, Anversa said in a telephone interview from Naples, Italy, where he
lectured yesterday on his findings.

    The area of heart cell regeneration research has been controversial. But
Anversa had support for his views from some leading experts not involved with
his research who called the report in today's New England Journal of Medicine "a
landmark study." The experts said the findings have important implications for
treating heart disease, the nation's leading cause of death.

    "This is a breakthrough, at least for a new way of thinking about the
heart's recuperative power and ways to repair a damaged heart," said Dr.
Valentin Fuster, a former president of the American Heart Association.

    With more research "you might have a new therapeutic weapon" for heart
disease and "the implications are incredible," Fuster, who is chief of
cardiology at Mt. Sinai Hospital in Manhattan, said in an interview.

    Dr. Claude J. Lenfant, the director of the National Heart Lung and Blood
Institute, said Anversa's findings "provide the most dramatic and clear-cut
demonstration to date of heart cell regeneration after cardiac injury."

    Anversa's findings add to those from studies on animals that show the dogma
that the heart cannot regenerate "is no longer true," said Lenfant, whose
federal agency in Bethesda, Md., paid for the research that was conducted in
Valhalla and at the University of Udine and University of Trieste in Italy.

    Lenfant said the findings eventually could have "enormous public health
value" if it led to new therapies that delayed the onset of heart failure and
prolonged life. Lenfant also said he believed Anversa's research holds greater
promise for heart disease than gene therapy, which many experts consider a
promising route to new therapies.

    But, Lenfant cautioned, the new therapies are "not going to be here
tomorrow."

    Anversa said he never believed that the heart was an exception to the rule
that cell regeneration is essential to life. Nor did he believe, as the dogma
held, that scarring after heart attacks was evidence against the heart's ability
to make new cells. Other organs, like the skin, constantly grow new cells to
replace old and damaged ones and still leave scars, Anversa said.

    Anversa said "it made no sense" to him that humans were born with a set
number of heart cells "that were able to contract 70 times a minute for more
than 100 years without the capacity for regeneration."

    Until recently, medical dogma also held that the brain could not grow new
cells. But a flurry of recent research activity has upset that belief.

    New research by his and other teams shows that, with respect to its ability
to make new cells, "the heart is no different than any other organ," Anversa
said. "The paradigm has to change."

    Anversa began this line of research 20 years ago. In its latest version his
team compared muscle cells in the hearts of 13 patients who died four to 12 days
after a large heart attack with those in the hearts of 10 patients who died from
other causes. Anversa's team focused attention on two areas -- the zone of
tissue bordering the site of a heart attack and from a more distant area of the
heart.

    Anversa attributed his success chiefly to use of an old tool and a new
technique.

    The old tool is a high resolution, confocal microscope that can provide
resolution for up to 0.5 micrometers. The new technique involves measuring the
activity of a protein present in the nucleus of cells and known as Ki-67 that is
essential for cell division.

    Using the two methods and other standard ones like fluorescence staining,
Anversa's team found that the number of muscle cells, or myocytes, multiplying
in diseased hearts was 4 percent in the border areas and 1 percent in distant
areas, many times higher than in normal hearts.

    The technique is "solid," Fuster, the Mt. Sinai expert, said.

    Further calculations suggest that rapid growth of even a small number of new
heart cells could regenerate a large number of cells in three weeks.

    The findings still leave researchers seeking answers to a number of crucial
questions about the origin of the new heart muscle cells Anversa identified.
Were they cells in the heart that had been awakened after sleeping for years,
even decades, only by the crisis of a heart attack? Or were the cells recruited
from another site in the body in response to the heart attack?

    Anversa said that his team has a good idea because it has identified
"pockets" of primitive cells with the characteristics of stem cells in the
heart.

    But he declined to disclose their precise location because he has not
published the findings.

    "We want to use what is in the heart to repair the heart" by promoting
migration of large numbers of new cells to repair the damaged tissue before it
dies, Anversa said.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2001


                             1751 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

               June 07, 2001, Thursday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; IN BRIEF; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Drug offered free to poor nations

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:


   Pfizer Inc. announced Wednesday that it would offer the governments of more
than 50 of the world's poorest nations an unlimited free supply of a powerful
drug to combat fungal infections associated with AIDS.

   The company began providing the drug, which it markets under the brand name
Diflucan, to South Africa early this year under a program that company officials
said will cost $ 50-million over two years. Henry McKinnell, Pfizer's chairman
and chief executive officer, said the project now will be extended to five other
countries in the region - Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia and Swaziland.

   Pfizer said it was extending the program to the governments of all 50
countries that the United Nations considers to be the poorest and most affected
by AIDS.

   "There is no time or dollar limit set on this program," McKinnell said. "We
are ready to begin providing Diflucan immediately."

   Governments would be expected to sign an agreement assuring Pfizer that the
drug would be provided free.

   Obesity called greater risk than smoking, survey says

   LOS ANGELES - Obese adults have more chronic health problems than smokers,
heavy drinkers or the poor, according to a study released Wednesday.

   The report by the RAND institute in Santa Monica found that obese people have
on average nearly twice the chronic health troubles of people of normal weight.

   "We didn't expect this big difference," said Roland Sturm, a RAND economist
and lead author of the survey, which was published in the latest edition of the
British journal Public Health.

   The study also found that smoking harms the health of women more than men,
with female smokers having about 40 percent more chronic health problems than
non-smokers. The figure was 30 percent for men.

   Sturm said the survey, funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation,
demonstrates that public health officials should intensify their fight against
obesity to levels that at least match the campaign against smoking.

   The study found that more people are overweight or obese than are those
collectively who smoke, drink heavily and live below the federal poverty line.

   The survey found that 59 percent of Americans are at least overweight - a
figure that is in line with other recent studies.

   NARCOLEPSY DRUG: A government advisory panel concluded that a drug abused in
date rape can be useful as a treatment for a rare but dangerous complication of
the sleep disorder narcolepsy. The panel convened by the FDA had been asked to
consider whether prescription sales should be permitted for GHB - gamma hydroxy
butyrate - under the brand name Xyrem. The committee voted 6-3 Wednesday that
the manufacturer has shown that the drug is useful in treating cataplexy, a
complication that can cause people to suddenly collapse when their muscles lose
strength.

   GENE THERAPY: An experimental new gene therapy technique has proved it can
safely deliver a healthy gene and shows promise as a treatment for hemophilia,
researchers report.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                             1752 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             June 7, 2001 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Cell Transplants Help Hemophiliacs;
Genes Engineered to Produce Blood-Clotting Factor Have Limited Success

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    Human cells genetically engineered to produce a blood-clotting factor can be
transplanted safely into people with severe hemophilia and can reduce the number
of bleeding episodes in those patients, researchers reported yesterday.

    In all six patients, the new genes stopped helping within 10 months,
indicating that the technique will have to be improved if it is ever to become a
practical treatment for the hereditary disorder.

    Nonetheless doctors said they were buoyed by the results, which are the
first to show that gene therapy can boost levels of the key clotting factor. If
human studies bring improvements like those recently achieved in hemophiliac
dogs, scientists said, gene therapy could become an important treatment in the
next decade for many of the approximately 17,000 Americans with hemophilia.

    "This is truly exciting news for the bleeding disorder community," said Mark
Skinner, president of the National Hemophilia Foundation in New York. "We
believe a cure will come incrementally, it won't occur overnight. But to see an
announcement like this encourages us that the field is commencing, there's a
commitment to the research and it does hold promise for the future."

    The study, led by doctors at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston
and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a biotechnology company in Cambridge, Mass.,
comes at difficult time for people with hemophilia -- a disease that comes in
many forms depending on which one of several clotting genes is faulty from
birth.

    Thousands died after receiving infusions of blood products contaminated with
the AIDS virus in the early 1980s. Now, because of production problems, there is
a major shortage of recombinant factor VIII, a manufactured form of the clotting
factor that is absent or dangerously low in people with hemophilia A, the most
common form of the disease. The new work also comes at a crucial time for gene
therapy, an experimental approach that aims to cure diseases by replacing
people's faulty genes. A decade of efforts in thousands of patients with many
different diseases has yet to provide a documented cure. And the September 1999
death of a teenager in a gene experiment in Philadelphia that was later found to
be in violation of several research rules cast a cloud over the entire field.

    Researchers this week said that, given that record, they were reluctant to
enthuse about the new result. But several noted that hemophilia is more likely
than most diseases to respond to gene therapy. In part that's because even a
small increase in clotting factor levels can make a big difference in a
patient's health. In the new work, led by Beth Israel hematologist David Roth
and described in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine, doctors
removed a small patch of skin from each patient's arm and cultivated some of
those skin cells in laboratory dishes. Then, using an electrical shock, the
researchers blasted tiny holes in the cells' outer walls, through which they
infused new copies of the factor VIII gene the cells had lacked.

    Those genes turned the cells into tiny factor VIII factories. Doctors used a
surgical instrument inserted through the skin just below the navel to inject a
few hundred million of the cells deep into the patients' abdomens. The hour-long
surgery was one of the major risks of the procedure for the bleeding-prone
patients. Each received extra injections of clotting factors in advance and for
a week afterward to prevent complications. Apparently the cells settled down and
survived, because factor VIII levels rose in four of six patients -- albeit very
modestly, with levels rarely exceeding 1 percent or 2 percent of normal.
Initially those levels had been less than 1 percent in all patients.

    Scientists are not sure how high concentrations must get to prevent abnormal
bleeding, but as little as 5 percent is probably enough, experts said. Even at
the 1 percent to 2 percent levels achieved in the experiment, bleeding episodes
decreased for two of the three patients who kept careful logs before and after
treatment. One who had spontaneous bleeding almost weekly before treatment had
no such bleeding for 10 months after treatment.

    Roth said the team has now treated six more patients with a modification
that he hopes will lead to even higher levels of factor VIII. "Even if we
achieve a long-lasting durable effect at a lower level, that would be a humble
first step and it will evolve over time," she said.

    Katherine High of Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania who is developing gene
treatments for hemophilia B, said recent improvements in gene therapy techniques
have raised clotting factor levels to about 10 percent of normal in hemophiliac
dogs. "We are reasonably confident that you can get that level in people with
some combination of techniques," she said.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2001


                             1753 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 6, 2001, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
TKT-GENZYME RIVALRY TAKES TO THE JOURNALS

BYLINE: BY NAOMI AOKI and ANTHONY SHADID, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s drug Replagal markedly relieves pain and
improves heart and kidney function in patients with Fabry's disease, according
to an article in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.

   The publication is the latest development in TKT's race with Genzyme Corp. to
be the first, and perhaps sole, provider of a breakthrough therapy for the rare
genetic disorder.

      The two Cambridge firms are developing nearly identical drugs to treat the
disease, and sought approval within weeks of each other. The drugs are expected
to be approved soon in Europe, and are still under review by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   But FDA rules require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease
such as Fabry's, which afflicts only a few thousand people worldwide, putting
pressure on the agency to approve the better drug or find a loophole that allows
approval of both.

   Today's article gives doctors, patients and investors their first in-depth
look at the data behind TKT's application. A detailed report on Genzyme's drug
Fabrazyme is also expected to be published in a respected medical journal.

   In the Replagal study, 26 men were given the drug or a placebo intravenously
every other week for 12 weeks. Most people on the drug stopped or reduced their
use of pain medication and reported a better quality of life.

   "How our drug will stack up against Genzyme's is ultimately not our call.
It's the FDA's call," said TKT co-founder and chief executive Richard Selden.
"But we are very excited by the investigators' report."

   Mark Goldberg, Genzyme's senior vice president of clinical research, said a
head-to-head comparison is difficult because the drugs were evaluated
differently. But, he said, Fabrazyme cleared more of the fatty lipids that
accumulate in Fabry patients, causing pain and organ damage, than TKT's drug.

   "You have to separate out the publications from the regulatory filings,"
Goldberg said. "I don't think this impacts the filings one way or the other."
AMGEN'S IN TOP 10 OF LOBBYING BIG SPENDERS

   For the first time, Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology company, ranked
among the 10 pharmaceutical and health companies spending the most on lobbying
in Washington, says a report by the watchdog group Center for Responsive
Politics.

   The company, based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., spent $3.4 million in 1999, the
last year for which figures were available, the report said. That ranked Amgen
ninth, behind Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer Inc. Leading the list was
Schering-Plough Corp., which spent more than $9.2 million, the report said.

   "Pharmaceutical and biotech companies have been growing pretty explosively
over the past couple of years," said Bill Shingleton, the center's lobbyist
researcher.

   Amgen has almost tripled its spending on lobbying in two years. It ranked
21st in 1997.

   The lobbying focused on extending a research-and-development tax credit as
well as fighting a Democratic plan to add a prescription drug benefit to
Medicare, which many fear would give the government the ability to regulate drug
prices, the report said. Biotech companies also opposed legislation that would
allow approval of generic versions of their drugs.

   RESEARCH CENTERS RANK BIOGEN THIRD

   Biogen was rated as one of the top five drug companies to work with on
clinical trials by the research centers that conduct the studies, according to a
survey by Boston publisher CenterWatch.

   The survey of 405 research centers ranked the Cambridge company third, behind
pharmaceutical giants Glaxo SmithKline and Merck, and ahead of industry
powerhouses Pfizer and Eli Lilly.

   "It reflects Biogen's emphasis on good science and good medicine," said
company spokeswoman Kathryn Bloom.

   Overall, however, the survey found that the quality of the relationships
between drug makers and study sites had deteriorated since the last survey in
1999. On average, companies got lower marks in many of the survey's 24
categories.

   Most notably, the drug companies were criticized for the design of their
clinical trials, the grant payment process, and their lack of responsiveness to
inquiries from the study sites.

   CenterWatch managing editor Steve Zisson said low marks in these categories
are particularly disturbing because they affect on the success of clinical
trials, without which companies can't get new treatments to the public. "What
that ultimately means for pharmaceutical companies is lost revenue," Zisson
said.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2001


                             1754 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             June 04, 2001, Monday

SECTION: NWANEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Clinical trial uses virus in bid to grow blood vessels in leg

BYLINE: DANIEL YEE, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE, @Private:, @Caption:,
@Correction:

BODY:

   *NW EDITION*
If it was just a matter of will, Joseph Ryan would not have any trouble walking.
The 60-year-old Stephens man, an Army veteran of the Vietnam War, has plenty of
that.
But walking is a matter of clean arteries and blood flow. Ryan has a 2-inch-long
blockage in an artery just above his left knee, a closed freeway for blood that
transports crucial oxygen and nutrients for cells in his leg.
He cannot mow his lawn without having to stop several times to let the
excruciating pain in his leg subside.
Enter cutting-edge gene therapy, which may accomplish what Ryan's will cannot.
Doctors at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences believe that an
injection of a genetically modified virus may cause needed blood vessels to
grow.
They hope the shots will induce Ryan's body to create new blood pathways that
will lead to better circulation and more importantly, pain-free walking.
Ryan on Tuesday received the injections -- a set of 10 shots each on the front
and back of his leg near the knee. As a participant in a clinical trial, he
doesn't know if he was injected with the virus or a placebo.
But he hopes the shots were the real thing. They certainly felt real, he said.
"I took them like a true soldier," Ryan said. "I have a feeling this one is
going to help a lot more."
UAMS is one of several medical centers in the country conducting the clinical
trials, the results of which are not expected to be known until next year. Dr.
Jorge Saucedo, director of clinical research in the UAMS cardiology division who
is leading the trial, is hoping to enroll 20 to 30 patients in the study.
"We're hoping to provide more vessels in the muscles near the knee or lower,"
Saucedo said. "It is cutting-edge research. Many people are looking into this
study    to see the benefit of gene-therapy research."
In the past, doctors had few options when dealing with artery blockages in the
legs. They could prescribe a walking regimen, but the program is painful, and it
takes a lot of motivation for the patient to stay with it.
Medication helps some people, although the drugs that provide relief aren't
recommended for patients who have had heart problems, and it's not unusual for
patients who have leg artery blockages to also have weakened hearts, Saucedo
said.
Doctors could try to clear the blockage through surgery or the use of a balloon
catheter, but results have found that the farther down the leg the blockage is,
the more likely the artery will become clogged again within a year.
The UAMS doctors believe gene therapy can promote blood flow through the
construction of new blood vessels. To accomplish the growth, doctors use the
adenovirus, which is similar to the virus that causes the common cold, and
modify it so it will not make the patient ill.
The virus is also given a series of genetic instructions that, when injected
into a human cell, it is believed will create "vegf", or vascular endothelial
growth factor, which is the molecule responsible for cell proliferation.
Because the new blood vessels created by the gene-therapy procedure may be too
small for doctors to detect, doctors will measure success in the trial by
testing, after 30 days and again at six months, how long participants can walk.
Research at UAMS last year gave Saucedo confidence the procedure may succeed. In
a clinical trial titled "Traffic," Saucedo injected a protein designed to
promote the growth of blood vessels into the leg arteries of patients. Patients'
walking time increased by 34 percent.
The gene-therapy procedure is easier to administer, with a series of injections
in the leg muscle instead of the leg artery. In addition, Saucedo believes the
adenovirus will last longer in the leg than a protein and will promote the
growth of more blood vessels.
Back in Stephens, Ryan bides his time between checkups in Little Rock, hoping
for a return to normal mobility.
"Really, I can't do what I want to do," he said. "I was a real active person. I
felt like if [gene therapy] don't help me, it may help somebody else sooner or
later. I mean, that's just a feeling you get, you know."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2001


                             1755 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             June 04, 2001, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Trial uses virus in bid to grow leg blood vessels

BYLINE: DANIEL YEE, ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE, @Private:, @Caption:,
@Correction:

BODY:

   If it was just a matter of will, Joseph Ryan would not have any trouble
walking. The 60-year-old Stephens man, an Army veteran of the Vietnam War, has
plenty of that.
But walking is a matter of clean arteries and blood flow. Ryan has a 2-inch-long
blockage in an artery just above his left knee, a closed freeway for blood that
transports crucial oxygen and nutrients for cells in his leg.
He cannot mow his lawn without having to stop several times to let the
excruciating pain in his leg subside.
Enter cutting-edge gene therapy, which may accomplish what Ryan's will cannot.
Doctors at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences believe an injection
of a genetically modified virus may cause needed blood vessels to grow.
They hope the shots will induce Ryan's body to create new blood pathways that
will lead to better circulation and more importantly, pain-free walking.
Ryan on Tuesday received the injections -- a set of 10 shots each on the front
and back of his leg near the knee. As a participant in a clinical trial, he
doesn't know if he was injected with the virus or a placebo.
But he hopes the shots were the real thing. They certainly felt real, he said.
"I took them like a true soldier," Ryan said. "I have a feeling this one is
going to help a lot more."
UAMS is one of several medical centers in the country conducting the clinical
trials, the results of which are not expected to be known until next year. Dr.
Jorge Saucedo, director of clinical research in the UAMS cardiology division who
is leading the trial, is hoping to enroll 20 to 30 patients in the study.
"We're hoping to provide more vessels in the muscles near the knee or lower,"
Saucedo said. "It is cutting-edge research. Many people are looking into this
study    to see the benefit of gene-therapy research."
In the past, doctors had few options when dealing with artery blockages in the
legs. They could prescribe a walking regimen, but the program is painful and it
takes a lot of motivation for the patient to stay with it.
Medication helps some people, although the drugs that provide relief aren't
recommended for patients who have had heart problems, and it's not unusual for
patients who have leg artery blockages to also have weakened hearts, Saucedo
said.
Doctors could try to clear the blockage through surgery or the use of a balloon
catheter, but results have found that the farther down the leg the blockage is,
the more likely the artery will become clogged again within a year.
The UAMS doctors believe gene therapy can promote blood flow through the
construction of new blood vessels. To accomplish the growth, doctors use the
adenovirus, which is similar to the virus that causes the common cold, and
modify it so it will not make the patient ill.
The virus is also given a series of genetic instructions that, when injected
into a human cell, it is believed will create "vegf", or vascular endothelial
growth factor, which is the molecule responsible for cell proliferation.
Because the new blood vessels created by the gene-therapy procedure may be too
small for doctors to detect, doctors will measure success in the trial by
testing, after 30 days and again at six months, how long participants can walk.
Research at UAMS last year gave Saucedo confidence the procedure may succeed. In
a clinical trial titled "Traffic," Saucedo injected a protein designed to
promote the growth of blood vessels into the leg arteries of patients. Patients'
walking time increased by 34 percent.
The gene-therapy procedure is easier to administer, with a series of injections
in the leg muscle instead of the leg artery. In addition, Saucedo believes the
adenovirus will last longer in the leg than a protein and will promote the
growth of more blood vessels.
Back in Stephens, Ryan bides his time between checkups in Little Rock, hoping
for a return to normal mobility.
"Really, I can't do what I want to do," he said. "I was a real active person. I
felt like if [gene therapy] don't help me, it may help somebody else sooner or
later. I mean, that's just a feeling you get, you know."
Slug Line: xgene 1B STATE

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2001


                             1756 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                   June 4, 2001, Monday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 1277 words

HEADLINE: NEW AND IMPROVED If scientists could redesign the human body, here are
some of the changes they' d make

BYLINE: BY MICHELE INGRASSIA DAILY NEWS FEATURE WRITER

BODY:
Admit it: We're a nation obsessed with Pamela Anderson's breasts and Jennifer
Lopez's butt. But forget about curves. If you want to live to 100, the body you
want is short and squat, with stooped shoulders, backward-bending knees, pointy
ears and hefty muscles. In other words, a gnomish creature that could rate a
perfect 10 for mechanics and a total zero for glam.

   At least, that's the vision of three of the nation's leading longevity
researchers, who've come up with a blueprint for a human form that's built to
last, if not forever, then certainly long past middle age, when the vagaries of
gravity and nature start taking their toll on everything from perfect pecs to
microscopic ear hairs. "The human body is artistically beautiful and worthy of
all the wonder and amazement it invokes," researchers S. Jay Olshansky, Bruce A.
Carnes and Robert N. Butler wrote in the March issue of Scientific American.
"But from an engineer's perspective, it is a complex network of bones, muscles,
tendons, valves and joints that are directly analogous to the fallible pulleys,
pumps, levers and hinges in machines."A BETTER BODY

   Their millennium man or is it a woman?  arrives just as researchers are
predicting that we could up our current lifespan of 77 years to 100 years by the
26th century. But in an interview, Butler said that, even with a 500-year lead
time, evolution alone won't get us there. As every movie star knows, the body
needs a little help.

   "Evolution has only one job the perpetuation of the species," said Butler,
founding director of the National Institute on Aging and president of the
International Longevity Center in New York. "Nature doesn't care about all these
[body] flaws. Unfortunately, longevity isn't nature's measure of success;
reproduction is."

   The idea for designing a more durable body came over lunch last year "We
didn't even have wine," Butler quipped when the trio was discussing what it
believes is the unreachable goal of living forever. If you can't live to
eternity, the three wondered, what do you need to make it to 100? "Just
eradicating disease cancer and heart disease would only give us an additional 15
years of life," Butler said. "That means we have to understand the underlying
biological processes of aging. We have to learn how to shore up the bodily
systems to resist external noxious forces and internal forces like free
radicals. And we have to develop better repair systems."

   Butler, Olshansky and Carnes disdain the quick-fix promises of anti-aging
products espcially hormones that are sold over-the-counter in health-food stores
and malls. On the other hand, they're optimistic about the prospects of
"spare-parts medicine," gene therapy that could lead by the end of the century
to the replacement of some defective cells say, defective pancreatic cells that
cause diabetes.

   But those are only pieces. An extended life, they say, calls for a whole new
body. What will the new you look like? To compensate for the physical stresses
caused by man's move from a four-legged to a two-legged creature, the body
should be shorter about 5 feet tall to lower the center of gravity. It would
have a forward-tilting torso and curved neck, and to guard against the breaks
that are common among the elderly, thicker bones and padded muscles. There would
be internal changes too, from a replumbed prostate for men (eliminating epidemic
urinary problems) to tighter bladder muscles for women (eliminating the need to
memorize the address of every McDonald's in the universe).

   The most dramatic quality-of-life changes, though, would come from tinkering
with the eyes and ears. To protect against blindness, the optic nerve would be
attached to the back of the retina instead of the front, which would stabilize
it. To curb hearing loss, the inner ear would have more and more durable hair
cells, which are destroyed by everything from airplane noise to blasting Santana
through your headset. "If you study centenarians, the biggest quality-of-life
issues are vision and hearing," Butler said. "If you don't see well, you trip
and fall. If you don't hear well, you're isolated in relationships with people."

   So how quickly could Butler & Co. get their new model on the market? Don't
look for it anytime soon. "In the meantime," he said, "we all should be taking
better care of the machinery we've got."

   ADDED FEATURES

   STATURE A shorter body would lower the center of gravity and help prevent
bone-breaking falls.

   TORSO The body would tilt forward, to relieve pressure on the vertebrae and
lessen the risk of ruptured disks, which can cause back pain. The neck would be
curved for counterbalance; disks would be thicker.

   MUSCLES Extra muscle and fat would add weight to bones, offering a cushion
against breaks and countering effects of demineralization.

   VEIN Leg veins would have a string of valves to help push blood back toward
the heart, protecting against development of varicose veins.

   THICKER BONES Would protect against breakage during falls

   LARGER HAMSTRINGS/TENDONS Would help support the leg and hip

   CURVED NECK Would counterbalance the tilted torso and enable the head to stay
up and face forward

    FLAWS AND FIXES:   Resolutions to common problemsPROSTATE

   FITS AND STARTS

   The prostate enlarges (BPH, or benign prostatic hyperplasia) in one of every
two men at some point in later life. As it grows, it squeezes the urethra,
potentially obstructing the flow of urine.

   SMOOTH PASSAGE

   The urethra hugs the outside of the prostate and so would not be squeezed if
the prostate becomes enlarged. Doctors would also be able to more easily
diagnose prostate cancer by ruling out BPH.

   RIB CAGE

   WEAK BACK

   The rib cage is relatively short and does not fully protect most internal
organs, exposing them to damage from accidents and injuries. Spongy spinal disks
can slip, rupture, or bulge and press painfully on nerves NEW SUPPORT

   Added ribs could help prevent hernias and other problems by holding organs in
place more effectively. Thicker spinal disks would resist destructive pressures
that leads to back pain in millions of men and women.

   EYE

   DETACHABLE LENS

   The optic nerve, which carries visual signals from the retina to the brain,
connects to the retina only from the inside of the eye, not from the back, often
resulting in retinal detachment.

   FIXED VIEW

   If the optic nerve were attached to the back of the retina, the retina's
connection to the back of the eye might be stabilized, helping prevent retinal
detachment

   FEMALE BLADDER

   LACK OF CONTROL

   Particularly after multiple pregnancies, the muscles of the pelvic floor and
the bladder, as well as the ligaments that support the bladder, can sag, leading
to incontinence.

   DEPENDABILITY

   Stronger sphincter muscles in the bladder, a stronger bladder muscle wall and
more durable supporting ligaments would increase control over bladder function.

   EAR

   WHAT'S THAT?

   Hair cells of the inner ear, which relay sound information to the brain,
become damaged by exposure to loud noises, leading to ringing in the ears
(tinnitus) or to hearing loss.

   LOUD AND CLEAR

   An enlarged, mobile outer ear would collect sound with greater efficiency and
compensate for age-related loss. More plentiful and durable hair cells would
preserve hearing longer.

   KNEE JOINT

   BUMP AND GRINd

   As the joints are used repeatedly through the years, lubricants can grow thin
(worsened by arthritis), causing the bones to grind painfully against each
other.

   SLIP AND SLIDE

   A knee that was able to bend backward would make the bones less likely to
grind and deteriorate. Added ligament support would be required to stabilize the
leg.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION BY SIMON NG: REWIRED EYES, BIGGER EARS, CURVED NECK,
FORWARD-TILTING UPPER TORSO, EXTRA PADDING AROUND JOINTS, REVERSED KNEE JOINTS,
SHORTER LIMBS AND STATURE     ILLUSTRATIONS BY JEFFREY ROSENKRANTZ

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2001


                             1757 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2001 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 3, 2001 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: OPINION; Part M; Opinion Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1369 words

HEADLINE: The Politics of Cloning;
We must soon make tough decisions about how to regulate the genetic revolution.
But in the debate over creating human life, traditional alliances are no longer
relevant.

BYLINE: ERIC COHEN, Eric Cohen, former managing editor of The Public Interest,
is a, resident fellow at the New America Foundation

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   At various points in U.S. history, issues and events come along that make old
ideologies obsolete, that make existing coalitions untenable, that make the
contradictions within parties too pressing to ignore. When this happens, the old
assumptions about politics no longer hold. The old battles begin to make little
sense.

   The genetic revolution--like slavery, civil rights and the Cold War before
it--is such an event. In time, it may overshadow them all.

   In the past few months, committees in both the House and the Senate have
heard testimony on the now very real possibility of human cloning. Nearly all
who testified agreed that initial attempts would bring horrific
results--including spontaneous abortions, deformed children and grave dangers to
the women who carried the first clones. With the exception of a few fringe
cloning advocates, there is near universal consensus that cloning human beings
with the intention of bringing them to birth ought not to be tried--at least not
yet.

   The politics of cloning are complicated by the closely related issue of
stem-cell research. Stem cells are undifferentiated cells that many scientists
believe may someday cure many of our worst diseases and injuries. While there
has been some promising research on stem cells harvested from adults, most
scientists say the greatest promise is in embryonic cells--and that cloned
embryos may be a key resource in this effort. Until now, this research has been
barred from receiving federal funding.

   But federal funding is only a small piece of a much larger set of moral and
political issues: whether allowing human cloning to produce stem cells for
research is the first step toward the cloning of newborns; whether the possible
benefits of the new genetics justify the potential horrors; and whether we want
to create whole new biotech industries that depend on a ready supply of human
embryos, to be created, used and destroyed.

   These questions are entangled in the politics of abortion--with the mostly
pro-life Republicans treating embryos as sacred, and the mostly pro-choice
Democrats seeing them as collections of cells that only have moral status if
pregnant women choose to give them one. But the stakes, interests and complexity
of the new genetics transcend, though certainly do not eclipse, the
long-simmering abortion standoff. Stem cells and cloning, however significant,
are only the beginning.

   The mapping of the human genome raises the prospect of not just new genetic
therapies for disease but genetic enhancements, or so-called germ-line
interventions, that would affect all future generations. Eventually, the line
between therapy and enhancement may become too difficult to draw--with genetic
backwardness one day becoming the social equivalent of disease, and genetic
equality becoming the next social egalitarian crusade.

   Some research already underway, including the creation of genetic hybrids of
human and animal embryos, raises the specter that our worst science-fiction
nightmares may soon become possible. As of now, such experiments remain
perfectly legal.

   This brings us to the first wave of political and moral controversies in the
new genetic age: Who regulates and what is regulated? What is allowed and what
is banned? What guidance, if any, do prevailing ideologies and
parties--conservatism and liberalism, Republicans and Democrats--supply for this
next war of the gods?

   There are many interests in this debate: religious conservatives and pro-life
groups who see the new genetics as an affront to human dignity; biotech
companies that stand to profit from the unregulated science of the future;
reproductive-rights activists who see cloning as a personal choice that the
government should not meddle with; and patient's rights groups who see in the
new genetics a new source of hope.

   The first faction, led by Sen. Sam Brownback (R-Kan.), wants to ban all human
cloning research. This group is made up of mostly Republicans and social
conservatives, though it includes some members of the egalitarian, naturalist
and environmentalist left, who remain skeptical of technological progress and
open to government regulation. This pro-regulation movement has tried to
separate the debate over human cloning and embryonic stem-cell research from the
politics of abortion, hoping that the nation's near-universal horror at the idea
of live human clones will give them an easy legislative victory.

   Another new alliance of interests is that of reproductive-rights groups and
biotech companies. This faction is willing to accept a temporary ban on
reproductive cloning, on the grounds that the technology is still untested and
unsafe. But it seeks to legalize and expand the use of cloned human embryos for
medical research. It includes nearly all Democrats, who have been the most
vigorous defenders of embryonic stem cells, and a sizable number of Republican
capitalists, who believe free markets and technological progress are what
defines their party, not religious conservatism and defense of the unborn.

   The American middle, as usual, is somewhere in the uncertain in-between. Most
Americans think abortion is wrong but should remain legal. They also believe
that if embryos are available from abortions or in vitro-fertilization clinics,
then using them for medical research is acceptable. They believe that the idea
of live human clones is repugnant--just as most Americans once found the idea of
test-tube babies repugnant. But they seem likely to tolerate the cloning of
embryos for research if there are clear medical benefits of doing so. They want
both moral seriousness and scientific progress, but seem to put initial moral
concerns aside once experimental science shows itself to be safe.

   Taken together, this coming battle will bring a sea change in American
politics. If no ban or only a partial ban on human cloning is passed, then
research will proceed in two directions. Those who seek to actually clone live
humans will experiment on cloned human embryos to perfect the safety of the
technique, so that they can eventually claim that human cloning is simply a
reproductive choice. At the same time, scientists will attempt to use cloned
embryos to develop revolutionary medical therapies. If successful, they might
well create a whole new industry and perhaps even a new economy: the economy of
genes. This new capitalism will be, by its very nature, pro-choice. The
pro-life, pro-business, anti-regulation alliance that has long shaped U.S.
conservatism will become tenuous, if not impossible.

   If the Republican Party casts its lot with the new capitalism, it will likely
drive committed pro-lifers to revolt. The moral repugnance that spawned the
influential conservative magazine First Things to declare 'the end of democracy'
in 1996 because of the institutionalization of abortion will return in earnest.
Those who believe that the sanctity of life is violated--by the manufacture of
human embryos, by the manipulation of man's genetic make-up, by the legalization
of human cloning--may one day find America impossible.

   But even if a ban on human cloning is achieved, it will remain precarious.
Such controversial research is likely to go ahead in other countries, and if it
is shown to be medically and economically successful, the floodgates of advocacy
and protest from the biotech industry will be only that much more powerful. When
and if this happens, the genetic capitalists will look to the Democrats, not the
Republicans, as the anti-regulation, pro-industry party.

   Where this is all heading is still unclear. That it will mean the end of
liberalism and conservatism as we know them seems likely. There will be new
coalitions, new divides. In the end, an America that often flees hard choices
will have to make a very difficult one: between the new science, with its
remarkable powers and unforeseen dangers, and the old faith or wisdom, with its
humbling demands and veil-shrouded mysteries.

   It seems likely that it will be our generation that must make this choice--a
decision upon which the future of the American experiment, and perhaps the fate
of mankind itself, may ultimately hinge. That we are unprepared is the
understatement of the pre-genetic age.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (no caption), JAVIER AGUILAR / For the Times
GRAPHIC-DRAWING: (no caption), JAVIER AGUILAR / For the Times

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2001


                             1758 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2001 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              June 3, 2001 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. W14

LENGTH: 5504 words

HEADLINE: A Cure for Milly;
When his wife was diagnosed with Parkinson's, he sought more funding for
research in a race against time. But Washington politics made that crusade more
difficult than he ever imagined

BYLINE: Morton Kondracke

BODY:

    "Marry Milly!" Joan Kehoe whispered in my ear. Then she repeated it, more
insistently. We were at an Italian restaurant, Riccardo's, the favorite
martini-lunch spot for reporters at the Chicago Sun-Times in the 1960s. Joan had
introduced me to Millicent Martinez a few months before. Milly was sitting out
of earshot as Joan importuned me. She also couldn't see the quizzical look on my
face, which betrayed what was in my mind: Marry Milly? Out of the question.

   Not that I didn't like her. I did. She was pretty. She was self-assured. And
she was exotic, half-Mexican and half-Jewish. But she did not fit my life's
plan, which was to become a big-shot Washington journalist. I figured that the
person I planned to be someday should have a Vassar or Wellesley graduate for a
wife, or possibly an heiress -- a woman whose family connections and
intellectually stimulating company could help me attain the goal.

   Eventually Milly overwhelmed this stupid idea and I realized that, wherever I
went in life, I would regret it the whole way if she were not with me. So
ultimately I followed Joan's advice.

   We got married on October 7, 1967. We wrote our own wedding ceremony, praying
for peace in the world and justice in America and also pledging in the
traditional way that we would be there for each other in sickness and in health.
Two photographers from the Sun-Times took different wedding pictures of us at
separate moments leaving the church and walking to our reception. Both show
Milly and me laughing, in a state of pure joy. I felt utterly confident that I
had made the best decision of my life. I have never for a moment regretted it,
in health or in sickness.

   In fact, for 33 years we've lived a love story -- but of one kind for the
first 20 and a very different kind for the last 13, after Parkinson's disease
invaded our lives. We moved to Washington in 1968, and Milly developed into a
dynamo -- a gifted psychotherapist, a strong mother to our two daughters, a wise
neighbor and generous friend, and a formidable companion to me. We were bonded,
almost welded.

   In 1987, the first shadow of Parkinson's disease cast itself upon our lives.
Milly was writing a check and remarked that she could not form the letter "K"
correctly. She got a piece of paper and wrote her signature four or five more
times, then more times, and said her handwriting just wasn't right. I saw no
difference. Anyway, I thought Milly was both vain and perfectionist about her
clear penmanship. Whatever was wrong -- if anything was wrong -- was in her
imagination or was being exaggerated, I figured.

   That May, Milly made an appointment to see her old boss at the Neurology
Center in Bethesda, Marvin Korengold. In fact, after getting her master's degree
in social work at Catholic University, Milly had counseled patients at the
center for a few years. She'd brought home harrowing stories about people
stricken with Alzheimer's disease, epilepsy and particularly Parkinson's.
Korengold, a neurologist, examined Milly and diagnosed ulnar neuropathy, a nerve
inflamed from pressure at the elbow. He told her to try to keep her arms
straight and avoid leaning on the elbow. Milly reported these findings to me
with relief that the problem was not serious. But, even though she followed
instructions, her symptoms did not go away.

   On a follow-up visit in June, Korengold had her swing her arms and noticed
that the right did not move as smoothly as the left. He prescribed Symmetrel,
which Milly took believing it was meant to help her nerve problem. He did not
tell her what it was actually for, evidently not wanting to scare her. She went
back to see Korengold a few times during the summer because her right little
finger remained weak and she began to notice a slight tremor in her right foot
when she pressed the accelerator or brake while driving.

   One day in September she called me at work in tears, with a panic in her
voice that I'd never heard before.

   "Something terrible has happened," she said. "You've got to come home." I had
a fleeting terror that one of the girls had been injured or killed. She said, "I
looked up the medicine Korengold gave me in my pill book. Symmetrel is for
Parkinson's disease!" I was relieved that this was not the worst possible news,
but for Milly it was. "I know what Parkinson's is. I've seen people with it,"
she cried. "It's a horrible disease, People shake. They can't walk. They choke
on their food. It can't be that!"

   I drove home as soon as I could and found Milly utterly distraught. This was
the first time in our lives together that I had ever seen Milly out of control.
She said that if she did have Parkinson's it meant that she would have to give
up her psychotherapy practice because clients would not want to be treated by
someone "so pathetic." She predicted, "You won't keep loving me. You'll leave
me. You don't know what Parkinson's does to people. You'll have to take me to
the bathroom. You'll have to feed me. You won't want to do that."

   I said rather automatically that I didn't care what happened, I'd never leave
her. I meant this, too, although she was correct: I knew nothing about
Parkinson's or the extreme disabilities it could cause. And, of course, her
problems then were so mild that her grim predictions seemed speculative and
extreme.

   For five years, as is usual with Parkinson's patients, a medicine called
Sinemet worked to keep her tremor and stiffness under control. But gradually, as
is usual, it stopped working. She began to experience severe leg cramps. She
sometimes froze in a chair, unable to move. Worst of all, she began to lose her
sense of balance. She fell often, and we became regular visitors to the
emergency room at Suburban Hospital, where she received stitches in her lips,
forehead and chin.

   In 1994, as Milly's condition continued to worsen, we began looking at
drastic surgical therapies to relieve the symptoms. Basically, two were
available -- a fetal cell transplant and a pallidotomy. I read a lot about both.
Milly and I met up with Joan Samuelson, president of the Parkinson's Action
Network, who got us involved in advocacy and lobbying for increased federal
funding of Parkinson's research. Samuelson, a Parkinson's patient herself, put
us in touch with some of the top neurologists in the country, whom I called for
advice about what we should do next for Milly.

   They told me that, theoretically, a fetal transplant would be the most
advisable thing for a direct hit at Milly's Parkinson's. The procedure, made
controversial by opposition from the antiabortion movement, involves injecting
dopamine-producing cells from aborted fetuses into the brain of a Parkinson's
victim to replace those that have died. At the time we were considering the
operation, federally sponsored research trials were just beginning because
President Clinton, as one of his first acts, had lifted a ban imposed by the
Reagan and Bush administrations.

   A few doctors were performing the operation without federal sponsorship,
notably a surgeon in California who was reporting dramatic results. But the
researchers I talked to warned me away from him, saying that he was not
publishing any scholarly findings and stories were circulating about botched
operations and brain damage. The experts I consulted also said that their review
of results from Europe and elsewhere indicated that while fetal transplantation
was a promising area of research, there were significant problems keeping cells
alive after they were transferred. They advised looking seriously into
pallidotomy instead. A doctor named Mahlon DeLong had been studying this daylong
surgical procedure in which the patient is awake throughout, helping to guide
doctors to the targets they would be trying to hit deep in the brain to slow the
misfiring of hyperactive nerve cells. DeLong had been Milly's neurologist at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore before moving to Emory University in
Atlanta. He warned there was potential danger to a pallidotomy, but Milly begged
him to perform the surgery. "I can't stand to live this way anymore," she said.
"I'd rather die." He agreed to do it.

   The first indications were good. When Milly was able to get out of bed after
the surgery, she and I danced briefly around the room. Her balance wasn't
perfect, but it seemed improved, and I thought she moved less haltingly than
before the surgery. But the old pattern resumed: Some days, she could walk
around the house safely by herself or using a walker. Other times, at home and
away, she collapsed forward or to the side and was unable to break her fall. The
emergency room visits recurred, and the stitches. One day when our daughter
Andrea was home from medical school, Milly had almost reached the bottom of the
stairs when she suddenly fell forward, hitting her head on a wall. We put our
three-story house on the market and signed a contract on a one-story rambler.

   There was no longer much hope that Milly could avoid being rendered a
permanent invalid by Parkinson's.

   Inside and out, the White House fairly shimmers with light at Christmastime.
And so it did on December 15, 1993, when Milly and I made our first foray into
politics as a way of saving her from Parkinson's disease.

   By the time Bill and Hillary Clinton's Christmas invitation arrived, I was
beginning to understand disease politics. My eyes were first opened earlier in
1993 by literature that Jill Schuker, Milly's best friend, sent to us from the
Parkinson's Action Network. It pointed out that Parkinson's research was deeply
underfunded by the federal government in comparison with other diseases. The
minute I read it, I felt that I'd let Milly down by not taking action earlier. I
knew I had to do something, but I didn't know what. I had a twice-weekly column
in Roll Call, a newspaper read by practically everyone on Capitol Hill, but at
first it struck me that using my position to campaign for more Parkinson's money
constituted unethical special pleading.

   But in July of that year I decided I could write something if I disclosed my
personal interest. I phoned Joan Samuelson, whom I hadn't yet met. On the basis
of the interview, I wrote a column saying that President Clinton had given a
gift of hope to victims of Parkinson's, Alzheimer's disease, diabetes and
prenatal disorders by lifting the ban that Presidents Reagan and Bush had
imposed on federal funding of fetal tissue research. But, I wrote, Clinton then
"dashed that hope by cutting the funding" for research -- $ 9 million from the
budget of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and $ 4
million from the National Institute on Aging. I quoted Samuelson as saying that
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's research were "sacrificial lambs to pay for cures
for AIDS and cancer while trying to reduce the deficit."

   Indeed, in his first budget as president in 1993 Clinton had asked for $ 225
million more for AIDS research, to bring the total to $ 1.3 billion, and $ 130
million more for cancer, for a total of $ 2.1 billion. According to what came to
be known as Samuelson's "disparity chart," NIH then was spending an average of $
1,000 a year on research to help each of the nation's 1.3 million HIV/AIDS
victims. For each of 8 million cancer victims, NIH spent $ 260, while 4 million
Alzheimer's patients got just $ 54 each, and 1 million Parkinson's victims $ 26
each. In this column I said that "a close relative of mine" had Parkinson's.

   The next step in my education came just a few weeks before the White House
party, at a big dinner honoring Abe Pollin, owner of Washington's pro basketball
and hockey teams, whose wife, Irene, was Milly's friend and former social work
colleague at the Neurology Center. The Pollins arranged for us to sit with Abe's
political adviser, Washington health lobbyist Terry Lierman, who proceeded to
completely demystify medical research politics. Lierman told Milly and me that
diseases were allocated research money based on the clout of their advocates --
in the White House, in Congress, in the media and public opinion, and within NIH
and the scientific community. Disease researchers who were receiving the most
money one year had the best chance of getting more the next year, sometimes
regardless of the scientific merit of their proposals. Parkinson's was bringing
up the rear, he said, and probably would stay badly funded unless the whole of
NIH got a major boost in funding.

   Lierman also revealed to us that Bill Clinton, though he was helping AIDS and
breast cancer research, was giving short shrift to every other disease studied
at NIH, not just neurological diseases. This news stunned me, but it had
credibility because Lierman was a Democrat. It was news that the public was
unaware of -- something I could definitely write about, I said.

   Now, as we moved slowly through the receiving line that snaked from the
cavernous main-floor receiving room of the White House, down a stairway and
through a ground-floor hallway, Milly rehearsed what she planned to say: "Mr.
President, I love the two of you. I think you're great. I tell Morton that all
the time. I tell him to write nice things about you. I want to say, I have
Parkinson's disease, and there isn't enough money being spent on research. I
hope you'll do something about that."

   She repeated the speech two or three times. I was ready to cite some figures
from Samuelson's disparity chart and tell the Clintons that Parkinson's was a
disease that could be conquered soon with an extra effort.

   When we reached the Clintons and were introduced by a military aide, Milly
started, "Mr. President, I want to tell you something. I have Parkinson's
disease . . ." Then she lost track. She turned to me, "Morton, what do I want to
say?"

   I, even less articulate, hiked my thumb into the air and blurted: "Increase
brain research." Clinton just nodded, but Mrs. Clinton chimed in, "Oh, wait till
we pass health reform. We're going to do a lot!"

   You move on fast in these receiving lines. That's all we got to say. I felt
embarrassed that I'd been so frozen-headed. But I muttered to Milly as we walked
on, "Well, you've just been lied to by the first lady of the United States."

   There was nothing in Mrs. Clinton's health care reform plan for neurological
research, or much of anything at all for medical research. To make matters
worse, the Clinton budget released the following February contained a mere 0.5
percent net increase for neurology after inflation. For NIH as a whole, Clinton
requested a 4.7 percent increase, only 1.7 percent after inflation.

   For the next year, fiscal 1995, Clinton was proposing less of an increase
than had been enacted for the previous year, with the biggest increase going for
just two favored diseases -- breast cancer and AIDS. Clinton had angered the gay
rights movement, which supported him in the 1992 campaign, by failing to lift
the ban on gays serving in the military, instituting the policy of "don't ask,
don't tell" instead. However, in an apparent effort to mollify gays, he
increased the AIDS research budget by 20 percent in his first year in office. In
the meantime, women's groups were legitimately angered that breast cancer
research was underfunded, and Clinton responded with a 33 percent increase in
fiscal 1994 and another 28 percent the following year.

   More than one conservative Republican we visited looked at Samuelson's
disparity chart, expressed sympathy with our cause, and declared, "We can get
the money for Parkinson's from AIDS." A few members added, "Preventable
disease," referring to AIDS. I confess, I did not argue with them.

   For four years a newly energized Parkinson's community rallied around the
Udall bill, named after Mo Udall, the longtime chairman of the House Committee
on Interior and Insular Affairs who was diagnosed with Parkinson's in 1979. One
celebrated effort was mounted by the Tucson real estate investor Bob Dolezal to
get Arizona's senior senator, Republican John McCain, to support the bill.
Diagnosed with Parkinson's in November 1992, Dolezal first wrote to McCain in
1993. He got back a form letter thanking him for his views. He shifted his
attention to Rep. James Kolbe (R-Ariz.) and gained his support rather easily.
Then he turned back to McCain. His mail and phone calls started getting answered
-- impatiently -- by a particular McCain aide. Dolezal bombarded him with
correspondence.

   Finally, in March 1996, Dolezal exploded in an e-mail that ended: "One can
reach one of three conclusions: The NIH is stonewalling and doesn't want
[Parkinson's funding] data made public, that the request of the senior senator
from Arizona has been cavalierly disdained by NIH; or that the senior senator
from Arizona never seriously pursued this matter, and really doesn't give a
damn. Which one gets your vote?" This outburst had consequences, short- and
long-term. Somehow word got back to the University of Arizona, which promptly
severed connections (since restored) with the Tucson chapter of the American
Parkinson's Disease Association, which Dolezal headed. That response not only
inspired Dolezal to launch a statewide campaign in Arizona's Parkinson's
community to work on McCain but persuaded him to fly to Washington to visit
McCain personally.

   He took along Brad Udall, Mo's son and lookalike, who was a board member of
PAN, and Mary Helen Davila, a Parkinson's activist and sufferer from Phoenix.
Davila told McCain what Parkinson's was doing to her -- and cried. Dolezal
launched into the Parkinson's case. McCain interjected that he did not like to
earmark for specific diseases. Dolezal kept spouting statistics and arguments.

   Suddenly McCain put up his hand. "Okay, that's enough. I'll co-sponsor the
bill." This time Dolezal began crying. "It was one of the greatest experiences
of my life," he told me.

   When Oregon's Mark Hatfield retired in 1997 after 30 years in the Senate, it
became crucial for the Parkinson's movement to find an influential Republican to
carry the cause. Sen. Paul Wellstone of Minnesota, both of whose parents had
died with Parkinson's, was the lead Democrat. In January 1997, Dolezal wrote to
McCain, suggesting that it would be especially appropriate for him to take the
lead given his friendship with Mo Udall. Within a week Dolezal got a call from
McCain's office with the word: The senator would do it.

   On September 3, 1997, McCain and Wellstone offered the measure as a floor
amendment to the annual appropriation for the departments of Labor, Education,
and Health and Human Services. There was a brief floor debate in which McCain
said that "there is a gross inequity here that needs rectification," citing
figures from Samuelson's disparity chart. The vote to approve the Udall bill was
overwhelming, 95-3. However, the Senate fight was not yet over. The next day,
antiabortion Sens. Dan Coats (R-Ind.) and Don Nickles (R-Okla.) planned to amend
the Udall bill with language reviving the Reagan-Bush ban on federal funding for
fetal tissue research. Samuelson and PAN's policy coordinator, Mike Claeys, were
at PAN's office in Santa Rosa, Calif., and from there spent all night soliciting
statements from scientists on the importance of the research and faxing material
to friendly senators in Washington. The next day the Coats-Nickles amendment was
defeated, 60-38.

   The Udall bill survived a House-Senate conference on the Labor-HHS
appropriation. Its passage was hailed by Parkinson's advocates as a moment of
triumph. Indeed, we were invisible no more.

   But the passage of the Udall bill did not guarantee that one cent more would
be spent on Parkinson's research. Even though it passed as an amendment to an
appropriations bill, the Udall bill was not an appropriation; it simply
authorized NIH to establish a Parkinson's-related research program.

   Where should the money come from? My first instinct -- based partly on my
knowledge of the funding disparities, and partly perhaps on prejudice -- was to
take it away from HIV/AIDS. It struck me as deeply unfair that the government
was spending something like 40 times the amount per victim on AIDS as on the
disease that was killing my wife.

   In 1996 I began working on a PBS documentary, "The Politics of Medicine,"
which ran on the network in October 1997. One of the first people I interviewed
was the AIDS activist (and patient) Gary Rose, who had once attacked PAN over
the disparity chart, calling it "AIDS-phobic." When I asked him about that, he
accused me and PAN of telling Congress that the plight of AIDS victims was their
own fault, that the money should be given to Parkinson's. He said that, after
watching so many friends die, he found that argument repulsive. And to put the
blame on the victim, whether the disease is HIV or lung cancer, is wrong.

   "Most people don't have a choice about getting HIV-infected," he said. "I
didn't have a choice. To say to someone, 'You should have worn a condom,' just
think about that: If HIV were a disease primarily of middle-aged, white
heterosexual men . . . you tell the entire community . . . 'You have to wear a
condom for the rest of your life. Period. And if you don't, it's your own fault
if you die.' That would not wash if you were telling those people that . . .
Human beings like to have sex . . . and they like it to be natural, not
negotiated."

   As I sat across from him, I felt myself getting furious at the implication of
his argument. I burst out at him: "Well, as a citizen and as somebody who's
married to someone who has Parkinson's, the way I look at it is, I see a
community that has a preventable disease. It has mobilized itself very
carefully, using Hollywood and the gay community, has impacted Congress, has
gotten an enormous amount of money spent on it . . . And the consequence of this
is that an enormous amount of money . . . has been devoted to this group's
disease . . . The diseases that I care about are defunded, underfunded. Why am I
wrong?"

   He burst back, underscoring how AIDS had ravaged "homosexuals, drug addicts,
poor black people . . . If the most condemned sections of American society can
pull together and do the remarkable and miraculous thing that we've done . . .
We didn't have any power. We didn't have any money. We had nothing. We had nada.
No one would talk to us. If we can build that out of those garbagey tools, I
don't understand how anybody in good faith can now come after us and say, 'You
really don't deserve your success. You could have stopped it. You can stop it
now . . .'

   "I'm just incredibly offended by being condemned for success that has cost me
every person I cared about in my entire life. This epidemic has decimated my
entire peer group. Everybody that I've worked with, cared about, lived with. And
out of that pain, we've developed a movement, a process where we could cure this
disease in 10 years. And I have to have somebody coming after me and saying,
'You don't deserve that? Give some of it to us.' I'm sorry, I don't think that's
moral."

   He finished me off with a challenge: "Are you going to stop working in
television and become a full-time Parkinson's advocate? When you've done that,
when thousands of other people, including people with Parkinson's, have done
that, have given up your lives to find a cure, then you come back to me and say,
'You have to give up some of yours.' "

   It was a powerful rebuttal, but Rose made an even stronger argument that
convinced me that there was no future in trying to rob AIDS to help Parkinson's.
Even if the money were cut from AIDS research, he said, it wouldn't go to
Parkinson's; it would go to the next most powerful disease. He cited breast
cancer research, which was being pushed by a powerful coalition of women's
groups and the White House, and diabetes, at the time the favored disease of
Republicans because House Speaker Newt Gingrich's then-mother-in-law suffered
from it. I knew instantly that Rose was completely correct and that the funding
definitely had to come from somewhere else.

   The object of the Parkinson's movement's post-Udall lobbying was to get
Congress to actually appropriate $ 100 million for Parkinson's research -- or to
write language as close to a directive earmark as we could persuade
congressional leaders to accept. Other diseases kept getting them. One year
Gingrich and then-White House Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles, whose child suffers
from juvenile diabetes, quietly put an extra $ 300 million for diabetes research
into a final budget agreement. Another year Ted Stevens (R-Alaska), chairman of
the Senate Appropriations Committee, became irritated that prostate cancer was
getting less attention than breast cancer and added $ 50 million for that. In
truth, Parkinson's also benefited from inside action when Rep. Joe McDade
(R-Pa.), a member of the House Appropriations Committee who has since retired,
was diagnosed with Parkinson's in 1996 and created a $ 25 million fund for
neurotoxin disease research in the Defense Department.

   In 1998, in an effort to get a $ 100 million earmark for Parkinson's in the
NIH budget, I went with Samuelson to talk to McCain. We met McCain in an ornate
room just off the Senate floor. He listened as we explained that NIH, despite
the Udall bill, was refusing to significantly increase Parkinson's funding and
probably would not do so without a command from Congress. Would he co-sponsor a
floor amendment with Wellstone to write $ 100 million into the Labor-HHS
appropriations bill? McCain became irate. "This is earmarking," he said. "This
is pork. I have spent my entire congressional career fighting this sort of
thing. If you're looking for somebody to do this, I'm not your guy."

   Running for the Republican presidential nomination in 2000 and eager to
retain the support of abortion opponents, McCain later apologized for his vote
lifting the ban on fetal tissue research and came out against federal funding of
highly promising research using stem cells derived from leftover embryos at
fertilization clinics.

   On January 31, 2000, the day before George W. Bush lost the New Hampshire
primary to John McCain, I slipped into a makeup room at Manchester TV station
WMUR, where Bush was cleaning his face after a Fox News appearance. He knew who
I was because I'd interviewed him for a profile in Reader's Digest the year
before. I said, "Can I write you a letter about my favorite cause?"

   "What cause is that?" he asked.

   "Doubling the NIH budget," I started. "It's . . .

   "I'm for it," he said. "I've talked to Connie Mack about it. I told him I'm
for it. It's the right thing to do."

   I said, just as inarticulately as I'd done at the Clintons' Christmas party,
"Think brains."

   "Brain cancer?" he asked.

   "No, neurology," I said. I made a botch of my speech. "Great things are
happening," I said. "Neurodegenerative factors . . . No, I mean, something
called neural growth factors . . . Great implications for Alzheimer's, ALS
[amyotrophic lateral sclerosis], stroke, Parkinson's. Great things are happening
. . ."

   I finished with my favorite political argument for Republicans: "Republicans
in Congress have been increasing NIH by 15 percent a year, ramping up to double.
They never take credit for it."

   "They don't know what they are doing," Bush said.

   "Al Gore only wants to double the cancer budget, not the whole," I
volunteered, hoping he'd try to trump Gore and make doubling the NIH budget a
centerpiece of his campaign.

   "No," Bush said, "I'm for doubling the whole -- what, over 10 years?"

   "No," I said, "five. They can do it over five. NIH can absorb it over five."

   "Okay, I'm for it."

   Besides writing columns, I kept nagging Bush's political and issues staff to
get the candidate to make a major speech proposing a doubling of funding for
medical research.

   In September 2000, Bush came out with a rousing statement: "As president, I
will fund and lead a medical moonshot to reach far beyond what seems possible
today and discover new cures for age-old afflictions . . . Our government will
promote medical advances with new resources and new resolve."

   Bush's campaign staff produced a position paper that was thorough and
sophisticated about the hopes that medical research might fulfill reasonably
soon, including gene therapies for cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease and
some forms of deafness, and new drugs that strangle the blood vessels that feed
tumors. The language on Parkinson's was pure music: "The world's leading
neuroscientists have declared that Parkinson's can be cured within 10 years --
and what's learned in the process can help cure Alzheimer's, Huntington's and
other neurodegenerative diseases." Bush promised to finish the job that Sens.
Mark Hatfield, Arlen Specter (R-Pa.) and Tom Harkin (D-Iowa) and Rep. John
Porter (R-Ill.) had started in fiscal 1998, doubling the NIH budget to $ 27.5
billion by fiscal 2003. He promised to increase spending over 10 years by $ 67
billion.

   Even though his September speech was eloquent, the message was never repeated
in the campaign, indicating it was not a core part of his program. And he didn't
promise to redouble the research budget in the five years after 2003. The $ 67
billion he campaigned on would not pay for redoubling over 10 years.

   In January 2000 Michael J. Fox announced that he was leaving his TV show,
"Spin City," to devote himself to conquering Parkinson's. This produced a huge
burst of publicity -- and an invitation from Hillary Clinton to sit in her box
when President Clinton delivered his State of the Union message on January 27. I
was sitting in Chicago's O'Hare Airport en route from the Iowa presidential
caucuses. My cell phone rang. It was Fox. He said he was inclined to turn down
Hillary's invitation. It would look like an endorsement of her senatorial
candidacy, he said. I was a little startled, but in an instant I realized that
he had shrewd judgment. I said, "You are absolutely right. All you'll get out of
it is five minutes of face time with Hillary, if that. She'll promise you
something for Parkinson's, but she'll lie just like Clinton did to Christopher
Reeve. You'll just get used." (Reeve had visited the White House and was
promised $ 10 million extra for spinal cord injury research. But it never
materialized.) Without accepting my invidious analysis, Fox skipped the State of
the Union.

   In the fall, just before the 2000 election, Fox wrote an op-ed column in the
New York Times pointing out the differences between George Bush and Al Gore on
the issue of embryonic stem cell research -- Bush remained against it, Gore was
for it -- and urging that the research be allowed to continue in order to save
lives. When Bush became president, he hinted that he might issue an executive
order banning federal money for stem cell research. As it turned out, Bush had
heard from numerous disease advocates -- including Sen. Connie Mack (R-Fla.) --
urging him not to stop the research. And he did not, ordering a study of the
issue instead. The issue is still pending.

   Fox wants to tell President Bush that he could be the president who presides
over the conquest of Parkinson's. The request for a meeting is also still
pending.

   Ever since Milly was diagnosed with Parkinson's, the nation's leading
neurologists have been saying that this disease could be cured within 10 years.
They still say that, but Milly's time is running out.

   She is confined to a wheelchair. It's progressively harder for her to eat
solid foods. Four times, I have had to perform the Heimlich maneuver to prevent
her from choking to death. Often she has trouble even drawing liquids up through
a straw. She can barely speak. Her voice has no volume and she has difficulty
forming intelligible words. Her mind, however, is sharp. We communicate mainly
through portable computer, though she has difficulty punching the right keys.
She is inexorably becoming a prisoner trapped in her own body.

   I do not know how our love story will end, or when. Some days, she says she
does not want to live like this any longer and, when the time comes, will refuse
a feeding tube and starve herself to death at a hospice. Other times, she says
she will agree to have a tube implanted in her stomach -- reserving the right,
however, to have it removed when she feels utterly trapped and life becomes
intolerable.

   I pray every day that a medical miracle will save her. But it does not seem
to be forthcoming. I am losing Milly. But when I lose her, if I lose her, our
story will not end. Memory will survive. I remember the restaurant where we
first met, the raincoat she was wearing the moment I knew I had fallen in love
with her, the soft couch where we first made love, the smell and taste of her
that I became addicted to for life. And 33 years of marriage -- our fighting,
our children, her steel, her generosity. Her courage. I will keep working to end
Parkinson's disease on her behalf, and I will hug her in my heart forever.

   Morton Kondracke is the executive editor of Roll Call, a commentator on the
Fox News Channel and co-host of Fox's weekly political show "The Beltway Boys."

   </body>

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2001


                             1759 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                      June 2, 2001 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 16C BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 548 words

BODY:

   In the Region

   2 EntreMed drugs, delivered by viruses, show promise in mice

   EntreMed Inc., of Rockville, said yesterday that two of its anti-cancer drugs
had shown effectiveness after the genes for them were carried to mouse tumors
inside disabled viruses, a sign that gene therapy might one day be used to
deliver its drugs in people.

   The results of the experiments on lung tumors in mice were reported by Cell
Genesys Inc. at the American Society for Gene Therapy meeting in Seattle. Cell
Genesys, of Foster City, Calif., owns the rights to the gene-delivery systems,
which were injected into the mice and carried genes for EntreMed's Angiostatin
and Endostatin.

   Delivery of Angiostatin or Endostatin genes using one kind of Cell Genesys
delivery system resulted in greater than 50 percent inhibition of tumor growth,
the companies said in a joint news release. Delivery of Angiostatin using
another delivery system resulted in greater than 80 percent reduction in the
spread of tumors, compared with mice that didn't receive the treatment.

   Elsewhere

   Wal-Mart to offer Internet service on AOL for $10

   After a much delayed start, Walmart.com will finally roll out its own
Internet service this fall with America Online, offering unlimited access for
less than $10 a month.

   The details, along with Wal-Mart's plans to prosper in an economic downturn,
were revealed at the retailer's annual shareholders' meeting yesterday in
Fayetteville, Ark.

   The service, called Wal-Mart Connect, will be based on AOL's CompuServe
platform. The move comes at a time of uncertainty in the online world as many
experiments to offer free or low-cost Internet service have been unsuccessful.

   No. 2 tire maker in Europe to supply Ford in recall

   Continental AG, Europe's second-largest tire maker, will supply Ford Motor
Co. with more than 2 million tires to replace Firestone tires on the automaker's
Explorer sports-utility vehicles.

   Continental said it has been negotiating with Ford for several weeks. The
automaker is replacing 13 million tires because it has data to suggest that the
tires might be prone to failure.

   Ford said Wednesday that Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. also will replace tires
on the Explorers.

   Alcatel to cut 425 more jobs, shut 2 U.S. labs

   French telecommunications giant Alcatel SA said yesterday that it will close
two more U.S. facilities, cutting 425 more jobs in the next few months.

   Alcatel will close laboratories in Milpitas, Calif., and Andover, Mass., that
develop products for phone company networks.

   The company said Thursday that it will close a fiber-optic cable plant in
Portland, Ore., and shift the work to plants in France and Australia. About 480
jobs will be lost at the Oregon plant.

   Advertising agency drops Kellogg for General Mills

   Kellogg Co. is searching for a new agency to market its products to black
consumers after its current agency severed a four-year relationship with Kellogg
to work for rival General Mills Inc.

   General Mills announced this week that Burrell Communications Group is its
new agency for marketing to black consumers. Citing a conflict, the Chicago
agency then cut ties with Kellogg.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press, Bloomberg News and Reuters.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2001


                             1760 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 2, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1137 words

HEADLINE: Biotech world to converge in S.D.; Industry leaders will face an
estimated 5,000 demonstrators

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 This month, San Diego will be center stage for the world's largest gathering of
biotechnology leaders and for a growing global battle between the industry and
its critics.

   About 15,000 biotech executives are expected to attend Bio2001, a four-day
conference that will showcase developments ranging from the breakthrough mapping
of the human genome to the latest in lifesaving therapies.

   Many of the nation's estimated 1,280 biotech companies -- 216 of them based
in San Diego, home to the third-largest cluster of U.S. biotech firms -- will
strive to present their best corporate face during the eighth annual event.  It
begins June 24 at the San Diego Convention Center.

   Their message?  A Golden Age of biotechnology has arrived, fueled by new
research tools and a wealth of information gleaned from the recent mapping of
our roughly 35,000 human genes, the chemical building blocks of life.

   "There is a real revolution in the understanding of life that may change how
we look at ourselves, and biotech is the corporate face of that," said Hank
Greely, co-director of Stanford University's program in genomics, ethics and
society.

   But it's a face that frightens some opponents.

   The conference is expected to draw up to 5,000 demonstrators, including
environmentalists and anti-globalization activists who hope to grab the
spotlight with rallies, acts of civil disobedience and a multi-day counterevent
called BioDevastation.

   Their vision of biotech is decidedly dark: a science-run-amok world of
"Frankenfood," human cloning and corporations that seek to own and manipulate
the world's genetic resources.

   "The whole natural world is at their disposal," said Doreen Stabinsky, a
spokeswoman for Greenpeace.  "Genes are the oil of the Information Age, another
resource for corporations to make money off of."

   Industry leaders defend their science as both sound and sufficiently
regulated by government.  The goal, they say, is to find solutions to the
world's food and medical needs while turning a profit for shareholders.

   "Science has not run amok, but public education about the science has
certainly not kept pace.  That's the warp we are in now," said Carl Feldbaum,
president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization.  The BIO, a national trade
organization representing more than 900 of the nation's biotech companies,
sponsors the industry conference.

   Such disparate stances are likely to spark heated debate, if not constructive
dialogue, when the two sides are in San Diego later this month.  A bewildered
public may be the better for the verbal sparring, Greely said.

   "For major social changes, some level of debate is a good thing," he said,
"and biotechnology is likely to lead to major social changes."

   As protesters take their concerns to the streets, Bio2001 conference
participants will tackle some of the same issues in sessions and workshops
inside the convention center -- though from an industry perspective.

   Among the subjects to be discussed:

   [] Efforts to develop new drugs and vaccines to treat the worldwide AIDS
epidemic.  The drug industry took a public-relations beating this year over the
cost of such treatments and the inability of many developing countries to afford
them.

   [] The recent mapping of the human genome, and the staggering amount of data
that biotech researchers are exploring.  New insights into genes raise some
thorny issues, including ownership of gene patents and how to safeguard the
genetic privacy rights of individuals.

   [] Efforts to genetically engineer crops and ways to ensure that
bioengineered corn, soybeans and other gene-altered products that haven't been
approved for human consumption stay out of the food supply.

   [] Issues surrounding patient rights and the ethical conduct of experimental
drug studies.  Since the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who
suffered a fatal reaction to an experimental gene therapy, a number of sanctions
and guidelines have been imposed by regulators.

   These and other issues affecting biotech companies come at a time when the
industry is moving rapidly from gawky adolescence to adulthood.  Born just a few
decades ago, biotech is coming into its own with a slew of new products, from
monoclonal antibodies that specifically target cancer cells to gene-altered
seeds that resist pests and weeds.

   Last year, U.S. biotechnology companies generated $22.3 billion in revenue
and won government approval for 32 new drugs or existing drugs with new uses,
according to the BIO.

   Biotech has also become a force -- though a high-risk one -- on Wall Street.
Last year the industry raised about $35 billion in investor dollars, despite the
fact that a vast majority of companies do not make a profit and have not won
federal approval for their products.

   Yet for all of the gee-whiz scientific glamour, there continue to be growing
pains.

   In the industry's early years, biotechnology was mostly about science and
business -- how to take an idea out of a research laboratory and put enough
capital behind it to bring a product to market.

   Now it's also about politics and ethics.  New research technologies, coupled
with powerful computing tools, have advanced scientific knowledge by leaps.  But
with the knowledge come questions about how the science gets used and who
profits.

   Those questions are increasingly the stuff of banner headlines and
congressional debate.  As in January, when an international team of doctors
announced its intention to clone a human.  Or with last year's contamination of
taco shells and other foods with a bioengineered corn not approved for human
consumption.

   Such controversy is fodder for a relatively small but vocal international
protest movement that is targeting gatherings like Bio2001. Last year, when the
industry held its annual gathering in Boston, about 2,500 protesters took part
in a largely peaceful anti-biotech demonstration.

   In 1999, another loose-knit coalition of protesters with similar
anti-globalization aims disrupted the World Trade Organization meeting in
Seattle, and rioting resulted in numerous arrests.

   San Diego police are taking security precautions, planning for a worst-case
WTO scenario but hoping the protests will prove uneventful.  The price tag for
San Diego taxpayers is expected to be a minimum of $2 million for additional
police training, overtime and special equipment, said John Welter, assistant
police chief.

   Welter said police are communicating with protest organizers and biotech
industry leaders, and that both sides are working to ensure a peaceful
gathering.

   "The unfortunate part is we aren't sure the people who might be violent will
be the ones talking to us," he said.  "It would be nice to have a crystal ball,
but since we don't, we will prepare for the worst-case scenario."


LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2001


                             1761 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 2, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Biotech world to converge in S.D.;
Industry leaders will face an estimated 5,000 demonstrators

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   This month, San Diego will be center stage for the world's largest gathering
of biotechnology leaders and for a growing global battle between the industry
and its critics. About 15,000 biotech executives are expected to attend Bio2001,
a four-day conference that will showcase developments ranging from the
breakthrough mapping of the human genome to the latest in lifesaving therapies.
Many of the nation's estimated 1,280 biotech companies -- 216 of them based in
San Diego, home to the third-largest cluster of U.S. biotech firms -- will
strive to present their best corporate face during the eighth annual event.

   It begins June 24 at the San Diego Convention Center. Their message?

   A Golden Age of biotechnology has arrived, fueled by new research tools and a
wealth of information gleaned from the recent mapping of our roughly 35,000
human genes, the chemical building blocks of life. "There is a real revolution
in the understanding of life that may change how we look at ourselves, and
biotech is the corporate face of that," said Hank Greely, co-director of
Stanford University's program in genomics, ethics and society. But it's a face
that frightens some opponents. The conference is expected to draw up to 5,000
demonstrators, including environmentalists and anti-globalization activists who
hope to grab the spotlight with rallies, acts of civil disobedience and a
multi-day counterevent called BioDevastation. Their vision of biotech is
decidedly dark: a science-run-amok world of "Frankenfood," human cloning and
corporations that seek to own and manipulate the world's genetic resources. "The
whole natural world is at their disposal," said Doreen Stabinsky, a spokeswoman
for Greenpeace.

   "Genes are the oil of the Information Age, another resource for corporations
to make money off of." Industry leaders defend their science as both sound and
sufficiently regulated by government.

   The goal, they say, is to find solutions to the world's food and medical
needs while turning a profit for shareholders. "Science has not run amok, but
public education about the science has certainly not kept pace.

   That's the warp we are in now," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization.

   The BIO, a national trade organization representing more than 900 of the
nation's biotech companies, sponsors the industry conference. Such disparate
stances are likely to spark heated debate, if not constructive dialogue, when
the two sides are in San Diego later this month.

   A bewildered public may be the better for the verbal sparring, Greely said.
"For major social changes, some level of debate is a good thing," he said, "and
biotechnology is likely to lead to major social changes." As protesters take
their concerns to the streets, Bio2001 conference participants will tackle some
of the same issues in sessions and workshops inside the convention center --
though from an industry perspective. Among the subjects to be discussed: []
Efforts to develop new drugs and vaccines to treat the worldwide AIDS epidemic.

   The drug industry took a public-relations beating this year over the cost of
such treatments and the inability of many developing countries to afford them.
[] The recent mapping of the human genome, and the staggering amount of data
that biotech researchers are exploring.

   New insights into genes raise some thorny issues, including ownership of gene
patents and how to safeguard the genetic privacy rights of individuals. []
Efforts to genetically engineer crops and ways to ensure that bioengineered
corn, soybeans and other gene-altered products that haven't been approved for
human consumption stay out of the food supply. [] Issues surrounding patient
rights and the ethical conduct of experimental drug studies.

   Since the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who suffered a fatal
reaction to an experimental gene therapy, a number of sanctions and guidelines
have been imposed by regulators. These and other issues affecting biotech
companies come at a time when the industry is moving rapidly from gawky
adolescence to adulthood.

   Born just a few decades ago, biotech is coming into its own with a slew of
new products, from monoclonal antibodies that specifically target cancer cells
to gene-altered seeds that resist pests and weeds. Last year, U.S. biotechnology
companies generated $22.3 billion in revenue and won government approval for 32
new drugs or existing drugs with new uses, according to the BIO. Biotech has
also become a force -- though a high-risk one -- on Wall Street.

   Last year the industry raised about $35 billion in investor dollars, despite
the fact that a vast majority of companies do not make a profit and have not won
federal approval for their products. Yet for all of the gee-whiz scientific
glamour, there continue to be growing pains. In the industry's early years,
biotechnology was mostly about science and business -- how to take an idea out
of a research laboratory and put enough capital behind it to bring a product to
market. Now it's also about politics and ethics.

   New research technologies, coupled with powerful computing tools, have
advanced scientific knowledge by leaps. But with the knowledge come questions
about how the science gets used and who profits. Those questions are
increasingly the stuff of banner headlines and congressional debate.

   As in January, when an international team of doctors announced its intention
to clone a human.

   Or with last year's contamination of taco shells and other foods with a
bioengineered corn not approved for human consumption. Such controversy is
fodder for a relatively small but vocal international protest movement that is
targeting gatherings like Bio2001. Last year, when the industry held its annual
gathering in Boston, about 2,500 protesters took part in a largely peaceful
anti-biotech demonstration. In 1999, another loose-knit coalition of protesters
with similar anti-globalization aims disrupted the World Trade Organization
meeting in Seattle, and rioting resulted in numerous arrests. San Diego police
are taking security precautions, planning for a worst-case WTO scenario but
hoping the protests will prove uneventful.

   The price tag for San Diego taxpayers is expected to be a minimum of $2
million for additional police training, overtime and special equipment, said
John Welter, assistant police chief. Welter said police are communicating with
protest organizers and biotech industry leaders, and that both sides are working
to ensure a peaceful gathering. "The unfortunate part is we aren't sure the
people who might be violent will be the ones talking to us," he said.

   "It would be nice to have a crystal ball, but since we don't, we will prepare
for the worst-case scenario."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1762 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             June 2, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: Tulane names new Primate director

BYLINE: By Stephanie A. Stanley; St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   A Harvard Medical School professor specializing in AIDS research has been
named the new director of Tulane's Regional Primate Research Center near
Covington, university officials said.

   Andrew Lackner, who has a doctorate in veterinary medicine and comparative
pathology, will take over the job beginning Oct. 1 from longtime director Peter
Gerone, who is retiring.

   "With a career that has been devoted to research on AIDS, cancer and other
life-threatening diseases, Dr. Lackner brings with him the promise of continuing
the groundbreaking research for which the Tulane Regional Primate Research
Center has become known," Paul Whelton, senior vice president for Tulane's
Health Sciences Center, said in a prepared statement.

   Lackner has held academic positions at several primate centers throughout the
nation, including the California Regional Primate Research Center and the New
Mexico Regional Primate Research Laboratory, the university said.

   At Harvard, where he is an associate professor of pathology, Lackner holds
the chair of the Division of Comparative Pathology at the New England Regional
Primate Center.

   In 1997, he was a recipient of the international Elizabeth Glaser Scientist
Awards from the Pediatric AIDS Foundation for his AIDS research.

   The 500-acre Tulane Primate Center, which opened in 1964, is the largest of
the seven regional primate research centers in the United States financed by the
National Institute of Health, the university said.

   About 160 people work at the center, including 15 full-time scientists
conducting research on AIDS, Lyme disease, tuberculosis, microsporidia, gene
therapy and primate reproduction technology, Gerone said.

   Gerone, 73, who is leaving the center after directing it for 30 years, says
he is most proud of the breeding colonies it has built.

   When he began in 1971, the center had only 800 rhesus monkeys imported from
India, he said.

   When India banned the export of the monkeys in 1978, the center began to
raise its own. Now, it is home to about 5,000 monkeys, he said.

   Tulane President Scott Cowen praised Gerone for his "visionary leadership and
research contribution in the service of humanity." He also thanked Gerone for
agreeing to remain in his position at the center during the extended search for
his successor.

   Three years ago, Gerone told his bosses that he was ready to retire and that
they needed to start looking for his replacement.

   "It took awhile," said Gerone, who had bought property in Folsom and plans to
spend some quiet time there in his retirement.

   "They wanted to make sure they found someone to move the Primate Center
forward."

   . . . . . . .

Stephanie A. Stanley can be reached at sstanley@timespicayune.com or (985)
898-4827.

GRAPHIC: Andrew Lackner AIDS research specialist

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2001


                             1763 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                       June 1, 2001 Friday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg.A-3

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FOR DYSTROPHY CALLED POSSIBLE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Adding an experimental, pared-down gene to muscle cells in mice led to
improved muscle strength, researchers found, raising hopes that gene therapy
could provide a treatment for muscular dystrophy.

    Researchers led by Xiao Xiao, a molecular biologist at the University of
Pittsburgh, presented the new findings yesterday at the annual meeting of the
American Society of Gene Therapy in Seattle.

    His team constructed smaller versions of the gene that makes dystrophin, the
protein lacking in patients who have Duchenne muscular dystrophy. The
minidystrophin gene is more practical for gene therapy because it can be carried
easily into cells by vectors, while the normal gene was too bulky.

    Xiao's previous experiments showed minidystrophin gene therapy corrected
many microscopic abnormalities in diseased muscle cells. Without dystrophin to
stabilize cell membranes during routine muscle contraction, muscle cells are
damaged. After minidystrophin treatment in those early animal tests, the cells
no longer looked as if * they were undergoing repair and their membranes
remained intact.

    But experts really wanted to know if treated muscle was stronger and
functioned better.

    Researchers with expertise in muscle development from Magee-Womens Hospital
joined Xiao's team for the latest experiments.

    "We were able to show that in addition to enhancing the muscle strength, we
were also able to enhance the muscle's ability to resist injury," said Dr. Jon
Watchko, one of the investigators and Magee's director of neonatology and
developmental biology.

    Ideally, the gene therapy needs to get to all muscles. Duchenne patients die
in their early 20s or late teens because respiratory muscles fail.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2001


                             1764 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 31, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: THURSDAY, MAY 31, 2001; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Grant supports research

   The Tulane Center for Gene Therapy received $500,000 from the Oberkotter
Foundation as part of an ongoing commitment for research into the genetic causes
and potential cures of Alzheimer's disease.

   George H. Nofer, co-trustee of the foundation, recently presented the funds
to Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the center.

   The Tulane center is the first gene therapy center to devote research to
using "adult" stem cells to regenerate lost neurons and other essential elements
of mental functioning.

   The Oberkotter Foundation is dedicated to providing financial support for
research into chronic diseases such as deafness, diabetes and Alzheimer's
disease.

Nurse honored

   New Orleans native Carmel Preyan was named 2001 Nurse of the Year by the LSU
Health Sciences Center-Shreveport Patient Care Services, Ambulatory Care
Division and Medical School Nursing Staff.

   Preyan, a 1979 graduate of Cabrini High School, was cited for her commitment,
dedication and hard work.

   She received a bachelor's in science in nursing from Northwestern State
University and a master's degree from the University of Texas. She is an
administrative house manager for LSUHSC-S, adjunct faculty for Grambling
University, and a perinatal clinician.

Dillard receives financing

   The Dillard University faculty recently received $677,511 in financing from
the Louisiana Board of Regents' Support Fund for 2001-02 programs in higher
education projects.

   A total of 14 of the 22 grant applications submitted by the Dillard faculty
were recommended for financing through the Support Fund's undergraduate
enhancement program. Dillard received the highest ratio of grant dollars and
more funds than any other undergraduate college or university in Louisiana in
this category.

   Dillard will use the funds to strengthen teaching and learning, including by
making technology investments, implement instructional development and
technology investments nursing, natural sciences, humanities and education.

Schools get grants

   Bishop Perry Middle School and Henriette Delille Middle School will each
receive $2,000 grants from Catholic Life Insurance, the nation's 10th largest
fraternal life insurer. The grants were two of seven $2,000 grants awarded to
Catholic elementary schools through Catholic Life's Grade School Grant Program.

   "If we are able to make a difference in one child's life by assisting needy
Catholic elementary schools, then we have accomplished our goals," Catholic Life
President and CEO J. Michael Belz said.

   Both schools plan to use the grant money to buy new textbooks, software and
other student resources.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the following Thursday's editions.

GRAPHIC: Carmel Preyan: Named Nurse of the Year.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2001


                             1765 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 31, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: THURSDAY, MAY 31, 2001; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 897 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   Scientist selected

   Tulane environmental health scientist Assafa Abdelghani has been selected to
be one of six scientists nationally to sit on an Environmental Protection Agency
panel dedicated to analyzing proposals from agencies and institutions interested
in studying the impact of exposure to pesticides on health.

   Abdelghani, who chairs the department of environmental health sciences at the
Tulane University School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, is known
internationally for his leadership in water quality and the health impact of
chemicals.

Literacy group gets grant

   Loyola University New Orleans and the Lindy Boggs National Center for Adult
Literacy have received a $290,000 grant for use through September for a
metropolitan adult literacy initiative.

   The effort will bring together adult students, representatives from
institutions providing adult literacy education, and community organizations and
businesses in Orleans, Jefferson, St. Tammany, Plaquemines and St. Bernard
parishes.

   The grant was made by a local private foundation that did not want its name
revealed.

   Staff from the Boggs Center will act as catalyst for the group and form a
collaborative plan to address adult literacy requirements in the five-parish
area.

   Boggs Center Executive Director Michael Cowan said, "With Loyola's Jesuit
tradition, it is fitting that we serve as facilitator in the formation of this
collaborative. Our role speaks directly to our commitment to social justice, one
of the core Jesuit values."

Group supports police

   The New Orleans East Business Association presented a $6,000 check to the 7th
District of the New Orleans Police Department for the purchase of two special
police bicycles and equipment.

   The business organization also presented 7th District commanding officer
Capt. Lonnie Swain a plaque in recognition of outstanding leadership.

Officers Installed

   Connie Kitchen was installed as president of the board of Raintree Children
Services.

   Other officers installed were Ashton B. Avegno Jr., first vice president;
Dale Rathke, second vice president; Carolyn Sheridan, corresponding secretary;
Gloria O'Leary, recording secretary; Joy Plauche, assistant recording secretary;
Charles B. Mayer, treasurer; Eugene Priestley, assistant treasurer, and Myrtle
Shepard, historian.

   New board members of the organization are Elly Harper and Dr. Trudy Raiford.
Mary Beal is a new associate board member.

Grant supports research

   The Tulane Center for Gene Therapy received $500,000 from the Oberkotter
Foundation as part of an ongoing commitment for research into the genetic causes
and potential cures of Alzheimer's disease.

   George H. Nofer, co-trustee of the foundation, recently presented the funds
to Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the center.

   The Tulane center is the first gene therapy center to devote research to
using "adult" stem cells to regenerate lost neurons and other essential elements
of mental functioning.

   The Oberkotter Foundation is dedicated to providing financial support for
research into chronic diseases such as deafness, diabetes and Alzheimer's
disease.

Nurse honored

   New Orleans native Carmel Preyan was named 2001 Nurse of the Year by the LSU
Health Sciences Center-Shreveport Patient Care Services, Ambulatory Care
Division and Medical School Nursing Staff.

   Preyan, a 1979 graduate of Cabrini High School, was cited for her commitment,
dedication and hard work.

   She received a bachelor's in science in nursing from Northwestern State
University and a master's degree from the University of Texas. She is an
administrative house manager for LSUHSC-S, adjunct faculty for Grambling
University, and a perinatal clinician.

Dillard receives financing

   The Dillard University faculty recently received $677,511 in financing from
the Louisiana Board of Regents' Support Fund for 2001-02 programs in higher
education projects.

   A total of 14 of the 22 grant applications submitted by the Dillard faculty
were recommended for financing through the Support Fund's undergraduate
enhancement program. Dillard received the highest ratio of grant dollars and
more funds than any other undergraduate college or university in Louisiana in
this category.

   Dillard will use the funds to strengthen teaching and learning, including by
making technology investments, implement instructional development and
technology investments nursing, natural sciences, humanities and education.

Schools get grants

   Bishop Perry Middle School and Henriette Delille Middle School will each
receive $2,000 grants from Catholic Life Insurance, the nation's 10th largest
fraternal life insurer. The grants were two of seven $2,000 grants awarded to
Catholic elementary schools through Catholic Life's Grade School Grant Program.

   "If we are able to make a difference in one child's life by assisting needy
Catholic elementary schools, then we have accomplished our goals," Catholic Life
President and CEO J. Michael Belz said.

   Both schools plan to use the grant money to buy new textbooks, software and
other student resources.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the following Thursday's editions.

GRAPHIC: Jim Oldfield of Chevron U.S.A. Production Co.'s Gulf of Mexico
Deepwater Business Unit hands the keys of a passenger van donated by Chevron to
Edith Jones, president and CEO of the Urban League of Greater New Orleans.
Observing the donation at the United Way Office, from left, are: Dolores
Brickley of the Urban League Urban League board members Rosa Edwards and the
Hon. Robert Jones United Way staffers Mary Ambrose and Greg Bono and Chevron
employee Gary Hampton. The van will be used to transport Urban League clients
and volunteers of programs such as the Street Academy alternative school, Wicker
Elementary School tutoring program and the Job Search/Job Readiness program.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2001


                             1766 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      May 29, 2001 Tuesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY, Pg.A-10 OTHER DEATHS

LENGTH: 571 words

BODY:

   Pennsylvania state Rep. Italo Cappabianca, 64, the dean of Erie County's
legislative delegation and a representative for Erie's west side since 1978,
yesterday in Erie of complications from brain cancer, which was diagnosed in
1993. A Democrat, Mr. Cappabianca won his 12th two-year term as representative
for Erie's west side last year, running unopposed. Since the legislator learned
of his malignant brain tumor, he battled it with surgery, radiation,
chemotherapy and experimental gene therapy. He was the first person to
participate in the first use of the new therapy at the University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Institute.

    Christian Peruzzi, 38, the head of Fiat Germany, Friday in an accident
during a qualifying round for an auto race in Berlin. Mr. Peruzzi lost control
of his Alfa Romeo 147 on a curve during final training for the 24-hour race on
the Nuerburgring circuit. Mr. Peruzzi, who was born in Mannheim, became the head
of Fiat's German division in November of last year.

    Harry Townes, 86, who appeared on Broadway and in movies during a
half-century acting career, Wednesday in Huntsville, Ala. He played the
leprechaun in "Finian's Rainbow" on Broadway for two years, as well as a year in
London. Other Broadway appearances included "Tobacco Road," "How the Other Half
Lives" and "Twelfth Night." He also appeared in films, including "Operation
Manhunt," "The Mountain," "The Brothers Karamazov," "Cry Tough," "Sanctuary,"
and "The Hawaiians."

    Maurice J. Noble, 91, a film animator whose award-winning design work can be
seen in the Disney classics "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," "Bambi," "Dumbo"
and "Fantasia," May 18 at his home in La Crescenta, Calif. In addition to the
Walt Disney Co., Mr. Noble also worked for Warner Brothers on cartoons,
including "What's Opera, Doc?" and "Duck Amuck," both of which were inducted
into the National Film Registry. For Chuck Jones Film Productions he directed
"The Dot and the Line," an Academy Award winner for best short animated subject
in 1961. Mr. Noble also collaborated with Jones at MGM, where they produced the
Dr. Seuss cartoons "The Cat in the Hat," "Horton Hears a Who" and the original
animated adaptation of "How the Grinch Stole Christmas."

    Carmencita Romero, 87, who performed with Katherine Dunham in her first
company, the Negro Dance Group, in the mid-1930s, May 6 at a nursing home in New
York City. Born Lilly Butler, she changed her name at Dunham's request. She
began her training at 18 when she studied ballet and modern dance with Dunham,
later adding Caribbean ethnic dance when Dunham returned from anthropological
studies in the West Indies. "I kept thinking that it was good that Daddy didn't
know what I was doing because he certainly would not have approved such
dancing," Miss Romero said in the American Dance Festival documentary "Free to
Dance." She began performing with Dunham in the late 1930s, traveling with the
group to New York, where she appeared in the musicals "Cabin in the Sky" and
"Carmen Jones." She toured the United States with the Dunham company until 1942.
In the late ' 40s she returned home to Chicago and opened a dance school, then
left to open others in Rome and Tokyo and to teach throughout Europe. She also
performed in films made in Rome and London. She also choreographed for dance
companies and festivals and, in the 1960s, for the television series "The Man
From U.N.C.L.E."

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2001


                             1767 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                      MAY 28, 2001, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1242 words

HEADLINE: Embryonic stem cell debate is more than science vs. religion;

Rhetorical battle is also about politics of money

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
One of the thorniest issues in biotechnology involves research into the
therapeutic uses of stem cells taken from human embryos.

    In nature, embryonic stem cells divide and multiply to form every nerve,
muscle and organ in the body. In the laboratory, these same embryonic stem cells
could be used to fashion spare parts to repair weak hearts or damaged nerves.

    Prominent academic scientists want the federal government to fund research
into embryonic stem cells, provided they are obtained from consenting couples
with embryos left over after in-vitro fertilization. Anti-abortion groups have
so far successfully used Congress and the courts to prevent the National
Institutes of Health from funding embryonic stem cell research.

    The latest turn of events came in March, when anti-abortion groups led by
Nightlight Christian Adoptions in Fullerton (Orange County) filed a federal
lawsuit that has had the effect of stopping NIH from considering grant
applications to do experiments with embryonic stem cells.

    Academic scientists countersued earlier this month, seeking to force the
Bush administration to follow through with an NIH policy hammered out under
Clinton that would have allowed federally funded embryonic stem cell research to
proceed. Roger Pedersen, a professor of reproductive sciences at the University
of California at San Francisco, said he felt morally obliged to join the
countersuit.

    "I understand the distinction between a very early embryo and a baby at
birth . . . and because I see that distinction I choose to do research,"
Pedersen said. The stem cells he wishes to use would be derived from embryos
that would literally be discarded if not used for research.

    "I find it rather immoral to deprive people -- existing people -- the
benefits of (stem cell) knowledge by simply throwing away the (embryonic)
material," he said.

    Ronald Stoddart is executive director of Nightlight Christian Adoptions,
which, among other things, places surplus embryos with adoptive parents. He said
he's placed eight embryos so far, including one baby born the morning we spoke.

    "I understand that there's an enormous difference between an embryo that's
two or three cells and a baby that can cry and I can hold," Stoddart said. "But
we got into this because we view the embryos as life . . . that everything you
need for a human is there and it's just a matter of time and growth."

    The stem cell controversy is generally portrayed as a stark conflict between
anti-abortion groups who believe the embryo is every bit as deserving of
protection from vivisection as you or me, and scientists who hold out the
prospect of creating miraculous treatments if only they are allowed to use a few
cells, plucked from embryos that would be discarded anyway.

    I sought out another point of view, from a scientist whose qualms about stem
cell research arise from secular concerns.

    "I don't like (embryonic stem cell research) and not from any religious
conviction," said Stuart Newman, a professor of cell biology at New York Medical
College in Valhalla and a biotech critic who supports women's right to choose
abortion.

    "It's putting a use value on a human embryo that is different than what it
was produced for, and when you attribute a use value to something, it becomes a
commodity," Newman said.

    In years of debates over stem cell research, the National Bioethics Advisory
Commission said harvesting of stem cells from surplus embryos is like taking
organs from consenting accident victims and using them for transplants. I asked
Newman about this.

    "You don't use organs from executed people to save the lives of other people
even if those organs are going to waste," he said.

    Seeking permission from the parents who produced surplus embryos -- as
pro-stem cell scientists are doing -- doesn't satisfy Newman. He doesn't want an
embryo, created to help a couple give birth, to become part of a biotech value
chain. Better to throw it away than to create a potential market for embryonic
tissue the way people today buy and sell female eggs.

    Opponents of embryonic stem cell research say there are alternatives. Adults
also produce stem cells in the blood, brain and muscle. These adult stem cells
are also being studied for their therapeutic potential.

    The great weight of scientific opinion, however, says adult stem cell
studies are not a substitute for properly conducted research into the uses of
embryonic tissue. Eighty Nobel laureates recently told that to President Bush in
a letter quoted in Pedersen's countersuit:

    ". . . Impeding (embryonic) stem cell research risks unnecessary delay for
millions of patients who may die or endure needless suffering while the
effectiveness of adult stem cells is evaluated."

    It's tough to argue with 80 top scientists and even tougher to confront the
patients who might one day benefit by research. Former actor Christopher Reeve,
now paralyzed by an accident, has been the most visible advocate of federal
funding for embryonic stem cell research.

    But these scientific and emotional appeals, though powerful, should inform
our thinking, not substitute for it.

    Bear in mind this is not a debate about the legality of embryonic stem cell
research. Such work is being carried on today, on a modest scale, supported by
biotech firms like Geron Corp., the Menlo Park company that controls many
patents on embryonic stem cells.

    What is at issue in the current lawsuit is whether NIH should use federal
funds to accelerate this research.

    "We think we can control embryonic stem cells to provide a wide variety of
tissues that could be useful for diseases," said UCSF's Pedersen. "The ability
to achieve and deliver on that is a function of the number of people who put
their minds to it. You can't expect one California biotech company to accomplish
this -- it takes the entire medical enterprise."

    It is this last point that makes the issue most important to me.
Biotechnology is an industry whose products often depend on federally funded
university science. This gives research debates political overtones. When
academics look for money to bioengineer crops, they say they want to feed the
world. When these scientists say they want money for embryonic stem cell
research, they ask on behalf of the diseased.

    The scientists may be completely in earnest, but the research takes on a
life of its own. Modern bioscience is geared toward commercialization. The last
step in discovery used to be publication in a scientific journal. Now scientists
take discoveries through to patents, products and profits.

    Andy Kimbrell, director of the International Center for Technology
Assessment in Washington, D.C., said the financial pressures on science,
combined with "public amnesia" about past technological claims, encourage hype.

    "Ten years ago it was gene therapy and fetal tissue research that were going
to be silver bullets for disease," he said. "Neither of these have lived up to
their promise. Now we're hearing the same promises for embryonic stem cell
research."

    Are we moving too fast, too slow or just right on embryonic stem cell
research? As you filter these questions through your own values, please don't
think it's as simple as lining up behind science or religion.

   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, tabate@sfchron icle.com; fax, (415)
543-2482; or phone, (415) 777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2001


                             1768 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 27, 2001, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Researchers target oral cancer cells using mouthwash

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO - A gene-therapy mouthwash shows promise of warding off oral
cancer by destroying ominous growths before they turn malignant.

   The idea is to attack these pre-malignant patches by unleashing viruses that
have been programmed to kill cells that contain cancer-causing genes.

   The first study of this approach is still under way, but doctors said it
appears to work in at least some patients, making ominous patches in their
mouths disappear completely.

   Over the past two decades, scientists have learned that all cancer arises
from genetic defects, often a half-dozen or more, that accumulate over a
lifetime, causing cells to grow rampantly and spread through the body.

   With this insight came the belief that it might be possible to target these
bad genes to stop cancer. This approach was once one of the hottest ideas in
cancer research. But enthusiasm cooled as scientists hit roadblocks.

   One of the biggest of these was reaching and killing every last cancer cell,
when tumors are buried deep within organs or spread widely. Even reaching 80
percent of the cells - a tall order - is not good enough, because the rest keep
growing.

   So researchers decided that the mouth might be an excellent target for gene
therapy, since the problem can be so easily reached. Dr. Ezra Cohen of the
University of Chicago reported the results of testing on 10 patients at a
meeting in San Francisco of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   "The advantage is that it's where we can see it," Cohen said. "We can get to
it, and the therapy does not get absorbed into the body."

   White or red patches in the mouth, called dysplastic lesions, are common in
smokers and heavy drinkers and frequently are a forerunner of malignancy.

   These cells typically contain mutant genes, and one of the most common,
occurring in about half, is a broken p53 gene. This is a tumor-suppressor gene,
and it ordinarily kills cells that contain dangerous mutations. Without a
working copy of this gene, the mouth growths can go on to become cancerous.

   Cohen and colleagues at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center
in Houston and the University of California at San Francisco tested a
gene-therapy mouthwash developed by Onyx Pharmaceuticals, which financed the
study.

   The treatment consists of adenovirus, a kind of cold virus, that lacks a
working copy of one gene that ordinarily allows the virus to infect cells with
good p53 genes. Without this gene, it should infect only cells with damaged p53
genes. In theory, at least, the crippled virus will enter these precancerous
cells and kill them.

   The doctors decided to conduct the study after a promising start in one
patient, a 28-year-old woman smoker with extensive patches in her mouth. After
two brief rounds of treatment, they disappeared. But later they came back, this
time as cancer.

   So now the doctors are giving patients the flavorless mouthwash once a week
for 12 weeks. Those who respond get another 12 weeks of treatment.

   So far, the patches have disappeared completely in two of the 10 treated, one
of them for nearly six months. They have partially cleared up in two others.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2001


                             1769 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2001 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3400 words

HEADLINE: Races for a Cure, Straight From the Heart

BYLINE:  By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   ARI Eisenberg was born in 1971 with blisters on his hands. The skin on his
feet had fallen off because he had kicked in the womb. He had to be fed by a
nasal tube because blisters in his mouth made breast-feeding impossible.

        Afflicted with a rare genetic skin disease, Ari faced a short, painful
life. "I visualized his future prospects and they looked very grim," recalled
his father, Dr. Mark Eisenberg. "I was determined not to accept that."

    Dr. Eisenberg, a general practitioner with no particular expertise in
research or dermatology, set out on a quest to save his son. One thing he
developed was an artificial skin. Now, 30 years later, Ortec International, a
company he co-founded, hopes to market that skin to treat burn victims.

   Not all biotechnology companies are started by scientists eager to advance
medicine or make money. Some are started by ordinary people -- a computer
salesman, a shrimp processor, meat distributors and lawyers, among others --
hoping to cure a loved one. Their stories echo the movie "Lorenzo's Oil," but
with a corporate twist.

   Nor are scientists already working at biotechnology companies immune from
making a business of their personal crusades. Dr. Julia Levy was chief scientist
at a Canadian biotech startup working on a cancer drug when her mother was
diagnosed with age-related macular degeneration, an eye condition that causes
blindness.

   "I had never heard of the disease," Dr. Levy recalled. But after hearing
scientists discuss it at conferences, she realized that her company's drug might
work for the eye condition. Today, Dr. Levy is president of the company, QLT
Inc., which sells the only drug for macular degeneration.

   Many people with sick relatives will try to collect money, start a
foundation, lobby Congress, harangue scientists and take other steps to spur
research on that disease. But some say nonprofit research is not enough to bring
a drug to market. They start companies to try to get the job done.

   At first, Martine A. Rothblatt, a Washington attorney and satellite
entrepreneur, started a foundation to seek a cure for pulmonary hypertension, a
potentially fatal condition that afflicts her youngest daughter. Then Ms.
Rothblatt went on to start United Therapeutics, which is now seeking Food and
Drug Administration approval of a drug for the disease.

   "If you want to cure something you have to do it yourself," she said.

   In perhaps no other industry could such a personal stake be so crucial to the
start of a business. But having an executive desperate to save a relative can be
a double-edged sword for investors. It motivates the executive but can divert
corporate attention to, say, a rare disease offering only limited sales for its
products. And there can be many emotional distractions.

   "What looks like greater motivation could be a shell for what later ends up
breaking that person apart," said David R. Cox, a Stanford University geneticist
and pediatrician who often deals with parents of children with rare genetic
diseases. Many such parents, he said, plunge into work on a cure as a way to
"avoid dealing with the difficult reality" facing their children.

   That was an issue raised in "Lorenzo's Oil," the 1992 movie based on a true
story of parents who developed a drug to treat their son's rare neurological
disease. But not all such stories end so hopefully.

   Floyd Nichols, a computer entrepreneur with a hereditary disease that almost
invariably leads to colon cancer, started Cell Pathways to develop a drug that
promised to keep him alive. But he died in 1996, before the drug was ready. Even
after Cell Pathways completed its research, the F.D.A. decided last September
not to approve the drug as a treatment for that disease, familial adenomatous
polyposis.

   Cell Pathways, based in Horsham, Pa., is still using the drug experimentally
to treat Mr. Nichols's son, Eric, 13, who inherited the disease. And it is
hopeful the drug will some day be approved as a treatment for several types of
cancer. But its stock has lost two-thirds of its value.

   That illustrates the potential drawback of making a business of a personal
crusade. As compelling as their stories may be, companies based on a founder's
search for a cure have to make a case to investors on business terms. "Why
should people invest in Martine's quest to cure her daughter?" Ms. Rothblatt
said. "I have to build the company to be the Amgen of the East."

   So far, none of these family-founded startups has come close to the success
of that California biotech giant. Indeed, the corporate missions of many of them
have diverged from the personal quests that led to their creation, so if the
company succeeds, it will be others, not the founders' loved ones, who will
benefit.

   That is the case with QLT. Dr. Levy's mother lost her vision and died from
old age in 1996, never getting to try the eye drug. "The only thing I can give
her," Dr. Levy said, "is a legacy."

Brain Tumors
A Quest to Restore A Boy's Balance

   A play date changed the career of Richard Garr, a lawyer and real estate
developer near Washington.

   Mr. Garr's son, Matt, had had a brain tumor removed when he was 4, but the
benign growth had permanently impaired the boy's sense of balance. A few years
later, Mr. Garr took Matt to play at the home of a classmate. Mr. Garr recalled
that when he explained to the classmate's father not to be alarmed about Matt's
balance problems, the man replied, "Oh, some day we'll be able to fix that."

   The man, Karl K. Johe, was a scientist at the National Institutes of Health
working on neural stem cells. Dr. Johe said such cells, which can be grown in
test tubes, might one day be implanted into the brain to rewire broken circuits.
"Did I want to believe him? Sure," recalled Mr. Garr. "Did I want someone to
come along and say they can cure brain cancer? Sure."

   The two men formed a company, NeuralStem Biopharmaceuticals, in 1996, with
Mr. Garr as chief executive, Dr. Johe as chief scientist and $1.5 million raised
from Mr. Garr's friends and business associates. The company, which is privately
owned, now has 40 employees and is based at the University of Maryland.

   There never really was much chance that the company's work would help Matt
Garr. It will be years before NeuralStem will even attempt to transplant cells
into people. And the first targets will probably be Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's
diseases, which are considered easier to treat than brain tumors.

   "The stem cell technology was too far away to be beneficial to Matt," Dr.
Johe said. "That's still the case. I'm sure Richard knew that, too."

   In any case, Matt, now 14, leads a fairly normal life, except that he has
trouble playing certain sports. But his tumor recently grew again and he
underwent radiation therapy.

   Mr. Garr said he realized that nothing would be done for brain tumors unless
the company tackled other areas first. "We're not going to get to there until we
have a huge company with huge resources," he said. So the emphasis is on
succeeding as a business. Still, he said, his personal experience has imparted a
sense of urgency to his work.

   Hanging on the wall above his desk are reprints of newspaper articles about a
local girl who underwent experimental gene therapy to treat a brain tumor. It
failed and she died. "Every day is the last day for somebody, someplace," Mr.
Garr said.

Pulmonary Disease
Parent Reclaims Abandoned Drug

   When her daughter, Jenesis, was diagnosed with primary pulmonary
hypertension, a potentially fatal obstruction of the blood vessels feeding the
lungs, Martine Rothblatt did not think there was much she could do except rely
on doctors. That is, until 8-year-old Jenesis, having lived with the disease for
two years, asked her parents one day why they themselves couldn't work on a
cure.

   "It was like an epiphany," Ms. Rothblatt said. "Somehow, for the rest of the
day, I couldn't get that out of my mind."

   Ms. Rothblatt was not one to shirk a challenge. She had helped start and run
several satellite-communications companies like PanAmSat.

   Within a month she had sold her satellite interests and started the nonprofit
PPH Cure Foundation. But in 1995, a doctor treating Jenesis told Ms. Rothblatt
of an experimental drug that Burroughs Wellcome had abandoned because the market
was perceived as too small.

   Ms. Rothblatt contacted the scientist who had led the project, James Crow,
and pleaded to meet with him, even though he had left the company after it was
acquired by Glaxo. "I said, 'Dr. Crow, my daughter's life is at stake,' " she
recalled.

   Ms. Rothblatt flew Dr. Crow from his home in North Carolina to Washington the
next day, and within hours they agreed to form United Therapeutics. Ms.
Rothblatt, the chief executive, promised to pay the salaries of Dr. Crow and his
associates from her own pocket at first.

   The new company expected to have a difficult time getting rights to the drug
from Glaxo. But fate intervened. The sister of a top Glaxo researcher had
recently been diagnosed with pulmonary hypertension.

   The next challenge was to raise money. While the number of Americans and
Europeans with primary pulmonary hypertension is small, about 5,000, as many as
100,000 people have a related disease called secondary pulmonary hypertension.
United Therapeutics lumped the two conditions together and argued that sales of
a successful drug could eventually exceed $2 billion.

   Investors bought the argument -- and United Therapeutics stock, which went on
sale in June 1999. Many investors were impressed by the personal nature of Ms.
Rothblatt's mission, said Robert J. Toth Jr., who was an analyst at Vector
Securities, one manager of the stock offering.

   But United Therapeutics is no longer purely a labor of love. Ms. Rothblatt
earns $250,000 a year, and her stake in the company is worth more than $20
million. The company bought its headquarters building in Silver Spring, Md.,
from her for $581,000 and paid $555,000 last year to a law firm in which she is
a partner.

   And Jenesis, now 16, is one of the minority of patients whose disease can be
kept in check by existing heart medications. So at least for now she does not
need United Therapeutics' drug.

   The drug, Remodulin, did not work as well as expected in clinical trials, and
the F.D.A., which was supposed to decide by April whether to approve the drug
for sale, postponed its verdict until July. The company's stock, which soared as
high as $132 last July, has sunk to about $14.

   Ms. Rothblatt says she is confident Remodulin will be approved. And, she
added, the company has other projects as well, many related to pulmonary
hypertension.

   Dr. Robyn J. Barst of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, who first told
Ms. Rothblatt about the Burroughs drug and is now on United's scientific
advisory board, is also confident. "I've never met anyone as driven as Martine,"
she said.

Genetic Disorder
A Food Executive Masters a Science

   In October, Affymetrix, the leading supplier of so-called DNA chips used to
analyze genes, announced it was starting a new company that would rapidly read
people's genes. The company would be headed by Brad Margus, described in the
press release merely as an "executive" and an advocate for research on genetic
disorders. What the press release did not say was that Mr. Margus was an
executive at a shrimp company. And the research he advocated was on a rare
disease that threatens the lives of two of his sons.

   After receiving a business degree from Harvard in 1986, Mr. Margus led a
leveraged buyout of a shrimp-farming and processing company in South Florida.
But in 1993, two of his toddlers were diagnosed with a rare genetic disease
called ataxia-telangiectasia, which robs its victims of muscle control and makes
them highly susceptible to cancer. Few live past their early 20's.

   Mr. Margus and his wife, Vicki, set up a foundation, the A-T Children's
Project, to sponsor research on the disease. Mr. Margus hired scientists to
tutor him in biology. And he tried to get scientists to find the genetic
mutation that causes the disease.

   To provide advice on gene-hunting, he called upon Dr. Cox, the Stanford
geneticist. Dr. Cox initially declined, but was won over by Mr. Margus's
persistence and command of the field. Two years later, scientists partly
financed by Mr. Margus's foundation found the gene.

   But knowing the gene is not having a cure. Mr. Margus continued to raise
money for research and set up a treatment center at Johns Hopkins University,
all the while running his business. "I'd take a phone call from a shrimp farmer
in Ecuador, and the next phone call would be a molecular biologist or a parent,"
he said.

   He began to think he needed to be in the medical arena full time. That chance
came last year when Affymetrix decided to set up a company to use its gene chips
to find genetic differences between people that contribute to disease and to
sell such information to drug companies. Dr. Cox took a leave from Stanford to
be scientific director. And he happened to know a go-getter to recommend as
chief executive. "The guy's unbelievable -- and he runs a shrimp company," Dr.
Cox said.

   Not any more. Mr. Margus sold the shrimp business and joined the new company,
Perlegen Sciences, in Santa Clara, Calif. Perlegen recently raised $100 million
from private investors, reducing Affymetrix's stake to less than 50 percent.

   Mr. Margus said he realized that Perlegen's basic research would not directly
help his sons, Jarrett, 12, and Quinn, 10, who attend school in wheelchairs with
full-time aides but whose conditions continue to deteriorate. But at least he is
now an industry insider with a front-row view of new techniques that might
advance research into his sons' affliction. "I'm right in the middle of the drug
discovery business," he said.

Autism
Effort to Improve Child's Behavior

   In 1998, Dateline NBC ran a story about the mother of an autistic boy who
believed that secretin, a hormone given to diagnose her son's digestive
problems, had helped improve his behavior. She became a champion of secretin as
a treatment for autism, winning a patent to use the hormone for that purpose.
Thousands of parents, desperate for any ray of hope, began giving their children
the drug, even as medical experts remained skeptical about it.

   The saga caught the attention of Walter C. Herlihy, who has two daughters
with autism, a condition in which children withdraw from normal social
interactions. Dr. Herlihy was also president of Repligen, a biotechnology
company that was working on a drug for use in bone marrow transplants.

   "I'm not in favor of pumping drugs on television before they are tested," Dr.
Herlihy recalled. But when his younger daughter, Lillian, was given secretin to
help diagnose the cause of her severe constipation, he noticed some improvement.
"She stops crying for the first time in weeks," he recalled. "She sleeps through
the night for 24 or 25 days." She also began speaking some words.

   So in 1999, Repligen acquired the rights to use secretin for autism from the
woman profiled by NBC, Victoria Beck. The company began to conduct the clinical
trials needed to win F.D.A. approval. While the company, based in Needham,
Mass., continues to work on the bone marrow drug, it has redefined its main
mission to be childhood diseases.

   Dr. Herlihy insists that buying the rights to secretin was justified as a
business decision. Investors agreed: Repligen's shares rose more than a third
the day the deal was announced, and the company raised $30 million to finance
the clinical trials.

   "The fact that there was no drug at all for autism and nothing in the
pipeline really perked up the ears of people on Wall Street," said Dr. Herlihy.
"Even if it was attractive for me personally as a medical pursuit, it was
attractive for the company."

   Paul Schimmel, Repligen's co-chairman, said the directors debated the issue
and agreed. Mr. Schimmel said the board knew that Dr. Herlihy had two daughters
with autism, but he said, "We didn't think it should stand in the way."

   But the results of Repligen's clinical trial, announced two months ago, were
less than convincing. Parents sensed an improvement in their children but
psychologists did not. Repligen's stock dropped by a third.

   Dr. Herlihy insists there was more than enough positive evidence to justify
further trials. He says he now knows the drug will not help his oldest daughter
Julia, 11, and that the effects first seen in Lillian, now 9, proved to be
minor. Still, he sympathizes with other parents.

   "There's nothing like being in there with your potential customers to know
what's going on," he said. "There's a huge gap between what the autism doctors
know and what every autism parent knows."

Skin Disease
Search for a Cure, Then a Memorial

   When Mark Eisenberg, who lives in Australia, determined to help his son 30
years ago, starting a company was the furthest thing from his mind.

   Ari suffered from epidermolysis bullosa (EB), a rare disease in which the
skin easily blisters. Dr. Eisenberg traveled the world to attend conferences and
to speak to experts on the disease. He began research on his own. He helped set
up a specialized clinic at a hospital in Sydney. It was a struggle to keep Ari
alive.

   One complication of Ari's illness is that scar tissue can cause victims'
hands to contract into a fist, then fuse into a useless stump. Ari needed skin
grafts to open his hands -- no easy task since much of his body was covered with
blisters.

   So Dr. Eisenberg, taking a cue from an American scientist, tried to grow an
artificial skin in a test tube, starting with foreskins from circumcisions. As
an observant Jew who is certified to perform ritual circumcisions, Dr. Eisenberg
even obtained some of the foreskins himself.

   In the late 80's, Ari and some other Australian children with EB were treated
with the artificial skin, which acts as a living bandage to promote growth of
the patients' own skin. Dr. Eisenberg wanted to make the skin more widely
available, but could not raise money for a skin bank.

   In 1990, while in New York for a medical conference, he explained his problem
to Steven Katz, a distant relative who taught finance at City University and
also ran a meat distribution business. Dr. Katz advised Dr. Eisenberg to start a
company, and to emphasize the potential of the test-tube skin for bigger markets
like treating burns and ulcers.

   Ortec International was formed in New York in 1991 with Dr. Katz as chief
executive and Ron Lipstein, his partner in the meat business and the owner of a
mail order doll-parts catalog, as chief financial officer. Dr. Eisenberg became
chief scientist and a director, staying in Sydney.

   "We thought it would be three years and $5 million to be finished with the
project," Dr. Katz recalled. It has taken 10 years and $50 million so far. But
in February, the Food and Drug Administration approved the company's Composite
Cultured Skin for use in hand surgery on patients with Ari Eisenberg's form of
EB. Under a special humanitarian rule for rare diseases, only limited clinical
trials were required.

   The approval means little to the business because there are perhaps only a
few hundred people in the United States with that form of EB and because another
artificial skin, made by Organogenesis Inc. of Canton, Mass., is already on the
market.

   In July, an F.D.A. advisory committee will consider Ortec's application to
use the skin on burn victims, a far bigger market. The company is also testing
the skin as a treatment for leg ulcers and diabetic ulcers.

   Still, the approval for EB marked a milestone in Dr. Eisenberg's 30-year
odyssey. But the joy for him was muted: Ari was seriously ill.

   Despite frequent operations, Ari had achieved a semblance of a normal life.
After working for Ortec as a computer programmer while earning a college degree,
he took a job for the Australian operations of Toshiba. He moved out of his
parents' home into an apartment with his brother. Ari, who as a baby couldn't
crawl without the skin coming off his knees, even took up skiing.

   But when he was 25, Ari's kidneys failed, possibly as a result of his
disease, and his health deteriorated. He died in April, two months after the
F.D.A. approved his father's artificial skin for use on his disease.

   "It's almost like his life's mission was done," Dr. Katz said.

   Dr. Eisenberg said he wanted to continue working with Ortec, to see that the
skin is widely used. That, he said, would be "a fitting memorial" for his son.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Richard Garr, founder of NeuralStem, with his son, Matt, who
has had surgery for a brain tumor. (Forrest MacCormack); Dr. Mark Eisenberg of
Ortec International, a company that developed an artificial skin.; Dr. Steven
Katz, co-founder of Ortec, left, and Ron Lipstein, its chief financial officer,
at its New York office. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. 7); Brad Margus
of Perlegen Sciences at Disney World with his sons Quinn, 10, left, and Jarrett,
12, right. The boys suffer from ataxia-telangiectasia, a rare genetic disease.
(Gregg Matthews for The New York Times)(pg. 1) Chart: "Healing From The
Heart"These biotechnology companies are trying to treat diseases that afflict
someone close to their executives. CELL PATHWAYSWorking on a drug to treat forms
of cancer.BASED IN: Horsham, Pa.'00 REVENUE: $0.3 million'00 NET INCOME: -$26.9
million ORTEC INTERNATIONALWants to sell artificial skin.BASED IN: New York
City'00 REVENUE: None'00 NET INCOME: -$12.1 million QLT INC.Sells the only drug
to treat macular degeneration.BASED IN: Vancouver, British Columbia'00 REVENUE:
$32.8 million'00 NET INCOME: $6.2 million REPLIGENDeveloping method for bone
marrow transplants.BASED IN: Needham, Mass.'00 REVENUE: $3.0 million'00 NET
INCOME: -$3.8 million UNITED THERAPEUTICSSeeks F.D.A. approval for a drug to
treat pulmonary hypertension.BASED IN: Silver Spring, Md.'00 REVENUE: $2.1
million'00 NET INCOME: -$75.6 million Graphs show share prices for these
organizations since January. (Source: Bloomberg Financial Markets)(pg. 7)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2001


                             1770 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                       May 25, 2001 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 1287 words

BODY:

   In the Region

   Lockheed wins FAA contract for tracking equipment

   Lockheed Martin Corp. will install new equipment at three U.S. air traffic
control centers that closely track transoceanic flights.

   The Federal Aviation Administration said yesterday that the Bethesda company
won the contract worth as much as $200 million.

   Officials say the amount of the contract, which could change, is less
important than the position it will give Lockheed Martin in selling its system
to other countries with oceanic responsibilities, such as Britain. The new
system, called Advanced Technologies and Oceanic Procedures, will eliminate the
current paper-based system of keeping track of planes crossing the Atlantic,
Pacific and Arctic oceans.

   NeighborCare elevates Smith to president

   NeighborCare Inc. named Robert A. Smith its new president yesterday. Smith
has been executive vice president and chief operating officer.

   He replaces Wallace E. Boston, who had been president since December 1999. In
a statement, NeighborCare said Boston "will be leaving the company to spend more
time with his family."

   NeighborCare, based in Baltimore, is a division of Genesis Health Ventures
Inc. of Kennett Square, Pa. NeighborCare, with more than two dozen retail
pharmacies in the Baltimore area and two in Pennsylvania, is the country's
third-largest institutional pharmacy, supplying nursing homes and
assisted-living facilities. It also handles medical supplies and equipment.

   Southwest is to begin flights to Norfolk in Oct.

   Southwest Airlines Co. plans to begin flights to Norfolk, Va., in October and
later add service to Richmond, Va., extending an East Coast expansion that the
largest low-fare carrier started almost eight years ago.

   Southwest won't announce a Norfolk flight schedule until later this summer.
Richmond service will begin at an undetermined date after terminal expansions
are completed in several destination cities, the airline said.

   It was unclear yesterday whether the Norfolk flights would connect through
Baltimore-Washington International Airport, where Southwest is the largest
carrier. But the airline has connected other new service in the Northeast
through Baltimore and has indicated it plans to continue doing so.

   GenVec develops viruses that can be targeted

   GenVec Inc., a Gaithersburg developer of gene therapies, said yesterday that
its scientists have demonstrated that the disabled viruses the company is
developing to carry genes could be modified to target specific cells,
potentially increasing the safety and selectivity of gene therapy.

   The more highly targeted gene-carrying vehicles are modified to avoid
grabbing onto tissues that aren't targeted, such as liver tissue, while
delivering genes to cells that are, according to data presented yesterday at the
annual meeting of the American Society for Microbiology in Orlando, Fla.

   C. Richter King, GenVec's vice president of research, said the technology has
the power to increase the specificity and safety of gene transfer for many
important medical needs, including the treatment of cancer.

   Human Genome board adds 2 Clinton officials

   Human Genome Sciences Inc. said yesterday that it has appointed Richard C.
Holbrooke, a former U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, and Richard J.
Danzig, a former secretary of the Navy, to its board of directors.

   Holbrooke was ambassador to the United Nations from 1999 until this year. As
assistant secretary of state for Europe from 1994 to 1996, he was an architect
of the 1995 Dayton peace agreement governing the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
He also was vice chairman of Credit Suisse First Boston and a managing director
of Lehman Brothers.

   Danzig was secretary of the Navy from November 1998 until this year. He had
been a partner in the law firm of Latham & Watkins, where he handled
white-collar crime defense work, civil litigation and corporate law.

   Duratek wins pact to rid atom plant of components

   Duratek Inc. said yesterday that it was awarded two multimillion- dollar
contracts to dispose of large components, such as steam generators, from an
unnamed nuclear power plant.

   The contracts are with Bechtel Power Corp., which designs, builds and manages
installations worldwide. Work by Duratek's commercial services segment, which is
handling the projects, has begun.

   The Columbia company, which cleans up hazardous and radioactive wastes, did
not disclose the location of the facility or the value of the contracts.

   MGH wins ad contract for tax amnesty program

   MGH Advertising Inc. of Owings Mills has been awarded the $1 million account
for the state comptroller's tax amnesty program.

   The program will seek to collect more than $70 million in back taxes between
Sept. 1 and Oct. 31 by allowing delinquent taxpayers to pay the taxes plus
interest and avoid late penalties.

   The last time Maryland offered a tax amnesty was in 1987. More than $36
million was recouped.

   Elsewhere

   DaimlerChrysler to invest $1 billion to aid Mexico plants

   DaimlerChrysler AG, the No. 3 producer of cars in Mexico, plans to invest $1
billion in Mexico during the next two years to increase production of engines
and cars, such as the PT Cruiser.

   DaimlerChrysler, which has plants in six Mexican cities, will more than
double the size of an engine plant in Ramos Arizpe in northern Mexico. The
company also will increase PT Cruiser production at its plant near Mexico City
by 50 percent to 60 an hour, or 260,000 a year, to meet higher-than-expected
demand for the retro-styled car.

   The increase in production of 2- liter and 2.4-liter engines at the Ramos
Arizpe plant will mean increasing the work force from 900 to 1,500, the company
said.

   Another consulting firm backs Weyerhaeuser bid

   Timber company Weyerhaeuser Co.'s bid to gain three seats on the board of a
smaller rival, Willamette Industries, gained momentum yesterday when Proxy
Monitor became the second consulting firm this week to support its efforts.

   Weyerhaeuser said in a prepared statement that Proxy Monitor, an independent
firm that makes recommendations on pending proxy fights for large institutional
shareholders, issued a report supporting Weyerhaeuser's rival slate of
directors.

   Willamette, which is also trying to fend off Weyerhaeuser's hostile $5.5
billion takeover attempt, will ask its shareholders to vote down the
Weyerhaeuser slate and support the company-nominated slate at its annual meeting
June 7 in Portland, Ore.

   Cutbacks in Austin, Texas, cause FedEx to fire 130

   FedEx Corp. will lay off 130 workers in Austin, Texas, as it reorganizes a
unit and ends a contract to manage warehouses for Dell Computer Corp.

   Jobs at FedEx Supply Chain Services Inc., a unit of FedEx, will be cut
between May 31 and July 31, according to documents filed at the Texas Workforce
Commission.

   The move comes after FedEx decided to stop managing clients' warehouses.

   Machinists union extends strike deadline at Boeing

   The union representing 3,200 workers at Boeing Co.'s fighter aircraft plant
has agreed to extend a strike deadline to June 3, putting off a walkout
scheduled for midnight Monday.

   The extension resulted from an informal meeting yesterday between leaders of
the District 837 of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace
Workers and representatives of Boeing's Military Aircraft and Missile Systems
division. They also agreed to resume talks Wednesday.

   The union said that if a tentative contract can be worked out Wednesday, it
would be distributed to the rank and file Thursday and Friday before a vote June
3.

   This column was compiled from reports by Sun staff writers, the Associated
Press, Bloomberg News and Reuters.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2001


                             1771 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section E; Part 2; Column 1; Leisure/Weekend Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1415 words

HEADLINE: The Genome Gets to Meet The Family

BYLINE:  By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Long-winded, repetitious, immensely hard to understand, the human genome
would not obviously qualify as the ideal weekend guest. But for anyone who has
been putting off that inevitable one-to-one meeting, the American Museum of
Natural History has prepared a most pleasant surprise in a new exhibition
entitled "The Genomic Revolution." The show, which opens tomorrow, highlights
the genome's elegance, power and decided air of mystery while playing down the
awkward guest's most tiresome features.

        The visitor's first sight of the genome is a giant gray column of DNA
that stands in a farther room and is seen though a scrim. But then the eye is
immediately caught by another aspect of the molecule of life, a gorgeous
waterfall of color that cascades down a nearby wall. The image comes from a
laboratory instrument known as a capillary sequencer, the chief workhorse of the
two rival teams that decoded the human genome, the total genetic information of
the species. The sequencer figures out the coded message in a DNA molecule by
attaching different colored dyes to each of its four different bases. As the
dyes stream out of hair-thin tubes, an electric eye records their passage and
infers the order of the letters in the DNA molecule being analyzed.

    With these two vivid images of DNA, one limned in ancient chiaroscuro and
the other in the latest fluorescent DNA-analyzing dyes, the visitor then
encounters a quite different representation, three stout columns of boxy-looking
slabs, stacked in spirals that stretch from floor to ceiling. On closer
inspection these turn out to be Manhattan phone directories, 142 of them, which
contain the same number of printed letters -- 3.2 billion -- as there are
chemical units in the DNA of the human genome. The display is intended to convey
the enormous amount of information that is packed into the nucleus of an
ordinary human cell, each of which contains two copies of the genome.

   The exhibition thus gets off to a stunning start that simultaneously
impresses the observer with the mystery, beauty and complexity of DNA. Next,
before dipping into the scientific complexities of how DNA operates the
organism, the designers draw attention to the possible impact of the new genomic
knowledge with a wall of scrolling headlines predicting such possibilities as
the conquest of disease and parental choice of children's attributes.

   Some feared that Bill Gates would gain a monopoly of the personal computer
with the Windows operating system, but Microsoft's power is minuscule compared
with the absolute lock on biological programming enjoyed by evolution's software
designer. All forms of life use the same programming language, and the
instructions in that language, a k a genes, are very similar, even among species
as far removed from each other as a man is from a mouse or a microbe. The
reason, of course, is that many of the counterpart genes in each of these
organisms have been inherited from an ancestral gene that existed in the
earliest forms of life. The exhibition underlines this commonality of genes with
a display panel in which the visitor can touch a photo of one species to learn
how many of its genes are similar to human genes.

   Next are tableaus about human genetics, one of which may explain why you
never bothered to get in touch with your second cousin or learn about the lives
of your great-great-grandparents. The reason is that they have only slightly
fewer genetic differences with you than would someone plucked at random from a
New York City street.

   The exhibition now gently offers the chance to learn more about how DNA
programs the operation of a living cell. It takes the example of color
blindness, which can be caused by defects in the genes for one of the opsin
proteins. Seven wall panels and a film loop in an adjacent theater offer much
detailed information for those who are interested. This is the hard science part
of the exhibition, and in a clear and enticing way it does a fine job of
presenting as much detail as a general audience can probably stomach.

   The visitor is then led into a section where wall panels discuss some of the
social consequences of the new genetic knowledge, grouped under the headings of
genetic screening (testing patients for disease), gene therapy (correcting
genetic defects) and genetic enhancement (improving human qualities). The most
striking exhibit in this room is a magnificent rendering of a DNA chip, or
microarray, a device now much in use for detecting which genes in a cell are
active.

   Microarrays monitor the activity of thousands of genes at a time. One of
their most useful tricks is to compare a normal cell with a cancerous cell so as
to determine which genes are wrongly switched on (or off) in the cancer cell.
The devices are marvels of miniaturization, being based on a little window of
glass an inch or less on each side. The exhibition designers have turned a DNA
microarray into a glorious macroarray, a giant box gridded with lights of
different hues and intensities. The display gives viewers a good feel for the
complexity of human cells and the daunting task biologists face in trying to
figure out the meaning in the complex pattern of genetic activity the
microarrays measure.

   The centerpiece of the next room is a beautiful assembly of exotic plants and
creatures whose common theme is that museum scientists have learned interesting
things from their DNA. Perhaps some extra visual reminder would have helped here
to underline for the spectator that each of these creatures, from the northern
elephant seal to the monarch butterfly, is made of cells that run on the same
operating system. Beneath the riotous diversity of nature lies the unity of
DNA's ubiquitous programming language.

   To the side is a DNA lab where visitors can scrape a few cells from the
inside of the cheek and extract their own DNA. There are also thoughtful
discussions with visually arresting displays about genetically modified foods
and the art of cloning.

   For a finale, there is a striking piece of participatory computer art created
by Camille Utterback. It is a camera that projects a digitized image of the
viewer. But the pixels on the screen are just A's, T's, G's or C's, the four
letters of the DNA alphabet, prompting visitors to wonder whether they are just
a program based on their own DNA or perhaps something more, but if so what?

   This bare description does insufficient justice to the appearance of the
exhibition, which was organized by Rob DeSalle and designed by the museum's
in-house team. Every object is elegant and interesting and draws in the eye, if
not the hand as well. Visitors shouldn't hesitate to scoop up the little vial of
DNA they will see on entering the exhibition -- real as it seems, it's just an
image projected by a clever lensing technique.

   The show, in its preview stage, included an oversight of a certain physical
consequence: there should have been 284 Manhattan phone books to indicate the
information storage capacity of an ordinary human cell's nucleus, not the 142
displayed, since ordinary cells contain two copies of the genome, one from each
parent. A museum spokesman said that the glitch would be corrected, either by
changing the text or ordering another 142 phone directories.

   The contents of the show strike a judicious balance between the science of
the genome and its applications. People find it easier to discuss the possible
hazards of genetic testing and modified crops than the complicated mechanics
that lie between a sequence of DNA bases and a physical trait in an organism.
The designers have tried to make the exhibition work on both levels and to a
large extent have succeeded.

   According to Ellen V. Futter, the museum's president, this is the first
exhibition to describe the emerging genome revolution to the public. It is a
brave and excellent start and sets a high standard for the many that will
doubtless follow. It may even make you think you'd like to get to know the
genome a little better.

Times and Tolls

   "The Genomic Revolution" opens tomorrow and runs through Jan. 1 at the
American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street. Museum
hours: Sundays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 5:45 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays,
10 a.m. to 8:45 p.m. Suggested admission: $10 for adults; $7.50 for students and
65+; $6 for children. Information: (212) 769-5100; advance tickets: (212)
769-5200. Some special lectures and panels are planned with the exhibition.
Information: (212) 769-5176.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The common thread of these animals is that scientists have
learned something interesting from their DNA. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York
Times)(pg. E32); A model of the double helix of DNA in "The Genomic Revolution,"
at the American Museum of Natural History. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York
Times)(pg. E25)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2001


                             1772 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2001 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                      MAY 25, 2001, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find how Alzheimer's clutters brain;

Defective protein gums up cells' normal cleanup work

SOURCE: Chronicle Science Writer

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall

BODY:
Alzheimer's disease can turn the brain into a biochemical garbage dump. Today,
scientists report for the first time just how the brain's normal cleanup might
go awry.

    A pathbreaking study, published in the journal Science by researchers at
Stanford University, shows how toxic clumps of a defective protein can interfere
with the routine hygiene system brain cells need to keep functioning into old
age.

    Experts said the study, the latest in a vital field of brain research,
points to the intriguing possibility that the same problem might be a culprit in
many seemingly unrelated disorders, not just Alzheimer's.

    The toxic clumps, consisting of a protein called amyloid-beta, are not
necessarily the sole cause of Alzheimer's, or any other disease.

    NEW ANGLE FOR TREATMENTS

    But the new finding, if it bears out in further research, could help
scientists design a powerful blueprint for new therapies. Besides Alzheimer's,
such an approach might also prove beneficial in Parkinson's disease and other
common movement disorders arising from breakdowns in the nervous system.

    "There's a sense this may be a common mechanism in a number of
neurodegenerative diseases," said Bill Thies, vice president of medical and
scientific affairs at the Chicago-based Alzheimer's Association.

    But experts warned that the work is still at the stage of basic research --
and has yet to produce a single drug candidate.

    "We're pretty early in terms of unraveling how this process works, so how to
intervene at the clinical level is not immediately obvious," Thies said.

    DEFECTIVE PROTEINS GROUND UP

    When functioning normally, brain cells grind up misshapen or otherwise
unwanted proteins for disposal using a system of enzymes.

    Study authors Neil Bence, Roopal Sampat and Ron Kopito found that clumps of
amyloid gum up this cellular garbage disposal system. That allows still more
clumps to form, causing even less efficient protein degradation.

    Accumulated debris in brain cells can interfere with many basic processes
the cells depend on to keep alive, and as they die, normal brain function
becomes more and more difficult. The symptoms vary depending on which cells are
affected and how many cells are wiped out.

    Scientists said the breakdown in the cleanup system therefore could help
explain the creeping memory loss of Alzheimer's, the worsening tremor of
Parkinson's and the advancing paralysis of ALS, or amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

    "What leaps out at anybody who studies any of these neurodegenerative
diseases is that they all involve the formation of these protein aggregates,"
Kopito said.

    He and his co-authors suggested the problem may not be peculiar to the
brain, either. Essentially the same mechanism of cleanup inhibition could be
involved in cystic fibrosis, which affects breathing.

    'VICIOUS CIRCLE'

    "This is an extremely interesting study," said Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad,
associate director of a research program on the neuroscience of aging at the
National Institute on Aging.

    "What they're suggesting is a vicious circle," she said, in which cellular
hygiene "becomes less functional, degrading less protein, and therefore allows
more protein to accumulate in these clumps.

    "Degradation and synthesis of proteins in cells have to be exquisitely
balanced," she added. "If something is inhibiting degradation, it's just like
when your rubbish is not picked up every week. Very quickly you get into
terrible trouble."

    SEPARATE JAPANESE STUDY

    A separate study, also appearing today in Science, from a team of Japanese
researchers points to a potential new method to break up the faulty amyloid
protein that forms the toxic clumps.

    The presence of these clumps, or plaques, has long been known as a hallmark
of advanced Alzheimer's and a worthwhile target of drugs, even though
researchers were never quite sure if the amyloid clumps were a cause or merely a
consequence of the disease.

    So far, however, most drug researchers have tried to look for ways to block
enzymes that help build the amyloid. The new study suggests a different
strategy, involving an enzyme called neprolysin, which tears down amyloid.

    Experts said the trick will be to find a drug or gene therapy capable of
achieving that goal. It's often considered easier to block an enzyme than it is
to rev one up.

    "This is a harder target," said Louis Hersh, a biochemist at the University
of Kentucky working in the same general field as the Japanese researchers.
"You've got an enzyme here that gets rid of amyloid-beta. The problem is how
does one figure out how to increase the activity of an enzyme like this?"

    There are no current strategies to do that in the case of amyloid-destroying
neprolysin. But there are many efforts in the works along those lines, and even
if a drug is not found right away, the latest study could also lead to earlier
identification of genetic risk factors that make people vulnerable to the
disease.E-mail Carl T. Hall at chall@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2001


                             1773 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      May 23, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 08C

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: OFF THE TEE

BYLINE: GARY D'AMATO of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   PLAYER OF THE WEEK

   Sergio Garcia

   Nearly two years after he captivated the golf world with his youthful
exuberance during the 1999 PGA Championship, "El Nino" finally won his first PGA
Tour event. Garcia, 21, closed with a 63 to win the MasterCard Colonial with a
13-under-par 267 total, two strokes ahead of Brian Gay and defending champion
Phil Mickelson. Garcia was considered Europe's version of Tiger Woods in '99,
shooting a 62 in his first PGA Tour round as a pro and battling Woods to the
wire in the PGA. Garcia's anticipated rivalry with Woods never materialized . .
. but perhaps it's not too late.

   BY THE NUMBERS

   7: Times Phil Mickelson has finished in the top three in PGA Tour events this
year. He has one victory.

   68: Consecutive 36-hole cuts made by Tiger Woods, the longest streak on the
PGA Tour. Next on the list are Vijay Singh and Hal Sutton, tied with 16.

   613: Eagles made on the Tour this year.

   TOUR TALK

   Closing the gap: It's no mystery why it took Sergio Garcia two years to win
on the PGA Tour. As talented as he was as a 19-year-old in 1999, his wedge game
was substandard.

   The top pros give themselves birdie opportunities from within 120 yards 90%
of the time. Far too often, Garcia turned short-iron approaches into bogeys.

   "One of my problems was I probably wasn't as good as I should be with my
wedges," he said last week. "I'm working on that. It's getting better and
better."

   CHARITY EVENTS

   Forty athletes and celebrities have committed to play in the 31st Vince
Lombardi Memorial Golf Classic on June 9 at North Hills Country Club in
Menomonee Falls. Tee times begin at 7 a.m.

   Admission is $5 and includes a raffle ticket. Parking is $5. Proceeds benefit
the Vince Lombardi Cancer Clinic, Gene Therapy Research Laboratory and Cancer
Counseling Center at St. Luke's Medical Center.

   Celebrities who have committed to participate include:

   Sal Bando, Ernie Banks, Darrell Bevell, Josh Bidwell, Zeke Bratkowski, Willie
Buchanon, Bonnie Blair-Cruikshank, Chad Clifton, Lynn Dickey, Bob Donner, Doug
Hart, Ted Hendricks, Bob Jeter, Gary Knafelc, Greg Koch, Wayne Larrivee, Johnny
Logan, Ryan Longwell, Jim MacGeorge, Max McGee, Dan Needles, Bob Reitman, Bill
Schroeder, Wil Shriner, Tom Sneva, Bart Starr, Barry Stokes, Terry Stotts, Tom
Sutton, Mark Tauscher, Jim Temp, Fuzzy Thurston, Steve True, Jim Tunney, Bob
Uecker, Mike Wahle, Frank Winters, Joe Wolf, Willie Wood, Woody Woodbury.

   PEOPLE

   Peter Schmitz, 7, of Brown Deer, used a 2-iron Monday to make a hole-in-one
on the 70-yard fifth hole at Noyes Park. "I saw it go in the hole," said
Schmitz, a first- grader. "It went in the air, then it landed on the green and
rolled in the hole." Schmitz was playing with his 11-year-old brother, Mark.

   Ely Callaway, 81, who revolutionized golf with his line of Big Bertha metal
woods, has retired as chairman and CEO of the Callaway Golf Co. because of
health problems. Ron Drapeau, 54, senior executive vice president of
manufacturing, was named president and CEO. Callaway, who will keep his titles
of chairman and CEO emeritus, had gall bladder surgery on April 23. Doctors
discovered a tumor in his pancreas during the surgery.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                             1774 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2001 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      May 23, 2001 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07A

LENGTH: 1164 words

HEADLINE: Fast-moving research is changing view of life;
Discoveries with human genome open new vistas

BYLINE: ROBERT COOKE Newsday

BODY:

   Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y. -- Results from the Human Genome Project are coming
in at such a furious pace, in such astounding detail, that gene scientists can't
scramble fast enough to keep up.

   Research reports from laboratories around the world -- about 300 were
presented recently during a major genome conference at the Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory -- show clearly that an exciting, worldwide enterprise has been born.

   Based on the map of human DNA provided by the project, genome science is
already changing our view of life.

   Knowing the genome, the chemical "spelling" and location of all our genes,
biologists are now focusing this powerful "lens of genetics" at life from the
bottom side up -- learning how genes create an organism, rather than how an
organism exploits the genes it gets.

   Eric Lander, who leads a major genome laboratory at the Whitehead Institute
in Cambridge, Mass. , said the new data are so powerful that scientists can
compare the genes in other animals to ours, can see signs of humanity's
prehistoric wanderings, can spot the genes that cause disease, and are beginning
to understand the nature of genetic variation.

   The genome was deciphered by two competing groups of scientists. The larger,
called the Human Genome Project, is composed of the U.S. Department of Energy
and the National Institutes of Health, the Wellcome Trust in England and
universities in the United States, the United Kingdom and other nations.

   The second group is privately funded Celera Genomics, a gene-discovery firm
in Rockville, Md., founded several years ago by biologist Craig Venter.

   Francis Collins, the molecular geneticist who is director of the Human Genome
Project, expects serious debate concerning the idea that humans will "take
charge" of our own species' evolution.

   Challenging ideas

   Even now, challenging ideas are emerging. For example, a California team
reported at the Cold Spring Harbor meeting that by looking at "conserved
sequences" in various animals' genes, they find that humans are more closely
related to dogs than to mice. Such work gets them right into the history of life
on Earth, following the paths of evolution.

   These so-called "conserved sequences" are vital to life itself. They
represent genes, or lengths of the DNA chain, which are so important to
fundamental processes that they must be preserved in every organism. Creatures
as varied as yeast cells, fruit flies, roundworms, mice and humans all have
these conserved sequences governing their biological processes. Without these
active chunks of DNA, vital activities such as DNA copying, gene repair,
reproduction and response to stress are impossible. And without such functions,
life at any level is impossible.

   What has been found, however, is that in and around these conserved sequences
there can be variation; one set of DNA links sometimes works as well as another,
so a small amount of variation is allowed. And by counting the differences, how
subtle mutations have changed a vital gene over time, it's possible to measure
how closely -- or distantly -- two organisms are related. The greater the degree
of "sequence similarity," the more closely they're related.

   Now, the race is on to sort out those relationships, chasing the genetic
details that speak of evolution.

   Also, a team in Boston recently found that by using computer listings of all
the human gene sequences, it's possible to electronically filter or erase all
the human DNA from a given part of the genome, plus any contaminants and errors,
in order to spot residue of genes left there by disease-causing micro-organisms,
such as viruses.

   Targeting disease

   Such work is exciting, because it offers a way to find unknown infectious
agents that may be causing disease. In fact, said Matthew Meyerson of the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, "undiscovered infectious agents are
believed to cause a wide variety of human diseases," including some forms of
cancer, auto-immune diseases such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, and
inflammatory ailments such as arthritis. The problem lies in finding these
infecting organisms, if they exist.

   New patterns are emerging from the research. Lander and his colleagues
recently reported in the journal Science, for instance, that analysis of tiny
genetic differences -- called SNPs -- has uncovered a surprising phenomenon in
the history of Homo sapiens, us.

   One of the major efforts springing from the Human Genome Project is to
identify SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) that can be used as identifying
markers in various parts of the genome. These SNPs represent single mutations
that can sometimes cause diseases and account for individual variation, such as
hair and eye color. They can also interact and contribute to disease
susceptibility for cancer, diabetes and heart disease.

   What Lander's team recently discovered, in collaboration with scientists at
the Institute for Biological Anthropology in England, is that in northern
Europeans, SNPs are linked together in larger-than-usual blocks.

   The large size of the DNA blocks, Lander explained, will make it easier to
follow and map the positions of disease-causing genes on the chromosomes,
because the disease genes are embedded within these recognizable chunks of DNA.

   It is also possible that genetic research will soon uncover the roots of
complex disorders such as cancer, heart disease, mental illnesses and diabetes
that are thought to be caused by several genes acting in concert.

   FAST FORWARD TO THE FUTURE

   Francis Collins, head of the Human Genome Project, forecasts that health care
will change dramatically because of discoveries made through the project:

   By 2010

   -- Predictive genetic tests will be available for 25 conditions.

   -- Interventions to reduce risk will be available for most of them.

   -- Gene therapy will be successful for a few conditions.

   -- Many primary care providers will begin to practice genetic medicine.

   By 2020

   -- Gene-based designer drugs for diabetes, hypertension, etc., will be coming
on the market.

   -- Cancer therapy will be precisely targeted to the molecular fingerprint of
a tumor.

   -- Mental illness diagnosis will be transformed, with new therapies arriving,
societal views shifting.

   By 2030

   -- Genes involved in the human aging process will be fully cataloged.

   -- Clinical trials will be under way to extend the human life span.

   -- Complete genomic sequencing of an individual will be routine and will cost
less than $1, 000.

   -- Major anti-technology movements will be active in the United States and
elsewhere.

   By 2040

   -- Comprehensive genomics-based health care will be the norm.

   -- Individualized preventive medicine will be available and largely
effective.

   -- Gene therapy and gene-based drug therapy will be available for most
diseases.

   -- The average life span will reach 90 years.

   - - Serious debate will be under way about humans' possibly "taking charge"
of their own evolution.

   Newsday

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                             1775 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     MAY 23, 2001 Wednesday CITY-D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1200 words

HEADLINE: Business News in Brief

BODY:

   In the Region

   Comcast to increase ownership in two cable networks

   Comcast Corp. will increase ownership control of two cable TV networks, the
Golf Channel and Outdoor Life, in a deal with Fox Cable Networks Group. The
Philadelphia cable company will pay undisclosed amounts of cash for Fox's
minority interest in the Golf Channel and Fox's pending 83 percent stake in
Outdoor Life. According to a person close to the transaction, Comcast will pay
$365 million for Fox's 31 percent stake in the Golf Channel. The amount Comcast
will pay for Outdoor Life has not been settled yet. The deals are expected to
close in the second or third quarter, after which Comcast will hold all of
Outdoor Life and 92 percent of the Golf Channel.

   Sale of Vlasic's North American operations completed

   The sale of Vlasic Foods International Inc.'s remaining North American
operations closed yesterday, the company said. Dallas buyout firm Hicks, Muse,
Tate & Furst paid $370 million for Vlasic pickles and condiments, Swanson frozen
foods, and Open Pit barbecue sauce, and formed a company called Pinnacle Foods
Corp. to run the businesses.

   Octagen to work on gene therapy for hemophilia

   Octagen Corp., Bala Cynwyd, said it would collaborate with a University of
Minnesota researcher to develop a novel gene therapy technique for hemophilia A,
the most common form of the bleeding disease. The technique would add the
missing blood-clotting factor to a patient's own blood cells. Octagen is also
working with Emory University and a French drug company to develop non-gene
therapies for hemophilia.

   Unisys to redeem $334 million in debt early

   Unisys Corp. has offered early redemption of debt securities worth $334
million to reduce its interest costs. The securities are due in 2004, and carry
an interest rate of 11 3/4 percent. The Blue Bell company plans to finance its
offer primarily with proceeds from an offering of $350 million in 8 1/8 percent
debt securities, due in 2006, which was completed last week. Unisys said the
tender could result in an after-tax extraordinary charge in the second quarter
of about $17 million.

   SAP acquires contracts from Lawrenceville, N.J., firm

   SAP AG, the parent company of SAP America Inc. in Newtown Square, said it had
acquired software and customer contracts from Infinite Data Structures Inc., a
Lawrenceville, N.J., company that specializes in services for the life-sciences
and consumer-products industries. Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but SAP
said 15 Infinite Data employees would join SAP's new Global Solution Center in
Newtown Square.

   Judge clears Mediq's plan for emerging from bankruptcy

   A judge has confirmed Mediq Inc.'s Chapter 11 recovery plan, clearing way for
the Pennsauken medical equipment rental company to emerge from bankruptcy. Mediq
and its Mediq/PRN Life Support Services Inc. unit, the largest U.S. renter of
portable life-support equipment, filed in January after defaulting on about
$104.7 million of bond debt. Under the plan approved in federal bankruptcy court
in Delaware, Mediq will pay off more than $325 million in old loans with $240
million in new notes, new preferred stock, and cash.

   Maersk to add service to Australia and New Zealand

   Maersk Sealand, an international ocean cargo line, said it would launch
scheduled service between Philadelphia and Australia and New Zealand in
September. The new service would strengthen Philadelphia as a major seaport for
north-south shipments. The port already has scheduled service to both coasts of
South America as well as to Australia and New Zealand. Maersk Sealand said it
was negotiating with Tioga Marine Terminal in Northeast Philadelphia and the
Packer Avenue Terminal in South Philadelphia.

   Elsewhere

   Goodyear plans to raise tire prices next month

   Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. plans to raise tire prices as it cuts some
production and benefits from demand created by concern about the safety of tires
made by Bridgestone/Firestone Inc. The increase will be effective June 15, and
will be Goodyear's second this year. Prices will rise by 3 percent to 5 percent
on Goodyear, Dunlop, Kelly-Springfield and private brands, analyst Rod Lache of
Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown Inc. said. Lache said Goodyear, which is based in
Akron, Ohio, may raise prices further. Goodyear spokesman Keith Price would not
comment on price increases.

   Josephthal and two executives fined $3.3 million-plus

   Regulators ordered Josephthal & Co. and two top executives to pay more than
$3.3 million in a case in which they were accused of fraudulently pushing
customers to buy a troubled stock owned by the New York brokerage. A Nasdaq
hearing panel found that the firm and its executives "acted with a total
disregard for the welfare of the firm's customers" when they gave brokers a
special incentive to sell VictorMaxx Technologies Inc. shares without telling
investors about the arrangement. Some of the firm's 650 brokers responded by
using high-pressure tactics to sell VictorMaxx stock shortly before it tumbled
65 percent in May and June 1996, causing $1.5 million in losses to 360
customers, the panel found.

   Faster U.S. economic growth predicted for second half

   U.S. growth will pick up later this year and the economy will avoid recession
because the Federal Reserve has been aggressive in lowering interest rates,
Anthony Santomero, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia told
the Central Bucks Chamber of Commerce. Santomero said it was premature to say
whether the central bank would need to cut interest rates in June. "I believe
the Fed has put substantial monetary stimulus into the pipeline," he said.
"While there are some downside risks, economic growth should begin to increase
in the second half of this year, and reach a more acceptable pace next year."

   Verizon to expand directory business in Canada

   Verizon Communications Inc., the largest local-phone company in the United
States, said it would expand in Canada by buying Telus Corp.'s
directory-information service for about $520 million. Verizon said the deal,
subject to regulatory approval, would enable it to combine the Telus unit with
directory businesses it owns in British Columbia and Quebec, creating a division
that would have 2001 revenue of about $232 million and produce 118 directories.

   The Bottom Line

   Citigroup Inc. said it would drop the name "Salomon Smith Barney" as it
combines the investment bank with its corporate banking business under the name
"Citigroup Corporate & Investment Bank." . . . Lufthansa and the union
representing most of its pilots agreed to take their bitter pay dispute to
arbitration, but it was unclear whether the move would avert a third 24-hour
strike planned for tomorrow. . . . Albertson's Inc., parent company of Acme
Markets, said chief financial officer Craig Olson resigned a month after the
nation's second-largest supermarket chain appointed a new chief executive
officer, and would be replaced on an interim basis by Richard Navarro, senior
vice president and controller.

   Compiled from staff reports, the Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Reuters
and other wire services.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2001


                             1776 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 22, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 1109 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS Stephen Reucroft and John Swain are experimental
particle physicists who teach at Northeastern University.;
ADDICTION MEMORIES

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN

BODY:

   Even when cocaine addicts have kicked the habit and their cravings seem to be
gone, sometimes a sudden relapse has them in trouble again, and science is
beginning to get to the root of the problem. Stanislav Vorel and his colleagues
at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City got rats addicted to
cocaine by feeding it to them intravenously whenever they pressed a lever. After
making them quit "cold turkey," which in this case meant replacing the cocaine
with saline, the researchers stimulated a part of their brain responsible for
memory and found that the rats would try to get cocaine again by pressing the
lever, at least until they figured out that there wasn't any cocaine coming out
anymore. The work is interesting, as it is a specific glutamate-rich part of the
brain that is involved in memory that seems to trigger the cravings; stimulation
of the brain to simply produce pleasure didn't set off the cravings. This new
work suggests that drugs that are tailored specifically to interact with
glutamate may help recovering addicts from getting hooked again.

   ref: Science, May 11.


   Fuzzy molecules

   The laws of quantum mechanics tell us that all objects must obey the
uncertainty principle, which limits the accuracy with which the position and
speed of an object can be known, but this fuzziness tends only to be noticeable
for very small objects such as electrons or single atoms. Do the same laws
really hold for big things? Olaf Nairz, Markus Arndt, and Anton Zeilinger of the
University of Vienna have managed to show that this fuzziness persists in carbon
buckyballs, spherical molecules made of 70 carbon atoms, at a temperature of
about 600 Celsius. By making a beam of these molecules and sending it through a
small slit, they tried to be sure of its position, and, just as quantum
mechanics would predict, it's velocity became smeared out. These are the
largest, hottest, most complex objects so far proven to obey the laws of quantum
mechanics.

   ref: E-print at http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/quant-ph/0105061, May 15.

   Blind dogs see

   Congenital blindness in dogs suffering from a genetic defect in the RPE65
gene has been successfully treated using gene therapy. RPE65 is needed to
produce a protein that is essential for proper vision, and, if it is defective,
a disease called Leber congenital amauosis or LCA, results. Jean Bennett and
colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia injected a virus
carrying a working form of the gene into the retinas of dogs suffering from LCA,
restoring 40 percent of the vision to what would otherwise be blind eyes. The
disease also affects humans, and the therapy may point the way to treatments.

   ref: Nature Genetics, May.

   Suds science

   Many of the seemingly simple phenomena of day-to-day life turn out to be
quite hard to describe in terms of basic physics, and the foam on a glass of
beer is no exception. Nevertheless, Howard Stone and his colleagues at Harvard
University have managed to make some headway (pun intended) with a mathematical
model that describes the combined and correlated effects of the expansion of
bubbles and the drainage of fluid from between them. The model is in good
agreement with observational data, and is the first to give quantitative
results. The work may help everyone from beer manufacturers who want
longer-lasting heads, to soft-drink manufacturers who want none.

   ref: Physical Review Letters, May 14.

   Get the lead out

   Children exposed to lead can be treated with chemicals called chelating
agents that bind strongly to the metal and help it to be eliminated, but do
these drugs really help? The answer, unfortunately, seems to be that often they
don't. Walter J. Rogan and his colleagues at the National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences at Research Triangle Park in North Carolina found
that children ages 1 to 3 who were exposed to environmental lead from lead-based
paint had no significant benefits from chelation therapy. The problem seems to
be that, while chelates can remove lead from the blood, a lot can remain stored
in bones and released after treatment over a long period of time. Lead causes
reductions in the IQ's of children, and now that it seems that treatment after
exposure is not much help, the need to get rid of lead-based paints is more
pressing than ever.

   ref: New England Journal of Medicine, May 10.

   Neutrals in the ring

   Storing electrically charged particles in circular orbits within so-called
"storage rings" is a standard technique in many fields of physics and
engineering, but the same trick with neutral particles has remained elusive -
after all, neutral particles are not supposed to be affected by electricity or
magnetism. Now Gerard Meijer and his colleagues at the FOM Institute for Plasma
Physics in Neiuwegein and the University of Nijmegen, both in the Netherlands,
have managed to pull it off anyway. The researchers take advantage of the fact
that even neutral atoms have some small separation of electrical charge within
them, and that turns out to be enough of a handle for a complex system of
electric and magnetic fields to be able to speed them up, slow them down, and
bend them in circles just like charged particles. This breakthrough development
may lead to all sorts of new basic physics never before possible.

   ref: Nature, May 10.

   Anthrax on the run

   A new treatment for anthrax helps the body fight off the toxin produced by
the bacteria rather than the bacteria themselves. R. John Collier and his
colleagues at Harvard Medical School have managed to protect mice against the
toxin using a modified form of one of the three proteins of which it is
comprised in order to stimulate an immune response. The work may help as an
adjunct to antibiotic treatments that kill the bacteria themselves. Anthrax is
widely considered to be a powerful biological weapon, and it's not a bad idea to
have as many defenses against it as possible.

   ref: Science, April 27.

   Brain repair

   Regeneration of nerve and brain tissue is only rarely seen, but now new
research points the way to the reason why, and a way around it. James Fawcett
and his colleagues at the Physiological Laboratory at Cambridge University in
England have shown that proteins modified by addition of sugars called
chondroitin sulfates can inhibit the growth of new neurons. These substances are
associated with scar tissue, and it is well-known that neurons have difficulty
growing through such tissue. Enzymes interfering with these substances seem to
encourage nerve growth and may one day help humans with central nervous system
damage.

   ref: Nature Neuroscience, May.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2001


                             1777 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                          May 21, 2001, Monday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1101 words

HEADLINE: Making dentures obsolete? ; Researchers hope gene therapy willsomeday
keep the long of tooth in teeth.

BYLINE: Cindy Tumiel


BODY: Squirreled away down a labyrinth of hallways at the University of Texas
Health Science Center, Mary MacDougall presides over a crowded and busy
laboratory, making big plans for the Tooth Fairy.

    Twenty years from now, if this dental researcher has her way, the mythical
sprite will be more than just a figure of childlike imaginations making stealth
midnight visits to 7-year-olds who've parted with baby cuspids and incisors.

    She'll walk around in broad daylight, wearing a lab coat and employing gene
therapy to grow new teeth for 50-year-olds who've lost their original choppers
to periodontal disease, decay or trauma.

    That sounds far-fetched, but MacDougall and other prominent dental
researchers say it's a very possible future for dentistry, as the Human Genome
Project bears fruit in the coming decades.

    Someday, MacDougall said, dentures and fillings will be forever banished to
the museums. Dentists will know how to turn on long-dormant genes and prompt
patients to fix their own cavities or grow their own replacement teeth.

    "It sounds like science fiction," admits MacDougall, associate dean of the
dental school at the health science center. "But it's something that can be done
eventually."

    Already, MacDougall has taken steps toward accomplishing that task in
animals. Researchers in her lab have taken root buds from laboratory mice and
successfully grown mice molars in a culture dish - the roots, crown and
finishing enamel, assembled into perfectly formed teeth not much bigger than a
pinhead.

    Humans are far more complicated, though. First, researchers must find the
genes responsible for building the 25 major proteins that make up a tooth. Then,
there may be dozens of other genes involved in telling the body when and how and
where to build a particular tooth.

    Other prominent dental researchers are watching the ongoing work in San
Antonio with interest.

    "There's a lot of hurdles there, but I wouldn't say anything isn't doable,"
said Frederick Eichmiller, director of the American Dental Association's
Paffenbarger Research Center in Gaithersburg, Md.

    "It's an enormously complex process," Eichmiller said. "You'll have to have
all the genes that generate that one tooth, so you get a tooth that will match
all the characteristics of the one that was lost. If you lose a front tooth, you
want a front tooth back."

    Progress will come in increments, beginning with development of fillings and
crowns that more closely resemble real human teeth. Scientists in MacDougall's
laboratory already have undertaken this first piece of the puzzle, and believe
that they will have new products on the market within five years.

    Beyond that, researchers hope to be able to grow laboratory teeth that can
be implanted in a human mouth. These won't be living teeth with nerves and blood
vessels, but they will be made of the same materials as human teeth.

    The final step will come perhaps 20 years from now, MacDougall said, when a
dentist's arsenal will include treatments that cause teeth to repair themselves.



    "I tell my students, one of the wonderful things about science is, when you
answer one question, you get five new questions. You never run out of things to
investigate," MacDougall said.

    Unlike skin, bone and muscle cells, the cells in human teeth do not
replenish themselves.

    Teeth form twice during our lives. Twenty primary or "baby" teeth erupt in
stages between the ages of 8 months and 3 years. Those are displaced by 32
permanent adult teeth between ages 6 and 17.

    Then the teeth-forming genes go silent for the duration of human lives.
Still, they remain in the nucleus of every cell, part of the 6-foot-long ringlet
of DNA that make up the 23 chromosomes.

    The recently completed genome project has sequenced the chemical code along
each of the chromosomes. Scientists now are investigating precisely where the
estimated 30,000 genes are, and what each gene is programmed to do.

    Researchers have found some of the major genes involved in tooth formation,
but have quite a ways to go, MacDougall said.

    "There may be as many as 10 percent of the total genes that are somehow
involved in the formation of teeth," she said.

    The biggest search is for key regulator genes; the ones that tell the body
when to form a tooth, where in the mouth it should erupt and whether it should
be a molar or an incisor. Once these are found, MacDougall said, scientists will
be on their way to knowing how to generate new teeth.

    "We just got a grant to look at how these proteins are turned on only in the
teeth, are only expressed in the teeth," she said. "These genes are in every
cell, yet these proteins are not found anywhere else in the body.

    "Can we find some kind of basic patterns that regulate that process and then
use those in clinical dentistry? Can we apply this back in some form of gene
therapy and really take dentistry to the next millennium?"

    Clues on the identity of these genes could come from many sources and even
other species, MacDougall said. Sharks, for example, generate new teeth
throughout their lives. Some rodent species have teeth that grow continuously,
like hair, to replenish teeth that are worn by chewing or gnawing.

    MacDougall also hopes to pull clues from several ongoing studies into
genetic defects that cause malformed teeth. Such studies will help identify
potential treatments for patients with these defects and also will advance basic
knowledge about the genes involved in tooth formation.

    One such study involves four members of a Cotulla family who suffer from a
very rare genetic defect that causes them to grow extra teeth.

    Delia Pedroso and her three children, Emma Ramirez, Humberto Pedroso and
Idalmis Pedroso, have cleidocranial dysplasia, a syndrome that causes an
assortment of skeletal abnormalities, including production of extra teeth.

    The children have been patients at the health science center's dental school
for several years. Last year, mother and children gave tissue and blood samples
to MacDougall so researchers could look for the cause of the defect.

    MacDougall said she's awaiting publication of the results of that research,
which identified a gene potentially responsible for cleidocranial dysplasia.

    "We know what gene causes that and what changes occur in the normal gene,"
she said. "So now that we know that, can we use that information to trigger
another tooth to develop when someone loses one?"

    ctumiel@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: KEVIN GEIL/STAFF ; Express-News Graphic - Growing teeth : Dr. Mary
MacDougall looks at a slide showing a mouse tooth she has grown in her lab at
the University of Texas Health Science Center.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2001


                             1778 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              May 21, 2001, Monday

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; A SPECIAL REPORT: THE IMPACT OF CANCER; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

LENGTH: 1676 words

HEADLINE: CANCER WARRIORS

BYLINE: JIM ROSS; ALEX LEARY

BODY:


   Cancer is tragic, painful, pervasive. It also is big business.

   An entire subset of the medical community is dedicated to the disease. In
Citrus alone there are dozens of doctors, nurses, aides and clerical workers who
fight cancer for a living.

   And that's not to mention the less visible troops, like Terri Lynn Hope, who
sells wigs to cancer patients who lose their hair during chemotherapy, or Susan
Smith, who goes from hospital to hospital collecting information for the huge
cancer data bank Florida maintains.

   Only a disease this widespread and devastating - cancer killed 447 Citrus
residents in 1999, and doctors diagnosed 935 new cancers here that same year -
could require such attention from so many people.

   Dr. Jayanth "Jay" Rao is one of those cancer warriors. He operates the
Florida Regional Cancer Centers, a radiation oncology operation with offices in
Beverly Hills and Ocala.

   Rao almost missed the fight. He was an internist for six years with an eye
toward specializing in gastroenterology.

   "We are not taught about cancer in medical school," he said. "The knowledge
of (general) practitioners is very poor."

   When Rao came to this country from England, his sponsor was Dr. Nisar Syed.
For a variety of reasons, mostly logistical, Rao decided to switch from
gastroenterology to cancer treatment, which is what Syed practiced at Long Beach
(Calif.) Memorial Medical Center.

   While at Long Beach, Rao witnessed Syad's work with brachytherapy, which
involves briefly implanting radiation seeds or ribbons into a tumor so it can be
internally bombarded with high doses of radiation.

   "Here was a surgeon by occupation but he went into cancer medicine because he
saw his mother die of cancer," Rao said.

   Quickly, Rao's practical decision became a passionate one. He enlisted in the
cancer war.

   "Otherwise," he said, "I would have been a gastroenterologist" today.

   Although he came relatively late to cancer medicine, Rao hasn't wasted any
time.

   He spent 1993 to 2000 operating the Cancer Treatment Center of the Nature
Coast on County Road 491 near the Beverly Hills Bowl.

   There, he practiced brachytherapy and became a pioneer in the use of 3-D
images of tumors for treatment planning. His patient suffered from cancers of
the breast, prostate, lung and other body parts.

   At the time, the business belonged to health care giant Tenet, which also
owns Seven Rivers Community Hospital. But Florida Regional, whose investors
include Rao, Syed and some doctors who teach in California, bought the building
and practice.

   Fighting the war

   The intellectual challenge attracted Dr. V. Upender Rao to cancer medicine.
He is a specialist in hematology and oncology, which means his patients suffer
from ailments such as leukemia or lymphoma.

   Staff and patients call him Dr. V. Rao to avoid confusion with Dr. Jay Rao.
The men are not related.

   Dr. V. Rao said radiation has a limited application: It works where it is
directed. But cancer spreads, and it's not always clear where in the body it's
going or why.

   He said he and his colleagues must have a wide range of training in internal
medicine because they handle chemotherapy, hormone therapy and gene therapy. Rao
said the molecular biology, the combination of therapies and the ever-present
challenge make the field more interesting than cardiology, which he had been
pursuing.

   "I feel this field is more challenging. These are some of the sickest people
who need the most care," he said.

   His mother, for whom his Lecanto office building is dedicated, died of
cancer.

   But the intellectual challenges take a human toll. Cancer doctors become
dispirited sometimes.

   "You need a special personality, in my opinion," Dr. Jay Rao said.

   "It's very difficult. Not everybody can do it year after year," according to
Dr. V. Rao.

   "People ask: "Is it depressing?' " said a third cancer doctor, Timothy Brant.
"Not at all, it's very rewarding."

   Brant is a radiation oncologist at the Robert Boissoneault Oncology
Institute, which has offices in Inverness, Lecanto and Marion County. He said he
was attracted to the specialty because of the measurable results.

   "Either they do well or they don't," he said. Even if he can't cure someone,
he might be able to ease their pain.

   Sometimes, the doctors don't just battle cancer and their own feelings - they
must battle other doctors.

   Some doctors are ready to give up on patients, either because they don't know
what kinds of treatments are available or because they don't want a patient to
suffer during a futile search for answers.

   One day, Dr. Jay Rao checked his mail slot at Seven Rivers hospital. There
was a note, presumably from another physician: Why do you treat lung cancer
patients? Other cancer doctors received the same missive.

   Of course, good doctors try to be sensitive to patients' needs. And they
understand why physicians would object, in specific cases, to recommending
cancer treatment and perhaps incorrectly boosting a patient's hopes for living a
longer and better life.

   "I don't blame them," Rao said of the skeptical doctors, "because they have
no knowledge until they get into the specialty. There's a resistance from some
doctors, and that's from ignorance."

   Resistance or not, cancer medicine is bound to continue growing in Citrus.

   There was a time when patients had to travel beyond the county line for
cancer treatment. Some still do: About 370 Citrus patients sought treatment,
surgery or just a second opinion at the H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
Institute in Tampa during the first six months of this fiscal year; the number
was 409 at Shands at the University of Florida during its 1999 fiscal year.

   For the most part, though, cancer treatment is available here. Doctors say
they are extremely busy and some fear patients might have to be turned away
unless more specialists, nurses and technicians settle in Citrus.

   "We can meet demand," Brant said, "but it's close."

   Battling behind the scenes

   Of course, doctors and their staff members are only part of the story. Many
less visible people help cancer patients cope, either through financial
assistance or by making them feel better about their bodies.

   The Citrus County Health Department, for example, helps people who generally
can't afford to pay the huge bills that accumulate for a cancer patient.

   Poor people qualify for Medicaid. Better-off people can afford health
insurance. Treating the so-called working poor - too poor to afford coverage,
too "rich" to get government assistance - is the department's constant
challenge.

   "We're really fortunate in this community," said Marybeth Nayfield, who leads
the Health Department. Cancer doctors have been generous donating their time in
treatment and handling diagnostic screenings, although there is a waiting list
for patients to receive a colonoscopy.

   The news might get better. Soon, women in the the "working poor" category
will qualify for Medicaid if diagnosed with breast or cervical cancer, Nayfield
said.

   Other people help cancer patients feel better about themselves.

   Terri Lynn Hope began selling wigs at her beauty salon in Beverly Hills seven
years ago after a few women came in with ill-fitting hairpieces.

   Hope, who sells the wigs for between $ 49 and $ 200, has become much more
than a saleswoman.

   "I have learned to be a friend and listen. They are thinking about life and
they are thinking about death. When I fit these women with wigs it makes such a
difference. A glow comes over them. It makes them stronger."

   Hair can always grow back over time. A breast cannot. Connie Crider of
Connie's Mastectomy Boutique in Crystal River has been fitting local women with
prosthetics for the past decade. The silicone devices sell for between $ 100 and
$ 600.

   Crider, like Hope, got into the business because she wanted to help fellow
women in distress. "I couldn't make a living doing this if my husband didn't pay
the bills," she said.

   "I found I really like working with these ladies. I like their attitudes. So
many of them are upbeat even though they are going through trauma."

   Susan Smith of Spring Hill helps in another way: She drives hundreds of miles
each year collecting the latest cancer statistics from area hospitals.

   Under Florida law, all new cases of cancer must be recorded in a huge data
base maintained in Miami: www.fcds.med.miami.edu. Smith looks for the type of
cancer, how aggressive the tumor is, whether it has spread to other areas and
what treatment was used.

   The information can be used for research and to pinpoint unusual pockets of
the disease, or "hot spots" that may be linked with potential environmental
threats.

   Believe it or not, some of the most cutting-edge cancer warriors can be found
inside the truck trailer parked outside Citrus Memorial Hospital every Monday.

   The trailer is a mobile medical unit. Inside, workers perform positron
emission tomography, or PET, which is a full-body scan similar to an MRI.

   The scans allow doctors to detect and see disease by viewing how cells'
metabolic activity and chemistry change. PET scans are particularly helpful as a
diagnostic tool for lung cancer, lymphoma, melanoma and colorectal cancer,
experts have said.

   There are plenty of cancer fighters inside the hospital, as well. One who is
well known to patients is registered nurse Carol Poteet, a 23-year veteran who
manages the surgical and endoscopy unit.

   Years ago, Poteet managed the hospital's second floor, where patients
underwent chemotherapy. That work typically is accomplished in doctors' offices
these days.

   "The main thing is being able to talk to the patient . . . and let them
understand" about their bodies and the treatment, Poteet said.

   Poteet still facilitates a cancer support group, and she continues to work
with cancer patients who come to her part of the hospital.

   "It's rewarding," she said, "because you are there to help them."

   Text for "CANCER FACT" box accompanying story not provided for the electronic
library. Please see microfilm.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, RON THOMPSON, (2); Dr. Jayanth Rao inspects a patient's CAT
scan, which shows a lung tumor, at his Florida Regional Cancer Centers office in
Beverly Hills.; Steve Chapman, operations manager for Insight Health Services,
shows how workers perform positron emission tomography, or PET, in a truck
trailer parked outside Citrus Memorial Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2001


                             1779 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     May 20, 2001 Sunday FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: FORUM, Pg.E-1

LENGTH: 1138 words

HEADLINE: OUR BIOTECH BOOM: NOW OR NEVER

BODY:

   Pittsburgh can prosper in the next great economic force,          say Mark
Jay Kurtzrock and Karen Wolk Feinstein.        But government and business
leaders                                    must make bold investments now, or
risk losing out

    Microscopic robots that deliver drug therapies. "Duplicate" tumors grown so
cancer treatments can be tested for safety and effectiveness before being
administered to the patient. Engineered hybrid biological/mechanical human
organs.

    Recent scientific breakthroughs are turning what was once science fiction
into science fact. Around the world, advances such as the completion of the
Human Genome Project are leading to dramatic progress in the overlapping fields
of biomedicine and biotechnology, with possibilities such as cures for cancer,
diabetes and Alzheimer's disease looming on the horizon.

    The potential economic impact is enormous. In the next few years, experts
project, biotechnology, as a percentage of the gross domestic product, will
overtake information technology. What information technology was to the latter
half of the 20th century, they say, biotechnology will be to the first quarter
of the 21st. A major economic boom appears imminent.

    For the Pittsburgh region, that news is exciting and urgent.

    We are a strong contender in what may be one of the most important economic
races of the century. With our renowned research universities and health care
systems, Pittsburgh can emerge as a global leader in this up-and-coming
industry, and in so doing create substantial jobs and wealth in the region.

    The time frame, however, is short, and competition is fierce. Other regions
and states are investing millions of dollars in comprehensive plans to develop
their capabilities. Our own efforts must come together quickly, beginning as
soon next week when a vote on Gov. Tom Ridge's Life Sciences Greenhouse proposal
may occur in the state Legislature.

    It's a high-stakes race that raises a crucial question: Does Pittsburgh have
what it takes to convert this opportunity to reality?

    *

    In many ways, the region begins with a head start on much of the
competition. Just last month, the Pittsburgh Regional Alliance and the Jewish
Healthcare Foundation released a report documenting our formidable strengths in
biomedical research and clinical care. "Pittsburgh's Biomedical Centers of
Excellence: Identification and Validation" reveals 56 specialty and
sub-specialty areas that qualify as centers of excellence.

    From transplantation and oncology to gene therapy and tissue engineering,
the report defines Pittsburgh's capabilities as among the very best of the best.
(The full report can be found at www.pittsburghregion.org.)

    Leading the way, the study found, are the region's highly ranked research
universities and health systems. The University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon
University and UPMC Health System, along with West Penn Allegheny Health System
and Duquesne University, comprise an enviable health sciences/information
technology powerhouse.

    For example, Pittsburgh is the 12th-largest recipient of National Institutes
of Health funding for medical research, drawing $256 million in 1999. Any one of
the more than 1,100 NIH-funded projects under way could spin out to be the
biomed version of an Oracle or Hewlett-Packard.

    Perhaps Pittsburgh's most significant edge is the complementary capabilities
that Pitt, UPMC and Carnegie Mellon possess in life sciences research, clinical
care and information technology, respectively. IT allows researchers and
physicians to work with vast amounts of data, dramatically shortening the roads
to scientific discovery, diagnosis and treatment. The growing partnership
between these stellar institutions adds extraordinary horsepower to Pittsburgh's
biomed engine.

    While research discoveries provide a hotbed of opportunity for
commercialization, our region's cluster of biotech firms is relatively small.
Although home to many promising and successful ventures, Pittsburgh has no
equivalent of a Merck or Eli Lilly investing billions of dollars in research and
development. Nor does a younger, smaller commercial sector have the benefit of a
well-established network of support resources -- from business planning to
marketing to financial know-how -- to help entrepreneurs turn ideas into
profit-making businesses.

    Stiff competition is another factor. Consider New York's $500 million
Gen*NY*sis program, the $1.9 billion Illinois VentureTECH, and Michigan's $1
billion Life Sciences Corridor, enormous efforts to enhance capabilities and
take the biotech prize.

    In the face of these odds, can Pittsburgh prevail?

    In many ways, as in any competition, it boils down to a question of will.
Pittsburgh must run the race of a lifetime. Leaders in government and business
and the biomedical and biotech sectors must commit their time, resources and
best thinking to:

    *Aggressive efforts to secure increased government funding for biomedical
research.

    *Rapid development of smarter technology transfer to bring research to
market.

    *Critically needed increases in basic science, and the funding to support
them.

    *Vigorous and coordinated action to leverage increased private investment,
develop businesses and partnerships, and ensure the creation of adequate
incubator space and other support resources.

    Already, important efforts are under way. In addition to Gov. Ridge's Life
Sciences Greenhouses initiative, which would put $90 million of Pennsylvania's
tobacco settlement funds into the creation of three greenhouse sites in the
state, the Legislature will consider a more than $60 million biotech venture
capital fund. A coalition of regional leaders is working to attract an adequate
share of these funds.

    Pitt, UPMC and Carnegie Mellon continue to attract hundreds of millions of
private and public dollars each year for research and infrastructure
development. While each university is working to develop its own new
capabilities and strengthen existing ones in the life sciences, research and
commercialization, they have joined forces under an initiative called Pittsburgh
BioVenture. This initiative was formed to identify, strengthen and leverage the
combined academic research excellence in medical, computational, biologic, and
information sciences and technologies to promote institutional excellence and
regional economic development.

    This is a good beginning; the kind of aggressive, intelligent and visionary
action that is needed if the region is to emerge as one of the victors in the
race for biomedical preeminence.

    So, does Pittsburgh have what it takes to be one of the big winners in the
biomed-biotech boom? If we can rise to the occasion and act quickly to supply
the will, the vision and the means, the answer will be an emphatic "yes."

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2001


                             1780 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      May 20, 2001 Sunday TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg.E-1

LENGTH: 1102 words

HEADLINE: OUR BIOTECH BOOM: NOW OR NEVER

BODY:

   Microscopic robots that deliver drug therapies. "Duplicate" tumors grown so
cancer treatments can be tested for safety and effectiveness before being
administered to the patient. Engineered hybrid biological/mechanical human
organs.

    Recent scientific breakthroughs are turning what was once science fiction
into science fact. Around the world, advances such as the completion of the
Human Genome Project are leading to dramatic progress in the overlapping fields
of biomedicine and biotechnology, with possibilities such as cures for cancer,
diabetes and Alzheimer's disease looming on the horizon.

    The potential economic impact is enormous. In the next few years, experts
project, biotechnology, as a percentage of the gross domestic product, will
overtake information technology. What information technology was to the latter
half of the 20th century, they say, biotechnology will be to the first quarter
of the 21st. A major economic boom appears imminent.

    For the Pittsburgh region, that news is exciting and urgent.

    We are a strong contender in what may be one of the most important economic
races of the century. With our renowned research universities and health care
systems, Pittsburgh can emerge as a global leader in this up-and-coming
industry, and in so doing create substantial jobs and wealth in the region.

    The time frame, however, is short, and competition is fierce. Other regions
and states are investing millions of dollars in comprehensive plans to develop
their capabilities. Our own efforts must come together quickly, beginning as
soon next week when a vote on Gov. Tom Ridge's Life Sciences Greenhouse proposal
may occur in the state Legislature.

    It's a high-stakes race that raises a crucial question: Does Pittsburgh have
what it takes to convert this opportunity to reality?

    *

    In many ways, the region begins with a head start on much of the
competition. Just last month, the Pittsburgh Regional Alliance and the Jewish
Healthcare Foundation released a report documenting our formidable strengths in
biomedical research and clinical care. "Pittsburgh's Biomedical Centers of
Excellence: Identification and Validation" reveals 56 specialty and
sub-specialty areas that qualify as centers of excellence.

    From transplantation and oncology to gene therapy and tissue engineering,
the report defines Pittsburgh's capabilities as among the very best of the best.
(The full report can be found at www.pittsburghregion.org.)

    Leading the way, the study found, are the region's highly ranked research
universities and health systems. The University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon
University and UPMC Health System, along with West Penn Allegheny Health System
and Duquesne University, comprise an enviable health sciences/information
technology powerhouse.

    For example, Pittsburgh is the 12th-largest recipient of National Institutes
of Health funding for medical research, drawing $256 million in 1999. Any one of
the more than 1,100 NIH-funded projects under way could spin out to be the
biomed version of an Oracle or Hewlett-Packard.

    Perhaps Pittsburgh's most significant edge is the complementary capabilities
that Pitt, UPMC and Carnegie Mellon possess in life sciences research, clinical
care and information technology, respectively. IT allows researchers and
physicians to work with vast amounts of data, dramatically shortening the roads
to scientific discovery, diagnosis and treatment. The growing partnership
between these stellar institutions adds extraordinary horsepower to Pittsburgh's
biomed engine.

    While research discoveries provide a hotbed of opportunity for
commercialization, our region's cluster of biotech firms is relatively small.
Although home to many promising and successful ventures, Pittsburgh has no
equivalent of a Merck or Eli Lilly investing billions of dollars in research and
development. Nor does a younger, smaller commercial sector have the benefit of a
well-established network of support resources -- from business planning to
marketing to financial know-how -- to help entrepreneurs turn ideas into
profit-making businesses.

    Stiff competition is another factor. Consider New York's $500 million
Gen*NY*sis program, the $1.9 billion Illinois VentureTECH, and Michigan's $1
billion Life Sciences Corridor, enormous efforts to enhance capabilities and
take the biotech prize.

    In the face of these odds, can Pittsburgh prevail?

    In many ways, as in any competition, it boils down to a question of will.
Pittsburgh must run the race of a lifetime. Leaders in government and business
and the biomedical and biotech sectors must commit their time, resources and
best thinking to:

    *Aggressive efforts to secure increased government funding for biomedical
research.

    *Rapid development of smarter technology transfer to bring research to
market.

    *Critically needed increases in basic science, and the funding to support
them.

    *Vigorous and coordinated action to leverage increased private investment,
develop businesses and partnerships, and ensure the creation of adequate
incubator space and other support resources.

    Already, important efforts are under way. In addition to Gov. Ridge's Life
Sciences Greenhouses initiative, which would put $90 million of Pennsylvania's
tobacco settlement funds into the creation of three greenhouse sites in the
state, the Legislature will consider a more than $60 million biotech venture
capital fund. A coalition of regional leaders is working to attract an adequate
share of these funds.

    Pitt, UPMC and Carnegie Mellon continue to attract hundreds of millions of
private and public dollars each year for research and infrastructure
development. While each university is working to develop its own new
capabilities and strengthen existing ones in the life sciences, research and
commercialization, they have joined forces under an initiative called Pittsburgh
BioVenture. This initiative was formed to identify, strengthen and leverage the
combined academic research excellence in medical, computational, biologic, and
information sciences and technologies to promote institutional excellence and
regional economic development.

    This is a good beginning; the kind of aggressive, intelligent and visionary
action that is needed if the region is to emerge as one of the victors in the
race for biomedical preeminence.

    So, does Pittsburgh have what it takes to be one of the big winners in the
biomed-biotech boom? If we can rise to the occasion and act quickly to supply
the will, the vision and the means, the answer will be an emphatic "yes."

NOTES:
Mark Jay Kurtzrock is interim president of the Pittsburgh Regional Alliance.
Karen Wolk Feinstein is president of the Jewish Healthcare Foundation.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                             1781 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 17, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1138 words

HEADLINE: CALENDAR

BODY:

   TODAY

MIDTOWN

Legal Secretaries of New Orleans & The River Region, brown bag seminar, noon to
1 p.m., U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Louisiana, 500 Camp St. Group
will meet in lobby. Topic will be the court's new electronic courtroom. Free for
members, $3 for nonmembers. To register, call Alison Zeller Sturtz at 585-7299
or e-mail azeller@monbar.com.

FRIDAY

UPTOWN

Eisenhower Center for American Studies of the University of New Orleans,
unveiling of the medals of honor of President Theodore Roosevelt and Brig. Gen.
Theodore Roosevelt Jr., featuring guest speaker Tweed Roosevelt, great grandson
of Theodore Roosevelt, 4:30 to 6 p.m., National D-Day Museum, 945 Magazine St.
Free. Call 539-9560 to RSVP.

Book Fest 2001, giant book sale, Milton H. Latter Branch of New Orleans Public
Library, 5120 St. Charles Ave., 6 to 9 p.m., preview for members of Friends of
the Library, membership available at the door, $15 for individuals, $25 for
families. Sale opens Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. and continues Sunday, 10 a.m.
to 5 p.m. For information, call 596-2587.

Women's Republican Club of New Orleans, meeting, 11:30 a.m., Pontchartrain
Hotel, 2031 St. Charles Ave. For reservations, call 866-1764.

Alzheimer's Association of Greater New Orleans, education seminar for
health-care providers and families dealing with Alzheimer's disease, 7:45 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m., Jewish Community Center, 5342 St. Charles Ave. Call 895-6223.

C.G. Jung Society of New Orleans, Dr. Michael Conforti will discuss his book,
"Field, Form and Fate: Patterns in Mind, Nature and Psyche," 7:30 p.m., Parker
Memorial United Methodist Church, 1130 Nashville Ave., $15 for members, $25 for
nonmembers. A workshop will be held Saturday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., $55 for
members, $65 for nonmembers. Both programs cost $65 for members and $80 for
nonmembers. Call 895-8556.

SATURDAY

UPTOWN

Eracism group, ERACE, open discussion meeting, 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., Cafe
Reconcile, 1631 Oretha Castle Haley Blvd., 866-1163. The group believes in
treating people of all colors with love and respect.

Uptown Shepherd's Center, afternoon of fun with guitarists Julio and Cesar and
Mexican dancers Delfina Maya, refreshments, 1 p.m., 921 South Carrollton Ave.,
donation, $5. Call 314-0300.

Fourth annual New Orleans Wellness Festival, disease screenings and health and
disease prevention information, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., Xavier University. Call
241-1136.

Asian Pacific American Society Heritage Festival, featuring cuisine from the
Asian Pacific rim, Asian folk music and performances, handicrafts and activities
for children, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Audubon Zoo. Admission, $4 with festival
advertising flier, or $9.75 regular zoo admission. For information, call Raj
Pannu at 417-3282, Rollie Vidal at 639-3191, Catherina Wan at 255-5657, or
Margaret Nguyen at 254-1410.

MIDTOWN

Women With A Vision, grocery food auction to benefit low-income women and their
families, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., 2601 Tulane Ave., top floor. Free.

LAKEFRONT

Crohn's & Colitis Foundation, 5K pledge walk on Lakeshore Drive, 9 a.m.
registration, walk starts at 10 a.m. behind Kiefer Arena, Lakeshore Drive and
Franklin Avenue.

EAST

Car, truck and bike show, sponsored by Unified Racers of New Orleans, 9 a.m. to
6 p.m., Lake Forest Plaza parking lot, trophies will be awarded, parts swap meet
and raffle. $20 fee for car, truck or bike entry. For information, call Greg at
244-2029, Don at 246-8298, Gene at 340-9435, Sherman at 283-1936, Austin at
436-6433, Reggie at 282-0174, David at 242-5169, or Mike at 246-1782.

SUNDAY

UPTOWN

"Heritage in the Woods," A tour of eight Uptown homes, including a garden
boutique and refreshments, sponsored by the Baronne Street Neighborhood
Association, 1 to 5 p.m., $10. Buy tickets at first home on the tour, 4631 St.
Charles Ave. Call 895-5750 or 899-2241.

Blue Jeans for New Genes, a fund-raiser to benefit Canavan disease research, 5
to 9 p.m., Banks Street Bar and Grill, 4401 Banks St. The event will be a
get-together in denim where guests will be treated to food, drink and live music
by The Plowboys. Tickets are $25 per person. All proceeds from ticket sales will
go directly to Canavan research. In addition, there will be a raffle to raise
money to pay for recently approved gene therapy for Lisette Guth, an Algiers
child with Canavan disease. Call 362-3792.

Rayne Memorial United Methodist Church, the Rev. David Impwi will discuss his
work with street children in Nairobi, Kenya., 3:30 p.m., 3900 St. Charles Ave.
Call 899-3431.

DOWNTOWN

Faubourg Marigny home tour, self-guided walking tour of old homes and commercial
building in Faubourg Marigny, noon to 4 p.m., $10 in advance, $15 on day of
tour. Advance tickets available at PJ's Coffee & Tea, 643 Frenchman St. On day
of tour, tickets will be sold at 1412 Dauphine St. and 2020 Burgundy St.

Faubourg St. John home and garden walking tour, six historic homes and five
gardens, 1 to 5 p.m., $10. Purchase tickets at Kennedy Park, corner of Ursulines
Avenue and North Lopez Street. Call 482-0610.

EAST

The Rev. Bernard K. Assenyoh, will officially be installed as pastor of St. Paul
the Apostle Catholic Church at the 9:30 a.m. Mass at the church, 6828 Chef
Menteur Highway.

TUESDAY

UPTOWN

Eracism group, ERACE, open discussion meeting, 6 to 7:30 p.m., PJ's Coffee and
Tea Co., 3000 Magazine St., 866-1163. The group believes in treating people of
all colors with love and respect.

MIDTOWN

Newcomer's Club of New Orleans, luncheon meeting and social, 11 a.m., Hotel
Intercontinental, 444 St. Charles Ave.

Women in Community Service, a nonprofit organization dedicated to reducing
poverty by promoting self-reliance in women, community job fair, 9 a.m. to 2
p.m., Annex Conference Room, 2475 Canal St. Call 827-5383 or 827-5384.

EAST

Free childhood immunizations, for children birth to 18 years, Greater New
Orleans Immunization Network's mobile immunization unit, 2 to 6 p.m., Toys-R-Us,
Bullard Road and I-10. Parents must bring child's immunization record.

MAY 24

Dryades YMCA,awards ceremony honoring African-Americans committed to sharing
their success with inner city kids, 7 to 11 p.m., Grand Ballroom of Hilton New
Orleans Riverside Hotel, $50. For tickets, call 522-8811.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news or information of interest to the community, call Valerie
Faciane at The Times-Picayune at 826-3325, or drop by or write to our office at
3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, La., 70125-1429. Items must be submitted in
writing at least 10 days in advance. Submissions may be edited.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2001


                             1782 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 17, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: MIDTOWN PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: CALENDAR

BODY:

   TODAY

MIDTOWN

Legal Secretaries of New Orleans & The River Region, brown bag seminar, noon to
1 p.m., U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Louisiana, 500 Camp St. Group
will meet in lobby. Topic will be the court's new electronic courtroom. Free for
members, $3 for nonmembers. To register, call Alison Zeller Sturtz at 585-7299
or e-mail azeller@monbar.com.

FRIDAY

UPTOWN

Book Fest 2001, giant book sale, Milton H. Latter Branch of New Orleans Public
Library, 5120 St. Charles Ave., 6 to 9 p.m., preview for members of Friends of
the Library, membership available at the door, $15 for individuals, $25 for
families. Sale opens Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. and continues Sunday, 10 a.m.
to 5 p.m. For information, call 596-2587.

Alzheimer's Association of Greater New Orleans, education seminar for
health-care providers and families dealing with Alzheimer's disease, 7:45 a.m.
to 4:30 p.m., Jewish Community Center, 5342 St. Charles Ave. Call 895-6223.

C.G. Jung Society of New Orleans, Dr. Michael Conforti will discuss his book,
"Field, Form and Fate: Patterns in Mind, Nature and Psyche," 7:30 p.m., Parker
Memorial United Methodist Church, 1130 Nashville Ave., $15 for members, $25 for
nonmembers. A workshop will be held Saturday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., $55 for
members, $65 for nonmembers. Both programs cost $65 for members and $80 for
nonmembers. Call 895-8556.

SATURDAY

UPTOWN

Uptown Shepherd's Center, afternoon of fun with guitarists Julio and Cesar and
Mexican dancers Delfina Maya, refreshments, 1 p.m., 921 South Carrollton Ave.,
donation, $5. Call 314-0300.

Fourth annual New Orleans Wellness Festival, disease screenings and health and
disease prevention information, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., Xavier University. Call
241-1136.

Asian Pacific American Society Heritage Festival, featuring cuisine from the
Asian Pacific rim, Asian folk music and performances, handicrafts and activities
for children, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Audubon Zoo. Admission, $4 with festival
advertising flier, or $9.75 regular zoo admission. For information, call Raj
Pannu at 417-3282, Rollie Vidal at 639-3191, Catherina Wan at 255-5657, or
Margaret Nguyen at 254-1410.

MIDTOWN

Women With A Vision, grocery food auction to benefit low-income women and their
families, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m., 2601 Tulane Ave., top floor. Free.

SUNDAY

MIDTOWN

Blue Jeans for New Genes, a fund-raiser to benefit Canavan disease research, 5
to 9 p.m., Banks Street Bar and Grill, 4401 Banks St. The event will be a
get-together in denim where guests will be treated to food, drink and live music
by The Plowboys. Tickets are $25 per person. All proceeds from ticket sales will
go directly to Canavan research. In addition, there will be a raffle to raise
money to pay for recently approved gene therapy for Lisette Guth, an Algiers
child with Canavan disease. Call 362-3792.

UPTOWN

Rayne Memorial United Methodist Church, the Rev. David Impwi will discuss his
work with street children in Nairobi, Kenya., 3:30 p.m., 3900 St. Charles Ave.
Call 899-3431.

DOWNTOWN

Faubourg Marigny home tour, self-guided walking tour of old homes and commercial
building in Faubourg Marigny, noon to 4 p.m., $10 in advance, $15 on day of
tour. Advance tickets available at PJ's Coffee & Tea, 643 Frenchman St. On day
of tour, tickets will be sold at 1412 Dauphine St. and 2020 Burgundy St.

Faubourg St. John home and garden walking tour, six historic homes and five
gardens, 1 to 5 p.m., $10. Purchase tickets at Kennedy Park, corner of Ursulines
Avenue and North Lopez Street. Call 482-0610.

TUESDAY

MIDTOWN

Newcomer's Club of New Orleans, luncheon meeting and social, 11 a.m., Hotel
Intercontinental, 444 St. Charles Ave.

Women in Community Service, a nonprofit organization dedicated to reducing
poverty by promoting self-reliance in women, community job fair, 9 a.m. to 2
p.m., Annex Conference Room, 2475 Canal St. Call 827-5383 or 827-5384.

MAY 24

Dryades YMCA,awards ceremony honoring African-Americans committed to sharing
their success with inner city kids, 7 to 11 p.m., Grand Ballroom of Hilton New
Orleans Riverside Hotel, $50. For tickets, call 522-8811.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news or information of interest to the community, call Valerie
Faciane at The Times-Picayune at 826-3325, or drop by or write to our office at
3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, La., 70125-1429. Items must be submitted in
writing at least 10 days in advance. Submissions may be edited.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2001


                             1783 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             May 16, 2001 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: Did the Gold Medalist Get Extra Help?

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   What will be the glory for future athletes if gene therapy will be the
deciding factor that lets them run faster or jump farther ("Someday Soon,
Athletic Edge May Be From Altered Genes," front page, May 11)?

        Will there be an asterisk adorning the names of the new champions who
break the records with such assistance, like the asterisk by Roger Maris's
record? Or perhaps there will be two categories, as there are for competitive
body building -- one for those who take advantage of such wonders of science and
another for those who go au naturel.

    What will be the point of sports at all if winners come out of a beaker
rather than from the training fields? As you quote Dr. Bengt Saltin, the
director of the Center for Muscular Research at Copenhagen University, if such
enhancements are used, "then sport is dead."

RON KAPLAN
Montclair, N.J., May 11, 2001

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2001


                             1784 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     May 16, 2001 Wednesday SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg.A-3 HEALTH & SCIENCE ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 466 words

BODY:

   BREAST-FEEDING MAY REDUCE CHILD'S RISK OF OBESITY

    CHICAGO -- Two new studies add to the evidence that breast-fed infants may
be less likely to become overweight later in childhood.

    In a study by Harvard researchers, the longer infants were breast-fed, the
less likely they were to be overweight in adolescence. In the second study,
government researchers found that breast-fed infants tended to be leaner at ages
3 to 5 than formula-fed infants, but the duration of breast-feeding did not make
much difference.

    The studies, published in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical
Association, do not answer whether breast milk itself, the act of breast-feeding
or socio-economic and lifestyle traits in the infants' mothers might explain the
results.

    The government study also suggests that other factors, including the
mother's weight, are much more important determinants of a child's weight. It
found that children were three times more likely to be overweight if their
mothers were overweight.


    Cancer-fighting mouthwash

    SAN FRANCISCO -- A gene-therapy mouthwash shows promise of warding off oral
cancer by destroying ominous growths before they turn malignant.

    The idea is to attack these pre-malignant patches by unleashing viruses that
have been programmed to kill cells that contain cancer-causing genes.

    The first study of this approach is still under way, but doctors said
yesterday it appears to work in at least some patients, making ominous patches
in their mouths disappear completely.

    White or red patches in the mouth, so-called dysplastic lesions, frequently
are a forerunner of malignancy, and they are common in smokers and heavy
drinkers.


    HRT & breast cancer

    WASHINGTON -- Hormone replacement therapy after a diagnosis of breast cancer
does not increase the risk of recurrence of the disease and may even lower
chances that the cancer will return, according to a new study.

    The therapy, in which post-menopausal women take pills to replace female
hormones that diminish with age, generally has been avoided by women with breast
cancer because it was known that estrogen was linked to the growth of some
tumors.

    But Dr. Ellen O'Meara, a University of Washington cancer researcher, said
her new study in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute suggests that
breast cancer patients should not fear hormone replacement therapy, or HRT.

    However, O'Meara and a University of Washington co-author, Dr. Noel Weiss,
said their study should not be considered the final answer.

    Weiss said the numbers in the study are too small to give final statistical
evidence of the effects of HRT on breast cancer patients.

    The study also found some data that suggested HRT might increase the risk of
cancer in the previously unaffected breast.


LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2001


                             1785 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        May 16, 2001, Wednesday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; HEALTH ; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Mouthwash stops some oral cancers ; Gene therapy study targetslesions


SOURCE: Associated Press

BODY: SAN FRANCISCO - A gene-therapy mouthwash shows promise of warding off oral
cancer by destroying ominous growths before they turn malignant.

    The idea is to attack these pre-malignant lesions by unleashing viruses that
have been programmed to kill cells that contain cancer-causing genes.

    The first study of this approach is still under way, but doctors said
Tuesday it appears to work in at least some patients, making ominous patches in
their mouths disappear.

    Over the past two decades, scientists have learned that cancer arises from
genetic defects, often a half-dozen or more, that accumulate over a lifetime,
causing cells to grow rampantly and spread through the body.

    With this insight came the belief that it might be possible to target these
bad genes to stop cancer. This approach was once one of the hottest ideas in
cancer research. But enthusiasm cooled as scientists came up against roadblocks.



    One of the biggest of these was reaching and killing every last cancer cell,
when tumors are buried deep within organs or spread widely. Even reaching 80
percent of the cells - a tall order - is not good enough, because the rest keep
growing.

    So researchers decided that the mouth might be an excellent target for gene
therapy, since the problem can be so easily reached.

    Dr. Ezra Cohen of the University of Chicago reported the results of testing
on 10 patients at a meeting in San Francisco of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology.

    "The advantage is that it's where we can see it," Cohen said. "We can get to
it, and the therapy does not get absorbed into the body."

    Cohen and colleagues at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston and the
University of California at San Francisco are giving patients the mouthwash once
a week for 12 weeks. Those who respond get another 12 weeks.

    So far, the patches have disappeared completely in two of the 10 treated.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2001


                             1786 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            May 16, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 1127 words

HEADLINE: Eco Soil cuts jobs as losses mount

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Eco Soil Systems Inc. has laid off an undisclosed number of employees and
announced the resignation of its chief financial officer as part of a
reorganization effort to stem losses.

   The company was previously warned by Nasdaq that it may be delisted unless it
can improve its liquidity and reduce expenses.

   The company also announced a loss of $3.3 million, or 17 cents per share, for
the quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $3 million, 16 cents, from
the year-ago period.

   Revenues for the quarter dropped 17.4 percent to $5.7 million from $6.9
million from the year-ago period.  The drop in revenue was due primarily to the
closing of five unprofitable stores, the company said.

   The Rancho Bernardo company's shares closed yesterday at 23 cents, down 1
cent.

   Dennis Sentz resigned as CFO. He is being replaced by Max Gelwix, who will
continue as chief operating officer and president.

   Eco Soil develops and markets biological products for the golf and
agricultural industries.

   Local earnings

   Excel Legacy, a San Diego real estate company, said first-quarter losses
widened slightly to $500,000 as the company recorded fewer gains on the sale of
real estate.  The company also said Price Enterprises, in which it holds a 91
percent stake, reported net income down 5 percent to $8.7 million.

   Excel Legacy and Price Enterprises recently announced plans to merge.

   Excel said its earnings before depreciation, amortization and deferred taxes
fell 30 percent to $1.4 million, or 2 cents a share.  The company reported gains
on real estate sales of $100,000, compared with $1.8 million a year earlier.

   The company said Price reported funds from operations, a common measure of
profitability for real estate investment trusts, of $3 million, or 22 cents a
share.  That compared with $3.2 million, or 24 cents a share, a year earlier.

   Excel Legacy did not report funds from operations.

   Burnham Pacific Properties reported first-quarter net income of $3.2 million,
or 10 cents a share, as the owner of shopping centers continued an ongoing
liquidation.  The San Diego company said revenue fell 19 percent to $25.3
million.

   The company said its net income resulted in part from a switch to liquidation
accounting, under which depreciation is not counted in the results.  A year
earlier the company lost $80,000, but there would have been net income of $6.4
million if depreciation were excluded.

   The company said it continues to sell properties, including 20 sold in April
for a total of $350.9 million.

   Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp. reported a loss of $17.2 million for the third
quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $21.1 million for the same
period a year ago.  Revenue rose to $1.2 million from $9,000.

   The San Diego biotechnology company reported cash and short-term investments
of $20.3 million, of which $6.5 million is in restricted cash.

   Collateral Therapeutics reported a loss of $3.6 million for the first quarter
ended March 31, compared with a loss of $3.2 million in the same period a year
ago.  Revenue rose to $1 million from $600,000.

   The San Diego gene therapy company reported cash and short-term investments
of $22.7 million at the end of March.

   Santa Fe Financial Corp. reported a $221,000 net loss, or 20 cents a share,
for the three months ended March 31. For the same period a year ago, the company
reported a net income of $1.9 million, or $1.57 a share.

   The San Diego holding company reported $549,000 in revenue for the quarter,
compared with $4.3 million in revenue for the same period last year.

   Protein Polymer Technologies reported a loss of $940,000 in the first quarter
ended March 31, compared with a loss of $548,000 in the same period a year ago.
Revenue was $92,000, compared with $403,000.

   The San Diego medical products company had $2 million in cash at the end of
March.

   Vista Information Solutions, a San Diego e-commerce company focused on the
real estate industry, reported a net loss of $1.2 million, or 5 cents a share,
for the three months ended March 31. For the same period last year, the company
reported a net loss of $341,000, or 1 cent per share.

   Revenue fell to $18.8 million from $22.2 million.

   I.C.H. Corp. said that it had a first-quarter net loss of $957,000, or 34
cents a share, compared with net income of $548,000, or 17 cents a share, during
the same period a year ago.

   The San Diego-based company said that revenues in the quarter were $41.6
million, up by $3.5 million.  I.C.H. operates 240 Arby's restaurants, which are
located primarily in Texas, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Florida and
Connecticut.  As previously disclosed, I.C.H. sold its Lyon's of California Inc.
subsidiary, through which it previously operated 72 full-service family dining
restaurants under the Lyon's name in Northern California and Oregon.

   Other earnings

   The Home Depot reported first-quarter net income that was essentially flat
and sales that rose modestly from the same period last year.  The results were
slightly better than Wall Street had expected, and its shares rose.

   The world's largest home-improvement retailer said net income was $632
million, or 27 cents per share, up 0.4 percent from $629 million, or 27 cents a
share, in the first quarter of 2000. Its shares rose 95 cents to close at $50.10
yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.

   J.C. Penney Co. posted a $41 million first-quarter profit, turning around a
year-ago loss.  But the retailer warned it will be in the red again in the
second quarter as the slower economy hurts apparel sales.

   The profit amounts to 13 cents per share and compares with a loss of $156
million, or 63 cents per share a year ago, when the company took large charges
for store closings.  Excluding real estate sales and other one-time items,
operating income fell to $35.4 million, or 11 cents per share, from $44 million,
or 13 cents per share.

   Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said first-quarter net income rose to $1.38 billion, or
31 cents a share, from $1.33 billion, or 30 cents, a year ago, as sales rose 12
percent to $48.1 billion.

   The company's shares fell $2.35 to $52 on the New York Stock Exchange after
company officials warned that double-digit growth won't return until the second
half of its fiscal year.

   Williams-Sonoma Inc. said first-quarter net income fell 90 percent to
$492,000, or a penny a share, from $4.84 million, or 8 cents, a year earlier.
That topped analysts' predictions of a loss of 2 cents, issued after the company
lowered forecasts in February.


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2001


                             1787 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 16, 2001 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 1075 words

HEADLINE: Eco Soil cuts jobs as losses mount

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Eco Soil Systems Inc. has laid off an undisclosed number of employees and
announced the resignation of its chief financial officer as part of a
reorganization effort to stem losses. The company was previously warned by
Nasdaq that it may be delisted unless it can improve its liquidity and reduce
expenses. The company also announced a loss of $3.3 million, or 17 cents per
share, for the quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $3 million, 16
cents, from the year-ago period. Revenues for the quarter dropped 17.4 percent
to $5.7 million from $6.9 million from the year-ago period.

   The drop in revenue was due primarily to the closing of five unprofitable
stores, the company said. The Rancho Bernardo company's shares closed yesterday
at 23 cents, down 1 cent. Dennis Sentz resigned as CFO. He is being replaced by
Max Gelwix, who will continue as chief operating officer and president. Eco Soil
develops and markets biological products for the golf and agricultural
industries. Local earnings Excel Legacy, a San Diego real estate company, said
first-quarter losses widened slightly to $500,000 as the company recorded fewer
gains on the sale of real estate.

   The company also said Price Enterprises, in which it holds a 91 percent
stake, reported net income down 5 percent to $8.7 million. Excel Legacy and
Price Enterprises recently announced plans to merge. Excel said its earnings
before depreciation, amortization and deferred taxes fell 30 percent to $1.4
million, or 2 cents a share.

   The company reported gains on real estate sales of $100,000, compared with
$1.8 million a year earlier. The company said Price reported funds from
operations, a common measure of profitability for real estate investment trusts,
of $3 million, or 22 cents a share.

   That compared with $3.2 million, or 24 cents a share, a year earlier. Excel
Legacy did not report funds from operations. Burnham Pacific Properties reported
first-quarter net income of $3.2 million, or 10 cents a share, as the owner of
shopping centers continued an ongoing liquidation.

   The San Diego company said revenue fell 19 percent to $25.3 million. The
company said its net income resulted in part from a switch to liquidation
accounting, under which depreciation is not counted in the results.

   A year earlier the company lost $80,000, but there would have been net income
of $6.4 million if depreciation were excluded. The company said it continues to
sell properties, including 20 sold in April for a total of $350.9 million.
Alliance Pharmaceutical Corp. reported a loss of $17.2 million for the third
quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $21.1 million for the same
period a year ago.

   Revenue rose to $1.2 million from $9,000. The San Diego biotechnology company
reported cash and short-term investments of $20.3 million, of which $6.5 million
is in restricted cash. Collateral Therapeutics reported a loss of $3.6 million
for the first quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of $3.2 million in
the same period a year ago.

   Revenue rose to $1 million from $600,000. The San Diego gene therapy company
reported cash and short-term investments of $22.7 million at the end of March.
Santa Fe Financial Corp. reported a $221,000 net loss, or 20 cents a share, for
the three months ended March 31. For the same period a year ago, the company
reported a net income of $1.9 million, or $1.57 a share. The San Diego holding
company reported $549,000 in revenue for the quarter, compared with $4.3 million
in revenue for the same period last year. Protein Polymer Technologies reported
a loss of $940,000 in the first quarter ended March 31, compared with a loss of
$548,000 in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue was $92,000, compared with $403,000. The San Diego medical products
company had $2 million in cash at the end of March. Vista Information Solutions,
a San Diego e-commerce company focused on the real estate industry, reported a
net loss of $1.2 million, or 5 cents a share, for the three months ended March
31. For the same period last year, the company reported a net loss of $341,000,
or 1 cent per share. Revenue fell to $18.8 million from $22.2 million. I.C.H.
Corp. said that it had a first-quarter net loss of $957,000, or 34 cents a
share, compared with net income of $548,000, or 17 cents a share, during the
same period a year ago. The San Diego-based company said that revenues in the
quarter were $41.6 million, up by $3.5 million.

   I.C.H. operates 240 Arby's restaurants, which are located primarily in Texas,
Michigan, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Florida and Connecticut.

   As previously disclosed, I.C.H. sold its Lyon's of California Inc.
subsidiary, through which it previously operated 72 full-service family dining
restaurants under the Lyon's name in Northern California and Oregon. Other
earnings The Home Depot reported first-quarter net income that was essentially
flat and sales that rose modestly from the same period last year.

   The results were slightly better than Wall Street had expected, and its
shares rose. The world's largest home-improvement retailer said net income was
$632 million, or 27 cents per share, up 0.4 percent from $629 million, or 27
cents a share, in the first quarter of 2000. Its shares rose 95 cents to close
at $50.10 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange. J.C. Penney Co. posted a $41
million first-quarter profit, turning around a year-ago loss.

   But the retailer warned it will be in the red again in the second quarter as
the slower economy hurts apparel sales. The profit amounts to 13 cents per share
and compares with a loss of $156 million, or 63 cents per share a year ago, when
the company took large charges for store closings.

   Excluding real estate sales and other one-time items, operating income fell
to $35.4 million, or 11 cents per share, from $44 million, or 13 cents per
share. Wal-Mart Stores Inc. said first-quarter net income rose to $1.38 billion,
or 31 cents a share, from $1.33 billion, or 30 cents, a year ago, as sales rose
12 percent to $48.1 billion. The company's shares fell $2.35 to $52 on the New
York Stock Exchange after company officials warned that double-digit growth
won't return until the second half of its fiscal year. Williams-Sonoma Inc. said
first-quarter net income fell 90 percent to $492,000, or a penny a share, from
$4.84 million, or 8 cents, a year earlier.

   That topped analysts' predictions of a loss of 2 cents, issued after the
company lowered forecasts in February.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1788 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2001 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            May 16, 2001, Wednesday

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; Pg. 1

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: Lecanto junior wins honors at science fair

BYLINE: PAULETTE LASH RITCHIE

DATELINE: INVERNESS

BODY:


   Samir Amin, 17, a Lecanto High School junior, placed third in microbiology at
the International Science Fair held last week in San Jose, Calif.

   Amin received a $ 1,000 award. He attended the competition with Amit Patel,
who also is from Lecanto High.

   His project was titled "The Application of a Hammerhead Ribozyme Library for
Cleavage of mRNA to Identify Mouse Tumor Suppressor Genes." Amin said he used
ribozyme, a kind of biological scissors, that can be focused at various mRNA
(the substance that carries protein codes from DNA to the sites of protein
synthesis) to target mouse tumor suppressor genes.

   "I identified various tumor suppressor genes and tried relating them to human
genes," he said. Amin did his research in Dr. Alfred Lewin's laboratory at the
University of Florida under the guidance of Lewin's assistant, Jennifer
Bongorno.

   Besides his $ 1,000 award, Samir received an offer to intern at PPD
Discovery, a biomedical laboratory in California. He hasn't decided whether to
accept the offer.

   This was Amin's second time competing in the International Science and
Engineering Fair. He attended one as a ninth-grader in Philadelphia. He plans to
try again during his senior year.

   Amin said he is considering a career in science or medicine and is interested
in gene therapy. His science teacher at Lecanto is Ron Worthington and he is the
son of Nila and Kamalesh Amin.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, STEVE HASEL; Samir Amin, 17,

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2001


                             1789 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2001 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       May 15, 2001 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 009

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may reverse disabling leg condition

BYLINE: By FRANCI RICHARDSON

BODY:

   A progressive medical condition that has caused serious nerve damage in 20
million Americans may now be reversible thanks to a new gene treatment recently
developed by doctors at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center.

   "Up to this point, there were no options in hopes of reversing the
condition," said lead researcher Dr. Drasko Simovic.

   "The implication that this might work is really a remarkable thing . . .
(and) could have immense impact on public health."

   Ischemic neuropathy is a serious condition where insufficient blood flow to
the legs leads to nerve damage, causing numbness, painful burning sensations,
tingling and weakness.

   Often associated with diabetes, it can lead to disability.

   St. Elizabeth doctors have discovered that injecting the leg muscles of
afflicted patients with a gene, or protein, over a 12-week period can improve
their symptoms, according to a study published yesterday in "Archives of
Neurology."

   Doctors experimented on 19 patients who had been diagnosed with ischemic
neuropathy.

   Six months after their treatment, more than half of the patients reported
feeling better.

   Sixty-three percent of the treated subjects reported a decrease in symptoms
that include severe pain and loss of sensation.

   And about 53 percent showed improved nerve responsiveness.

   "They report that previously what was making them uncomfortable, either the
needles and pins affecting their legs - and over time in some of these patients
- the intensity of this painful burning sensation, diminishes," Simovic said.

   "They also say the area that's affected gets smaller."

   Simovic said the study started nearly 2 1-2 years ago when a patient who was
treated with the protein on a trial basis reported a remarkable improvement in
the feeling in his legs.

   The gene, Simovic said, is grown from a bacteria in the hospital laboratory
and is administered in eight injections into the patient during each session.

   Simovic said he can't predict whether his new treatment will ward off
relapses.

   "That is something we need to look for down the road," he said. "The
condition is still there and what might happen is that it will attack the nerves
again, but when? And will a second treatment help again? We don't know at this
point."

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2001


                             1790 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 15, 2001, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: DOCTORS REPORT NERVE REPAIR IN GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: BY ANNE BARNARD

BODY:

   Doctors trying to grow new blood vessels in the legs of patients with poor
circulation yesterday reported an unexpected result: In 10 of 19 patients, the
gene therapy treatment appeared to repair nerve damage that is usually
considered irreversible.

   Researchers at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Brighton, led by Dr. Drasko
Simovic, assistant professor of neurology at Tufts University School of
Medicine, cautioned that the results are preliminary, since the study had no
control group and some results could be attributable to a placebo effect.

      They now want a controlled trial to explore whether a growth factor that
stimulates blood vessel growth also repairs nerves, either by boosting growth of
microscopic blood vessels in nerve walls, or by causing growth of nerves
themselves.

   The findings, reported in this month's Archives of Neurology, were derived
from Dr. Jeffrey Isner's study of patients with arterial disease severe enough
to possibly require amputation. Funded by Genzyme, the study's aim was to
improve circulation by injecting vascular endothelial growth factor to grow
blood vessels. One patient, whom Simovic called "very observant," noticed that
the numbness that used to spread across much of his leg had shrunk to a small
patch.

   The researchers then began testing nerve response as well as blood vessel
growth. They started with 29 patients; after six months, 17 had not dropped out
or suffered amputations. Electrical tests showed that nerve function improved in
10 of the 19 limbs being treated. Twelve patients reported decreased symptoms.
Four of six diabetic patients showed improvement.

   By contrast, there was no neurological improvement in any of the patients who
didn't receive the injections, Draskovic said.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2001


                             1791 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2001 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      May 13, 2001, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 4241 words

HEADLINE: Liz Kowalczyk covers health care for the Globe;
THE MAVERICK WITH HIS COWBOY BOOTS AND BASEMENT INVENTIONS, DR. BILLY COHN IS
SHAKING UP CARDIAC SURGERY - AND THE BOSTON MEDICAL ESTABLISHMENT.

BYLINE: By Liz Kowalczyk, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Dr. Billy Cohn rounds the corner into a tiny operating room at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, where anesthesiologists have coaxed his patient,
William Hornyak, into a deep sleep. Hornyak lies helpless and unaware, his body
and face covered with sky-blue sheets, his future in the surgical team's hands.

   The operation begins normally. Cohn saws Hornyak's breastbone down the
middle, forces it open with a spreader, and settles himself on the edge of a
metal stool, hooking his trademark brown-and-black cowboy boots over one rung.
Moving a cauterizer shaped like a large yellow pencil, Cohn removes from the
back of Hornyak's sternum an 8-inch-long artery, which he will use to bypass a
diseased vessel in his heart. The smell of burning tissue is un mis tak able.

         Just then, two visitors appear. Dr. Paul Ruff, a heart surgeon from
Springfield, New Jersey, has come to Boston to see Cohn operate, escorted by
Elena Gadient, a product manager for the biotechnology company Genzyme who
arranges such visits.  "If Billy has a case, we're here," says Gadient.
"Everyone wants to meet Billy Cohn."

   Ruff is not here just to observe Cohn the surgeon. He's also come for Cohn
the creator - the basement inventor of a device that will allow Cohn to perform
this four-hour quadruple bypass heart operation without the aid of a heart-lung
machine.  The massive mechanical pumps have been used since the 1960s to
circulate and filter the blood during open heart surgery, allowing the surgeon
to stop the patient's heart so he can operate. But some doctors, including Cohn,
believe that turning off the heart during bypass surgery - the most common type
of cardiac surgery - can cause brain damage, resulting in cognitive defects, and
increase the risk of an eventual stroke. It is estimated that 18 percent of the
360,000 coronary bypass operations done in 1999 were "off-pump." So on this
morning in September, the heart-lung machine sits unplugged in a corner.

   Operating while the heart is beating, however, is far more difficult. A nurse
has made a long slit in Hornyak's right leg - from ankle to knee - and is
extracting a vein to use as a bypass graft. Cohn flips his patient's pulsating
heart into the right side of the open chest cavity so he can operate on a
clogged vessel on the back.

   "This is a very bright guy," Cohn says.  "If he ends up with significant
cognitive defects, that would be devastating. But if things start to go badly at
all, I would not jeopardize his safety. I would put him on the pump
immediately."

   Hornyak's large heart is beating so vigorously that each time the pink muscle
expands, it pulsates up over the top of his parted ribs and quivers there,
looking as though it might actually escape from its bony cage.

   Cohn asks a nurse for a stabilizer, a foot-long metal rod with a white
plastic square attached to one end. The middle of the square is cut out, and
this is Cohn's window.  He attaches the rod to the spreader and maneuvers the
white window so it rests firmly on Hornyak's beating heart. Then Cohn begins to
work inside the window - which keeps the muscle immediately beneath it still -
scraping away a thin layer of tissue to expose a portion of a diseased vessel.
He runs his finger over the artery to make sure this spot - where he will attach
the bypass graft - is soft and free of plaque.

   Satisfied, Cohn makes a slit in the surface of the artery; in a few minutes,
he begins to sew a piece of the vein from Hornyak's leg to the edges of the
slit. (He'll sew the other end of the vein to the aorta, creating the bypass.)
The heart pulsates, fully alive under Cohn's long, thin fingers.

   "This is my stabilizer; it's the only home-brew," Cohn says. "The other two
on the market were invented by engineers. But this will get better. Soon there
will be some sort of dynamic system that actually resists the heart" - that is,
pushes against it when it pulses, keeping the tissue even more securely
immobilized - "rather than just holding it in place."

   Cohn repeats the scraping and sewing sequence three times, and the operation
ends without a hitch.

   Surgeons always have been the cowboys of medicine, and heart surgeons, in a
sense, wear the biggest spurs. Cardiac surgery has a dramatic history made by
hard-driving doctors who embraced risk - men like Christiaan Barnard, the South
African surgeon who, after experimenting on dogs, performed the first human
heart transplant in 1967, and Dr. Michael DeBakey of Houston, who sewed together
the first synthetic blood vessel on his wife's sewing machine in the 1950s and
went on to pioneer bypass surgery.

   In just a few decades, heart transplants have become medium-risk operations,
valve replacements are routine, and surgeons at tiny community hospitals are
reaching into patients' open chests to fix broken hearts.

   But it wouldn't be medicine if the frontier wasn't always moving just out of
reach. And now there is a new generation of heart surgeons, dissatisfied with
invasive methods that once seemed revolutionary, that require the ripping open
of a sick person's entire midsection and tilting patients on tables every which
way to reach the heart's underside. This is Cohn's generation, the young turks
of cardiothoracic surgery, the men (and a few women) who are pushing the limits
in hopes of making surgery easier on patients.

   Cohn, 40, a native Texan, plays rock 'n' roll guitar for fun, and he's known
for amusing patients with magic tricks and demonstrations of superpowerful
magnets. He once presented a research paper at a medical meeting during the day
and entertained colleagues on his acoustic guitar at night. A wiry 5 feet 10, he
has sandy brown hair and a boyishly appealing face, and he always operates
wearing cowboy boots.

   But what other surgeons come from around the country to see are Cohn's
surgical inventions. Last year, the Intellectual Property Owners Association
named him Distinguished Inventor of the Year - the first time a practicing
surgeon had been given the award - and called him one of America's most creative
inventors.

   Nearly two years ago, Dr. Todd Rosengart, the head of cardiac surgery at
Evanston Hospital in Illinois, called Cohn and invited him to join the closest
thing there is to an organ ized group of maverick heart surgeons, the 60-member
21st Century Society. Admission is by invitation only, and new members must have
been born in 1950 or later.

   Society members envision, and are experimenting with, ways to perform heart
surgery without splitting open the chest or stopping the heart, with gene
therapy and lasers, and with robots so steady that they can thread tiny
camera-toting scalpels through veins to operate inside the chest.

   Cohn says that heart surgery the way it's been performed for 40 years
sometimes seems woefully outdated and essentially the equivalent of using a
machete to mince a clove of garlic. "Someday I'll be some white-haired old guy
describing this all to a group of horrified medical students," he says.  "I'll
tell them how we ripped open people's chests and lifted a vein from their leg.
They'll be like, 'What, did you wear a loincloth and do it on a stone altar?'
That's how barbaric it will seem."

   That's all well and good, say older colleagues, but what about data? Do these
newfangled procedures work? Cohn readily acknowledges that no one really knows
the answer for beating-heart surgery and that more research is necessary.
Doctors are still trying to figure out the crucial question: Does maintaining a
beating heart during surgery help patients or not?

   Surgeons do not need permission from the US Food and Drug Administration to
experiment with different tools when operating on patients.  But they must
receive FDA approval before they can sell their inventions.  Unlike drugs,
however, no clinical trials are required for instruments. So beating-heart
surgery and the devices used to perform it haven't been studied in large,
randomized trials, Cohn says, although several are underway.

   Meanwhile, the debate goes on.  Dr. David Torchiana, the chief of cardiac
surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital, says he performed his first
beating-heart operation in April 1996, using a fork with the middle two tines
removed as a stabilizer. "You'd have your assistant hold it down," he says.
"Everyone in Boston started doing it around that time." He did his first case
with the Genzyme system three years ago on an elderly woman from Worcester who
was turned down for surgery at another hospital.  "She had cirrhosis of the
liver and bad kidney function. She was going to die in relatively short order,"
he says. "A conventional on-pump operation would have held a high risk. With
beating-heart surgery, all of a sudden she had an option she wouldn't have had
three years earlier."

   For patients who qualify for traditional bypass surgery, success rates are
high - often better than 90 percent. But there are risks from the heart-lung
machine, including postoperative inflammation of the lungs and kidneys and the
possibility of bleeding complications such as stroke. And in the largest study
of its kind, researchers at Duke University Medical Center announced earlier
this year that one-third of the 261 patients in its five-year study had lost
some degree of mental acuity after being hooked up to a heart-lung machine
during bypass surgery.  Patients older than 60 suffered the most serious
decline; some of them were unable to perform simple arithmetic problems or
recall information that had recently been presented to them.

   Researchers theorize that the heart-lung machine produces tiny air bubbles or
that it jars loose bits of fat and plaque that travel to the brain and cause
damage.  But no one has studied whether off-pump surgery is any safer for the
brain. And it is unknown whether off-pump grafts of a vein to an artery last as
long as conventional ones. Besides, any benefits of off-pump surgery have to be
weighed against the advantages of operating on-pump, with the heart stilled.
"There is no bleeding to worry about," Torchiana says. "The blood pressure is
stable. You're not stressed. You can do a nice job under those circumstances."

   As a result, Torchiana does only his most high-risk cases off-pump - about 10
to 20 percent of his bypass operations. He believes that there is no benefit to
off-pump surgery for most patients.

   Surgeons near the end of their careers are less likely to perform off-pump
surgery, because it takes many operations to become comfortable with the
technique. "I did three or four cases and realized that this isn't for me," says
Dr. Ronald Weintraub, Cohn's friend and former boss, who retired from Beth
Israel Deaconess in February. "The learning curve is so steep that I realized it
was too late in my career to take on something new."

   Cohn's impulse is to move on to the next big thing, and he sometimes says
that he's "over the stabilizer now." But he acknowledges that the benefits of
beating-heart surgery, like the operation he performed on Hornyak, are still
open to questions that only long-term studies will answer.

   Perhaps most telling, Cohn himself has retreated from the procedure somewhat.
In the beginning, he did most of his operations without the heart-lung machine.
Now he has scaled back, using it in half of the 200 bypass operations he does
annually. "We just don't understand yet which patients benefit," Cohn says.

   Such caution and reserve don't come naturally to Cohn, who was irrepressibly
inventive even as a boy.

   The Cohn brothers - Billy and John, who is 18 months older - were in
elementary school when their parents donated a storage closet in the garage of
their Houston home to the budding young scientists. They cleared out the old
suitcases and empty bottles and set up "the lab," which turned out to be ground
zero for all sorts of good-natured mischief. (Their sister, Mary, was still a
toddler, safely out of their way. Now 34, she's a lawyer at Bingham Dana & Gould
in Boston.   The boys' inventions included an exploding garbage can, a credit
card that delivered electric shocks, and an infamous (at least at Spring Branch
Junior High School) Sucrets lozenge box that emitted a high-pitched squeal when
placed inside a school desk. Teacher and students would glance at one another
and around the room, at first baffled and then panicky about the source of a
sound as annoying as fingernails on a chalkboard. Innocently wide-eyed, Billy
would look around, too.

   "I look back in horror at some of the stuff we would do," says John Cohn,
laughing. "We handled mercury. We made nitroglycerin. We generated horrible
fumes in this unventilated, un-air-conditioned room in Houston, Texas. I would
never let my kids do what we did."

   John was the one who headed to the library to research electronics or lasers
for their latest proj ect. But Billy usually came up with the ideas - especially
the daring ones. His mind never seemed to stop.

   "He usually started out with a 'Hey, can we do this?' " says John Cohn, 42
and a software designer for IBM in Burlington, Vermont. "He began with the
concept and then worked backward. We weren't trying to push science forward. It
was always about what was cool, neat, and fun. When he went into medicine, it
was a big surprise to all of us. He was never studious. All of these other
doctors are - well, I don't want to say stiff, but they're very serious."

   Billy's wit and gregariousness won him lots of friends. He spent his high
school years staying out late, playing in a rock band, and painting a horse
mural on the wall of the high school cafeteria, where it remains today.

   "I was worried he would go off to the island of bad boys and become a rock
musician for the rest of his life," says his mother, Judy, who went to law
school after her children were grown.

   So Judy Cohn staged a counteroffensive. Whenever DeBakey, who became famous
while at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, made the front page of the
Houston Chronicle - and that was often - she clipped the article and placed it
next to her son's cereal bowl. Astronauts and heart surgeons, those were
Houston's local heroes. And Judy Cohn figured Billy had a better chance of
becoming a doctor than a space traveler.

   In fact, he swung between music and medicine as career choices. He enrolled
at Oberlin College in Ohio, which is known for its music program, and played in
a band, but he took mostly chemistry and biology classes. Then his mother did
something that pushed him irreversibly in one direction. She persuaded a friend,
Dr. Robert Franklin at The Woman's Hospital of Texas, to hire Billy as an
orderly for the summer between his sophomore and junior years. It was there that
he watched surgery for the first time; he was quickly hooked.

   "When I was younger, I loved building models - rockets, weapons, cars,
airplanes - putting things together and pulling them apart," he says. "With
surgery, it seemed like every day there'd be a brand-new challenge that allowed
you to go in and put something together and know immediately whether or not it
worked."

   Cohn was accepted at the Baylor College of Medicine, but he kept his hand in
music, which led to a fortuitous meeting. The summer before he started his
surgery internship in 1986, he was playing guitar in a rock and blues band at a
Republican fund-raiser in Houston. Shaun Drever, a junior at the University of
Houston, was there because her sorority was hosting the event. They caught each
other's eye, and Cohn and another band member asked Drever and her friend to
meet them at a bar afterward. Drever gave him $10 to prove she would come, if
only to get her money back. But when she arrived several hours later, Cohn and
his friend had already drunk through the money. She never got it back. Four
years later, they were married in the chapel at the medical center. One-third of
the guests, doctors or medical students on call, attended in green scrubs.

   Around the same time, Cohn started to dabble in inventing. He received his
first patent in 1992 for an exothermic biological fluid warmer, a portable
device for warming blood before transfusions to injured soldiers on the
battlefield. Cohn invented the device while a resident at hospitals affiliated
with Baylor, which bought the patent. In August 2000, he received two patents
for a shunt that allows blood to flow directly from an artery into an adjacent
vein, bypassing smaller vessels or those obstructed by disease. A California
company, TransVascular, has licensed the technology.

   Cohn's latest invention, which Genzyme launched in January, is NextStitch, a
chain of linked sutures that cuts in half the number of needle punctures and the
time needed to install a heart valve in a patient. Cohn says he thought of the
device while taking a bath and staring at the way his shower curtain is attached
to its metal rod with plastic rings.

   Before that was the Cohn Cardiac Stabilizer, now called the Immobilizer,
which he invented in his Brookline basement in 1997. As the oft-repeated story
goes, Cohn would purchase slotted serving spoons at the Stop & Shop on the VFW
Parkway in West Roxbury on his way home from the hospital. He would retreat to
his workshop and cut the metal spoon ends into various shapes, which he tested
first on animals and then on patients during open-heart surgery.

   In 1998, the hospital patented the device and sold the license to make it to
Genzyme. Cohn is now part of a core group of physicians who have increased Beth
Israel Deaconess's income from royalties on inventions from $600,000 in 1998 to
$3.5 million last year.

   Inventing and selling a surgical instrument is still a relatively rare feat
among doctors, a group that has largely shunned relationships with industry.
Cohn, however, embraces the business world.

   "The Cohn stabilizer really put us on the map," says Josh Hamermesh, a
marketing manager for Genzyme Biosurgery. "The competitors were out there first,
and they have a bigger market share. But he improved on what's out there. His
device is the only one that provides stability on all four sides. It's a window,
not a horseshoe. And that allowed us to basically come from nothing and grab a
very solid position in the market."

   For months, Cohn happily soaked up the attention. Requests for interviews
poured into the hospital's public relations department. And then, like the movie
star who ends up on the cover of the National Enquirer, Cohn discovered the dark
side of stardom.

   In a January 1999 New Yorker piece by Harvard Medical School professor and
author Jerome Groopman, Cohn referred to the cognitive deficits that some
patients suffer after being on the heart-lung machine as "pump head" - a catchy
term in medical circles that was apparently too cavalier for some of his more
reserved colleagues. Then, in June of that year, on a live Dateline NBC segment,
Cohn operated on a very high-risk patient using his stabilizer. During the
operation, a piece of cholesterol in the patient's aorta broke off and blocked
an artery; his blood pressure crashed, and Cohn could not save him.

   One or more doctors - Cohn says he doesn't know who - complained to the
hospital, saying Cohn's use of the device on patients constituted a conflict of
interest because he receives royalties from its sales. Cohn receives 20 percent,
while the hospital and his labs get the rest. And they didn't like Cohn
promoting his device on national prime-time television.

   It was already a tense time at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, which
was still struggling through the merger of Beth Israel Hospital and New England
Deaconess Medical Center. Hospital administrators immediately sent out a memo
suspending off-pump surgery, though Cohn says they lifted it six hours later
when it became clear that hospitals around the country were doing it. Hospital
officials said they conducted an internal review of mortality and complication
rates and found nothing unusual and no ethics violations.

   Says one cardiac surgeon, who asked to remain anonymous: "This is a
buttoned-down profession, and the way in which he was willing and eager to be
portrayed in the national media as eccentric and a character rubbed some senior
surgeons in this town the wrong way."

   Cohn is well liked by many of his older colleagues at Beth Israel Deaconess -
and by many outside the hospital - who describe him as clever, honest, skillful,
and fun. They concede that his full-throttle enthusiasm for new things drew
critical attention during the merger. "It was a bumpy road for him," says Dr.
Robert Thurer, a thoracic surgeon and former head of the department at Beth
Israel Deaconess. "I don't think anyone ever attacked his skills. He became a
lightning rod" for some of the discontent in the air. "But open-heart surgery
was built on risk - that's what we do, take risks."

   During the controversy, Cohn even talked to his wife, Shaun, about leaving
medicine. He decided to wait out the storm, but he was obviously changed by the
experience. He's ambivalent about interviews, first agreeing to one, then
avoiding phone calls. He now tempers his enthusiasm for new procedures with talk
about the need for evidence about what really works. When he meets Weintraub,
his 64-year-old mentor and friend, outside the OR one day, the older man begins
joking as they scrub for surgery. "It's tough when a star is here," Weintraub
says. "Sir, may I scrub up?"

   Cohn changes the subject to how Weintraub learned to build boats over the
summer.  Later he says: "There's a real virtue to keeping a lower profile."

   Today, Cohn has an adult version of "the lab" in his Brookline basement. On a
Monday night in February, he has just returned from snowboarding in New
Hampshire with Weintraub and Dr. Ralph de la Torre, Beth Israel Deaconess's
newest heart surgeon. Shaun is organizing the Cohns' five children after dinner,
and the house, a large Tudor surrounded by trees, is festively chaotic. Shaun
moves around the kitchen with Christopher, 1, in her arms as she cleans up after
the pasta-and-vegetable dinner. A brown cardboard box the size of a backyard
shed sits in the family room. "The babies," as Billy and Shaun call their brood,
use it as a playhouse. Ben, 9, is shooting Nerf darts at a wall. Billy, 4,
stands on the arm of a leather couch, takes a tumble onto the hardwood floor,
and erupts into sobs. Betsy, 7, is playing with Berto, 3. With the nonstop
laughing and running, the Cohn home feels more like a two-story playground than
a house.

   Cohn leads the way to the basement, past the electric guitars and drum set
(his band jammed here the night before), laundry bins, and Downy fabric
softener, to the corner where he invented the heart stabilizer.

   "Every single surgeon has five or six great ideas," he says, pacing back and
forth across the tiny workshop space. "They start by thinking, 'Why don't we
have a blank for blank?' But very few people take the first step to answer that
question. But the proc ess is so simple. In some circles of young surgeons, I'm
a patron saint. They come up to me at meetings, and I give them names of people
at the big companies to talk to and tell them how to fill out the forms."

   The original model for NextStitch - a pink styrofoam "heart valve" sewn with
green and ivory yarn - hangs from a water pipe in the workshop. So do four of
the 25 spoons that he cut up to make the heart stabilizer. There's also a potato
cannon Cohn made out of PVC pipe, which he shoots off in the backyard each year
on Ben's birthday.

   The clinical trials on beating-heart surgery are now underway, and Genzyme is
just getting NextStitch off the ground. But like the child who once glued
together model cars and played with them before the paint was dry, the adult
Billy Cohn admits he is more excited by his newer proj ects. He and de la Torre
are trying to persuade Beth Israel Deaconess to buy a surgical robot to perform
procedures that require absolute steadiness - "for the same reason people got in
covered wagons and went to California," he says. He is also meeting with
representatives from Genzyme and a small Beverly biotechnology company called
Axya Medical about a way to fuse the ends of sutures together, a technique he
says will make "surgeons tying knots absurd."

   His biggest proj ect, on the level of the stabilizer, has to do with valve
replacement surgery. His business partners won't allow him to discuss the
details of the valve invention, for which they have just filed patents. "Some
people are going to think what we want to try is crazy," he says. "But that's
what makes it exciting - that it seems impossible."

   And he's negotiating his first foray into nonmedical inventing.  "I'm going
to revolutionize the juice box," says the father of five.

   Despite his enthusiasm, Cohn has a weary manner tonight, the gray pouches
under his eyes making him look as if he's overdue for a break from his
jampacked, work-hard-play-harder schedule.

   But Cohn says he does not want to let even one potential blockbuster idea
slip away.

   "I love to operate. I love going in there and seeing the immediate results of
my work," he says. "But I have a strong creative drive. Although there is
creativity in every operation, a lot of it is reconstructive. It's attaching
things. These efforts by heart surgeons to do things a new way are the space
race of our generation. It's tremendously exciting."

GRAPHIC: From medicine to music to invention, Billy Cohn, 40, throws himself
into his pursuits. Bottom left: The doctor at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Cen
ter, preparing for open-heart surgery.  He does 200 bypass operations a year.
Top: In the basement of his Brookline home, Cohn uses a gar den hose and a pig's
heart to test an idea for a new sur gical device. Bottom right:  An accomplished
musician, Cohn plays for his wife and their five children.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2001


                             1792 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2001 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                  May 12, 2001, Saturday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 15 GUERRILLA INVESTING

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: THOUGHTS FOR MOTHER'S DAY Aging is a growth industry today

BYLINE: BY PETER SIRIS

BODY:
Tomorrow is Mother's Day, so I'm naturally thinking about my mother, Elaine, and
my mother-in-law, Lucy. Both are in their late 70s.

   If you don't already, it's a good bet that many of you will soon will have
aging parents like me.

   When investors talk about growth industries, they usually think of telecom or
fiber optics. But in the coming decades, businesses that deal with the aging of
the population may be the real growth companies. Demographically, we are
entering uncharted waters. People are living much longer. The longest portion of
a person's life may not be school, child rearing or even work - it may be
retirement.

   The impact of retirees on the economy will be greater than most can now
imagine. By the end of the decade, Baby Boomers will start to retire. This is
the population bulge that has shaped our society from the early days of rock 'n'
roll. As they hit their 60s, they will magnify the changes that are occurring
now. So if you want to find some worthy investments, stop and think about the
needs of your parents or grandparents.

   Health is a critical issue for older people. They use more medicine and see
more doctors. Drug companies will benefit from the aging. My hedge fund owns
Merck and smaller drug companies, like MiniMed, which makes devices that monitor
diabetes, and Pharmaceutical Resources, a generic drug maker. There are many
other attractive drug companies. Biotech companies will find new drugs to treat
specific illnesses. We own Aviron, Affymetrix, Myriad Genetics, Transkaryotic
Therapies and Arena Pharmaceuticals, among others.

   Companies that make medical devices will also grow. We own Cantel Medical,
which makes products to prevent infection, and Fusion Medical Technologies,
which makes products that stop bleeding in surgery. Home health care will also
be a major area of growth. We also own Invacare, the leading manufacturer of
wheel chairs.

   Hospitals and HMOs should benefit, as should nursing homes, and assisted
living companies, which should have huge growth in coming decades. We own
Coventry Health Care, an HMO, Healthsouth, a health care rehab company, Beverly
Enterprises and Manor Care, in nursing homes, and Sunrise Assisted Living, the
dominant company in that niche.

   Leisure will be different for those who are retired. Without work or children
to rear, older people will have far more time. Fewer will ski or play rugged
sports, but more will golf, garden, do crafts and read. We own Borders, the book
store chain.

   Vacations will be different, too. My friend Marian Schultheis from Seligman
funds thinks the cruise lines, like Carnival and Royal Caribbean Cruises will be
major beneficiaries.

   Financially, older parents are more concerned about preserving their money
than they are about getting rich. Most people want interest rates to come down,
but this is a mixed blessing for the elderly. Lower rates usually mean lower
Social Security payments and lower rates of interest from fixed-income
investments. So in this low interest environment, look at real estate investment
trusts for your parents. They pay high dividends, and many of the dividends are
free from taxes.

   The patterns set by today's retirees should point the way to future growth.
So while you are out shopping for a gift for your mother or grandmother, stop
and think about their needs. It may lead you to some profitable investment
opportunities.

   Columnist Peter Siris (GuerrillaInvesting@hotmail.com) is a New York hedge
fund manager and author of "Guerrilla Investing."


LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2001


                             1793 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 12, 2001, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1191 words

HEADLINE: Weapons of war; Vaccines seen as promising tool in fight against
cancer

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Linn Barbier ran the grim gauntlet of traditional therapies to battle a deadly
skin cancer, from cutting it out through surgery to poisoning it with
chemotherapy and interferon.

   When melanoma hit her again in 1999, Barbier drew the line.

   "When I had a third occurrence my oncologist suggested another year of
interferon, which has side effects that are hell on earth," said Barbier, 44, an
office worker in Rockford, Ill.  "I told him that I'd rather die."

   Barbier found an alternative.  She enrolled in a patient study to test an
experimental cancer vaccine developed by San Diego-based Vical Inc.

   The Vical vaccine, Allovectin-7, is one of numerous cancer vaccines being
developed by biotechnology companies and tested on volunteer patients around the
world.

   Unlike traditional vaccines designed to prevent diseases such as flu and
polio, most cancer vaccines are aimed at people who have developed the disease.
While the vaccines are made in a variety of ways, each shares the same goal: to
prime a cancer patient's immune system to recognize and kill tumor cells.

   In Barbier's case, her immune system learned its lesson, at least for now.

   During a monthlong treatment, researchers injected Allovectin-7 directly into
Barbier's tumor, which began to shrink rapidly.  When the tumor was the size of
a quarter, doctors removed it and determined that no cancer cells remained,
Barbier said.

   "With cancer patients who have reoccurrences, you get real afraid to hope,"
Barbier said.  "But I consider Dec. 29 to be my real birthday.  That's when my
doctor said I was cancer-free.  I've been cancer-free for a year and five
months, and I think the cancer vaccine saved my life."

   Researchers agree that cancer vaccines, none of which have been approved for
commercial use in the United States, could prove to be an important weapon in
the growing arsenal of cancer therapies.

   There is no doubt that new weapons are needed.  According to the American
Cancer Society, cancer is the second-leading killer in the United States,
accounting for 552,000 deaths last year.  More than 8 million Americans have
some form of cancer, and an additional 1.2 million will be diagnosed with cancer
this year.

   Yet cancer vaccines -- some of which are being developed by San Diego
biotechs such as Vical, CancerVax, Epimmune and Immune Response Corp. -- have
their share of challenges for patients and the investors backing the companies,
experts say.

   So far, extremely good results such as Barbier's are the exception.  Many of
the experimental vaccines have demonstrated benefits in relatively modest
numbers of patients.

   Results of a study of 70 patients with advanced melanoma found that only 10
percent of patients responded very well to Vical's gene-therapy vaccine, with
tumors shrinking by 50 percent or more.  In an additional 15 percent of
patients, the therapy appeared to stop the disease from progressing.

   Deirdre Gillespie, chief operating officer of Vical, said the complexities of
cancer so far defy anything like a vaccine "cure."

   "In the case of cancer, there are so many different types of abnormal cancer
cells, and they differ in different people and even in different tumors in the
same person," Gillespie said.  "So which foreign proteins from a tumor do you
choose to make your vaccine with?

   "That's the big challenge, and that's why a vaccine may work only in 15
(percent) to 20 percent of patients."

   Most vaccines are designed to work with standard therapies such as
chemotherapy, surgery and radiation, not to replace them.  As those therapies do
their job, the vaccines are added in hopes that they will teach the immune
system to recognize and kill rogue cancer cells before they proliferate.

   "We have to be cautious," said Dr. Vicky Jones, an oncologist at the UCSD
Cancer Center.  "You can't say, 'Oh, (vaccines) work brilliantly.' But to a
certain degree they are helpful, and one of the chief beauties is they are
helpful without uncomfortable side effects."

   Cancer vaccine technologies are divided roughly into two camps:
"personalized" vaccines custom-made from a patient's own tumor cells, and
off-the-shelf varieties made from cancer cell lines with antigens -- or proteins
on the surface of a cell -- common to many tumors.

   Big hurdles

   The quest for personalized vaccines took a hit in April when a leading
contender, Kansas City, Mo.-based Avax Technologies, ran afoul of the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration.

   Avax has a cancer vaccine approved in Australia, but the FDA forced it to
halt U.S. patient studies because of concerns about how the vaccine is prepared.
The FDA raised questions about the sterility of tumor cells and various
manufacturing practices.

   John McCamant, editor of the Berkeley-based Medical Technology Stock Letter,
said the Avax debacle demonstrates that companies which are pursuing more
complex personalized vaccines could face big hurdles from wary regulators.

   "The FDA is comfortable with drugs that are mass-produced -- a
one-size-fits-all mentality that has the merit of manufacturing consistency,"
McCamant said.  "Such personalized medicine has never been done on a mass
commercial basis before, and it is a real challenge for the industry."

   Vaccine pioneers

   In the other camp, contenders with off-the-shelf vaccines include
Carlsbad-based CancerVax and Foster City-based Cell Genesys, which has a
manufacturing facility and a gene-therapy subsidiary in San Diego.

   CancerVax's melanoma vaccine is one of the pioneering efforts in the field,
emerging from the research of Dr. Donald Morton at the John Wayne Cancer
Institute in Santa Monica.

   CancerVax was formed recently to commercialize the vaccine, and has raised
$30 million to fund final stages of patient studies.

   In a CancerVax study, about 40 percent of melanoma patients who underwent
surgery to remove tumors and took the vaccine survived five years or more,
compared with 15 percent who had surgery alone.

   CancerVax chief executive David Hale said his company's vaccine and others
provide incremental improvements to the treatment of cancer.  Yet more research
is needed before huge leaps are made.

   "Scientists are now understanding more about the immune system and what it
takes to activate it," Hale said.  "And we've gone from having one or two
vaccines in clinical trials to about 50. In the next few years we'll see several
vaccines approved, and that will stimulate the research and development of new
vaccine technologies."

   Vical's Gillespie agrees.

   "If I was a teen-ager now I'd be happy," she said.  "Because by the time I
was 40 years old there will be some very novel treatments in terms of cancer
vaccines."

   Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone
number is (619) 293-1237.

   Learn about vaccines

   For more information on the cancer vaccines being developed by local
biotechs, visit the following company Web sites:

   [] Vical -- http://www.vical.com

   [] CancerVax -- http://www.cancer-vax.com

   [] Epimmune -- http://www.epimmune.com

   [] Immune Response Corp. -- http://www.imnr.com

   [] Cell Genesys -- http://www.cellgenesys.com


GRAPHIC: 4 PICS | 1 CHART; 1. Associated Press 2,3. Laura Embry / Union-Tribune
4. Charlie Neuman / Union-Tribune; 1. Linn Barbier of Illinois used an
experimental cancer vaccine developed by San Diego-based Vical Inc. to treat her
skin cancer. 2. Jim Buchmiller prepared equipment at Vical. 3. A DNA sample in
Vical's quality control area. 4. David Hale is CEO of CancerVax, a Carlsbad comp
any formed recently to commercialize a melanoma vaccine. (C-2) 5. Learn about
vaccines (C-2)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2001


                             1794 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             May 12, 2001 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1173 words

HEADLINE: Weapons of war;
Vaccines seen as promising tool in fight against cancer

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Linn Barbier ran the grim gauntlet of traditional therapies to battle a
deadly skin cancer, from cutting it out through surgery to poisoning it with
chemotherapy and interferon. When melanoma hit her again in 1999, Barbier drew
the line. "When I had a third occurrence my oncologist suggested another year of
interferon, which has side effects that are hell on earth," said Barbier, 44, an
office worker in Rockford, Ill.

   "I told him that I'd rather die." Barbier found an alternative.

   She enrolled in a patient study to test an experimental cancer vaccine
developed by San Diego-based Vical Inc. The Vical vaccine, Allovectin-7, is one
of numerous cancer vaccines being developed by biotechnology companies and
tested on volunteer patients around the world. Unlike traditional vaccines
designed to prevent diseases such as flu and polio, most cancer vaccines are
aimed at people who have developed the disease.

   While the vaccines are made in a variety of ways, each shares the same goal:
to prime a cancer patient's immune system to recognize and kill tumor cells. In
Barbier's case, her immune system learned its lesson, at least for now. During a
monthlong treatment, researchers injected Allovectin-7 directly into Barbier's
tumor, which began to shrink rapidly.

   When the tumor was the size of a quarter, doctors removed it and determined
that no cancer cells remained, Barbier said. "With cancer patients who have
reoccurrences, you get real afraid to hope," Barbier said.

   "But I consider Dec. 29 to be my real birthday.

   That's when my doctor said I was cancer-free.

   I've been cancer-free for a year and five months, and I think the cancer
vaccine saved my life." Researchers agree that cancer vaccines, none of which
have been approved for commercial use in the United States, could prove to be an
important weapon in the growing arsenal of cancer therapies. There is no doubt
that new weapons are needed.

   According to the American Cancer Society, cancer is the second-leading killer
in the United States, accounting for 552,000 deaths last year.

   More than 8 million Americans have some form of cancer, and an additional 1.2
million will be diagnosed with cancer this year. Yet cancer vaccines -- some of
which are being developed by San Diego biotechs such as Vical, CancerVax,
Epimmune and Immune Response Corp. -- have their share of challenges for
patients and the investors backing the companies, experts say. So far, extremely
good results such as Barbier's are the exception.

   Many of the experimental vaccines have demonstrated benefits in relatively
modest numbers of patients. Results of a study of 70 patients with advanced
melanoma found that only 10 percent of patients responded very well to Vical's
gene-therapy vaccine, with tumors shrinking by 50 percent or more.

   In an additional 15 percent of patients, the therapy appeared to stop the
disease from progressing. Deirdre Gillespie, chief operating officer of Vical,
said the complexities of cancer so far defy anything like a vaccine "cure." "In
the case of cancer, there are so many different types of abnormal cancer cells,
and they differ in different people and even in different tumors in the same
person," Gillespie said.

   "So which foreign proteins from a tumor do you choose to make your vaccine
with? "That's the big challenge, and that's why a vaccine may work only in 15
(percent) to 20 percent of patients." Most vaccines are designed to work with
standard therapies such as chemotherapy, surgery and radiation, not to replace
them.

   As those therapies do their job, the vaccines are added in hopes that they
will teach the immune system to recognize and kill rogue cancer cells before
they proliferate. "We have to be cautious," said Dr. Vicky Jones, an oncologist
at the UCSD Cancer Center.

   "You can't say, `Oh, (vaccines) work brilliantly.' But to a certain degree
they are helpful, and one of the chief beauties is they are helpful without
uncomfortable side effects." Cancer vaccine technologies are divided roughly
into two camps: "personalized" vaccines custom-made from a patient's own tumor
cells, and off-the-shelf varieties made from cancer cell lines with antigens --
or proteins on the surface of a cell -- common to many tumors. Big hurdles The
quest for personalized vaccines took a hit in April when a leading contender,
Kansas City, Mo.-based Avax Technologies, ran afoul of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. Avax has a cancer vaccine approved in Australia, but the FDA
forced it to halt U.S. patient studies because of concerns about how the vaccine
is prepared.

   The FDA raised questions about the sterility of tumor cells and various
manufacturing practices. John McCamant, editor of the Berkeley-based Medical
Technology Stock Letter, said the Avax debacle demonstrates that companies which
are pursuing more complex personalized vaccines could face big hurdles from wary
regulators. "The FDA is comfortable with drugs that are mass-produced -- a
one-size-fits-all mentality that has the merit of manufacturing consistency,"
McCamant said.

   "Such personalized medicine has never been done on a mass commercial basis
before, and it is a real challenge for the industry." Vaccine pioneers In the
other camp, contenders with off-the-shelf vaccines include Carlsbad-based
CancerVax and Foster City-based Cell Genesys, which has a manufacturing facility
and a gene-therapy subsidiary in San Diego. CancerVax's melanoma vaccine is one
of the pioneering efforts in the field, emerging from the research of Dr. Donald
Morton at the John Wayne Cancer Institute in Santa Monica. CancerVax was formed
recently to commercialize the vaccine, and has raised $30 million to fund final
stages of patient studies. In a CancerVax study, about 40 percent of melanoma
patients who underwent surgery to remove tumors and took the vaccine survived
five years or more, compared with 15 percent who had surgery alone. CancerVax
chief executive David Hale said his company's vaccine and others provide
incremental improvements to the treatment of cancer.

   Yet more research is needed before huge leaps are made. "Scientists are now
understanding more about the immune system and what it takes to activate it,"
Hale said.

   "And we've gone from having one or two vaccines in clinical trials to about
50. In the next few years we'll see several vaccines approved, and that will
stimulate the research and development of new vaccine technologies." Vical's
Gillespie agrees. "If I was a teen-ager now I'd be happy," she said.

   "Because by the time I was 40 years old there will be some very novel
treatments in terms of cancer vaccines." Penni Crabtree's e-mail address is
penni.crabtree@uniontrib.com. Her phone number is (619) 293-1237. Learn about
vaccines For more information on the cancer vaccines being developed by local
biotechs, visit the following company Web sites: [] Vical --
http://www.vical.com [] CancerVax -- http://www.cancer-vax.com [] Epimmune --
http://www.epimmune.com [] Immune Response Corp. -- http://www.imnr.com [] Cell
Genesys -- http://www.cellgenesys.com

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Linn Barbier of Illinois used an
experimental cancer vaccine developed by San Diego-based Vical Inc. to treat her
skin cancer. 2. Jim Buchmiller prepared equipment at Vical. 3. A DNA sample in
Vical's quality control area. 4. David Hale is CEO of CancerVax, a Carlsbad comp
any formed recently to commercialize a melanoma vaccine. (C-2) 5. Learn about
vaccines (C-2); PHOTOBY: 1. Associated Press 2,3. Laura Embry / Union-Tribune 4.
Charlie Neuman / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             1795 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 64 words

HEADLINE: QUOTATION OF THE DAY

BODY:

        "Is the question, How fully can we engineer the human body to do
physically impossible things? If it is, what do you have at the end of that?
Something that looks like a human, but is so engineered, so tuned, that it's no
longer going to do what the body is designed to do."

DR. THEODORE FRIEDMANN, director of the gene therapy program at the University
of California at San Diego.  D5

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             1796 of 2092 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2001 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2001 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3083 words

HEADLINE: PUSHING THE LIMITS -- A special report.;
Someday Soon, Athletic Edge May Be From Altered Genes

BYLINE:  By JERE LONGMAN

BODY:

   For three decades, the International Olympic Committee has been engaged in a
game of chemical cat-and-mouse. Athletes use drugs to enhance their
performances, scientists devise tests to identify those drugs, then the athletes
move on to more sophisticated doping techniques.

        Now, the rules of the game may be changing, leaving the Olympic
committee even further behind.

    Concerned that athletes would soon employ genetic engineering in attempting
to run faster, to jump higher and to throw farther, the I.O.C. and the
affiliated World Anti-Doping Agency are about to convene inaugural meetings on
the subject. "For once we want to be ahead, not behind," Dr. Patrick Schamasch
of France, the I.O.C.'s medical director, said.

   Genes serve as a script that directs the body to make proteins. It seems
fantastic today to think that injecting a gene could result in more fast-twitch
muscle fibers, enabling a sprinter to run 100 meters in six seconds instead of
just under 10. Or injecting a gene that could increase oxygen-carrying capacity
so that a marathoner could run 26.2 miles in one and a half hours instead of
just over two. Some scientists and Olympic committee officials believe genetic
engineering in sports is a decade away. Some believe it may appear in two years.
Still others believe crude forms might already be in use, at great health risk
to athletes.

   "I think certain methods could have already started," said Johann Olav Koss,
the 1994 Olympic speed skating champion from Norway who is a member of the
I.O.C. and a doctor.

   Medical applications of gene therapy -- efforts to cure or prevent disease --
are at a very rudimentary stage, with only one form of gene therapy having been
shown conclusively to work. Little is understood about the implications of
introducing genes into a human body, so any use aimed at improving athletic
performance would now be considered dangerous and unethical.

   But the human genome has been mapped out and the technology, however
immature, is evolving rapidly. Athletes, who are often eager for an edge in
competition, are not very likely to wait for science to perfect gene therapy.
Inherently, athletes are risk takers. And there is enormous financial pressure
and reward to win, to produce records and to keep up with other athletes who are
succeeding through illicit means.

   Genetic engineering in sport will foster not only a greater potential health
risk for athletes than does conventional doping, but also a greater potential
for performance enhancement, said Dr. Jacques Rogge, a Belgian surgeon who is an
I.O.C. delegate and vice chairman of its medical commission. Instead of
repeatedly ingesting pills or taking injections, an athlete may be able, with a
single insertion of genetic material, to sustain bulked-up muscle mass or
heightened oxygen-carrying capacity for months or even years. Such genetic
manipulation would be extremely difficult, if not virtually impossible, to
detect using current methods, scientists said.

   At the coming meetings of the Olympic committee and the anti-doping agency,
officials will discuss the potential benefits and risks of genetic engineering
and the potential detection methods, and they will face a number of ethical
questions. Should genetic manipulation be banned entirely in sport? Should it be
allowed for athletes healing from injury or recovering from disease? If the
technology can be made safe, do healthy athletes have the right to engineer
themselves like race cars to push the boundaries of achievement? Will two
classes of competition be needed?

   "What if you're born with something having been done to you?" Maurice Greene
of Los Angeles, the Olympic champion at 100 meters, said. He wondered, would
manipulation of an egg or an embryo be considered cheating? "You didn't have
anything to do with it," he said.
The Olympic committee scheduled a meeting for June 6 on genetic engineering only
after the anti-doping agency announced plans for its own gathering in September,
an apparent political gesture to appear out front on the issue, said Dr. Arne
Ljunqvist of Sweden, who is an I.O.C. delegate and chairman of the anti-doping
agency's medical, health and research committee.

   The second meeting is considered the more significant of the two; the agency
hopes to gather three dozen athletes, sports scientists, genetics experts,
ethicists and policy officials from the Food and Drug Administration and the
National Institutes of Health in Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.

   "For the first time, a substantial group of people involved in sports
administration, sports science and genetic science will sit around the same
table and discuss a common potential problem," Dr. Ljunqvist said.

   The concerns range from the pragmatic to the philosophical. Do the Olympic
committee and other sports organizations have the willpower or financial
resources to combat the use of genetic engineering? The total cost of
conventional drug tests are already about $1,000 each.

   Ultimately, at the heart of the issue will be a profound question: what is a
human athlete?

   "What are the endpoints of manipulation?" said Dr. Theodore Friedmann,
director of the gene therapy program at the University of California at San
Diego and a member of the anti-doping agency's health and research committee.
"Is the hope to incrementally sneak up on the one-and-a-half-minute mile? Or six
seconds for 100 meters? Is the question, How fully can we engineer the human
body to do physically impossible things? If it is, what do you have at the end
of that? Something that looks like a human, but is so engineered, so tuned, that
it's no longer going to do what the body is designed to do."

Anything for an Edge?

   Athletes, scientists and sports administrators agree that someone will
attempt genetic engineering, if they have not already. Concern over health and
safety issues has not been a strong deterrent to the epidemic use of
conventional performance-enhancing drugs.

   In a 1995 survey, nearly 200 aspiring American Olympians were asked if they
would take a banned substance that would guarantee victory in every competition
for five years and would then cause death; more than half answered yes.

   A recent seminar on teenage steroid use, held in New York City, revealed
these desperate efforts to boost athletic performance: A female basketball
player asked a doctor to break her arms and reset them in a way that might make
them longer; pediatricians were being pressured by parents to give their
children human growth hormone to make them taller and perhaps more athletic;
doctors were being asked by the parents of football players to provide steroids
so their sons might gain college scholarships.

   A molecular scientist, speaking on condition of anonymity, said in an
interview that a foreign exchange student staying with the scientist's family
was approached at a swimming pool by a stranger and was told, "You are
absolutely beautiful; I'll give you $35,000 for one of your eggs." The student
accepted the offer. It is not inconceivable that some parent looking to create
an elite athlete would offer far more money for such an arrangement with, say,
Marion Jones, the world's fastest woman.

   "In theory, you could do in vitro fertilization, stick in a gene for x, y or
z and you've built a kid," the scientist said. "It's been done in mice. But I'd
consider that brave new world stuff. It's not happening with humans."

   Other techniques now being tested on lab animals seem much less futuristic.
For instance, the gene that codes for the hormone erythropoietin, or EPO, has
been identified. Produced by the kidneys, EPO regulates the production of red
blood cells. A synthetic version can serve as a wonder drug for patients
suffering from anemia, AIDS or cancer. Because it enhances oxygen-carrying
capacity, EPO is believed to be in widespread use in such endurance sports as
cycling and distance running.

   Conventional illicit doping measures require athletes to be injected at
regular intervals with EPO to maintain the endurance benefit. The insertion of a
gene, however, could theoretically turn the body into an EPO factory. Last year
a study by Dr. Steven M. Rudich, a transplant surgeon then at the University of
California at Davis, indicated that a single injection of the EPO gene into the
leg muscles of monkeys produced significantly elevated red blood cell levels for
20 to 30 weeks.

   "An athlete would be out of his mind to want to use this," Dr. Rudich, who is
now at the University of Michigan, said. Ruefully, he said about genetic
engineering in sports, "I bet it exists."

Muscular Mice

   Genetic material can be delivered to the body by several methods. Dr. Rudich
took a weakened virus, inserted a snippet of EPO gene, then injected it into the
monkeys' thigh muscles. Each gene consists of DNA, the ladder-like structure
that serves as a genetic carpenter, instructing the body what to construct. In
this case, the DNA signaled the muscles to produce EPO, which stimulated the
production of red blood cells.

   Other hormones and proteins that can be used in gene therapy for performance
enhancement are human growth hormone and a protein called insulin-like growth
factor-1, or IGF-1. Growth hormone can be used to treat dwarfism in children and
to prevent muscle loss in the aging process. IGF-1 is critical to the repairing
of muscle tissue. Both substances are believed to be used illicitly now by
athletes using conventional methods to increase muscle size and strength.

   Ten years ago, Dr. Helen Blau of Stanford demonstrated that a gene could be
introduced into a mouse to stimulate production of normal levels of human growth
hormone in the bloodstream for as long as three months, compared with 10 minutes
if the drug were taken directly. Recently, she and others showed that oral
antibiotics could be used as a switch to turn the gene on and off.

   "In theory, it is possible that an athlete could be genetically engineered to
have a gene so you could increase muscle strength, train with it and shut it off
when you want to, which would make drug testing more difficult," said Dr. Blau,
chairwoman of the department of molecular pharmacology at Stanford Medical
School. "Whether it's happened, I have no idea. In theory, it's possible. It's
something to keep an eye on. It could be a future concern for the Olympics."

   A 1998 study by scientists at the University of Pennsylvania and Harvard
involving IGF-1 used gene therapy in mice to halt the depletion of muscle and
strength that comes with old age. Older mice increased their muscle strength by
as much as 27 percent in the experiment, which suggested possibilities for
athletes as well as for preserving muscle strength in elderly people and
increasing muscle power in those who suffer from muscular dystrophy.

   "We called them Schwarzenegger mice," said Dr. Nadia Rosenthal, an associate
professor at Harvard Medical School and a co-author of the study. It has since
been demonstrated that mice enhanced with the IGF-1 gene continue to gain size
and strength when exercising on a wheel without any apparent adverse health
effects, she said.

   "I'd be totally surprised if it was not going on in sports," Dr. Rosenthal
said, speaking generally of crude attempts at genetic engineering. "Those with
terminal cancer and AIDS want to know, 'What will keep me alive?' Athletes want
to know, 'What will make me win?' "

Hidden Dangers

   The danger in attempting genetic engineering now for athletics, Dr. Rosenthal
and other researchers cautioned, is that experiments with mice and monkeys might
not work the same way in humans and might lead to negative side effects.

   If a gene for producing EPO cannot be shut off properly, the blood will begin
to thicken with excessive red blood cells and that could cause strokes and heart
attacks.

   If the gene for human growth hormone is not regulated, muscles might grow
until they outstripped the blood supply or overwhelmed tendons and ligaments.
Misuse could also lead to heart and thyroid disease and cause the size of
someone's head, jaw, hands and feet to increase dramatically.

   The entire process of genetic engineering remains imprecise. Dr. Thomas
Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a biomedical ethics research institute
in Garrison, N.Y., likened it to firing at the bull's-eye of a target with a
spray of shotgun pellets. It is not known exactly where the virus and DNA go
when injected, how they get where they are going or what the body's immune
response will be.

   An attempt to strengthen the shoulder muscles of a javelin thrower, for
instance, might lead inadvertently to an enlargement of the heart muscle. Or
worse. A teenager died in 1999 during a therapeutic study at the University of
Pennsylvania, apparently in reaction to the virus carrying genes intended to
treat a metabolic disorder.

   "We don't know the technology well enough even to be sure what's happening in
a therapeutic setting," Dr. Friedmann of California-San Diego said. "We
certainly don't know the technology well enough to know how safe a gene is going
to be to an athlete."

   Before athletes are fitted with designer genes, the next advance may be to
create more synthetic versions of drugs like EPO and growth hormone that mimic
the effects of genetic engineering, scientists said. But genetic manipulation of
the human body for sport is sure to come. The question is, to what extent?

   Michael Johnson, the Olympic sprinting champion, said he thought the health
risks would scare off many athletes. Werner Franke, a German molecular biologist
who helped bring to light the systematic doping of athletes by East Germany,
said he was not particularly worried about genetic engineering because chemical
footprints left by the inserted virus and DNA would facilitate detection.

   "I think it will be mostly science fiction," Mr. Franke said. He accused the
I.O.C. of "purposely barking up the wrong tree" in an attempt to camouflage its
lack of commitment to catching athletes who cheat by conventional methods.

   Many scientists, however, disagree with Mr. Franke's assessment of the
potential ease of detecting altered genes. With available technology, they say,
scientists would have to know exactly where the gene was inserted in order to
identify it, which would most likely require muscle biopsies.

   "No athlete in his right mind is going to allow himself to be probed here and
there for evidence of a virus," Dr. Friedmann said.

   Eventually, some noninvasive detection methods might be developed, like
chemical markers or a chip that could be encoded with the sequence of a
specifically altered gene. But some researchers believe that only a change in
cultural attitudes will curb genetic engineering, just as a cultural shift has
led to an intolerance for smoking.

   "We have to change the fundamental mind-set about doping," Dr. Don Catlin,
who operates the Olympic drug-testing lab at U.C.L.A., said.
There appears to be little fear that human cloning will have a significant
effect in sport. If say, Michael Johnson were cloned, the result would almost
certainly not be the same world record-setter as the original, researchers say,
because environmental, nutritional and motivational factors also play
significant roles in developing athletes.

   "If I'm the clone of Michael Johnson, I've got to bend myself into all sorts
of shapes to run, because genetically that's what I'm destined to be," Dr.
Friedmann said. "I run and run and run, and I can't ever get anywhere. Then what
am I? I'm a Michael Johnson who can't run. That's a nobody. That must be a
crushing experience to learn you're not what you're genetically destined to be."


Moral and Athletic Limits

   Cloning aside, many athletes and sports officials say they would abhor
genetic engineering in sport. "It is supposed to be a test of human capability,
not a chemical war or a genetic war," Brandi Chastain of the American women's
soccer team said.

   If genetic engineering is used, "then sport is dead," said Dr. Bengt Saltin,
director of the Center for Muscular Research at Copenhagen University in
Denmark.

   Yet, American society tolerates other types of enhancement, from the caffeine
stimulation of coffee to breast enlargement to erectile function. And although
there has been an outcry about genetically engineered corn, there was mass
celebration when Mark McGwire broke the major league home run record in 1998
using androstenedione, a steroid precursor that is banned by the Olympics and
many professional sports.

   "Nobody cared about what McGwire was using," said Jon Drummond, a member of
the victorious American 4x100-meter relay team at the Sydney Olympics. "They
just wanted to see him break the record."

   If genetic engineering can be made safe, with fewer side effects even than
conventional methods of doping, it may grow increasingly difficult to find
supportable arguments against using gene alteration to achieve excellence in
sport, Dr. Friedmann said.

   "Our society has already decided partly that maybe there isn't a lot wrong
with it, and that we can build ourselves, change ourselves, as much as we'd
like, consistent with safety and medical ethics," he said. "If a weight lifter
makes massive muscles and with a flinch of the finger can lift a few hundred
pounds, what's wrong with that ethically? I'm not sure you'll get good answers
to that."

   Not all athletes will have equal access to genetic engineering, but not all
of them have equal access today to the same nutrition and training facilities.
Not every distance runner, for instance, can train at altitude. Should sea-level
athletes be allowed to take EPO to match the oxygen-carrying benefits for those
who live at altitude?

   The most effective argument against genetic enhancement may be that it will
coerce others to alter their fundamental makeup, perhaps at great risk, if they
want to compete.

   "The argument in favor of allowing people to do this is based on our American
tradition of giving individuals a huge amount of autonomy over their own
bodies," said Dr. Eric Juengst, an ethicist at Case Western Reserve University
in Cleveland. "The limits on that kind of freedom are interpersonal. Once your
actions cross the line of affecting just yourself and begin to affect other
people, we have license to step in."

   That right to set moral limits, however, will inevitably clash with a desire
to break athletic limits. Anyone who could run 100 meters in six seconds "has no
place in sports," said Mr. Greene, the world record-holder at 9.79 seconds. But,
he added, "If anyone can run the 100 in six seconds, I'd like to see it."

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maurice Greene, who set the record in the 100-meter sprint
(9.79 seconds), said a 6-second 100 through genetic engineering would have no
place in sports. Still, he wouldn't mind seeing it. (Chang W. Lee/The New York
Times); Dr. Nadia Rosenthal in her Massachusetts laboratory with a mouse
genetically altered to grow faster and one that wasn't. Dr. Theodore Friedmann,
whose field is gene therapy, wondered about the limits of manipulation. (Thom
Vollenweider for The New York Times); (C. J. Gunther for The New York Times)(pg.
D5)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2001


                             1797 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 10, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: DOWNTOWN PICAYUNE; To the Rim; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: Taiwan sets its sights on gene therapy field

BYLINE: By Tina Soong

BODY:

   A delegation of scientists, legislators and venture capitalists from Taiwan
recently visited New Orleans to learn more about a medical procedure called
stem-cell therapy, and a prominent New Orleans researcher will be the keynote
speaker at a symposium on the same subject next month in Taipei City.

   A small amount of stem cells can easily be taken from the bone marrow with a
needle and local anesthesia. The stem cells can then be cultured into bone,
brain, muscle and cartilage cells, which can be used to repair bad genes, said
Dr. Darwin Prockop, director of the Tulane University Center of Gene Therapy.

   "Gene therapy can be used to treat a lot of common diseases, including
osteoporosis, arthritis, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease," Prockop
said. "A real cure will be a blessing to the patients. It will also be a big
industry."

   The conference was organized by the center and co-sponsored by St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, the International Society for Hematotherapy and
Graft Engineering in the United States, and the National Science Council of
Taiwan. The chief organizers of the March conference were Prockop, and Dr. Paul
Whelton, senior vice-president of Tulane University Center of Health Sciences.

   Prockop is invited to be the keynote speaker at the 2001 International
Symposium on Biomedical Technology, which will be held June 11-12 in Taipei
City.

   "Taiwan is interested in advancing its biomedical technology and in
developing the new field of stem-cell research. The recent conference has
provided new insights and information . . . on biomedical technology and stem
cells at Tulane University, as well as in the USA," said Ted Chen, director of
Asia-Pacific Health Promotion/Development at Tulane University School of Public
Health and Tropical Medicine, who arranged the visit of the Taiwan delegation.

   "The delegation also wishes to lay foundation for the future interaction and
cooperation between Louisiana and Taiwan in biomedical technology researches,"
Chen said.

    . . . . . . .

   A reception given by Consul General of Japan Hidoto Mitamura welcomed the
return of the most recent participants of the Japan Exchange and Teaching, or
JET, program, Alicia Martin and Stephanie Dodaro, and to honor the local alumni
of the program.

   "We encourage the JET alumni to continue to be involved in Japan-USA
activities, join Japan-related organizations, and strengthen the friendship
between our two nations," Mitamura said.

   Martin said that her time in Japan taught her about all of Asia.

   "The exposure to Japan is only the beginning of JET's benefits," she said.
"My knowledge of Asia and the world has been expanded. I also cultivated
lifelong friends from around the world."

   Dodaro considers her participation in the program a major event that has
influenced her life. Not only has she learned about the Japanese language and
culture, but also about people and herself.

   Among others who attended the reception, held at Mitamura's New Orleans home,
were Sarah Brombacher, president of the Mid-South Chapter of the JET Alumni, and
a banking officer at Whitney Bank; and June Labyzon, a teacher at Audubon
Montessori School, who recently went to Japan for an intensive three-week
Fulbright program.

   "The JET Alumni Association was created to strengthen the bond of friendship
developed by former participants. Through its activities, the group seeks to
achieve a broader and deeper understanding between Japan and USA. JETAA members
promote the JET program by holding orientations for future JET participants,
giving useful information on about life in Japan, and other activities,"
Brombacher said.

   Labyzon said that she will share with her students her information about
Japan and Asia, and she plans to hold a Japan program at the school this month.

   For information about the program, call 529-2101; for information about
JETAA, call 552-4804.

   . . . . . . .

Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to mail news items to Tina Soong at the Department of Human Performance
and Health Promotion, University of New Orleans, Lakefront, New Orleans, LA
70148.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2001


                             1798 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2001 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                             May 10, 2001 Thursday

SECTION: EAST NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: APPLAUSE

BODY:

   N.O. doctor honored

   Dr. Gholam A. Peyman of New Orleans was selected by the American Society of
Cataract and Refractive Surgery as the ASCRS Innovator of the Year.

   Peyman delivered the 2001 Innovator Lecture at the recent ASCRS Symposium on
Cataract, IOL and Refractive Surgery in San Diego.

   Each year, the American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery awards the
Innovator's Medal to an individual whose ground-breaking ideas have benefited
ophthalmologists and their patients. Peyman was honored for his milestone
contributions to the fields of vitreoretinal surgery, intraocular drug delivery
and anterior segment surgery.

   Peyman, professor of ophthalmology at Tulane University, is the original
patent holder on the procedure widely known as LASIK and recently developed a
photo-ablative inlay to expand the scope of LASIK.

Gospel music award presented

   Ellsworth Harris received the Gospel Is Alive Award presented by the Gospel
Outreach Committee of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Foundation.

   He was honored at the recent Gospel Is Alive Concert held at the Mahalia
Jackson Theater of the Performing Arts Center. The event was in conjunction with
the 32nd celebration of the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.

   Harris, director of the University Center at Southern University at New
Orleans, was selected for the award because of his "outstanding contribution to
gospel music," said the Rev. Lois Dejean, event coordinator.

UNO group presents awards

   The University of New Orleans Business/Higher Education Council held its 16th
annual awards luncheon to honor and recognize individuals and corporations for
exceptional dedication and continued support of education in the New Orleans
area and neighboring parishes.

   Dr. Charles C. Teamer Sr. received the First Citizen of the Learning Society
Award. Peter R. Quirk, vice president of URS Corporation, received the
Business-Education Leader Award. The Business-Education Partner Award was
presented to Texaco, Ltd.

Professor elected

   Tulane public health professor Jack C. Ling was elected chairman of the
International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders, a
multidisciplinary organization that is at the forefront of the global effort
against iodine deficiency.

   Ling is the first nonmedical professional to head the group.

Ballet group gets grant

   The New Orleans Ballet Association was one of several groups around the
country to share in $2.7 million awarded by the National Endowment for the Arts
and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to provide arts
instruction for youth living in public housing.

   The New Orleans Ballet Association will use its $135,000 portion of the grant
to support a three-year program of sequential dance instruction for children
residing in C.J. Peete and Lafitte public housing communities.

Tulane center receives grants

   Tulane Center for Gene Therapy received a three-year osteoarthritis
biomarkers, biomedical science grant from the Arthritis Foundation through the
efforts of Dr. Leena Maria Ala-Kokko.

   Ala-Kokko, associate professor at the center, was selected among 14
applicants from around the country for the grant. The award amount for the first
year is $90,000, which goes toward the research of osteoarthritis.

   Tulane Center for Gene Therapy also received a two-year $200,000 grant from
the Muscular Dystrophy Association, Inc. to begin a project on using stem cells
to treat diseases of the central nervous system.

   Donald Phinney, associate professor at the center, submitted the project.

   The Louis A. Martinet Legtal Society in New Orleans will acknowledge the
service and dedication of its members and award scholarships to law students at
the group's 19th annual awards and scholarship gala Friday from 7 to 11 p.m. at
the New Orleans Hilton Riverside's Napoleon Ballroom.

   Award recipients will be John P. Nelson, Lifetime Achievement Award; Phoebe
Roef, Louis A. Martinet Award; Karl J. Connor, A.P. Tureaud Award; Ivan L.R.
Lemelle, Ernest N. Morial Award; and James M. Singleton Sr., the Earl A. Amedee
Award.

   Law students receiving scholarships will be L. Chere Trigy, Southern
University Law Center; Marcella Atkinsons, Tulane University; Sharon Pris,
Loyola University; and Michelle Craig, Louisiana State University.

   Tickets for the event are $65 per person. Tables are available for $650. For
information or tickets, call Cheryl Gray at 599-8280.

   . . . . . . .

If you have news of an accomplishment deserving applause, send it to Applause,
The Times-Picayune, 3800 Howard Ave., New Orleans, LA 70125-1429. Items must be
received by Thursday to be included in the following Thursday's editions.

GRAPHIC: Ellsworth Harris Received Gospel Is Alive Award

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2001


                             1799 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2001 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        May 9, 2001 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-02

LENGTH: 904 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL REPORT Drug tests on mice provide hope in Alzheimer's fight

BYLINE: By Susan Okie, The Washington Post,

BODY:

   TAMPA, Fla. - The moment he hits the cool water of the  laboratory's baby
pool, the brown mouse swims for dear life. He is  17 months old - elderly for a
mouse - but he seems to have his  goal in mind. He paddles to the center of the
daisy-shaped water  maze, looks around, then heads rapidly down the correct
aisle and  clambers to safety on an invisible platform.

   An aging mouse's successful navigation of a maze might seem  unconnected to
the plight of the estimated 4 million Americans who  have Alzheimer's disease, a
common and incurable brain disorder  that steals its victims' memories and
personality. But the  maze-swimming mice are testing a remarkable vaccine that
one day  may reduce or prevent brain damage from Alzheimer's, which is
predicted to become epidemic as the nation's elderly population grows.

   Mice at the University of South Florida have been given  mutated human genes
that produce age-related brain degeneration  much like Alzheimer's disease. To
the astonishment of scientists  conducting the studies, vaccinating these mice
during midlife  slowed progression of the brain disorder and preserved their
ability to learn.

   The vaccine, developed by California scientists with Elan  Corp. of Dublin,
Ireland, and now undergoing safety testing in  people, is one of several
promising approaches being pursued for  Alzheimer's disease, a disorder whose
current treatments produce  only partial and short-lived improvement. In a field
where  progress has been glacially slow for many years, scientists now  speak of
intense competition and rapidly emerging discoveries.

   'We tried about a dozen things that didn't work and now  everything we're
trying is working,' said Dave Morgan, a  neuroscientist at the University of
South Florida who is testing  the vaccine and other experimental treatments in
transgenic mice.  'I'm very encouraged.'

   The upsurge in innovative research stems in part from a  clearer
understanding of precisely what goes wrong in the brains  of people with the
disease. For example, researchers have  identified two key enzymes that produce
beta-amyloid, a waste  protein that builds up in the brains of Alzheimer's
victims and  appears to be central to the destructive process. Several major
drug companies are racing to identify and develop enzyme-blocking  drugs called
secretase inhibitors that they hope will reduce  beta-amyloid accumulation. At
least one company, Bristol-Myers  Squibb Co., has begun testing such a drug on
patients.

   In addition, researchers are evaluating an array of  compounds - ranging from
anti-inflam- matory drugs, estrogen and  cholesterol-lowering agents to various
vitamins and supplements -  to see whether they can prevent Alzheimer's or delay
its onset.  Last month, in the first test of gene therapy for the disease,
doctors in California implanted skin cells engineered to produce  nerve-growth
factor into the brain of a woman with the disorder.

   However, it may turn out that to stave off Alzheimer's  disease, people will
have to begin treatments such as the vaccine  or enzyme-blockers in late middle
age, perhaps a decade or two  before symptoms would be expected to appear. At
present, no  medical test can predict who will develop the illness. Researchers
  say that if effective preventive treatments become available, such  a test
will be urgently needed.

   Like AIDS, Alzheimer's is an ultimately fatal disorder that  begins its
stealthy assault years before problems with memory or  learning make its
presence apparent.

   'The baby boomers are the people now getting Alzheimer's  disease,' said Trey
Sunderland, chief of geriatric psychiatry at  the National Institute of Mental
Health. 'They just don't know it.'

   The biggest risk factor for Alzheimer's disease is growing  old. The disorder
is rare in people younger than 60, but its  frequency doubles every five years
after 65. By age 80, about 9  percent of people have the condition; by age 90,
the prevalence is  29 percent. In the next half-century, as the elderly
population  grows, the number of Americans with Alzheimer's disease will
roughly quadruple. The total, estimated at between 2 million and 4  million now,
is projected to be as high as 14 million by 2050.

   The earliest sign that something is amiss in the brain is  usually loss of
recent memory. Later, people with the disease  develop poor judgment, confusion
and personality changes. They  lose the ability to care for themselves and may
fail to recognize  their loved ones. Most live for an average of five to nine
years  with the illness, eventually becoming bedridden and dying of  pneumonia
or other infections.

   Under a microscope, the brain of someone who has died of  Alzheimer's disease
resembles a junkyard. Scattered among the  surviving nerve cells of the cerebral
cortex - the cells  responsible for thoughts, learning and decisions - are
myriad  clumps or 'plaques' of beta-amyloid, a waste protein toxic to  nerve
cells that is a hallmark of the illness. Around the plaques  cluster
disease-fighting cells that seem to be trying  unsuccessfully to clean up or
wall off the mess. Everywhere are  misshapen pieces of dead nerve cells, their
insides choked with  tangles made of a twisted, cable-like protein called tau.

GRAPHIC:  Alzheimer's symptoms

LOAD-DATE: May 09, 2001


                             1800 of 2092 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2001 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     May 09, 2001, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine found to slow Alzheimer's;
Researchers pursue promising approach to treat brain disorder

SOURCE: Washington Post

BYLINE: SUSAN OKIE

DATELINE: TAMPA, Fla.

BODY:

   TAMPA, Fla. - The moment he hits the cool water of the laboratory's baby
pool, the brown mouse swims for dear life. He is 17 months old - elderly for a
mouse - but he seems to have his goal in mind.

   He paddles to the center of the daisy-shaped water maze, looks around, then
heads rapidly down the correct aisle and clambers to safety on an invisible
platform.

   An aging mouse's successful navigation of a maze might seem unconnected to
the plight of the estimated 4 million Americans who have Alzheimer's disease, a
common and incurable brain disorder that steals its victims' memories and
personality.

   But maze-swimming mice are testing a remarkable vaccine that one day may
reduce or prevent brain damage from Alzheimer's, which is predicted to become
epidemic as the nation's elderly population grows.

   Mice at the University of South Florida have been given mutated human genes
that produce age-related brain degeneration much like Alzheimer's disease.

   To the astonishment of scientists conducting the studies, vaccinating these
mice during midlife slowed progression of their brain disorder and preserved
their ability to learn.

   The vaccine, developed by California scientists with Elan Corp. of Dublin,
Ireland, and now undergoing safety testing in people, is one of several
promising approaches being pursued for Alzheimer's disease, a disorder whose
current treatments produce only partial and short-lived improvement.

   In a field where progress has been glacially slow for many years, scientists
now speak of intense competition and rapidly emerging discoveries.

   "We tried about a dozen things that didn't work and now everything we're
trying is working," said Dave Morgan, a neuroscientist at the University of
South Florida who is testing the vaccine and other experimental treatments in
transgenic mice. "I'm very encouraged."

   The upsurge in innovative research stems in part from a clearer understanding
of precisely what goes wrong in the brains of people with the disease.

   For example, researchers have identified two key enzymes that produce
beta-amyloid, a waste protein that builds up in the brains of Alzheimer's
victims and appears to be central to the destructive process.

   Several major drug companies are racing to identify and develop
enzyme-blocking drugs called secretase inhibitors that they hope will reduce
beta-amyloid accumulation. At least one company, Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., has
begun testing such a drug in patients.

   In addition, researchers are evaluating an array of compounds - ranging from
anti-inflammatory drugs, estrogen and cholesterol-lowering agents to various
vitamins and supplements - to see whether they can prevent Alzheimer's or delay
its onset.

   Last month, in the first test of gene therapy for the disease, doctors in
California implanted skin cells engineered to produce nerve growth factor into
the brain of a woman with the disorder.

   However, it may turn out that to stave off Alzheimer's disease, people will
have to begin treatments such as the vaccine or enzyme-blockers in late middle
age, perhaps a decade or two before symptoms would be expected to appear.

   At present, no medical test can predict who will develop the illness.
Researchers say that if effective preventive treatments become available, such a
test will be urgently needed.

   Like AIDS, Alzheimer's is an ultimately fatal disorder that begins its
stealthy assault years before problems with memory or learning make its presence
apparent.

   "The baby boomers are the people now getting Alzheimer's disease," said Trey
Sunderland, chief of geriatric psychiatry at the National Institute of Mental
Health. "They just don't know it."





   Alzheimer's warning signs


   The Alzheimer's Association has developed a list of warning signs for
identifying the symptoms of the disease.


   1. Memory loss that affects job skills

   2. Difficulty performing familiar tasks

   3. Problems with language

   4. Disorientation to time and place (getting lost)

   5. Poor or decreased judgment

   6. Problems with abstract thinking

   7. Misplacing things

   8. Changes in mood or behavior

   9. Changes in personality

   10. Loss of initiative


GRAPHIC: Graph: Alzheimer's warning signs (TEXT); Associated Press, Source:
American Academy of Neurology

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2001
