
                               1 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 31, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 2603 words

HEADLINE: We suffered. We prospered. We survived;
Tomorrow we salute the start of a new era in history. Today we say farewell to
the turbulent 20th century

BODY:

    What would they make of us now, those cheerful, confident subjects of the
old queen, secure in the certainty that Britain was great and progress would
make it still greater, who launched us 99 years ago into the 20th century? In
some ways, they would find our world reassuringly familiar. There is still a
Queen on the throne and a parliament at Westminster and cricket at Lord's.
Issues which dominated the political debate in the final decade of their century
- Ireland, the House of Lords, electoral reform, disestablishment of the church,
Russia, Serbia, even hunting with hounds - still preoccupy us today. But
elsewhere, our lives would astonish them. Some of the headlines in our
newspapers over the past few days reflect a Britain changed beyond their
imagination. Space walk triumph for Briton. Credit card chaos as the millennium
bug strikes. Queen drops her ban on gay couples. A traditional day for gays'
surrogate twins. Baby who is living proof gene therapy can really work. Human
cloning hits natural barrier. The women who get pounds 330 a month not to have
an abortion. Bible's creation story loses appeal for clerics. Even: Chelsea boss
fields premiership's first all foreign line-up.

    Most of these astonishments have something to do with science. Even more
than the 19th century, though certainly less than the one which begins tomorrow,
this has been the century of science. Two snapshots of our century. February 12,
1941: a policeman called Albert Alexander is dying from a staphylococcal
infection. At the Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, a doctor called Charles Fletcher
begins to give him little doses of penicillin, a treatment straight out of the
labs. Immediately Alexander begins to recover. His temperature drops, his wounds
cease to suppurate, his appetite returns. But there are not supplies enough to
keep the treatment going and on March 15, he dies. But millions will be saved
later. August 6, 1945: an atomic bomb, the most devastating weapon ever devised
on earth, is dropped on the Japanese city of Hiroshima. Eighty thousand are dead
at a stroke; 200,000 will be dead in time as a direct result of this bomb.
Another is dropped on Nagasaki. The Americans calculate that continuing the war
with Japan by conventional means would have killed even more than this. Yet
compared with the device tested at Bikini, compared to what technology can do
for us now, these bombs were mere toys.

    The science is neutral; what makes it decisive for good or ill is the use to
which we put it. In this century, we developed the means to destroy our planet:
just one instance in which we seized powers previously thought of as exclusively
God's. That it has been a time of unparallelled violence and evil is not
exclusively due to science. There was nothing very advanced about the technology
of Auschwitz, or Cambodia, or Tutsi versus Hutu, or Serb against ethnic
Albanian. But superior technology brought new pitches of destruction to war. In
the Boer war, approaching its close as this century opened, 20,000 British
soldiers died, but three-quarters of those deaths were due to disease. In the
first world war, using technologies which seem primitive now but were very
advanced in their day, the two sides disposed between them of perhaps 9m lives.
In the second world war, with a huge increase in airpower, perhaps 55m. Nobody
really knows.

    But in peace, we are safer than ever. Afflictions which in the first decade
of this century were often fatal - like scarlet fever, pneumonia, pleurisy even
- are now put right with a few convenient pills. Smallpox seems to be
vanquished, and diphtheria, though tuberculosis is making a comeback. Polio
could be next. Medicine has become targeted, with treatments cunningly tailored
to deal with specific diseases. Reading newspaper obituaries or even studying
tombstones in graveyards - so rarely inscribed today with those melancholy
catalogues so familiar in the last century of whole young families wiped out by
some routine epidemic - visiting Victorians would marvel at the ages we live to
now. In 1900, 35% of reported deaths were of children under four. Now the rate
is well under 1%. Life expectancy has risen to 75 for men and 79 for women. In
1900, it was still under 50.

    Some of that is due to what the 19th century set in hand: better public
health, and drainage, and hygiene. But we have vastly accelerated it, through
better housing and better nutrition and better preventive, as much as
corrective, medicine. As the century ended, even greater marvels seemed
imminent, with the development of gene therapies which in time will correct what
till now have been ineradicable human defects. Different sectors of science and
technology fed profitably off each other. The human genome project at the centre
of this activity would never have been conceivable without the modern computer.

    Technology has eliminated many of the back-breaking chores which made even
the young grow old, looking more worn and ancient at 30 than many now do at 60.
Ironing has yet to be conquered, but the vacuum cleaner (1899), the washing
machine (1907), the fridge (1926), the lawnmower (1930), are engines of
liberation. Electric light and central heating have eased and simplified life
for millions. The car, each journey designed to our own convenience, transports
us about our own country and the aeroplane takes us to lands to which only a
privileged few once had access. Places once the preserve of intrepid explorers
are now visitable on package tours. Science and technology have taken us to the
moon. The Victorian age had the telephone and the telegraph; we have radio and
television, bringing the world to our sitting rooms, and now the greatest
transformation of all: the world wide web (Victorians would have particularly
treasured it because it is a British invention). As they walked our streets,
Victorians would no doubt be mystified by the spectacle of so many chattering
away to themselves, one hand clamped to an ear, in a way that was once thought
demented. But life without a mobile telephone is unimaginable today to anyone
under 30.

    Science has also, in Britain and across much of Europe, though not in the
world of Islam, severely eroded religion. The Victorians talked of the death of
God. Faith receded as science advanced. But even those at the commanding heights
of society who had no belief themselves believed in belief for others, because
it cemented society and promoted civil order. As the historian JM Roberts says
in his wise and comprehensive account of our century newly published by Penguin,
to which this analysis is indebted, science has come to shape the way the world
is seen by millions, just as great religions shaped the mental landscapes of the
past: 'The core of western civilisation, articulated or not, would come to lie
in belief in the promise of manipulating nature. In principle, that civilisation
now asserts that there is no problem that need be regarded as insoluble, given
sufficient resources of intellect and money; it has room for the obscure, but
not for the essentially mysterious." Religion now no longer ordained how our
lives should be led - it tried to, but it generally failed; while thanks to the
disseminated teachings of Freud, some forms of self-expression once advertised
as the pathway to hell were now recommended as therapeutic, and essential to
human happiness and development.

    This too was a liberation, though a liberation whose consequences would have
deeply troubled our predecessors, producing a world in which everything seemed
to be relative, where solemnity was a sin, and in which we sometimes seemed to
be on the way to fulfilling the prophecy of the playwright John Osborne in mid
-century that England would one day sink giggling into the sea. This was
possible because the choices were ours. Just as in political terms one of themes
of the century was divestment of empire, the surrender to subordinate countries
of the right to run their own lives for good (though sadly often, in practice,
for ill), so the 20th century here has seen the end of a kind of moral and
cultural imperialism of which religion was part. Turn of the century Victorians,
fresh from the time of Wilde, would wonder to see the choice of Conservative
candidate for the London mayoralty disputed between a multiple adulterer and a
confessed homosexual.

    By the end of the century we seemed to have come close to a revised morality
close to that of the classic liberal statement of the actress, Mrs Patrick
Campbell: it doesn't matter what you do in the bedroom, as long as you don't do
it in the street and frighten the horses. This developing tolerance - yet to be
fully extended to some other sectors of life, especially race - has changed the
lives of men, but the lives of women more so. In 1900, the men who made these
decisions were still denying women the vote. Though it called itself a
democracy, Britain was not democratic until women were given the vote on the
same terms as men as late as 1928. But science, again, has been decisive in
resetting the balance: of all the dates in this century which deserve to be
regarded as landmarks, few matter more than 1956, the first appearance here of
the contraceptive pill.

    Just as we choose our moralities, so we can now choose divorce - a choice
now made on a scale unthinkable at the start of the century - and determine the
fate of our unborn children. The principle that women should have an unreserved
right to decide whether or not to have children started within them has not been
conceded officially, but the practice today comes far closer to that than was
ever envisaged when the law on abortion was changed (like the laws on divorce
and homosexuality) by free votes at Westminster in the liberal 60s. The choices
are all the greater because we are rich: about five times as rich, in terms of
gross domestic product per head, as our Victorian forbears. Dress, which used to
be an instant signal of class, is now the great leveller. Jeans, in this sense,
deserve a place beside genes among emblems of this century.

    So how should we account for ourselves, at the end of this century? In most
senses, we are exceedingly lucky. We have survived; in a way that sometimes at
the height of the second world war, and once or twice in the cold war (the
Berlin airlift; Cuba) seemed in doubt. Though the post-war settlement at Yalta,
with Europe divided between east and west, condemned many victims of Nazi
oppressions to life under regimes which were foully oppressive too, the allies
who won the second world war at least improved on their predecessors by not
designing a peace which effectively set the stage for a second world war only
two decades later. Astoundingly, no one under 54 in this country has lived
through great international wars as so many in the earlier years of the century
had to do twice. We may not be as rich as we wish to be, but by every previous
standard, and even more by the standards of millions living in poverty across
this allegedly globalised world, most people in Britain are swimming in money -
even if the public services on which they have to depend are conspicuously not.

    We are not, in any conventional sense, a great nation in the way that the
Britain of 1900 was a great nation. That estimate of ourselves persisted until
the end of the second world war, in the early stages of which Britain had earned
it, by its crucial resistance to Hitler. But realists knew even then that that
greater resources were needed; that the Russians and the Americans, who though
they came late to the war were by the end directing its fortunes, were more
decisive than little Britain could be in the defeat of Germany. Illusions
persisted at least until Suez: only eccentrics have harboured them since.

    We were served at the end of that war by one of our greatest governments.
New Labour today has little time for Old Labour, and sometimes behaves as if the
party's history began with the election of Tony Blair. The Labour government
which, to the world's astonishment, given what Churchill had done to save the
nation, Britain so wisely elected in the summer of 1945 gave us a welfare state
and engineered the largely peaceful retreat from empire. Whatever its
misjudgments and mismanagements, we owe it a deep debt for that; if Tony Blair's
government matches it, as it clearly aspires to do, we shall be richly
fortunate. But already under Labour's new leadership, this feels on the whole
like a more contented and cheerful and hopeful country than for many years past.
The recession which according to confident forecasts was going to turn
everything sour by now has failed to materialise. Though it is still far too
early for certainty, there is now a fair chance that the most intractable
problem facing British governments over the past 30 years - the future of
Northern Ireland - may be nearing resolution. The opinion polls tell an
astonishing story, with Mr Blair and his government vastly more popular than any
mid-term government since records began: though the abject state of the
Conservative party has something to do with that.

    Politics has changed with society. The rules which applied in the 50s and
60s are dead. This is now in every sense - moral, religious, cultural and
political quite as much as commercial - a shop-around society, where people
decide their votes less on competing ideologies than the goods they see in the
window. Labour and the Conservatives are rival political supermarkets, one now
much in need of a managerial revolution. Tony Blair is liked because he has
managed the store pretty well; stilled the political battle; taken, you might
even say, the politics out of politics.

    There is a powerful sense in all this of what the great economist JK
Galbraith calls a culture of contentment; the kind of smiling complacency for
which this century has always tended to mock its Victorian forebears. Most of us
are doing all right, thanks very much; a minority here, and huge majorities all
over the globe, largely exiled from progress, crippled by poverty, and afflicted
with great natural disasters, are not doing well at all, which is a rotten pity:
but that is life. The huge success of the Jubilee 2000 campaign on world debt,
the explosion of green thinking, the campaigns against genetically modified
crops, the disruption of the World Trade Organisation meeting in Seattle - all
of these furnish abundant evidence that the great greedy western consumer
society, dominated by ruthless international conglomerates, prospering while
millions starve, is breeding suspicion and fear and a taste for remedial action.

    But that is hardly - yet - the general mood of the pubs and the clubs and
the shopping precincts. There are sporadic outbursts not just of concern but of
real generosity for suffering people at home and abroad whose plight is shown
nightly on television. But a longer, deeper commitment to making the world a
fairer and more hospitable place remains a minority taste. In the early years of
this century, a great radical politician born in the age of Victoria, David
Lloyd George, looked forward 'to that good time when poverty, wretchedness and
the human degradation which always follows in its camp will be as remote to the
people of this country as the wolves which once infested its forests". We are
nearer to that today, but after almost a century, still nowhere as close as we
ought to be. We have to embrace that aspiration again as a new era opens before
us. We shall look at its prospects tomorrow.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1999


                               3 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 15, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1157 words

BODY:

    Picture this. It is 2016. A young couple are sitting in a doctor's waiting
room. They know that what they are about to do is illegal but they are
determined. They have come to make their child a world-beating athlete.

    The previous day the couple had watched the Olympic 800m final with some
satisfaction. The genetic tree that they have selected for their child came from
the champion of the games four years ago, a Kenyan who had outkicked a class
field by five 100ths of a second and still held the world record. Yesterday's
winner had not even come close.

    The doctor who called them into his surgery was efficient and discreet. All
that remained was for him to inject the patented genes into her embryo. The
couple had gone though extensive security screening, and he knew for the time
being that he was safe from the enforcement agencies. He could get on with
making an Olympic champion and millions of pounds.

    It is not so far fetched. One year ago the International Olympic Committee
was warned by Canadian scientists that it should prepare itself for the scenario
described above. Then this summer the call was taken up by Dr Bengt Saltin of
the Centre for Muscle Research in Copenhagen.

    Saltin, a Swedish scientist, had been given the urgent task by the Danish
government of examining not only the present state of doping, but more
importantly tracking future fears. His warning could not be starker. As soon as
the gene technology becomes available, GM athletes will turn the fields of play
into Frankenstein's playground.

    Sport must be ready to combat the bewildering pace of medical research which
will soon be able to provide us with a complete map of the human gene system.
From there it is a short step for sportsmen to exploit the benefits for
themselves.

    The head of doping in the International Amateur Athletic Federation and long
-time member of the IOC medical commission, Professor Arne Ljungqvist, agrees
that Saltin's initiative is vital: 'What he is arguing for is for the sports
community to be prepared for what may come so that we have some sort of
strategy. Things are moving very rapidly in this field. It is important that we
are not taken by surprise by what may come up.'

    The irony is that the technology which will provide sport with doping for
the next millennium is primarily dedicated to helping the terminally ill. The
world's most devastating sicknesses will provide the technology for the track
cheats of the future.

    But if the genetic fingerprint for cancer can be identified, so can the key
to what makes the human body run fast, throw far or kick hard. This is where the
interest will come from in sport. If you can extract a cancer gene from a child
and replace it with a healthy one to give them a risk-free adulthood then you
can also replace a mediocre speed gene with a super-fast one.

    'It is obvious that as gene therapy becomes a normal form of treatment, it
also has the potential to be misused in doping as every other medicine has
been,' said Saltin.

    The drug of choice of the 90s which almost brought down cycling's Tour de
France in 1998 is EPO (Erythropoietin). It is a blood booster that generates red
blood cells and so helps the system take in more oxygen and helps the legs pedal
further and faster.

    EPO was developed to help seriously sick kidney patients or road accident
victims with massive blood loss. But as soon as the sports underground got a
whiff of its magical properties it was in the kit bag. It is now used in any
sport where stamina is at a premium such as cycling, distance running and
cross-country skiing.

    Gene therapy is still very much in its infancy, but what no one
underestimates anymore is the sheer pace with which science can break down
borders and make today's fantasies the reality of tomorrow: 'Who would have
expected Dolly to appear already today,' commented Ljungqvist. 'That was fiction
some few years ago.'

    Though already being exploited in a limited way on cancer patients, the
cutting edge of gene technology has so far only been applied to mice and
monkeys. The results have been astonishing. Both mice and monkeys had raised red
blood cell levels (haematocrit) of 70% after treatment with a synthetic EPO
gene. The norm is under 40%. There were similar extraordinary results with
growth hormone genes. Within one month of implantation, dwarf mice had doubled
in size.

    Three techniques are envisioned for implantation: direct injection into
target muscle fibres, the virus bearing method and, lastly, extraction and re
-implantation of modified cells. Direct injection is the least satisfactory of
the three and can only be used on muscle fibres. Using a virus to introduce an
alien gene is the most effective but difficult to control. The introduced gene
riding piggyback on a virus could effect neighbouring cells it was not intended
for. The third method is the most failsafe but also the most complicated.

    Initially, gene-doping will only be used on a fraction of cells. So it will
just be a substitute for other forms of doping where the sportsman puts in
something extra that the body already produces, as is the case with EPO: 'But in
the long run,' says Saltin, 'when we are capable of modifying all the cells, it
will be possible to regulate the genes so as to produce extra fast contraction
proteins or to increase the amount of oxidising enzymes.' In other words, make
athletes run faster or longer.

    Apart from the clear advantage to the sportsman on the playing field there
is another more sinister ace in the hand. Because the body itself harbours the
'drug' it will be undetectable in tests. The ultimate nightmare for the dope
testers is upon them.

    But it could equally prove the ultimate nightmare for the sportsman. If a
cyclist stops taking EPO his haematocrit returns to normal. But there is no
going back on genetic modification. There are also dangers from rogue muscle
growth genes continuing to spiral out of control, producing fairground
monstrosities.

    The dangers, of course, have never stopped sport in the past. The average
life expectancy for a professional American footballer is under 50, a horrifying
statistic attributable to the widespread use of anabolic steroids. The Faustian
pact is already a reality. Early death, cancers, blood clots and strokes are
willingly gambled for fleeting moments of glory and monumental wealth.

    Society has woken up late to this threat to public health, but the French
have shown the way by getting the judiciary involved in the control of illicit
substance abuse. Dawn police raids and pre-stage testing in Tour de France
hotels are already realities that may well be the backdrop to the Olympic Games
of the future.

    Meanwhile, there will always be those who will have dodged the system, lying
quietly in their beds, waiting for their moment of glory, Frankenstein's
monsters with the bodies of Greek gods.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1999


                              10 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 30, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: Grannies regain key role in family life;
Social attitudes survey shows grandparents helping to hold things together in an
epoch of working mothers and marriage failures

BYLINE: John Ezard

BODY:

    John Ezard

    British family life may be evolving into a more woman-dominated, matrilineal
pattern in which some grandmothers could regain the central role they once had
here, and still have in other societies.

    This vision of the future was raised yesterday in a new British Social
Attitudes survey which highlights increasing contact and closeness between
grandparents and their grandchildren.

    The trend appears to reverse the postwar drift towards isolated, nuclear
families.

    The official report is one of the fullest looks yet taken at the world of
grandparents. It indicates that - during an epoch of working mothers, single
mothers and increasing marital breakdown - they seem to have responded to a
recent appeal in the House of Lords: 'Grandparents, come out of the woodwork -
we need you, you are important'.

    But they are also getting a bit fed up with the extra work they have to do
in helping heal the ruptures of broken or overworked households.

    The report, based on 3,000 interviews, says: 'It is possible that present
changes in our society are so fundamental that they are leading towards new
equations of mutual support in family life - in which some grandparents could
recover a central place.

    'It may be particularly tempting to see a new matrilineal template emerging.
Matriliny seems to be capable of motivating high levels of grandparental
support. So it is not inconceivable that it could become a more acknowledged
principle in family organisation in the future.'

    The report's focus on British grandparents reverses what it calls decades of
governmental neglect of their role, or their treatment 'solely as state
-dependent pensioners'.

    In the US, it says, more than one in 20 children under the age of 18 now
live in households headed by a grandparent. But in Britain little up-to-date
research has been done.

    The survey's interviews found that nearly 75% of all grandparents see their
grandchildren at least once a month.

    Ninety-one per cent viewed grandchildren as 'very rewarding' and felt close
to a particular grandchild. Three quarters said they had 'often' put themselves
out to help.

    Between 30% and 40% lived within 15 minutes travel of young or teenage
grandchildren and saw them 'at least several times weekly'.

    Three-quarters agreed that 'with so many working mothers, families need
grandparents to help more and more'. An equal number of mothers felt the same.

    Relationships cut both ways. More than 40% of children helped a grandparent
with household chores.

    The sharp, sudden rise in marital breakdowns is highlighted by the report's
revelation that more than four in every 10 younger grandparents had
grandchildren in broken or single-parent homes. This was true of only 23% of
grandparents in their 50s and only 18% in their 60s.

    In these homes, grandparents visited more often, 'put themselves out more'
to help, and took grandchildren out more alone.

    But they also complained more. Some 47% longed for 'a life free from family
duties', compared with 35% of those whose children's households were unbroken.
Yet 62% of those helping broken homes spoke of their role as 'very rewarding'.
This satisfaction was highest in matrilineal households where the mother was the
grandparents' daughter.

    Other issues highlighted in the survey were:

    A deep concern over gene therapy, with only one in five supporting its use
to breed more intelligent children. Nearly 50% favoured allowing a very
overweight person's genes to be changed, and 68% supported genetic alteration to
reduce heart disease risks.

    Fewer than 25% wanted any relaxation of countryside planning laws. Nearly
70% viewed traffic congestion in cities as serious but only 11% were willing to
pay more taxes to solve it.

    Only a third of under 25 year olds believed voting was a civic obligation.
This contrasted with about two thirds of 25-55 year olds and nearly 80% of
people over 55. Thirty per cent of teenagers had 'no interest whatsoever' in
politics. National Centre for Social Research . Ashgate Publishing, 39 Milton
Park, Abingdon. OX14 4TD ( pounds 27.50 hb). Leader comment, page 21


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1999


                              13 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 12, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: 'Star Trek future' for medicine

BODY:

    The GP surgery of the future will resemble the sick bay aboard the Starship
Enterprise, British and American doctors said yesterday.

    It will contain diagnostic scanning equipment and a computer capable of
analysing a patient's genetic blueprint in seconds.

    The doctors, meeting in London to launch future-medicine issues of the
British Medical Journal and its US counterpart, claimed that health care was set
to undergo more sweeping changes in the next two decades than had occurred in
the last 2,000 years.

    In 20 years' time, developments in technology will have transformed
hospitals and medical treatment beyond recognition.

    Hospitals will be crammed with sensors and robots, and patients themselves
will carry 'smart' devices to monitor their condition and inject the right doses
of drugs into their blood.

    In the lobby of the hospital of 2010, a vent in the ceiling will detect any
visitor carrying an airborne infection.

    Patients able to access a wealth of health information on the internet will
ultimately become their own physicians and the GP will adopt the role of a
professional adviser and 'fixer'. Gene therapy will take over from the scalpel.

    Many of the predictions are detailed in the BMJ and the Journal of the
American Medical Association.

    Neurosurgeon Charles Wilson, from the Institute of the Future and department
of surgery at the university of California in San Francisco, said central
intensive care units would be replaced by dispersed 'life-support' beds that
would monitor and support patients as well as serving as operating tables.

    He added that new vaccines would mark the biggest immediate change. Some
would contain 'chunks' of DNA that could be fired through the skin. Others would
be eaten or inhaled.

    They will protect against a variety of diseases, including non-infectious
conditions such as diabetes.

    'Within five years we're going to be seeing things from vaccines that are
really going to be quite amazing,' he said.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1999


                              14 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                November 3, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Hearts made to grow their own bypass arteries

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science Editor

BODY:

    Tim Radford Science Editor

    American scientists have used controlled doses of a human protein to get
hearts to grow their own bypass arteries.

    Bypass surgery involves stopping the heart, for which some patients are
already too ill.

    But a team from Harvard medical school has found a solution they say is
without side effects. Michael Simons and colleagues report in the latest issue
of the journal Circulation that they implanted tiny timed-release capsules into
the heart muscles of patients waiting for bypass surgery.

    The capsules contained either 10 millionths of a gram or 100 millionths of a
gram of a hormone called basic fibroblast growth factor (bfGF), which was then
delivered to the patients' hearts over a four to six week period. Baby hearts
grow new blood vessels as they mature; adult hearts do not.

    The test was to see whether the growth factor would trigger angiogenesis and
provide new pathways down which blood could flow.

    Those patients getting the higher doses showed clear and significant
improvement in blood flow, and they suffered no angina or chest pain. Those who
got the low dose got no worse.

    Those who were given only the placebo actually showed a worsening in blood
flow during stress tests, and they suffered tell-tale chest pains.

    The study only involved 24 patients, none of whom would have benefited from
surgery. Some were given only placebos. After treatment, blood flow was measured
by two sophisticated tests, involving magnetic resonance imaging, and nuclear
stress testing. A bigger trial involving 120 patients has now begun.

    'While the number of patients is small, we clearly saw an effect with the
100 microgram treatment group,' Dr Simons said.

    'This study showed that growth factor therapy could be done safely and is a
viable strategy for treating heart disease.'

    Heart disease is the biggest single cause of death in the western world.
There have been attempts to improve surgery itself. One team in Pittsburgh
experimented with 'minimally-invasive' therapy, using a single three inch
incision and operating while the heart was still beating.

    A team at Pennsylvania state university last year used a robot system called
Zeus to perform 'closed-chest' bypass surgery on a 70-year-old woman, using a
tiny camera and holes the size of pencils. But solutions such as these are
expensive and do not always work: bypass surgeries often fail ultimately because
of new blockages of atherosclerotic plaque.

    The growth factor experiment is not the only avenue of exploration: there
have been attempts at gene therapy for blocked arteries. A New York hospital has
slipped a genetic trigger into a virus and injected it into the hearts of
patients in the hope that their hearts, at least, would experience a second
childhood and grow new blood vessels.

    But gene therapy is in its medical infancy. By supplying precise quantities
of a known growth factor, experimenters had tighter control over the outcome.


LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1999


                              19 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 21, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Cancer cure explosion to plunge NHS into crisis

BYLINE: Sarah Boseley Health Correspondent

BODY:

    Sarah Boseley Health Correspondent

    Scientists will make big strides in the prevention, treatment and cure of
cancer in the next 15 years - but in Britain, where death rates are already
higher than in Europe and the US, NHS patients are in danger of losing out,
according to a leading cancer expert.

    Gordon McVie, director general of the Cancer Research Campaign, said the
health service would not be able to cope with what he called 'an explosion in
new ways of preventing and treating cancer', which a growing understanding of
genetics is making possible.

    He spoke out on the day news broke of another advance in the US. Scientists
revealed that they had found a way to switch on the entire immune system of men
with prostate cancer, using a genetically engineered vaccine. The injection
causes the immune system to seek out and attack malignant cells and has
important implications for other forms of cancer.

    Professor McVie said the work, by Johns Hopkins researchers, was one of
several exciting gene therapy trials that offered great promise for new
treatments. But the chances of the NHS allocating money for them was not high.

    'New approaches to cancer are evolving faster than the NHS can resource
them,' he told the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow.

    'This has resulted in disgraceful cancer mortality figures in the UK,
probably the worst in western Europe and certainly worse than in the United
States. So how will the NHS cope in the next 15 years, when an explosion in new
ways of preventing and treating cancer will occur?'

    Speaking to the Guardian, he added: 'We're not delivering state-of-the-art
treatment to everybody with cancer in the UK. We have been shouting and
screaming and protesting for five years, ever since our data first showed the
difference in outcomes according to where you live.'

    New drugs such as Taxol, which can extend the lives of young women with
ovarian cancer, were not being funded. Radiotherapy machines were 20 years out
of date. And the Calman-Hine review of cancer care, which recommended that
patients should see cancer specialists in centres of excellence instead of
general consultants at district hospitals, was not being fully implemented.

    'Health authorities and trusts are sitting there doing nothing,' he said.
'They are not changing the way they think about cancer - not prioritising it.'
His quarrel is not primarily with the government, which has prioritised cancer -
now the biggest killer in the UK.

    The attack was deflected by the NHS Confederation, which represents health
authorities and trusts. Prof McVie was 'right within the field he is in', said
Nigel Edwards, director of policy. 'Undoubtedly there are things that could be
better. But this is an issue for society about what it would like to pay for and
how it wants to pay.

    'The MS Society, the kidney patients' society - all of them have totally
legitimate claims for resources. The difficulty for any health service is how
you pay for that.'

    The Johns Hopkins gene therapy for prostate cancer - still in trials - is
extremely expensive, because it is tailor-made for patients. The vaccine
activates the immune system against malignant cells that remain once the tumour
has been removed. It uses cells from the patient's tumour injected with the
GM-CSF gene, which the researchers describe as 'the most potent gene known to
activate the immune system to recognise tumour antigens'.

    'Using gene therapy, we re-educated the immune system to recognise prostate
cancer cells as a potential infection and attack,' said Jonathan Simons,
associate professor of oncology and urology, who led the study. 'We were
astounded to find that every part of the immune system was alerted and turned
on.'

    Professor Nick Lemoine, director of the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's
molecular oncology unit, agreed with Prof McVie that the NHS would not be able
to pay for all the new developments in the pipeline.

    'The idea of trying to make these personalised vaccines is something that we
are not going to be able to cope with in the public sector,' he said.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1999


                              24 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 6, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 491 words

HEADLINE: Doctors call for ban on 'medical' weapons

BYLINE: Richard Norton-Taylor

BODY:

    Richard Norton-Taylor

    Doctors yesterday joined the Red Cross in calling for new guidelines
outlawing the use of weapons derived from research into genetics, laser
technology, and other areas of scientific research.

    They called on governments to ban weapons which inflicted 'superfluous
injury or unnecessary suffering' by being specifically designed to cause
injuries which have no military purpose.

    The concept is already used in international law. However, at a London
conference on 'wounds, weapons and the doctor', the British Medical Association
yesterday embraced criteria which would be covered in new agreements as well as
helping to enforce existing treaties which are ignored or contain loopholes.

    Based on data from an international committee of the Red Cross project, the
BMA said weapons should be banned where they were designed to cause:

    specific disease, abnormal physiological state, or permanent disability,
including so-called 'non lethal' weapons;

    battlefield mortality of more than 25% or hospital mortality of more than
5%;

    Red Cross classified grade 3 wounds - those, such as ex ploding bullets,
which inflict large wounds without being targeted against a specific part of the
body;

    effects for which there is no recognised or proven treatment.

    Nuclear weapons would be covered by the first, second, and fourth criteria.

    Robin Coupland of the Red Cross yesterday singled out in this last category
'blinding laser' weapons which cause permanent injury to the eyes. The new
criteria would also include 'point-detonated' anti-personnel mines.

    Vivienne Nathanson, the BMA's head of health policy, warned that research in
biotechnology and gene therapy could lead to new kinds of weapons. It was
recently disclosed that the government's chemical and biological weapons
research establishment at Porton Down had developed a plague vaccine while the
Basson case in South Africa showed that 'ethnic targeting' was a reality.

    Wouter Basson, former head of South Africa's chemical and biological weapons
programme, is on trial for multiple murder, fraud, and drug dealing. He is
accused of conducting experiments on humans to control black fertility and
developing poisons aimed at the black population.

    The BMA warned earlier this year that it was now possible that a bomb
containing anthrax or the plague could be tailored so that the virus would only
become active when it identified a certain group of genes, indicating membership
of a certain ethnic group, in the infected person.

    The emphasis yesterday was on the use of weapons against combatants rather
than civilians. Dr Coupland said yesterday that while cluster bombs would not be
'specifically prohibited' under the criteria, serious consideration should be
given to whether they should be outlawed.

    Unexploded Nato cluster bombs in Kosovo have led to the deaths of two Gurkha
soldiers and at least four children.


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1999


                              35 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 2, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 821 words

HEADLINE: Mice given extra gene become smarter

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science Editor

BODY:

    Tim Radford Science Editor

    A quick-thinking, genetically engineered mouse, called Doogie, has led
scientists to claim that they may one day be able to boost human intelligence.

    Joe Tsien, a neurologist at Princeton university, New Jersey, and
collaborators at other US universities, report in Nature today that by adding a
single gene to mice they have significantly boosted the ability of the
laboratory animals to solve maze tasks, learn from the environment and retain
the knowledge.

    They dubbed the mouse Doogie after an American television show Doogie Howser
MD. The addition of the gene, already known to be important in human and other
mam-mals' memory capabilities, enabled the engineered mice to stay mentally
young; they retained into adulthood certain brain features of juvenile mice. And
young mice, like young humans, are better than adults at grasping huge amounts
of new information. The re search is described as a 'breakthrough' and confirms
that there is a common biochemical piece of machinery at the root of nearly all
learning. It is likely to trigger debate about how society should handle the
astonishing new power of genetic research.

    It also follows a warning from another Princeton geneticist last year that
human evolution could undergo a new phase in the next millennium - prompted by
the rich being able to buy extra-intelligence genes for their unborn children.

    'This not only holds the hope of making animals smarter, but also ultimately
of having human gene therapy for use in areas such as dementia,' said Ira Black,
head of neuroscience at Rutgers university, New Jersey. 'But this is far in the
future and it is not something we could bring to the bedside tomorrow.'

    The scientists focused on mice because they are like humans. And like all
mammals, humans and mice have genes in common. Dr Tsien and his colleagues
selected a gene, named NR2B, long thought to a be a key 'switch' in controlling
the brain's ability to link one event with another - the bottom line of
learning. Mice without this gene had been shown to have impaired learning;
drugs, too, can provide the same blocking effect. But to clinch the case,
researchers needed to show that the gene would enhance learning.

    The gene is the recipe for a protein, on the surface of nerve cells, which
serves as a receptor for chemical messages. This receptor is called NMDA. Like a
double lock, it can only be opened with two keys or signals. If two signals
arrive at the same time - say, the signals from a lighted match and a burned
finger - the receptor is triggered and a memory is formed.

    In young animals, the receptor responds even if there is a gap between the
two signals, which could be one explanation as to why learning is very fast in
the young, but slower after adolescence.

    Dr Tsien gave the mice extra copies of the NR2B gene, and then engineered
the genes so that their activity increased with age. In experiments, mice with
the extra gene learned much faster than normal mice.

    They tested the little creatures by letting them explore objects for just
five minutes, and then removing the objects. Days later, they replaced one of
the objects and reintroduced the mice. The Doogie mice would remember the old
object and explore only the new one. But the normal mice would devote the same
amount of time to both old and unfamiliar objects.

    The mice were given electric shocks in a chamber, and the transgenic mice
were much more frightened than the others on confronting the chamber for the
second time.

    There was a similar response when the mice were taught to be afraid of a
certain sound. When the associated pain and fear were removed, the engineered
mice learned not to be frightened much more quickly than the others.

    Finally, the mice were dropped in a tank of water which contained a hidden
platform that would allow them to get out of the water. The Doogie mice learned
to escape twice as fast. 'They're learning things much better and remembering
longer,' said Dr Tsien. 'They're smarter.'

    British neuroscientists yesterday said that the research confirmed a theory
of the chemistry of memory, but they were less enthusiastic about the claim that
it could one day boost human intelligence.

    'This is a real piece of vulgar hype from Princeton. I'm rather shocked,'
said Steven Rose, head of the brain and behaviour research group at the Open
university. 'The work is interesting. It uses novel genetic techniques. It
doesn't tell us anything much that we didn't know before, but it is neatly
done.'

    He added: 'They shouldn't do this stuff, it really is irresponsible.
Intelligence doesn't reside in a gene, or in a cell or even in a brain. Human
intelligence is something that develops as part of the interaction between
children and the social and natural world, as they grow up. It is not something
locked inside a little molecule in the head.'


LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1999


                              48 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 5, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: Guardian Unlimited

BYLINE: ??

BODY:

    Leeson back Rogue trader Nick Leeson returned to London chirpy but under
instructions not to jeopardise his pounds 100,000 deal with the Daily Mail 4
Inside Story BBC executives have handed over footage of a father filmed
searching for his family who now stands accused of murdering his two chilren in
Israel 5 Gene fear A senior consultant has been suspended from his NHS post amid
allegations that he breached safety controls while conducting pioneering gene
therapy 7 Wedding bells Victoria Adams and David Beckham pulled off one of the
most extravagant showbiz weddings in recent memory yesterday 7 Wheeling and
dealing Britain's underground economy has become one of the biggest money
-spinners in the country 10

    Freetown horrors UN secretary-general Kofi Annan is to meet people who have
had their hands cut off by rebels in Sierra Leone as a warning against
supporting the elected government 11 Son of Slobodan For the playboy son of
Milosevic the war may as well never of happened as he launches a new amusement
complex called Bambipark 13

    Gold for sale Despite widespread opposition the government will this week
begin selling off the first tranche of its gold reserves with the sale likely to
be over-suscribed 19 Analysis Sick hospitals If we trust doctors to diagnose
illness shouldn't we also accept their strong criticism of the ill effects of
the Private Finance Initiative in the NHS? Comment

    Decca Aitkenhead says it's time we reached a compromise over the law on date
rape 15 Peter Preston 'William Whitelaw embodied values Mrs Thatcher never
aspired to - like humanity' 16 Plus Robert Hazell, Roy Hattersley and Martin
Walker 15-16 Leaders Northern Ireland Hopes for peace rise after low-key
Unionist action at Drumcree North Africa Algeria's new President makes good
start Leeson Did Nostradamus have Nick Leeson in mind? Obituaries

    Mario Puzo, author of The Godfather, aged 78 18

    Clinical efficiency Andy Beckett traces the rise of the Priory and asks how
it became the place for celebs to piece themselves back together 2 Charm
offensive He is a bon viveur, wit, quite good at TV quiz shows. But will he make
a good leader of the Lib Dems? Simon Hattenstone interviews Charles Kennedy 4
Criminal element Jake Arnott's debut novel is set amid the sexy sleaze of
gangster-ridden 60s Soho. It has earned him a six-figure advance 8 Frankly
embarrassing 'My main problem with the Smart car is that I couldn't really get
the point of it.' Sam Woollaston on the latest offering from Mercedes 10 Plus
guidemonday, the best entertainment listings in any British daily newspaper

    Four the Record The chief executive of Channel 4 on why he's changing the
network Planet Janet We ask Street-Porter what exactly a 'polymorphous journal'
is as she starts her first week on the Independent on Sunday Plus How to edit a
bus ticket; why is the state so worried about secrecy; the landmark judgement
that stopped the police seizing journalists' notes and pictures and why does
television ignore the old? www.guardian.co.uk Miss anything this weekend? Find
it online Movie madnessFind out where to catch the best movies with our
unrivalled listings service www.filmunlimited.co.uk

    Guardian Newspapers Ltd, 119 Farringdon Road EC1R 3ER.

    Telephone: 0171-278 2332

    Fax: 0171-837 2114 / 0171-833 8342

    www.guardian.co.uk.


LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1999


                              49 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 5, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 665 words

HEADLINE: Gene mix consultant suspended

BYLINE: Sarah Hall

BODY:

    Sarah Hall

    A senior consultant has been suspended from his NHS post amid allegations
that he breached safety controls while conducting pioneering gene therapy
research on dying liver patients.

    Nagy Habib, the head of liver surgery at Hammersmith hospital, west London,
is said to have injected up to 20 patients with a cocktail of human liver cells
and a flu virus before being given permission by the government's regulatory
body, the gene therapy advisory committee (GTAC).

    He allegedly failed to explain the risks involved to the private, overseas
patients he was treating or to offer them counselling. And, once he had
conducted the research, he is said not to have monitored them properly not
keeping them in isolation for the three days required and releasing them too
early.

    Last night, the chairman of the GTAC, Norman Nevin, said his behaviour was
being treated 'very seriously indeed'. An independent investigation the first
into breaches of gene therapy controls has been set up by the NHS regional trust
for London and is expected to take up to a year.

    The inquiry, which may be followed by a separate department of health
investigation, will also examine what safety controls were put in place to
prevent the spread of infection from the terminally-ill patients to others, how
many were experimented upon, and how long the trials have been taking place.

    'Gene therapy is still in its infancy and one has to be very careful about
monitoring such therapy,' added Professor Nevin, professor of genetics at
Queen's university, Belfast, who co-founded the GTAC in 1993. 'Whether it's one
or five or 10, it must not be conducted within the UK without the specific
approval of the gene therapy committee.'

    Mr Habib's research which involved a gene mixed with a benign flu virus
being injected into the blood stream leading to the liver was conducted in
conjunction with a study at the Arhus Kommune hospital, Denmark's largest
hospital, which was suspended pending a full investigation last month. The
consultant heading the experiment, Steen Lindkear, is now on sick leave, has
been demoted, and has been forced to resign from the hospital from the start of
next year.

    Last night, the hospital's managing director, Joern Koch, said around 23
people had undergone the trials in Denmark while a further 20 had been referred
to Mr Habib. Mr Koch also confirmed Danish press reports that patients had left
the hospital within hours of the controversial treatment.

    Gene therapy trials have only been conducted worldwide since 1990, and
cannot take place in Britain without a licence being granted by the GTAC. So far
22 have been approved by the body and Mr Habib's proposal was the first he had
submitted to the regulatory body.

    In order to gain a licence, doctors must comply with certain conditions
including: monitoring patients and reporting any adverse reactions to the GTAC
and the hospital's local ethics committee, gaining the patient's informed
consent, and ensuring they undergo independent counselling. Mr Habib, 46, who
had been at the Hammersmith Hospital for 10 years before being suspended on
full-pay last week, is said to have breached these conditions and to have
started the trials before gaining the GTAC's permission in February.

    Last night Dr Habib was unavailable for comment. But he told a Sunday
newspaper: 'I am distressed at the allegations which I strenuously deny. I will
vigorously defend my professional practice and reputation.'

    A spokesman for the Hammersmith Hospitals trust said: 'The allegations
relate to the possible use of gene therapy and, because of the complex nature of
the matters under investigation, and the fact that overseas patients are
involved, the inquiry is being set up by the London regional office of the NHS
executive.'

    The department of health, which was alerted to the allegations by GTAC, said
a separate inquiry would be launched pending the investigation's findings.


LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1999


                              60 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 22, 1999

SECTION: The Guardian Weekend Page; Pg. 78

LENGTH: 874 words

HEADLINE: THE TWENTIETH CENTURY: 21: Health;
A pill for all ills, a cancer cure, a weapon against bacteria, effective
contraception - medical science has given us some solutions, but kept us looking
for others. Since 1900, we in the west have certainly become fitter and live
longer, but disease is proving a resourceful foe. A century of triumph, or
failure?

BYLINE: SARAH BOSELEY

BODY:

    Modern medicine has moved not only beyond the hopes of doctors of the last
century, but way beyond anything they could have imagined. Now, the creation of
babies in test tubes and computer-guided, keyhole surgery are routine. Even
20th-century flights of fancy, such as the Star Trek-style, hand-held diagnostic
machine, which detects illness without touching the body, are now within reach.

    With this incredible progress has come a revolution in expectations.

    At the end of the last century, people anticipated a shortish life in which
illness led to pain and suffering, and many children did not survive to
adulthood. Now, maternal and perinatal mortality are tiny in the UK, we expect
to see out at least our threescore and ten - and if we do not get better in the
hands of the doctor, we sue.

    We have come so far, so fast, thanks to a stream of microbiological and
technological breakthroughs, together with a focus on public health and social
welfare. The launch of the National Health Service in this country in 1949,
following two world wars that concentrated minds on our general human frailty,
meant health - and glasses and dentistry - for all the population, not just the
rich.

    Immunisation has been one of the greatest successes of the century. The
recent backlash against the MMR (measles, mumps, rubella) jabs is a product
partly of the widespread dissemination of information today, where patients will
go to the doctor armed with an internet printout and knowing more about the
condition than the doctor does. But it is also born of complacency, in a society
where childhood deaths are relatively uncommon.

    Louis Pasteur died in 1896, but his research into the micro-organisms
responsible for disease was refined by scientists at the Pasteur Institute. The
first tuberculosis vaccine from live, attenuated bacillus, called the BCG
(Bacilli Calmette Guerin, after the two French scientists responsible), was used
on calves, but not on humans until 1924. War proved immunisation beyond doubt.
Tetanus and typhoid vaccinations during the first world war slashed the death
toll among troops.

    The same war inspired Alexander Fleming's work on wounds and resistance to
infection. This led to the discovery of penicillin, the most exciting medical
event this century, in August 1928. Penicillin was used with extraordinary
effectiveness against bacterial diseases such as meningitis, diphtheria,
anthrax, tetanus and syphilis. Pneumonia once killed one-third of those who
contracted it. With penicillin, the death-rate fell to 6%.

    Between 1952 and 1969, maternal mortality fell from 67 to 19 per thousand,
partly due to better care under the NHS, but also thanks to antibiotics.

    Not long ago, it was assumed we were on the way to eliminating infectious
diseases. The World Health Organisation has declared smallpox to have been
eradicated - the last death was 22 years ago. But the end of the century has
seen the emergence of new strains of TB, malaria and other diseases, as well as
hospital superbugs that are resistant to the now massively overused antibiotics.
And the most alarming new disease is Aids, a viral infection that is held in
check with expensive drugs in the west, but for which there is no cure. Much
ill-health is 'self-inflicted' by 20th-century lifestyles - tobacco kills 30
million a year, and the toll is rising sharply, while heart disease from junk
food, smoking and lack of exercise is spreading around the globe. Cancer is
often blamed on our damaged environment, but its incidence is soaring at least
in part because we are living much longer. Gene therapy and designed drugs,
tailored for each individual, may offer new hope in the next century.

    In 1962, Malcolm Muggeridge called this century 'the age of pills'. From
aspirin to Prozac, we have been seduced by hopes of a wonderdrug - to make us
whole, healthy, happy, awake or asleep at our convenience. But, in the early
60s, Thalidomide changed the blithe acceptance that drugs always did you good.
This anti-nausea drug, used by pregnant women, led to the birth of more than
5,000 deformed babies, and stringent rules governing the testing of drugs were
introduced.

    With advances in anaesthesia and drug treatment, new operations were
attempted. In December 1967, Professor Christiaan Barnard carried out the first
heart transplant. The recipient survived for 18 days. In Britain, there are now
around 400 such operations annually, and the world's first arm transplant took
place last year. Animal-to-human organ transplants are being researched, but may
be overtaken by developments in human tissue-growing and cloning.

    Improved education has led to the questioning of the belief that doctors
know best. In Britain, Grantly Dick-Read, and, later, Benjamin Spock in the US,
led a revolution against medical intervention in childbirth, encouraging women
to trust themselves, during labour and later, in the early years of child
-rearing.

    The closing years of the century have seen the revival of herbal and
homeopathic cures, and, in some quarters, suspicion of modern medicine. There is
a feeling that it is time to consolidate and assess the value of all we have
achieved.

    Next week: The home.


LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1999


                              64 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 20, 1999

SECTION: The Guardian Feature Page; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 709 words

HEADLINE: The doctor

BODY:

    Name: Ron Crystal Institution: New York Presbyterian Hospital Field: gene
therapy Ron Crystal is an American pulmonary specialist, an expert in the lungs
and heart, which is one of the reasons that he likes to break off from work to
exercise - he knows it's good for him. It was while running one afternoon that
he had a crucial idea about using a genetically modified cold virus to carry
genes into the damaged organs of his patients.

    On the day of the run in April 1989, Dr Crystal had received a call from a
medical research team in France with whom he had been collaborating on lung
diseases. They told him they'd adapted an adenovirus - a cold virus - to include
a gene which prompted the production of a naturally occurring protein (Alpha 1
antitrypsin).

    'They said they didn't know what to do with the virus,' said Crystal. 'I
told them, let me think about it and I'll get back to you. Then I went running
and suddenly got this idea. I said to myself, gee, adenoviruses are the cause of
the common cold. That means they must like the cells which line the airways. Why
don't we use the cold virus to cure cystic fibrosis?' He ran back to the lab to
tell his colleagues, and over the next few days made arrangements for one of his
team to travel to France to learn the techniques involved in modifying the cold
virus. The bigger problem was that no one had yet identified the gene which
causes cystic fibrosis, which meant that the virus could not be loaded with any
new instructions for the lungs. Crystal knew he had to launch a search for the
gene, a process which at that time might have taken years. But first he decided
to see if any other researchers were pursuing the gene. Eventually he approached
Francis Collins, a famous geneticist who now leads the Human Genome Project.

    'I talked to Francis and figured that he was holding something back from me.
I realised that he'd got the gene but wasn't telling me,' Crystal said, glancing
out of the window of the Starr Building in New York Presbyterian Hospital.

    He was right about Collins. Within a few months, Collins's team announced
that they'd found the gene, which enabled Crystal and his colleagues to begin
work to modify the virus so that it could carry instructions to the lung tissues
of cystic fibrosis sufferers. Several years passed, which were to prove exciting
but also rather frustrating. Crystal's original hope of finding a cure for
cystic fibrosis did not work out. They found that gene therapy could only
relieve sufferers for three or four days at a time because of what is called low
gene expression.

    It wasn't the idea that was at fault because the virus turned out to be the
perfect vehicle. 'We had this robust gene transfer system, and we began to ask
what else could we use this for? How could we help people? It became obvious to
me that we had a reasonable chance of rebuilding blood vessels, so we started
thinking of the heart and peripheral vascular disease,' he said.

    Crystal experimented with the idea by injecting a gene into a pig's heart
and observed new blood vessels being formed. Tests on humans followed in
December 1997, by which time he was working closely with the Todd Rosengart, a
cardiologist at the Presbyterian Hospital. The first 15 patients received the
gene therapy while also undergoing conventional bypass surgery. A further 10
patients have now received gene therapy in a minor operation that involves tiny
holes being bored in the chest through which a syringe and video camera are
passed. It is, of course, much less traumatic for the patient and it is hoped
that this amazingly ingenious operation will eventually replace a lot of open
heart surgery.

    The interesting thing about Crystal's progress over the last decade is that
he had the right idea for the wrong illness. The notion of using a cold virus
which would taxi in genes then be rejected by the immune system is neat. It's
best application has been to persuade an old heart to think young and create the
blood vessels. But a great panorama of possibilities opens up. And as the
analytical work is done on the human genome, more and more ideas will occur to
men like Crystal. The protocol may yet prove to be a new line of attack on
cancer.


LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1999


                              65 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 19, 1999

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1774 words

HEADLINE: And how tall would you like your child sir?

BODY:

    A quiet revolution is underway. One that will change our lives in ways we
can barely imagine. Such is the pace of discovery that most of us will live to
see the ageing process slowed, if not reversed, and quite possibly dinosaurs
brought back to life. We will be able to 'read' the personality of individuals
before they are born and even choose the traits of our children. Yet the elite
band of thinkers shaping our destiny remain largely unknown to us. In the first
of two unique reports based on in-depth interviews on both sides of the
Atlantic, Henry Porter offers a revealing portrait of the gene scientists and
the way they view the new world they are creating. Today he profiles the
(largely) publicly-funded purists; tomorrow the entrepreneurs racing to exploit
the cracking of the human code

    Imagine a very large geological event in which everything shifts in one
direction at once. Because everything has moved it looks as though nothing has
moved: life continues, yet each of us is dully aware that something enormous has
happened. That is how the genetic revolution is swamping humanity, affecting
every part of our culture and changing us forever. Whether it will be for good
is another matter.

    It all started in the mid-eighties when an excited gleam appeared in the
eyes of a number of molecular biologists and biochemists. The Strangelove
expression was the single outward sign of a dream that one day the entire human
genome (the 70 to 100,000 genes that add up to a blueprint for a complete human)
would be sequenced - laid out in a kind of vast map - then filleted, divvied up
and analysed. It was a big ambition and only they fully appreciated its
magnitude. To the rest of us, perhaps the Genome Project seemed bafflingly
expensive (its cost was first estimated at $ 3 billion, a sum which has now been
exceeded) and as relevant to ordinary life as the measurement of cosmic
radiation.

    But now we are compelled to think about it. Apart from anything else, we are
living through a period which is going to be much more broadly influential than
either the blossoming of chemistry in the last part of the 19th century or the
big discoveries made in physics at the beginning of this century. We are
approaching a big moment in humanity's understanding of itself, just half a
century after James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the double helix
structure of DNA and effectively invented modern genetics. But while this
revolution is about understanding, it is also - crucially - about a powerful
technology that we will use to wrest control from the randomness of nature.

    In the next 25 to 35 years we can expect to see genetic manipulation of
human embryos as routine practice. We will be able to eliminate inherited
diseases, but also to enhance the new human being with genes for height, energy,
spatial ability and intelligence.

    We will be on the verge of solving many problems about ageing. While we may
never create the immortal body, we will probably be able to add a youthful
lustre to an old person's skin, restore hair to its glistening prime, ease
creaking joints and rejuvenate fading hearts. Tissue engineers will use genes
they have located in the human genome to grow body parts: skin and cartilage
have already been made. There will be elaborate gene therapies that will
discreetly reprogramme organs without the need for invasive surgery. In fact
this is already happening: on the West Coast a scientist named Inder Verma has
modified the Aids virus to carry instructions to the nucleus of cells; and in
New York Ron Crystal of Cornell University uses the temporary deployment of an
adapted cold virus to create new blood vessels in a damaged heart.

    All the future developments rest on the work being done on the genome.
Galvanised by Craig Venter's challenge from the private sector, the publicly
funded Human Genome Project will shortly produce a rough draft of the great map.

    We can expect an announcement next year.

    Regardless of who sequences the human genome first, the important thing to
grasp is that the genome represents a starting point rather than the finishing
post. Some 20 organisms have now been sequenced, the largest of which is a worm
called C Elegans with 19,000 genes which has just been completed by the Sanger
Centre in Cambridge. The average human has about 80,000 genes which consist of 3
billion bits of information. The function of most of these genes is unknown and
years of research lies ahead to figure out which particular genes are
responsible for the traits and talents and flaws of mankind - athleticism, a
weak heart, a pug nose.

    Beyond this there are goals of almost unimaginable computation - how the
genes that come together in one person interact and combine to produce the
unique individual. We only have to think for a few seconds to realise that the
combination of genes that is formed when two humans mate successfully must have
an almost incalculable potential.

    If, for example, it had been possible to present scientists with the two
relatively ordinary genetic profiles of a couple living in 16th century
Warwickshire it seems unlikely that they could have predicted that the baby born
on April 23 1564 would have the genius of William Shakespeare. Who knows, maybe
when the third or fourth generation of DNA computers are in action, such a
prediction will be possible.

    Of course, there isn't going to be one seismic moment of revelation, but a
period of huge discovery is getting under way and it will alter countless areas
of our culture and our history. This came home to me while travelling around
labs in America. In Virginia I broke the journey to visit Monticello, the
Palladian house built by Thomas Jefferson in the 18th century. You could not
imagine a place further from the furious concentration of genetics, and yet the
science has thrown light on Jefferson's character. By testing the descendants of
a slave girl named Sally Hemmings it has been established beyond doubt that
Jefferson was the father of her children.

    Monticello, once thought of as an Olympus of enlightenment, suddenly seems
more like a middle eastern seraglio, and Jefferson comes into focus as a hard
task master, an abuser and a control freak.

    Knowledge is sometimes unsettling. As the evidence accumulates to show how
each of us is the result of traits that were thrown together at the moment of
conception, strong determinist arguments will make headway against assumptions
of personal responsibility and free will. After all, if we agree that a man with
a certain gene is likely to succumb to heart disease in his late fifties, we
must also surely accept that another gene is responsible for his extreme
violence in youth. If he cannot fight the heart trouble why should he be
expected to resist the impulses caused by the second gene? Such issues will have
to be explored by jurists and philosophers, while politicians will have to deal
with a broadening landscape of problems about inequality.

    Rather than levelling society, embryonic manipulation and new health
treatments are likely to increase gaps between poor and rich. We will intone the
usual pieties about the uniqueness and worth of each human being, but at the
same time there will be an increasing tendency - by schools, insurance
companies, maybe even employers - to define people by their genetic make-up.
Once your personal genome is known there will be no escaping the limiting
conclusions of society. Acute issues of privacy, therefore, also emerge.

    Surprisingly, the eight scientists that I interviewed all argued against the
power of their science, insisting that nature and nurture are of roughly equal
influence in a human being's development. Lee Silver says that in the right
circumstances aggressive genes are expressed as assertiveness. Likewise, heart
disease may be avoided with a good diet and exercise. There are choices, he
insists. Still, this won't prevent the reflex opinion that a person is
programmed with certain flaws.

    It is ironic that while scientists generally make efforts to buttress our
ideas of free will, their work silently makes the case for the supremacy of
genetic control. Potentially every organism on the planet is now up for
modification, and we've shown no qualms in tampering with the living world. The
gleeful abandon with which we have set about creation is truly worrying. Already
we are fashioning plants and animals to more convenient sizes, colours, rates of
production. There are sheep that produce human proteins and pigs with modified
hearts that will be transplanted into humans. If something looks useful or
possible or simply fun, we try it out without the slightest hesitation. Just for
the hell of it someone has produced a green fluorescent mouse by adding to its
embryo a gene that makes octopuses glow in the dark. Suddenly, creation has
become a playground.

    One has a dim inkling of some of the news stories of 25 years' time. There
will be reports about irreversible genetic pollution. We will hear how DNA
snatchers are trying to recreate Elvis and Marilyn, and one morning we will wake
up to see a living dinosaur on our television screens. It will be a crude
caricature confected from the genomes of several modern creatures, but man will
be the creator, the great gene artist.

    All this will be at the frivolous end of the biotech revolution. Back in the
labs of the 21st century, earnest scientists will be approaching the next great
frontier of knowledge which is generally held to be the mystery of the human
mind. We will want to know exactly how the instructions of some of those 80,000
genes form the organ that produces the sensation of consciousness. We will go to
any lengths to prise open this mystery, and will come to know ourselves in ways
that we have not before: we will feel awe, no doubt, but also a kind of baffled
revulsion as we reduce everything to a set of material explanations. One is
reminded of Hamlet. 'What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason! How
infinite in faculty! In form, in moving, how express and admirable . . . And yet
to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me.'

    'Genetics is going to be more important than physics was.

    It is going to affect everyone's life' Lee Silver 'This will tell us what
makes our brains work, and our minds.

    It will tell us what we are' John Sulston 'I am an optimist about having
control of future generations. We've been doing it for 2m years' Kary Mullis
'Suddenly everything is happening so fast that you are no longer arguing about
last year's results' Hugh Pelham


LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1999


                              79 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 16, 1999

SECTION: The Guardian Feature Page; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: Health: Cheating the Reaper;
New predictions say babies born today will live to 130. But is that really
possible, asks Roger Dobson. And even if it is, says Quentin Crisp (aged 90) who
would want to?

BYLINE: ROGER DOBSON.

BODY:

    American futurologist Michio Kaku's assertion that lifespan is set to
increase to 130 is based on the idea that medical developments are moving faster
than ever and taking place on a variety of fronts at the same time. If the
relatively slow pace of developments in the 20th century added 30 years, the
next should easily add 60, argue futurologists who say that official predictions
- 84 for women, 79 for men by 2050 - don't take into account the explosion of
life-extending developments about to take place.

    Top of the list of breakthroughs driving this engine of longevity is the
sequencing of the human genome, due for completion in 2005, which will open the
door to preventing much of the disease that blights us in today's old age. Close
behind come advances in tissue fabrication and manufacture, meaning that those
whose organs pack up won't be dependent on second-hand body parts but presented
with brand new ones grown from a few cells in the lab. Drugs breakthroughs in
chronic diseases will help, while lifestyle and dietary changes are already
making their mark.

    All this should mean that the 90-year-old of 2089 will have little in common
health-wise with the 90-year-old Quentin Crisp of today.

    But will it? While most scientists and doctors believe lifespan can be
extended, some are sceptical that great ages can be achieved so quickly.

    'We will continue to edge upwards, but for life expectancy to increase to
130 years would require quite astonishing advances in the treatment of so many
diseases," says Tom Kirkwood, professor of biological gerontology at Manchester
University. 'Once you get to old age there are multiple causes of death. If you
manage to push one back, there is always another waiting in the wings.' Dr Angus
Clarke, consultant clinical geneticist at the University Hospital of Wales,
agrees. 'The idea that you can quantify in years something like the benefits of
genetic therapy is too simplistic. There are so many other factors that are
important, not least poverty, social conditions, the environment and early life
experiences, all of which have an impact on health outcomes and are not being
taking into consideration.' Even British Telecom futurologist Ian Pearson, whose
own prediction for lifespan is 140, admits predictions can have 'enormous
flexibility'. 'Just when 130 or 140 will be achieved is speculation. No one
really knows, people are just giving their view. Some predictions will be right
and some wrong.' Better, then, not to hold your breath -after all, that's a
particularly easy way to die early.


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1999


                              81 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 1, 1999

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: Gene hope to end skin cancer

BYLINE: SARAH BOSELEY HEALTH CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

    SCIENTISTS are claiming a breakthrough in their understanding of malignant
melanoma, the potentially fatal skin cancer, which may enable them to stop
tumours from developing.

    Around 1,500 people a year die from malignant melanoma, and the numbers are
increasing. Many have developed the skin cancer through prolonged exposure to
the sun, particularly those in the 20 to 34 year-old age group.

    Scientists, who are led by Robert Newbold of Brunel university, revealed
last month, that they have found a way to switch off an enzyme called telomerase
that stops cancerous cells from dying when they ought to. They believe they have
found a group of genes on human chromosome three that can stop the production of
telomerase in breast cancers.

    Yesterday, at the Cancer Research Fund which has sponsored their work,
Professor Newbold revealed a similar "fundamental breakthrough" in melanomas.
His team has found two new genes which appear to stop cells developing into
tumours.

    One of the genes they have found is on chromosome nine and the other on
chromosome 10.  "These are known to be damaged in about 40 per cent of
melanomas," he said. "Our hypothesis is that these genes are being knocked out."

    In successful laboratory tests scientists took groups of healthy genes on
chromosomes and transferred them onto the melanoma cells. The malignant growth
dramatically stopped.

    The next stage is to find out more about the particular genes and their
function. The scientists need to map the genes and isolate or clone them. But
within five to 10 years, said Professor Newbold, there may be some sort of
treatment available.

    Professor Gordon McVie, director general of the Cancer Research Campaign,
said: "This work is another example of how gene therapy is being developed to
target cancer without damaging the healthy cells. It works in the test tube. The
real challenge will be the patient and this may take some years."


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1999


                              91 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 6, 1999

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find way of ending cancer cell 'immortality'

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

    SCIENTISTS in London have pinpointed the human genetic machinery that could
kill cancer cells.

    Although the knowledge cannot yet save lives - there is, so far, no simple
way to deliver genetic treatment to a tumour - the discovery could lead to a
radical new approach to the disease, which now takes one life in three in the
developed world.

    The latest research has focused on why cancers happen. Cancerous cells are
those which do not die when they should; researchers have detected in many kinds
of tumour an enzyme called telomerase which they think "switches off" cells'
natural "suicide" machinery and makes cancer cells immortal.

    Until a year ago, a question mark hung over telomerase. Was it there because
the cells were immortal? Or were the cells immortal because it was there? In
January last year the question was finally settled: the enzyme was the cause,
not the consequence. Suddenly, researchers concerned with ageing, and with
cancer, had a new direction to pursue.

    Robert Newbold and colleagues at Brunel university report in the Journal of
the National Cancer Institute today that they have found a way of switching off
the "immortality" enzyme. In effect this would tell the tumour to commit
suicide.

    The function of telomerase "in practically all human cancer cells is to make
those cells divide forever," said Professor Newbold last night. "If I take a
piece of tissue and put it in a culture dish it will grow fine for a while, and
after a programmed number of divisions it will stop. That we believe is a human
tumour suppression mechanism. We have found where the gene is that turns
telomerase off in normal cells - and it is probably the gene that is deleted in
cancer developments."

    The Brunel team worked with breast cancers and with cancers of the head and
hand, and think telomerase is involved in 85 or 90 per cent of all cancers.

    They have identified a group of genes on human chromosome three which have
the ability to stop the production of telomerase in breast tumours. Normal,
healthy copies of this chromosome, introduced into breast cancer cells, caused
the cells to revert to the normal ageing process and die. The discovery puts the
Brunel team a step ahead in the international race to find a way of switching
off telomerase.

    So far, the technique has worked only in the laboratory. The researchers
have a potential bullet but have yet to devise the right kind of gun to fire it.
Trials are expected in three to five years.

    Gene therapy was one option, said Prof Newbold. "It tells you how effective
anti-telomerase therapy is going to be. We have managed to do this and show that
all of the cells that receive the complete chromosome three go into the ageing
programme."

    The team has "mapped" the vital genes to a small region of chromosome three;
they suspect that other genes may be involved in some of the other cancers.

    Gordon McVie, of the Cancer Research Campaign, the charity that funded the
study, said last night: "This research really is a step forward in the hunt for
new and improved treatment for breast cancer patients."


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1999


                              94 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 1, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 2545 words

HEADLINE: We have the power. Do we have the wisdom?;
Continued from page 1

BODY:

    Attempting to predict the coming century is more than usually foolish. Even
10 years ago we could not have imagined the internet, the speed of computing
(currently doubling every eight or nine months), genetic mapping or cloning.
While the mystery of consciousness may elude us for many decades, there are
other large areas of our make-up which are about to be revealed. Last month
scientists announced the decoding of the first of 23 human chromosomes. It is,
as yet, only a rough sketch, but they will be reading the entire genome soon
enough, decoding every human characteristic, working out the genes or
combinations of genes which are responsible for musicality, schizophrenia, left-
handedeness, height, athletic prowess and aggression.

    It feels uncannily as though human beings are finally getting to the roots
of the tree of knowledge. No wonder today's scientists feel they are living at
the most exciting time in history. While Charles Darwin discovered the
probability that we evolved by natural selection, we did not understand the
mechanics of that change. Soon we will. We are learning from this string of
genetic information what life was for our predecessors, how it works for us -
and even catch a glimpse of what we might become. In short, we will read the
story life is telling us.

    This new knowledge will bring untold medical benefits and pose awesome
ethical dilemmas. It may be that within two decades traditional surgery will
largely be replaced by gene therapy - the injection of chemical messages into
diseased or malfunctioning parts of the body. The predisposition to
life-threatening diseases in certain patients will also enable doctors to
anticipate illness in their patients. The same technology may enable the rich to
give their children enormous advantages - enhanced athleticism, height,
mathematical ability, the absence of asthma. A scrap of DNA will tell any
authority anything they want to know about any person. Who is to determine how
this knowledge is used?

    It is easy to dwell on our fears. The geniuses of genetics have opened
Pandora's box. But people forget the end of the story of Pandora. At the bottom
of the box was hope, waiting to break out. Our new ability to eat from the tree
of life need not trigger a fall from grace. Take, for example, the fears that
the science of genetics would revive the science of eugenics and give
intellectual underpinning to crude racism. In fact, advanced genetics teaches us
not about the biological origins of our differences, but how strikingly similar
we all are to each other. Two groups of chimps found 20 miles apart differ more
from each other than one human being does from any other, even those who
resemble each other least: our brains are remarkably similar. As we open the
book of life during the coming millennium, we should see how much we all share -
and how bogus are any notions of racial superiority left over from the last
century.

    Nor should we blindly fear the prospect of doctors toying with our genes. We
need to keep a vigilant eye on what they do, of course, but we can also afford
to look forward to a world where diseases such as muscular dystrophy or
Huntington's chorea can be tweezed out before they have ruined a life. Would the
world really be worse off if those plagues were banished? And if genetics
enables human beings to stay alive for longer, and life becomes less of a risk -
with less need for the insurance policy of multiple children relied on in the
developing world - then perhaps world population might start to fall, easing
some of the strain on the planet.

    The implications are so vast that we can barely sketch their outline. Where
does God, already in retreat after 600 years of modern science, sit in a world
where we feel we may one day know the innermost secrets of human existence? Will
ours become an entirely godless world? The scientists do not seem to think so.
Indeed, some of the most imaginative thinkers speculate that we could eventually
discover the concept of right and wrong alongside our genetic instruction
manual, that we will realise that the notion of good and evil exists in the
universe, as real as the concept of a number: both are real, independent of our
perception of them.

    Cutting-edge studies of physics - of light, energy and matter - can also
feed, rather than choke, our mystical impulses. Now that we can describe the
entire physical history of the cosmos for all but the first thousandth of a
second, scientists have concluded that, in the words of one, 'it looked as if
the universe knew we were coming'. Somehow it seemed ready to welcome life. The
result is that religion may be different in the new millennium, it may have to
speak in a different language, but it will not be dead.

    The possibilities are thrilling. Space exploration will continue, reaching
beyond our solar system to discover . . . who knows what? Once we have cracked
the code for life, will we be able to construct a machine that mirrors it
perfectly? Will we crack the riddle of consciousness, so that computers start
resembling brains - or will we discover what exactly it is that makes us so
different from them? These are just some of the dilemmas that await us.

    Still, there is a question that has to be solved first, one that underpins
all the others. If, uniquely among all the creatures on earth, our evolution is
in our own hands - thanks to our understanding of our genes and our mastery of
our physical environment - what will we do with it? How will we ensure it is
just? And this, tough as it may seem, is not a question we can leave to the
experts. This is one for all of us. For there is a risk here that, as science
accelerates ever faster, our human institutions fail to catch up. We have the
brainpower to see how our lives could be improved beyond our dreams, to be rid
of much pain and hardship, yet we struggle to spread these new riches fairly. So
scientists develop a treatment for Aids which gives those in America or western
Europe once written off as the living dead a new chance of life, and yet Aids
still kills millions in Africa. This is not because our scientific creativity
hits some conundrum it cannot solve in Africa: it is because one part of the
planet is so much poorer than the rest. We could be about to repeat the mistake
with genetic medicine. The rich countries of the north may discover how to
abolish a raft of hereditary diseases forever, but in the south (or among the
poor anywhere) those genes could continue to kill. If the new millennium sees us
eating from the tree of knowledge, we need to work out how we can share out the
fruit.

    Our starting point is not easy. We live in a world where economic wealth has
grown in ways few ever imagined possible - but where it has become concentrated
in fewer and fewer hands. Rich countries such as the US are getting
fantastically richer, but the poor ones are not just shut out of the new wealth
party: they are getting poorer. Life expectancy, so long assumed to be ever-
increasing as man and medicine become more sophisticated, is actually falling in
the planet's poorest countries. Genetic research may be discovering the secret
of making clever babies in London and New York, but in Mali and Malawi children
are going blind for lack of basic eye-cream. If science has put humankind's
destiny in our own hands, we are getting it horribly wrong.

    In the past 50 years we have been so concerned with the individual rights,
with self-expression and personal liberation that we have quite forgotten what
we are doing to the planet in this binge of self-gratification. Capitalism
becomes more global; so does the threat to the environment. What were once local
problems of pollution have now merged into a huge general threat to the planet's
delicately balanced ecosystem. The oceans rise along with the steady increase in
global temperatures; the atmosphere is more polluted than at any stage in human
history; and hundreds of plant and animal species are becoming extinct. Our need
for fuel, food and living space increases every day and yet we do not have the
slightest inkling of how we are going to cope as the world's population leaps
from 6bn today to 10-12bn through the next century

    From the industrial revolution until a projected date of 2050, we will have
obliterated half the species on earth. Whether it is tiny plants, fungi or
insects, we are destroying about 27,000 separate creations a year. It is a
programme of devastation unlike anything the globe has witnessed before. Climate
change is making the problem worse, with arid areas getting more arid and wet
ones getting wetter. Land currently used for farming will become unviable,
either too dry or with vital top soil washed away. Some geographers predict a
kind of runaway meltdown, as global warming becomes a self-fuelling process,
galloping ahead beyond our control. The melting of the glaciers will not solve
our other looming problem: a world shortage of water, which could see whole
swaths of the Middle East and Asia running dry within 40 years, perhaps warring
over H20 the way they once battled for oil.

    What can we do about this glaring paradox, which has led us to understand
ourselves so profoundly and yet still organise our world so badly? Science can
offer some help. It may be that a nudge in the direction of genetic modification
will eventually be required to avert a food crisis, compensating for the once
fertile areas ruined by global warming. Nanotechnology, the use of tiny robots
to perform miniature tasks like microsurgery, could also help: the world will
consume fewer resources the more adept we become at manipulating matter. The
real answer, however, may be globalisation, since even the most highly developed
nations seem incapable of addressing the destruction that is going on. Not the
globalisation of the world economy, which currently serves to widen the gap
between rich and poor, but a new, as yet unformed idea of globalised politics.

    HG Wells saw the point a century ago: he realised that modern problems are
worldwide, requiring worldwide solutions. Only a kind of politics which weighs
up the needs of the entire human race could begin to address the water question,
for example, insisting that the water-rich countries use no more than they need,
while the water-poor get no less than they need. At the moment we do nothing
because the problem seems too large or the cause too obstinate. This is because
the growth of the most developed economies depends on the pillaging of natural
resources. It is a global problem which will eventually have to be sorted out by
powerful global institutions, rather than national governments. This will be the
only way to prevent the Brazilians from burning their rainforest, the Americans
from polluting the atmosphere with their factories and the British from dumping
nuclear waste in the oceans. Each nation bears a responsiblity for the terrible
state of the world's environment at the end of the 20th century, but it is way
beyond the powers and will of individual nations to right the damage.

    The anxiety we may feel about such things might just be alleviated if the
west, which has never been richer or economically more self-confident, began to
construct a proper programme of third world aid, as well as taking real action
on the vehicle and factory emissions, and the pollution of the seas. If we can
decode DNA and invent the internet, we should be able to do pretty much do
anything. The experience of the past decade in producing global answers to
global problems has not been encouraging. Last month's fiasco in Seattle
suggested a fatal dislocation between the ambitions of the developed world and
the needs of the developing world. Europe has been at peace for more than half a
century, but the struggle to establish successful pan-national governmental
structures shows the difficulty of reconciling international aspirations with
local cultures. The UN security council has so far been unequal to the task of
dealing with the problems thrown up after the collapse of the old communist bloc
and the consequent erosions of the 19th and 20th century concepts of state
sovereignty. The wars in Kosovo, Bosnia, Rwanda and Chechnya all illustrated the
international community's inability to intervene quickly and decisively.

    But pessimism should be tempered. The emergence of global consumer power,
thanks to the internet, could bring a company like Monsanto to its knees. The
web is creating new political communities, scattered across the globe, but
working together. To hint that all this might one day lead to a global
government, democratically elected, sounds laughable now. If anyone had
suggested votes for the masses at the beginning of the 19th century they would
have been ridiculed, too. But it happened.

    We need to pull off a shift as profound as that modern move to democracy,
this time at the global level. And yet we must still remain mindful of the
local. A challenge for the new century is to keep alive the belief that
individuals can shape the world around them, whether it is the planet or their
village. The new technology can be a friend or foe in this process - daunting us
with information overload or enabling us to reach out and connect with others.
We need to make sure the internet and its allied innovations work for us, not
against us.

    Where might our own, small island fit into all this? The answer could be
quite well. Our mother tongue puts us at the forefront of the web, whose first
language is English. We are also neatly situated between the old and new worlds,
perfectly placed to be the pivot between Europe and America. In the effort to
give birth to a new global awareness, we could be in just the right position. We
will need to resolve our dilemma over our relationship with the continent once
and for all, and we should do that sooner rather than later. That, in turn, may
require a new understanding of Britain itself. In the imperial age it was clear
what the union of England, Scotland, Wales and later northern Ireland was for.
At the start of the new century, we are much less certain. But we need to work
out the purpose of the union if we are not to watch it unravel in the coming
decades. Until we do, it is hard to see how we can enter into any other
arrangement, with Europe or others, with any self -confidence.

    So vast changes are ahead of us, perhaps an unending cascade of them. A new
relationship between women and men began to emerge in the past century, at least
in the developed world. That process of struggle and debate will continue into
the new era. But we should embrace it all. For as the scientists will keep
telling us, change is in our nature. We are evolutionary creatures, granted a
unique ability to ask questions about ourselves. Indeed, it is this very pursuit
of understanding which distinguishes us from the animal. We should cherish this
fact about ourselves, just as we cherish the intricate beauty of our existence.
To quote Eliot once more: 'Last year's words belong to last year's language/And
next year's words await another voice.' We are blessed to live now: let us make
this a blessed century and a blessed new millennium.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1999


                              95 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 1, 1999

SECTION: Guardian Saturday Pages; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 3853 words

HEADLINE: Born to be wired;
There she lies, the child who arrived full of promise in the dying days of the
20th century. But what awaits her in the next 100 years how bright will her
future really be? Andy Beckett takes the long view

BODY:

    The baby born today, living an average life, as an inhabitant of whatever we
continue to call these islands, could breeze right through the 21st century. He
or she could enjoy half a dozen different careers. She could become friends with
robots. She could be kept safe from cancer. Her world could become faster,
smarter, more minutely detailed and driven by the market than it is currently
possible to imagine. There could be silicon chips in her blouse collars,
security codes in her smallest trinkets, electronic servants always sifting and
choosing and facilitating. She could do a lot of reclining. She could stay
slightly pudgy.

    On the other hand, she could be living in a commune. The countryside around
could be drought-struck or flooded. Consumption could be rationed. Cash and
crime could be abolished, religion restored to dominance, neighbours her only
close friends. Slowness and silence could rule: the 19th and 20th centuries
could seem like aberrations, the rush for economic expansion as rational as
gambling. The millennium baby could grow up calmer than most people are today,
slimmer, more sated, more seasonal, more fatalistic. Outside the commune gates,
plague victims could be wandering.

    Or neither of these lives could unfurl at all. 'It is impossible to predict
the future,' wrote Arthur C Clarke, the twinkly veteran of science fiction and,
well, futurology, towards the end of last year. 'All attempts to do so in any
detail appear ludicrous within a very few years.' But the ambition is as
irresistible as it is foolish. In the 1950s, the prospect for our baby was all
silvery vistas; in the 70s, it was fuel exhaustion and catastrophes; in the
early 90s, it was subservience to the far east. Only six years ago, the much
-praised Yale historian Paul Kennedy wrote a book called Preparing For The
Twenty-First Century, which predicted, with the aid of many sober bar charts,
the economic eclipse of the United States. These days, almost every business
magazine and think tank foresees the opposite: the creation of a sort of global
California, competitive and bright and a bit lonely our baby, from school-age
on, enduring endless homework and weekend work and keyboard hum and clatter.

    How he or she will earn and spend is the main concern of the best-known
British forecasters such as the Future Foundation and the Henley Centre, which
profitably sell their research to corporations and publicise it through the
media with ad-man's rhymes and alliterations. Our baby, they suggest, will come
to favour 'Hedged Hedonism' (planning indulgences); or to think 'Vice is Nice'
(relishing naughty purchases); or to believe in 'Moral Money' (ethical
spending).

    Trickier or more overtly political matters, like whether poor Britons will
behave likewise, or how Britons of different types will get along, feature much
less in the futurologists' shiny reports. Will the millennium baby remain a
citizen of the European Union? The man from the Henley Centre gives an awkward
laugh, a pause, and mutters quickly about 'not getting into Mystic Meg stuff'.

    Yet the lifespan of our baby, almost every forecaster agrees, will make the
20th century seem glacial. Decades will be as busy as centuries; the family as
we know it, the way we communicate or travel or use our talents all of these, in
rich countries like Britain at least, will alter 'unprecedentedly'.

    By 2010, our baby will be able to have a robot pet, or an artificial heart.
By 2020, she will be expecting to live to 100; by 2030, to be in brain-to-brain
contact, via electronic implants, without needing to speak, with family members
and lovers and friends. By the end of the 21st century, says Professor Richard
Gregory of Bristol University, it is not clear 'whether we will be people or
robots'. In old age, our subject may be a hybrid of silicon and flesh, or a mere
electronic presence, discarding each worn and scuffed body as necessary. Our
baby's great-great-grandchildren may be learning about the old ways of birth,
and bodily growth and decay and mess, from their hologram of a history teacher.

    Other physical limits, though, will probably still rule our baby's life. For
a start, she will have to get used to less space. The British population,
according to the office of national statistics, will swell from 60m now to 64m
in 2021, then continue to grow steadily until at least 2036. Different parts of
Britain will be differently affected: Scotland is expected to lose population;
Wales and Northern Ireland may gain it for the next three decades only; England
is expected to go on accumulating well beyond that.

    London will be the most prominent and controversial importer of Britons, but
East Anglia, Oxfordshire and Wiltshire will draw people too. The 'south-east' as
we now know it could expand as far west as Cardiff and as far north as
Northampton. Our baby, like everyone else, will need to be where the jobs are
working at home will probably only be practical part of the time. She had better
learn to like mini-roundabouts.

    And buildings. Britain's cities, as far as they can be told apart from the
thickening mesh of suburbs, will feel denser and noisier. Growing up in a flat,
in an urban land scape, will cease to be solely the experience of the poor and
fashionable. Having foreign neighbours, as rich Europe continues to bind itself
closer, will become unremarkable. Having neighbours of a different skin tone may
be almost universal: in London, the commission for racial equality predicts, the
white population will fall from three-quarters now to perhaps half the total; in
other cities, the greater youth and higher birth rates of non-white Britain will
also tell. Mixed relationships will continue to be popular. Arranged ones will
become less so. The millennium baby, most likely, will have to grow up more open
than we are about other races and beliefs and behaviours.

    She will need to be nice to old people, too. There will be many more of
them. With the average life expectancy lengthening currently by two or three
years a decade, the proportion of Britons aged over 65 could rise by up to a
fifth by 2020. The number of people over 85 could almost double. The whole
status of being 'old' will probably change: pensioners will have more political
power, and a greater share of the national wealth. And the point of complete
retirement may recede, to 70 or 80 or beyond.

    The conventional landmarks of our baby's life will come later too. She may
study until the age of 25; the extra years will probably not be frittered away,
doing re-takes or down the pub, but will bustle with careers seminars and
vocational modules and conscientious note-taking on company-sponsored A4 pads.
Marriage, if it comes, will usually be well after 30.

    Home-buying, as southern English properties grow ever tinier and more
precious, may be later still. As for children, well, the millennium baby may
turn into far too career-hungry an adult for that, and her partner likewise,
until perhaps their mid-40s. And parenting may be just an interlude, until the
traditional 21st-century shift of career in her mid-50s, and again in her early
70s.

    Away from such responsibilities, meanwhile, the ties between age and taste
may loosen to nothing: rock stars will unashamedly chug through the decades with
their audiences; in reaction, teenagers may come to covet the most fogeyish
clothing brands. Our baby may end up in tweed skirt at 16 and tight denim at 60.

    Better health will be behind all this. In Britain at least, the 21st century
is confidently expected to eradicate cancer, many handicaps, even Aids. Our baby
will acquire artificial body parts: not just substitute limbs and contact
lenses, but brain implants to quicken memory and communication, eye implants if
fuzziness or blindness threatens, or for peering into electronic worlds, and
replacement organs that require no donors.

    All this may sound a little over-ambitious; but these very advances are the
present-day research projects of profit-sensing corporations. Gene therapy,
where human DNA is manipulated before birth to prevent the development of
harmful conditions, may be practical within this decade. The cloning, or genetic
copying, of human tissue and organs is also close to possible. The use of
microscopic robots to repair the body from within, without incision, is promised
by 2020.

    Remote-control medicine is coming too: clothes and wristwatches will monitor
patients, and convey the details to their doctors or hospitals. Surgeons, in
turn, will examine people electronically from afar, or guide local technicians
through operations. Fabrics that treat minor wounds without any human
intervention are envisaged.

    Not every medical development need be benign, though. Genetic manipulation,
for example, could make our baby into a tyrannically choosy parent. The
slightest imperfection or dot of individuality could be eradicated from an
embryo. As our baby lives a self-improving life, accepting transplants and
plastic surgery and painful weeks of readjustment, so she may well expect the
same of her offspring, in the womb even, or earlier. Certain standards for
future babies, of likely fertility, say, or diligence or intelligence, may be
imposed by governments.

    Or the millennium baby may learn medicine's limits. Already, 'the great age
of antibiotics', as the science writer Matt Ridley calls it, is over: 'If we are
to keep infectious disease at bay we must invent new chemicals. . .
Unfortunately, that looks increasingly difficult. The rate of invention. . . has
slowed down measurably.' Bacteria always adapt and outflank. New diseases will
appear, taking advantage of the end of vaccination programmes that defeated
others.

    The ever wider and busier patterns of human travel will help them spread.
That adventure holiday our baby took in Tanzania in 2026 may come, 10 years
later, to be seen as the moment some grave new tropical ailment arrived in
Basingstoke. And by then Berkshire may feel a bit like the tropics. Global
warming may have made the summer air stickier, the spring and autumn warmer, the
winter wetter and shorter.

    Some forecasters predict coastal flooding, in the south-east in particular,
and faster erosion right up the east coast, as the polar icecaps dissolve and
sea levels rise. There may be more marshland; there may be malarial mosquitoes.
On blazing June days, our baby may prefer to stay sealed indoors, rather than
fling open the windows.

    She will be more careful with water. The sheer quantity of new suburbs, and
their appetite for lush lawns and twin bathrooms, could strain a water
infrastructure designed for less demanding times. Piping water in from wetter
areas will be expensive and a sign of politics to come could be controversial.
More obviously than now, the new Britain will be composed of competing regions,
with diverging economies and ways of living. Where people live, and the natural
resources they use, and how they travel, will be less and less matters of easy
national cooperation.

    As the council for the protection of rural England sees it, our baby will
gradually, grumpily realise that the rural idyll as a place to live, rather than
a place to visit is an impossible fantasy. Instead, on rare days off, she may
drive out to an 'area of tranquillity'. These enclaves in the countryside, where
cars and industrial farming practices are barred, will be like Victorian city
parks: places to wander and flirt and experience 'nature', exhaustively
maintained by human hands.

    The majority of Britain will be less restful. The optimists see a country
built on silicon: roads murmuring with computer-driven traffic, intelligent
homes where kitchen appliances anticipate shortages, flats and houses cunningly
designed for every available slice of land. Pessimists see gridlock and redbrick
on every hillside. Either way, the natural world will probably seem more
distant: just the drift of clouds, most of the time, the other side of the
double-glazing.

    What sort of emotional life will our baby lead in this indoor, circuit
-regulated world? Who will she choose to be fond of? Most futurologists,
contrary to the frettings of conservatives, still favour the family. Not the
nuclear version, of two parents cocooned with their children, which rose, and is
now falling, with western industrialisation, but a looser and more inclusive set
of domestic arrangements. As people live and work for longer, grandparents and
extended families will become more active and important. Marriage will continue
to lose popularity, but its definition will broaden, to cover same-sex couples
and even time-limited arrangements, subject to renewal and renegotiation. The
number of unmarried people living together will grow swiftly, from less than a
tenth of the population now to approaching a seventh in 2010.

    Home life will not be busy and warm for everybody, though. Over a third of
households will be solitary ones. Our subject, very likely, will have this
status at some point, at least. New ways of linking people may be needed: shared
living spaces in blocks of flats, perhaps, and more 'third places' cafes and
other refuges from the home and work place, where people can loiter and meet in
the daytime and at weekends without heavy pressure to spend. The Henley Centre
bluntly predicts: 'Invest in dating agencies.'

    New technology will aid the lonely too. The internet is a perfect medium for
the like-minded but isolated. This decade, connection to it will become almost
as common as owning a telephone. The number of online clubs and societies, and
the possibilities for electronic friendships and intimacies, will swell
accordingly. And the millennium baby may not have to confine herself to the
company of humans. By 2019, says Ray Kurzweil, a much-praised American expert on
artificial intelligence, 'The vast majority of transactions (will) include a
simulated person, featuring a realistic animated personality and two-way voice
communication.' Wilder theorists of software and robotics visualise sexual
pleasure transmitted from circuit boards to human nerves, orgasms by e -mail,
even romance between metal and flesh.

    At home and in the workplace, computers will stop being bulky beige boxes on
tabletops. Instead, they will be everywhere: in every room our baby uses, in her
means of transport, mobile phone, clothes; in constant contact with other
computers, responsive to her voice or even mere thought, smoothly easing her
through her daily tasks, between the distracting storms of other people's data.

    There will be drawbacks. Our baby will be watched from birth; more and more
activities and movements and personal details will be memorised and stored.
Databases will be connected and scrutinised by governments and criminals. A
forecaster at British Telecom says, 'The concept of not being tracked. . . of
being out of touch, will be as difficult for people to grasp as the idea of
renouncing one's own identity: it will be meaningless.' At times, at the very
least, all this instant communication will give our baby a headache. At other
times, she may worry about being swamped by the babble, about losing her
identity. Mostly, she will probably be too tired.

    Or excited. By the time the millennium baby is a teenager, the possibilities
for consumption and cultural experience could be close to infinite. Online
shopping could be more dizzying than the greatest mall. Archives of, say,
paintings, or live performances could be instantly available. Shops, electronic
or otherwise, may never close. The Henley Centre's word for 21st -century taste
'polyglotting' anticipates constantly roving, shifting preferences, not from
year to year or decade to decade, but from hour to hour, even minute to minute.

    She will eat sushi and Mars bars, dress all-American then, like a country
lady, chase minimalist coffee tables and junk-shop kitsch. Sheer fickleness, and
the ability to satisfy it, will be a thrill for a while. Then it will be time to
invest in an electronic filter. The most common prediction is for 'choice
editors', either software programs or actual computers, which will sift and
recommend according to instructions. At their simplest, these will scour the
internet for, say, cheap flights; more complicatedly, they will choose furniture
and clothes based on previous purchases, perhaps even to fit an unspoken
self-image.

    Flesh-and-blood advice will also become more important. Friends and
colleagues' recommendations will be trusted and followed, as a means of
delegating choices. Shop assistants and established brands will be regarded with
less reverence. Our baby, even if otherwise unpolitical, may well take part in
revolts against particular products and corporations, motivated by ethics or
simply price. Bathed in the low grey glow of paper-thin computer screen, indoors
in the warm, with hundreds of comrades electronically at hand, all sorts of
brave gestures will be possible.

    Occasionally, too, she will still venture outside to 'go shopping'. Not in
the old daily or weekly sense, but to linger over purchases, to stare at fellow
consumers, to enjoy retail 'experiences' as a kind of theme park or theatre.
More mundane consumption will be electronic; supermarkets may be reduced to
warehouses and delivery networks. New ways of receiving goods at home will be
needed: perhaps our subject's house will have a special porch, the Henley Centre
speculates, with an entry code given out to the deliveryman. Or maybe the
nearest corner shop will become a depot, minding deliveries, for a small fee,
until she stumbles red-eyed away from the office.

    That could be pretty late. She will most likely do more than us. The
computerised house and helpers, new communications gadgets, generally more
flexible lives beneath all these predictions lies the assumption that work will
demand more attention and time.

    This assumption, like most of those underlying British forecasting, is very
American. French and German companies are currently cutting hours, but Britain
has been developing transatlantic work habits for decades. Some of these will be
self-reinforcing: the more time she spends at her desk, and at company social
events, and slipping into the office on Sunday mornings, the less she will be
able or inclined to sustain other interests. If she stays single, all the better
for her output.

    And if our baby should remain a student, or become a welfare claimant, she
will be encouraged to work as well, by financial necessity and the hustling of
governments. This is unlikely to involve making anything. By 2010, four-fifths
of British jobs are expected to be in services, many of them in performing
domestic tasks for others so that they can do more work. The millennium baby may
well end up booking tickets and unravelling parking fines for other, even busier
people. Back at home, in her small, humming flat, someone else could be doing
the same for her.

    Career switches will be more frequent. Training will be a constant
requirement. Surveillance and frequent assessments will enforce diligence. And
all the while, computers will keep leapfrogging parts of the workforce. 'If your
job title contains the word agent,' say the British Telecom forecasters, 'it is
at risk now.' Later this century, they speculate, people who process information
for a living, like management consultants and journalists, may become obsolete
as well. Computers will do it faster, more continuously, and with increasing
subtlety. The only safe group may be people with 'caring roles', like nurses and
counsellors, who 'are valued because they are people, and their output is
basically human interaction'.

    Millennium baby may not keep up. And the state will probably provide
diminishing protection from the whirrings of the new economy. By 2010, says the
Future Foundation, two-thirds of Britons will be paying for health insurance.
The state pension will be something for historians. Benefits will be a tiny
fraction of average earnings. Education will be part- privatised: corporations
running schools in 'difficult' areas.

    For self-improving people, this more demanding, less patient welfare state
may work well; for the unmotivated or most vulnerable, it may barely help at
all. From pre-school, our millennium baby may be captivated by all the computers
and virtual teachers and vast archives of stored knowledge. She may, on the
other hand, become an 'exclusion'.

    Illicit career paths will still beckon. The more things there are to buy,
the more there will be to steal. Illegal drugs and few forecast their
legitimisation will most likely still be profitable. Prisons will probably
continue to breed better-trained criminals.

    'The outlook is gloomy,' says Stephen Tumin, the former chief inspector of
prisons. He envisages 'overcrowding, and cutting of staff and budgets. . .
(Inmates) will be deprived of the education and psychiatric help they need.'
Jails may all become 'industrial': privately-run, profit-making factories with
captive workforces, their products sold to the public, their wages forcibly
directed to prisoners' dependants.

    If our baby turns out law- abiding, she may welcome all this. Twenty-first
century Britain, for all its predicted energy, may seem jittery, culturally
fragmented; the authoritarian may reassure. She may grow used to barred
downstairs windows, a gate at the end of the road, local rules against
'antisocial' behaviour, a private security guard. She may take refuge in
religion. Amid the apparent chaos that tends to accompany change, the historian
Felipe Fernandez-Armesto argues, science and rationalism will accumulate
doubters. All creeds and belief systems will come to seem equally questionable
to religion's advantage.

    Or perhaps our baby will grow into a pragmatist, holding lots of
contradictory ideas at once, and choosing according to mood and situation, just
as she does in the online shopping catalogues. When traffic fumes poison the
lawn, protest against congestion. When the roads beckon, commute by car
regardless. As she spends more time at the keyboard, and juggling commitments,
she may internalise the way computers and appointment books work: putting
everything in compartments. Occasionally, in a newspaper or its modern
equivalent, she may glance at a despairing article about the contemporary lack
of morals.

    Then again, events will probably jolt the selfish. Around 2040, says Yorick
Blumenfeld, a rare pessimist among British futurologists, capitalism will
collapse in on itself. So few people will have so much economic power, he
argues, the system will be terminally unstable; socialism will follow. Or maybe
these islands will be invaded, by a part of the world less favoured with wealth
and resources today's forecasters tend not to factor in war or political
upheaval. Or, as British Telecom's Atlas of the Future casually mentions, 'A
small asteroid may collide with the earth.' The millennium baby had better learn
to use a fire extinguisher.


LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1999


                              99 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 15, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: Tests to reverse effects of ageing offer hope against wasting diseases

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science Editor

BODY:

    SCIENTISTS using a new gene therapy have found a way to stop muscles from
wasting with old age. The treatment could increase muscle strength in the young
by 15 per cent, but in older patients by as much as 27 per cent, restoring the
strength of young adulthood.

    So far, though, the treatment works only in mice. If it works in humans it
could mean a huge advance for health managers - and a headache for sports
committees as athletes rush to use it, since as they age all mammals lose up to
one third of their muscle mass and power.

    Yesterday at a meeting of cell biologists in San Francisco, Lee Sweeney from
the University of Pennsylvania said tests on mice showed older ones were
restored to the strength of young adulthood. "We're now looking to see whether
this technique might also be used to increase muscle strength in diseases such
as muscular dystrophy."

    The scientists took a virus, removed its disease-causing genetic machinery,
and "reloaded" it with a gene called IFG-1 and a muscle-specific promoter to
kick the growth factor into higher production. The result was injected into
mice.

    IGF-1 aids muscle repair, and the researchers believe the problem of old age
may be that repair machinery declines.


LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1998


                              102 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 11, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1684 words

HEADLINE: A new map of a (quite) close cousin;
British and American scientists make history today. Tim Radford reports how by
taking a tiny worm to bits they have taken a giant step towards understanding
the very stuff of human life

BYLINE: Tim Radford

BODY:

    Analysis The genetic code

    THEY brought a worm to book(1). They completed and published the blueprint
for an entire complex, multicellular organism. It may be small and it may be a
worm but its basic functions are our basic functions. Biology today lurches
forward: the complete mapping of human genetic make-up gets ever closer.

    It took 15 years in all, and involved identifying more than 97 million bits
of DNA that add up to a recipe for more than 19,000 genes. These 19,000 genes
are what it takes to make a worm turn. In fact, the genes make the worm learn,
turn, squirm, eat, digest, and make what passes for love in the microscopic
world of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This worm is no more than 1mm from
end to end. It is about as simple as a multicellular creature can get, and it
takes about four days to get from egg to worm. It comes in just two sexes: male
and self-fertilising hermaphrodite, but it can still manage to produce around
100 offspring before it dies.

    It now joins some other important organisms whose DNA code is now complete,
and published on the Internet, for the benefit of researchers all over the
planet. One of them is yeast, which has been providing cakes and ale for
humankind for at least 6,000 years. Another is Helicobacter pylori, which has
been providing modern humans with stomach ulcers for decades. A third is
Treponema pallidum better known as venereal syphilis, which has been a global
health problem since about the time Columbus came back from America. A third is
a strange little monster called Methanococcus jannaschii which lives in volcanic
vents almost two miles under the ocean.

    But these are all single-celled organisms: each one a microscopic blob of
life's machinery. C. elegans is different: it is made of 959 co-operating blobs
of living tissue. The nematode may be too small even to step on, but it is a
giant leap for mankind all the same. The research matters for its own sake -
four out of every five creatures on the planet is a nematode worm - and as a
measure of the sheer effort taken so far. But there is bigger game to be stalked
and bagged, within the blueprint for a worm. The worm may be small, but it is
the nearest organism to humans so far described. It is a milestone in the race
to map the DNA sequences of mice, rats, rice, thalecress, zebrafish, chicken,
pig and other useful complex creatures. And it is a kind of shortcut to the
greatest prize of all: the entire 3 billion-letter alphabet that will spell out
the 80,000 genes or so that describe what it is to be human.

    That last should, if all goes well, be finished by 2003: a momentous date,
exactly 50 years after James Watson and Francis Crick determined the structure
of the double helix that supports the DNA code, the four-letter chemical
alphabet that describes all life on the planet. Crick and Watson are still
working as scientists. That is a measure of the speed of the operation. The
scale of the achievement is already enough to make even the achiever reel: new
human genes are being identified, described, examined and even tinkered with
almost every week. The sum of a creature's genes is called its genome. More than
40 nations have joined the Human Genome Organisation to complete the project, at
a cost - a figure plucked from the air, because nobody knows how to do the
accounting - of about $ 3 billion.

    The worm was turned to good account chiefly by a team from Washington
University in St Louis and the Sanger Centre in Cambridge. C. elegans exists
almost everywhere in the temperate world but the project started in Cambridge
more than 30 years ago with some worms collected from decaying mushrooms in
Bristol, although the systematic decision to sequence the entire genome was
taken only in the eighties. Since then, Sanger scientists helped map the
chromosomes of yeast; they are also working on fruitflies and pufferfish,
chickens, tuberculosis, malaria and the little bacterium that delivers bubonic
plague. This morning, in the American journal Science, the Sanger Centre's chief
John Sulston and his colleagues announce the completion of the worm project. As
they see it, it's both an end and a beginning.

    'We have in coded form essentially all the information needed to make an
animal,' Dr Sulston says. 'In a chicken-and-egg kind of way everything that is
needed is written in the genome of C. elegans, which is the first animal to get
sequenced. So there we have it. We can't understand it all. But if you want to
understand how an animal works what better basis can you imagine than actually
having in your hand all the information, even if it is written in a code we
cannot fully understand?' He sees the 97 million-letter alphabet as a
magnificent toolkit for understanding: a starting point for identifying all the
genes in the little worm. Genes make proteins. Proteins make tissue, and tissues
make systems, and systems make behaviour. With the genetic blueprint, it is
possible to see a little worm as a kind of complex, subtle, orchestra of parts
which play together in almost magical harmony. But mice, chickens and humans
march to the same harmonies: research into the genomes of yeasts, bacteria,
worms and humans tells the same over and over again: all life on Earth is
intimately related. If you can discover what makes a yeast or a worm tick, you
have at least part of the answer to a human mystery. So each gene identified and
catalogued is a prize for science.

    The yeast scientists - a Europewide consortium - have had a couple of years
start. They already have a measure of the massive task ahead. 'In all of these
organisms we find we do not know on any level what between 40 and 60 per cent of
the genes do. Sometimes we recognise them sometimes we don't. Even if you
recognise them because they are similar to genes in other organisms, it doesn't
necessarily tell you what their role in the organisms is,' says Professor
Stephen Oliver, of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and
Technology. But even yeast has genes that parallel human afflictions. One yeast
gene produces a protein doctors recognise: it is called frataxin. In humans, it
is produced by a gene that is linked with Friedrich's ataxia, a
neurodegenerative condition which makes the legs unsteady. 'Well, yeast doesn't
have legs,' says Professor Oliver. But yeast, being simple, can show exactly
what the gene does: you can swap yeast and human genes and watch the effect at
work in a laboratory dish.

    The worm will add to that value. Some worm genes announced themselves almost
immediately, in computer analysis. Because DNA is a code, you can use
sophisticated algorithms to 'spot' meaning the a string of gobbledegook. Other
genes have been spotted swiftly by comparison with sequences from other animals.
The next trick is to see what they do, how they work, and the instructions that
set the genetic machinery in operation will also be coded in the DNA sequence.
The worm will be a kind of data resource for biologists for decades to come. It
is beginning to answer questions about the machinery of programmed cell death,
and therefore about cancer. It is beginning to answer questions about why cells
grow old and die.

    'The picture one has to have is that all sorts of things drop out
immediately,' says Dr Sulston. 'Most of the sequence has been out for years now
and has provided lots of starting points for researchers. There are lots of new
research projects starting up: it has stimulated a whole field of biology. There
will be far more value yet to be extracted from it than we can see at this
point.' The next enticement is gene therapy: treatment, based on precise
knowledge, to repair the faults provided by heedless nature. The human genome
project actually began with the search for individual genes that have blighted
certain families for generations: muscular dystrophy, Huntington's chorea and so
on. The genes have been found. Treatment based on the knowledge of the genes so
far, has proved tantalising. Biologists can see what goes wrong in cases of say,
cystic fibrosis. But help for the sufferers is still a long way away. 'There
will be lots of little individual breakthroughs which will benefit individual
patients. There is going to be an ongoing series of advances which will depend,
in part, on the genome. But they will also depend of course on experimental
ingenuity.' That's the toolkit bit: the genome helps, but it does not provide
instant solutions. But the knowledge is expected to pay off, handsomely, in
terms of public health. The betting is that people who die relatively early in
life of heart failure, or stroke, or cancer, die because of their own peculiar
mix of genes: evolution has a way of keeping people alive until they ready to
procreate and rear their young. Then, so to speak, it loses interest. But genes
are only half the story: the environment in which the genes survive or fail is
the other half. The knowledge of the human blueprint is already beginning to
provide useful information about the lifestyles and diets that tend to healthy
maturity. It is also beginning to present insurance companies and health
authorities with some ethical headaches: if someone has 'bad' genes, why would
you want to accept them as a risk. If they have terrific genes, why should they
pay your premiums? Right now, it is the worm's turn in the limelight. It was
small, bred fast and it was transparent: researchers could actually see what was
going on in the worm. 'It's simpler than a human, in terms of the range of organ
structures, but it has a gut, it has muscle, it has skin and it has a got a
nervous system,' Dr Sulston says. 'It's a wonderful test tube for biology, you
can move things in there, and have them work, and look at them more closely. We
haven't come to the end of something. We have come to the beginning of
something.' Sources: (1)Science, December 11; information about the Human Genome
Project: http: /www.ornl.gov/TechResources/Human -Genome/home.html Research:
Matthew Keating Tim Radford is the Guardian's science editor


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1998


                              103 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 11, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: What is the Human Genome Project?

BODY:

    It's a multi-country 15-year effort begun in 1990 to discover the 60,000
-80,000 human genes, to make them accessible for further biological study. Non
-human organisms are being studied along the way to improve the technology and
help interpret human gene function. Roughly 4 per cent of the human genome has
been sequenced so far.

    What will it achieve? Genome research is revolutionising biology and has
given birth to a burgeoning biotechnology industry. Genes involved in various
diseases will be found. Animal husbandry and will be affected as knowledge of
human genetics is fed back into animal production What are its potential
benefits for people? l Increasingly detailed genome maps have aided researchers
seeking genes associated with dozens of genetic conditions, including myotonic
dystrophy, fragile X syndrome, neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2, Alzheimer's
disease, and familial breast cancer.

    l Rapid and more specific diagnostic tests. Novel therapeutic regimens based
on new classes of drugs, immunotherapy techniques, avoidance of environmental
conditions that may trigger disease, and possible augmentation or even
replacement of defective genes through gene therapy l Genomes of six microbes
that live under extreme conditions of temperature and pressure have been
sequenced. Learning what is unique about their proteins may lead to microbes and
their enzymes being used for waste control and cleaning up oil spills l
Biotechnology. Sales of biotechnology products are projected to exceed $ 20
billion by the year 2000. Genome project has already stimulated significant
investment by large corporations and prompted the creation of new biotechnology
companies hoping to capitalise on the far-reaching implications of the research
l Energy. Biotechnology will provide cleaner means for the bio -conversion of
raw materials to refined products. Having the genomic sequence of the
methane-producing microorganism Methanococcus jannaschii, could lead to cheaper
production of fuel-grade methane.


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1998


                              104 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 11, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1681 words

HEADLINE: Analysis: The genetic code: A new map of a (quite) close cousin;
British and American scientists make history today. Tim Radford reports how by
taking a tiny worm to bits they have taken a giant step towards understanding
the very stuff of human life

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD

BODY:

    THEY brought a worm to book(1). They completed and published the blueprint
for an entire complex, multicellular organism. It may be small and it may be a
worm but its basic functions are our basic functions. Biology today lurches
forward: the complete mapping of human genetic make-up gets ever closer.

    It took 15 years in all, and involved identifying more than 97 million bits
of DNA that add up to a recipe for more than 19,000 genes. These 19,000 genes
are what it takes to make a worm turn. In fact, the genes make the worm learn,
turn, squirm, eat, digest, and make what passes for love in the microscopic
world of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This worm is no more than 1mm from
end to end. It is about as simple as a multicellular creature can get, and it
takes about four days to get from egg to worm. It comes in just two sexes: male
and self-fertilising hermaphrodite, but it can still manage to produce around
100 offspring before it dies.

    It now joins some other important organisms whose DNA code is now complete,
and published on the Internet, for the benefit of researchers all over the
planet. One of them is yeast, which has been providing cakes and ale for
humankind for at least 6,000 years. Another is Helicobacter pylori, which has
been providing modern humans with stomach ulcers for decades. A third is
Treponema pallidum better known as venereal syphilis, which has been a global
health problem since about the time Columbus came back from America. A third is
a strange little monster called Methanococcus jannaschii which lives in volcanic
vents almost two miles under the ocean.

    But these are all single-celled organisms: each one a microscopic blob of
life's machinery. C. elegans is different: it is made of 959 co-operating blobs
of living tissue. The nematode may be too small even to step on, but it is a
giant leap for mankind all the same. The research matters for its own sake -
four out of every five creatures on the planet is a nematode worm - and as a
measure of the sheer effort taken so far. But there is bigger game to be stalked
and bagged, within the blueprint for a worm. The worm may be small, but it is
the nearest organism to humans so far described. It is a milestone in the race
to map the DNA sequences of mice, rats, rice, thalecress, zebrafish, chicken,
pig and other useful complex creatures. And it is a kind of shortcut to the
greatest prize of all: the entire 3 billion-letter alphabet that will spell out
the 80,000 genes or so that describe what it is to be human.

    That last should, if all goes well, be finished by 2003: a momentous date,
exactly 50 years after James Watson and Francis Crick determined the structure
of the double helix that supports the DNA code, the four-letter chemical
alphabet that describes all life on the planet. Crick and Watson are still
working as scientists. That is a measure of the speed of the operation. The
scale of the achievement is already enough to make even the achiever reel: new
human genes are being identified, described, examined and even tinkered with
almost every week. The sum of a creature's genes is called its genome. More than
40 nations have joined the Human Genome Organisation to complete the project, at
a cost - a figure plucked from the air, because nobody knows how to do the
accounting - of about $ 3 billion.

    The worm was turned to good account chiefly by a team from Washington
University in St Louis and the Sanger Centre in Cambridge. C. elegans exists
almost everywhere in the temperate world but the project started in Cambridge
more than 30 years ago with some worms collected from decaying mushrooms in
Bristol, although the systematic decision to sequence the entire genome was
taken only in the eighties. Since then, Sanger scientists helped map the
chromosomes of yeast; they are also working on fruitflies and pufferfish,
chickens, tuberculosis, malaria and the little bacterium that delivers bubonic
plague. This morning, in the American journal Science, the Sanger Centre's chief
John Sulston and his colleagues announce the completion of the worm project. As
they see it, it's both an end and a beginning.

    'We have in coded form essentially all the information needed to make an
animal,' Dr Sulston says. 'In a chicken-and-egg kind of way everything that is
needed is written in the genome of C. elegans, which is the first animal to get
sequenced. So there we have it. We can't understand it all. But if you want to
understand how an animal works what better basis can you imagine than actually
having in your hand all the information, even if it is written in a code we
cannot fully understand?'

    He sees the 97 million-letter alphabet as a magnificent toolkit for
understanding: a starting point for identifying all the genes in the little
worm. Genes make proteins. Proteins make tissue, and tissues make systems, and
systems make behaviour. With the genetic blueprint, it is possible to see a
little worm as a kind of complex, subtle, orchestra of parts which play together
in almost magical harmony. But mice, chickens and humans march to the same
harmonies: research into the genomes of yeasts, bacteria, worms and humans tells
the same over and over again: all life on Earth is intimately related. If you
can discover what makes a yeast or a worm tick, you have at least part of the
answer to a human mystery. So each gene identified and catalogued is a prize for
science.

    The yeast scientists - a Europewide consortium - have had a couple of years
start. They already have a measure of the massive task ahead. 'In all of these
organisms we find we do not know on any level what between 40 and 60 per cent of
the genes do. Sometimes we recognise them sometimes we don't. Even if you
recognise them because they are similar to genes in other organisms, it doesn't
necessarily tell you what their role in the organisms is,' says Professor
Stephen Oliver, of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and
Technology. But even yeast has genes that parallel human afflictions. One yeast
gene produces a protein doctors recognise: it is called frataxin. In humans, it
is produced by a gene that is linked with Friedrich's ataxia, a
neurodegenerative condition which makes the legs unsteady. 'Well, yeast doesn't
have legs,' says Professor Oliver. But yeast, being simple, can show exactly
what the gene does: you can swap yeast and human genes and watch the effect at
work in a laboratory dish.

    The worm will add to that value. Some worm genes announced themselves almost
immediately, in computer analysis. Because DNA is a code, you can use
sophisticated algorithms to 'spot' meaning the a string of gobbledegook. Other
genes have been spotted swiftly by comparison with sequences from other animals.
The next trick is to see what they do, how they work, and the instructions that
set the genetic machinery in operation will also be coded in the DNA sequence.
The worm will be a kind of data resource for biologists for decades to come. It
is beginning to answer questions about the machinery of programmed cell death,
and therefore about cancer. It is beginning to answer questions about why cells
grow old and die.

    'The picture one has to have is that all sorts of things drop out
immediately,' says Dr Sulston. 'Most of the sequence has been out for years now
and has provided lots of starting points for researchers. There are lots of new
research projects starting up: it has stimulated a whole field of biology. There
will be far more value yet to be extracted from it than we can see at this
point.' The next enticement is gene therapy: treatment, based on precise
knowledge, to repair the faults provided by heedless nature. The human genome
project actually began with the search for individual genes that have blighted
certain families for generations: muscular dystrophy, Huntington's chorea and so
on. The genes have been found. Treatment based on the knowledge of the genes so
far, has proved tantalising. Biologists can see what goes wrong in cases of say,
cystic fibrosis. But help for the sufferers is still a long way away. 'There
will be lots of little individual breakthroughs which will benefit individual
patients. There is going to be an ongoing series of advances which will depend,
in part, on the genome. But they will also depend of course on experimental
ingenuity.' That's the toolkit bit: the genome helps, but it does not provide
instant solutions. But the knowledge is expected to pay off, handsomely, in
terms of public health. The betting is that people who die relatively early in
life of heart failure, or stroke, or cancer, die because of their own peculiar
mix of genes: evolution has a way of keeping people alive until they ready to
procreate and rear their young. Then, so to speak, it loses interest. But genes
are only half the story: the environment in which the genes survive or fail is
the other half. The knowledge of the human blueprint is already beginning to
provide useful information about the lifestyles and diets that tend to healthy
maturity. It is also beginning to present insurance companies and health
authorities with some ethical headaches: if someone has 'bad' genes, why would
you want to accept them as a risk. If they have terrific genes, why should they
pay your premiums? Right now, it is the worm's turn in the limelight. It was
small, bred fast and it was transparent: researchers could actually see what was
going on in the worm. 'It's simpler than a human, in terms of the range of organ
structures, but it has a gut, it has muscle, it has skin and it has a got a
nervous system,' Dr Sulston says. 'It's a wonderful test tube for biology, you
can move things in there, and have them work, and look at them more closely. We
haven't come to the end of something. We have come to the beginning of
something.'

    Sources: (1)Science, December 11; information about the Human Genome
Project: http: /www.ornl.gov/TechResources/Human-Genome/home.html

    Research: Matthew

    Keating Tim Radford is the Guardian's science editor


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1998


                              105 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 11, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 340 words

HEADLINE: What is the Human Genome Project?

BODY:

    It's a multi-country 15-year effort begun in 1990 to discover the 60,000
-80,000 human genes, to make them accessible for further biological study. Non
-human organisms are being studied along the way to improve the technology and
help interpret human gene function. Roughly 4 per cent of the human genome has
been sequenced so far.

    What will it achieve?

    Genome research is revolutionising biology and has given birth to a
burgeoning biotechnology industry. Genes involved in various diseases will be
found. Animal husbandry and will be affected as knowledge of human genetics is
fed back into animal production

    What are its potential benefits for people?

    Increasingly detailed genome maps have aided researchers seeking genes
associated with dozens of genetic conditions, including myotonic dystrophy,
fragile X syndrome, neurofibromatosis types 1 and 2, Alzheimer's disease, and
familial breast cancer.

    Rapid and more specific diagnostic tests. Novel therapeutic regimens based
on new classes of drugs, immunotherapy techniques, avoidance of environmental
conditions that may trigger disease, and possible augmentation or even
replacement of defective genes through gene therapy

    Genomes of six microbes that live under extreme conditions of temperature
and pressure have been sequenced. Learning what is unique about their proteins
may lead to microbes and their enzymes being used for waste control and cleaning
up oil spills

    Biotechnology. Sales of biotechnology products are projected to exceed $ 20
billion by the year 2000. Genome project has already stimulated significant
investment by large corporations and prompted the creation of new biotechnology
companies hoping to capitalise on the far-reaching implications of the research

    Energy. Biotechnology will provide cleaner means for the bio-conversion of
raw materials to refined products. Having the genomic sequence of the methane
-producing microorganism Methanococcus jannaschii, could lead to cheaper
production of fuel-grade methane.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1998


                              106 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                December 8, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Vigil provokes anger and despair: The questions - and answers

BODY:

    How many animal experiments are carried out in Britain?

    Last year 2,635,969: including 1,517,888 mice, 636,694 rats, 102,656
domestic fowl, 84,173 guinea pigs, 44,496 rabbits, and 35,129 sheep, according
to Home Office figures. At the bottom end of the scale, three greyhounds and one
quail. By category of research, 829,414 experiments were for 'fundamental
biological research', 945,420 under "applied studies - human medicine or
dentistry" (ie disease prevention) and 201,024 for "protection of man, animals
or environment". Some 436,960 were the breeding of laboratory animals, almost
all mice and rats. About 300,000 experiments were carried out solely for cancer
research. About 2,000 were carried out to test household products. The number of
experiments has fallen steadily, by one million over the last decade (1987:
3,631,400). In France, the number is about the same; in Germany, much less
(1.5million). Supporters of vivisection say the number is likely to rise in the
short term as more work is done on genes - eg cloning.

    Is the research necessary?

    Yes, says the British Medical Association and the Research Defence Society
(RDS). The RDS says medical advances which depended on animal research include
anaesthetics, open heart surgery, whooping cough and polio vaccines, kidney
transplants, high blood pressure drugs, psychiatric drugs, life support systems
for premature babies, gene therapy.

    No, says the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV):
'Experiments are unreliable because they tell us about animals, not people. The
results produced are both crude and unreliable. They provide no guarantee that a
product will be safe or effective for humans' .

    Where was the research done?

    45 per cent in commercial laboratories; about one-third in universities and
medical schools. The remainder in public health labs, hospitals, government
departments, non- profit making organisations and 'other public bodies'.

    What are the alternatives?

    BUAV says some techniques have potential for development if more was spent
away from animal research. These include using computer modelling, testing human
cell/tissue cultures, test tube techniques and studies of patients. It also
promotes alternative methods including herbalism, acupuncture, osteopathy,
homeopathy and chiropractice. A European Commission body, the European Centre
for the Validation of Alternative Methods (ECVAM) carries out research to
develop replacements for animal experiments. Much of its work uses cultured
human cells. ECVAM believes animal testing can be cut by 50-60 per cent over the
next decade. Last year's main projects were work on photoxicity, skin
corrosivity, embryotoxicity, haematotoxicity, eye irritation and vaccines,
working in most cases with commercial companies. But the RDS says most
'alternatives' can only be used alongside animal tests, not because of them.

    What does the Government say?

    It has increased spending on non-animal research from pounds 182,000 to
pounds 259,000 - still regarded even by its own advisers as a paltry amount. The
Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 installed a 'rigorous' system of
controls. The people who do the work, the place they do it, the procedure they
use and the animals they test must all be specifically authorised. About 15,000
people and 300 organisations are licensed. The Animal Procedures Committee
advises the Home Secretary on the act. The Home Office says: 'The Government
looks forward to the day when the use of animals in experiments becomes
unnecessary. But unfortunately that will not happen in the foreseeable future.
The Government has never pledged either before or after the election to end such
use of animals.'


LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1998


                              116 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 21, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Saturday Page; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: Books: Paperback: Non-fiction

BYLINE: DESMOND CHRISTY

BODY:

    The Spanish Inquisition: An Historical Revision, by Henry Kamen (Phoenix
Giant, pounds 9.99) Kamen wants to put the Inquisition in the context of Spanish
history and answer such questions as 'How could a clergy and a population that
had never lusted for blood except in war (Queen Isabella thought even
bullfighting too gory), gaze placidly upon the burning alive of scores of their
fellow Spaniards for an offence - prevarication in religion - that had never
hitherto been a crime?' A fascinating and scholarly inquisition into 'the most
notorious tribunal of the western world.' Not counting the one that will decide
who will be Mayor of London, of course.

    Human Genetics: Choice and Responsibility (Oxford, pounds 7.99) Produced by
the British Medical Association, this is an excellent, succinct and up-to-date
account of the good and worrying developments in human genetics - prenatal
testing, the use of genetic information for insurance and employment, DNA
profiling, gene therapy, cloning and so on. To read it is to realise that the
science is moving a lot faster than society's appreciation of its implications.
The BMA is rightly anxious about the sensationalist reporting of developments in
human genetics. Knowledge is a great antidote to such hysteria.


LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1998


                              117 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 21, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Saturday Page; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1553 words

HEADLINE: Life - the complete story;
The over sixties are taking to the Net. And, Michael Kustow believes, that's
only the start for them

BYLINE: MICHAEL KUSTOW

BODY:

    'Oh sir, you are old,' says Regan to her father King Lear, in one of
Shakespeare's devastating monosyllabic half-lines. 'Nature in you stands on the
very verge / Of his confine." But now we seem to want to roll back age, along
with every other boundary. Aided by bio-genetics, technology and new management
resources, our society has at least half its mind set on ignoring the
limitations of age. So astronaut John Glenn goes up into space again at the age
of 77.

    Supermarkets send managers on courses to experience what it is to be old,
and to adjust their aisles and the type-size of their labels. Business estimates
it is losing pounds 25 billion a year by forcing out older workers. Retailers,
notably in banks and building societies, re-hire older workers, 'because mature
customers can relate better to mature staff '.

    In the most arresting development of all, the digital industry has just
published three surveys this week, showing that computer users over 60, the
silver surfers, are among the keenest mouse-pushers, spending 10 hours a week at
their home terminals, three hours longer than the average. Lady Wright, the
84-year-old widow of a former chairman of ICI, is hailed as a cyber-granny.
There is now an on-line Zimmer Frame Computer Club, with 3,000 members e
-mailing each other around the world.

    Something about that description cyber-granny worries me. Its two components
conjure up the unease we have about the old and the new, youth and age; the cult
of youth and the fear of death. Cyber means modern, sexy ads featuring young
digital-age people. Cyber is part of the techno-boosterism of our millennial
push. It can be appended to any noun to tug it into the future. It carries a
utopian promise. But granny comes from another world of benign caring or
cantankerous rebellion, 'raging against the dying of the light'.

    Marina Warner in her study of fairytales showed the benevolent, protective
presence of the grandmother as storyteller and, through those stories, the
person who initiates children into life's complexity. The cartoonist Giles drew
a granny who was obstinate, angry, and difficult, waving her brolly at the
world, and who bestrode my childhood. Both images come back to undermine
cyber-granny.

    Putting these age-related phenomena together - and one could add the image
of Viagra-spurred old men given a new lease of sexual life and the launch of an
upbeat magazine breezily aimed at 'middle youth' - there seem to be three
shifting frames of reference for age now. One is affirmative action, anti
-discrimination codes and laws. Another is the limitless promise of development,
the rhetoric of infinite horizons. Hence the semantic jangle in cyber-granny,
where the boundless Internet is steered by an ageing woman - and a woman driving
a machine, whether computer or car, is still seen as a contradiction.

    The third way of looking at age, the way of art and literature, is the
acceptance of limits and boundaries to our organisms and our lives. Our
ambivalence about accepting these boundaries, this outline to our existence, the
coexistence of growth and decay, is enshrined in our language. The
psychotherapist James Hillman has remarked on the force of the two Latin words
for youth and age, juvens and senex. These have formed attitudes: from juvens we
make youth and juvenile, from senex, senile.

    They have different weights: 'youth culture' is neutrally descriptive;
'senile culture' would mean clapped-out, dying. But as anyone who has passed
middle -age knows (and I turned 59 the day I was asked to write this), if you
want to make a good fist of the second half of your life, it means accepting the
senex you are becoming, shedding the term of any internalised self-disparagement
and making it your own.

    I realised recently that I have spent a good deal of my working life with
older people. Most recently, I had the pleasure of working with the octogenarian
designer Jocelyn Herbert, who designs all the plays Tony Harrison has written as
a dramatist. She shaped spaces for his plays on the heights of Delphi, in a
gale-swept Roman stadium, and she clambered across the environmentally despoiled
landscapes of Europe for his feature film, Prometheus.

    Her distilled creativity, stamina, and determination to get things precisely
right in a collective art that often makes do with the approximate, have made
her a kind of muse for Harrison. And for everyone around her there's a
lightness, a gaiety of spirit combined with a rigour of judgment which not only
command respect but also provide a touchstone of quality. That quality is
inseparable from age, and from experience digested and passed on.

    I had another experience last week, in two encounters with Sir Peter Hall,
now in his late sixties. The National Theatre Studio has been holding three
weeks of workshops about performing Shakespeare and other classical texts, and
the difficulties the younger generation of actors are having with them. A forum
kicked off the series featuring John Barton, who with Peter Hall established
contemporary Shakespeare-speaking in the Royal Shakespeare Company of the 1960s;
their successors, Adrian Noble and Trevor Nunn, also spoke, as did actors, from
David Suchet to Janet Suzman, who had been formed and nurtured by that
tradition. It was a funny, passionate debate. And it was a microcosm of theatre
in the England that is giving the old some new possibilities, within the
rationale of social justice and the humanised market-place.

    But there is more to life in age than righting discrimination, or including
the excluded old (and there are many of them: 40 per cent of the 50-64 age group
are not working) in the circle of the workplace or the virtual communities of
the Internet. These steps will give reassurance and some economic recognition.
They will lessen the feelings of being shelved or invisible. There is also the
creative legacy that everyone can pass on, their personal bounty with its
special signature. This is also a precious asset and may require more than a
workplace or access to the Web to express itself.

    Peter Hall's class to young actors on 'the clues in Shakespeare's text' last
week was a model, in its way. For three hours, to about 30 people, he worked on
the opening of Twelfth Night - 'If music be the food of love, play on.' It
wasn't just the specific clues in the text he drew attention to, the scansion,
the assonance, the intentional mixed metaphors, the half-lines, the line
-endings, all the instruments Shakespeare deployed 'to command the attention of
3,000 people in the open air'. It was Hall's own embodiment of what he knew: his
hand-beats syncopated to show the cross-rhythms, his spread arms to catch the
whole line's breadth. He said: 'We speak in words now, not in lines'. He lit up
the group. A few days later, he remarked, 'I don't know what I'm going to do
when I stop directing. Isn't life awful - just when you're beginning to get good
at something, it stops.' Peter Hall had the privilege of a space to pass on a
lifetime's belief and practice, and a community that wanted to know about these
things. Most people deserve the equivalent, in local libraries, arts centres,
theatre foyers that are empty during the day - all the public and civic spaces
we under-use and neglect.

    When we shot the Prometheus film, I spent a little time with miners who were
extras. It was a Pirandellian irony, them acting out what they used to earn a
living doing, and in what was once their mine. Some of the miners, some of the
managers, were in their fifties. I could have learned something from the labour
and struggle and solidarity of their lives in coal, as I've learned something
about language and thought and emotion from Peter Hall and John Barton in
Shakespeare. We need master-classes in life-experience.

    Surveys predict that by 2050 there will be twice as many people over 75,
three times as many over 90. This week we learned that hi-tech medicine can
remove, rejuvenate and replace cells, combating bone disintegration, brain cell
loss and muscle wasting. The offer comes with a health warning: gene therapy can
cause cancer. But it's a fair guess that early in the next century, many things
that limit old people now will be less burdening. We have yet more choices, in
this age of technology: to treat the longer-living population as workers,
probably in the service industries; as customers in markets; as users in front
of terminals; or as elders with something unique to pass on.

    Working and shopping do tie people back into society, though within defined
limits. Getting addicted to the Internet does not; chat-room exchanges are
depleted contact, e-mails tend to be informational and no more. To understand
how to respond to the human substance of the old, we need thinking that goes
beyond business or information technology.

    Despite forecasts of the wired society, for a long-foreseeable future most
old people will not have access to a PC, and will grow older in Shakespeare's
ruthless phrase 'sans eyes, sans teeth' and sans Internet. The modernity may
help the old with living, but only culture, only poems, plays and live public
exchange may help them incorporate and articulate their sense of the great road
from juvens to senex.


LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1998


                              118 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 12, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Online Page; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: Nature's motors;
Science and technology / Steven Block, a nano -mechanic, is studying a
'snowplough' a few millionths of a millimetre wide. Michael Brooks reports

BYLINE: Michael Brooks

BODY:

    As your eyes move across this text, you are performing a task that remains
beyond the understanding of modern science. The simple movement in the muscles
that control your eyes is still a mystery; inside the muscles, tiny proteins
called myosins are doing the work, but no one knows how. They are one example of
biological motors - your body contains billions of them, pushing, pulling,
carrying, lifting and breaking up the chemicals that, as a whole, make you what
you are.

    Biology could essentially be reduced to a collection of machines: exertion
and movement are involved in almost everything going on inside a living
organism. The dream of the Foresight Institute, a non-profit making
nanotechnology organisation whose annual conference kicks off today in Santa
Clara, California, is to create machines approaching the scale of these
biological examples. Then we might be able to build tiny robots that could
assemble new materials atom by atom, or carry out microsurgery inside the body.

    Steven Block, a molecular biologist at Princeton University, doubts that
these goals are entirely realistic. However, he will be speaking about his
research into biological motors at the Foresight conference this week. Block's
research team has just published studies on RNA polymerase, an enzyme which rips
through DNA, separating its twin strands so it can duplicate itself. This is an
essential part of life - every cell in the body is relying on this process to
work without a hitch.

    RNA polymerase, Block has found, is an extraordinarily powerful motor,
somewhat like a biological snowplough. A few millionths of a millimetre in size,
it is able to exert force equivalent to the weight of a red blood cell more than
a thousand times its size. Remarkably, the exertion that separates DNA strands
is fuelled by the DNA itself. 'It's as if you were laying down an asphalt road
using the asphalt itself as a fuel,' he says.

    Although Block knows much about RNA polymerase, he still has no idea how it,
or any other biological motor, actually moves. 'This is a truly fundamental
question for which a good answer has not been developed,' he admits. 'The more
we study, the more mysteries and enigmas we come across.' There is no shortage
of examples: bacteria use a rotary motor to twist their tails for propulsion;
life starts with sperm cells using their motors to swim to an egg; cell division
after fertilisation involves motors to take chemicals from one place to another,
and hairs in the ear use motors to change their shape for optimum performance.

    One of the biggest surprises in biological motor research came with the
discovery of the 'railway within': a molecular motor, called kinesin, pulls
chemicals around a cell using tracks called microtubules. Block has taken a
kinesin motor molecule, attached it to a micron-diameter plastic bead, and
watched it pull the bead along microtubules fixed to a microscope slide.

    By holding the bead using 'laser tweezers' (a trick where the bead is
trapped in the brightest part of a laser beam), Block has carried out a tug of
war with the kinesin motor to measure its capabilities.

    Kinesin, it turns out, is similar in strength to the myosin motors in
muscles, but five or six times weaker than RNA polymerase. But brute force isn't
everything: kinesin zips around cells at around 800 nanometres per second
(that's 3mm per hour), 200 times faster than RNA polymerase.

    Understanding the role of these motors is an important endeavour: research
indicates that some diseases - like Huntingdon's disease, sickle cell anaemia
and schizophrenia - are associated with their breakdown or absence. The latest
discovery, announced a fortnight ago, is that a lack of myosins can cause
deafness in humans and mice.

    'Obviously you need molecular motors to do a lot of things, including
building the components of the inner ear,' Block says. But you don't have to
know exactly how they work to cure the problem; you just need to be able to
introduce a working motor. That is where gene therapy can help.

    Block still sees his work as fundamental science: not clinical medical
research and not a path to building miniature robots as Foresight might hope. He
does concede that Eric Drexler, Foresight's founder, is probably right to look
to biology if that is where he wants to go.

    'He believes that, if one is to think about building machines on the scale
of proteins, we have a lot to learn from the way that nature builds things,'
Block says. None of the ways we now build tiny structures - silicon chips, for
example - even remotely resemble nature's way. The route to micromachines will
need a very different approach, Block says. 'Whether we can recapitulate
nature's way of building things in an artificial machine remains to be seen.'

    For more information, visit www.molbio.princeton.edu/ block/block.html Find
links to a kinesin site at http: /util.ucsf.edu/people/ kull/kinesin.html

    The Sixth Foresight Conference on Molecular Nanotechnology, from November 12
to 15, is at the Westin Hotel in Santa Clara, CA (www.foresight.org).  It will
be held in conjunction with a forum sponsored by the National Science
Foundation. Other sponsors include Sun Microsystems and the Ford Motor Company.


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1998


                              119 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 12, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Online Page; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: Science and technology: Nature's motors;
 Steven Block, a nano-mechanic, is studying a 'snowplough' a few millionths of a
millimetre wide. Michael Brooks reports

BYLINE: MICHAEL BROOKS

BODY:

    As your eyes move across this text, you are performing a task that remains
beyond the understanding of modern science. The simple movement in the muscles
that control your eyes is still a mystery; inside the muscles, tiny proteins
called myosins are doing the work, but no one knows how. They are one example of
biological motors - your body contains billions of them, pushing, pulling,
carrying, lifting and breaking up the chemicals that, as a whole, make you what
you are.

    Biology could essentially be reduced to a collection of machines: exertion
and movement are involved in almost everything going on inside a living
organism. The dream of the Foresight Institute, a non-profit making
nanotechnology organisation whose annual conference kicks off today in Santa
Clara, California, is to create machines approaching the scale of these
biological examples. Then we might be able to build tiny robots that could
assemble new materials atom by atom, or carry out microsurgery inside the body.

    Steven Block, a molecular biologist at Princeton University, doubts that
these goals are entirely realistic. However, he will be speaking about his
research into biological motors at the Foresight conference this week. Block's
research team has just published studies on RNA polymerase, an enzyme which rips
through DNA, separating its twin strands so it can duplicate itself. This is an
essential part of life - every cell in the body is relying on this process to
work without a hitch.

    RNA polymerase, Block has found, is an extraordinarily powerful motor,
somewhat like a biological snowplough. A few millionths of a millimetre in size,
it is able to exert force equivalent to the weight of a red blood cell more than
a thousand times its size. Remarkably, the exertion that separates DNA strands
is fuelled by the DNA itself. 'It's as if you were laying down an asphalt road
using the asphalt itself as a fuel,' he says.

    Although Block knows much about RNA polymerase, he still has no idea how it,
or any other biological motor, actually moves. 'This is a truly fundamental
question for which a good answer has not been developed,' he admits. 'The more
we study, the more mysteries and enigmas we come across.' There is no shortage
of examples: bacteria use a rotary motor to twist their tails for propulsion;
life starts with sperm cells using their motors to swim to an egg; cell division
after fertilisation involves motors to take chemicals from one place to another,
and hairs in the ear use motors to change their shape for optimum performance.

    One of the biggest surprises in biological motor research came with the
discovery of the 'railway within': a molecular motor, called kinesin, pulls
chemicals around a cell using tracks called microtubules. Block has taken a
kinesin motor molecule, attached it to a micron-diameter plastic bead, and
watched it pull the bead along microtubules fixed to a microscope slide.

    By holding the bead using 'laser tweezers' (a trick where the bead is
trapped in the brightest part of a laser beam), Block has carried out a tug of
war with the kinesin motor to measure its capabilities.

    Kinesin, it turns out, is similar in strength to the myosin motors in
muscles, but five or six times weaker than RNA polymerase. But brute force isn't
everything: kinesin zips around cells at around 800 nanometres per second
(that's 3mm per hour), 200 times faster than RNA polymerase.

    Understanding the role of these motors is an important endeavour: research
indicates that some diseases - like Huntingdon's disease, sickle cell anaemia
and schizophrenia - are associated with their breakdown or absence. The latest
discovery, announced a fortnight ago, is that a lack of myosins can cause
deafness in humans and mice.

    'Obviously you need molecular motors to do a lot of things, including
building the components of the inner ear,' Block says. But you don't have to
know exactly how they work to cure the problem; you just need to be able to
introduce a working motor. That is where gene therapy can help.

    Block still sees his work as fundamental science: not clinical medical
research and not a path to building miniature robots as Foresight might hope. He
does concede that Eric Drexler, Foresight's founder, is probably right to look
to biology if that is where he wants to go.

    'He believes that, if one is to think about building machines on the scale
of proteins, we have a lot to learn from the way that nature builds things,'
Block says. None of the ways we now build tiny structures - silicon chips, for
example - even remotely resemble nature's way. The route to micromachines will
need a very different approach, Block says. 'Whether we can recapitulate
nature's way of building things in an artificial machine remains to be seen.'

    For more information, visit www.molbio.princeton.edu/ block/block.html Find
links to a kinesin site at http: /util.ucsf.edu/people/ kull/kinesin.html

    The Sixth Foresight Conference on Molecular Nanotechnology, from November 12
to 15, is at the Westin Hotel in Santa Clara, CA (www.foresight.org).  It will
be held in conjunction with a forum sponsored by the National Science
Foundation. Other sponsors include Sun Microsystems and the Ford Motor Company.


LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1998


                              120 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                November 3, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 864 words

HEADLINE: Why tailoring could be the next Big Thing;
The genetic revolution does not have to mean cloning or creating the 'perfect'
person.  Jerome Burne says we can use it to help prevent serious diseases

BYLINE: Jerome Burne

BODY:

    Here are two typical headlines about recent medical breakthroughs: 'Cuppa
cuts cancer risk' and 'Boy gets own bladder back'. Which one do you think is the
best pointer to the medicine of the next century? The first story is about a
study that shows that the antioxidants in tea may reduce the risk of breast
cancer. The second story is about how surgeons took cells from a damaged
bladder, grew them in the laboratory and then grafted on a new bladder grown
from the patient's own tissue.

    Undoubtedly the most glamorous is the second. For several years now genetic
engineering has been promising to transform medicine. We will soon be able to
clone body parts, harvest human antibodies from transgenic pigs, alter our genes
to cure disease and so on. It is dazzling stuff but, according to a fascinating
new book, its very brilliance has blinded us to the true potential of this
genetic revolution.

    'People are worried about the Faustian bargain that genetic engineering
offers' says Jeremy Rifkin, author of The Biotech Century. 'It promises
undreamed-of powers but there are all sorts of unknowns, not to mention a host
of horrendous ethical questions. The molecular biologists will tell you that it
is a done deal. The genie is out of the bottle now, they say. It's too late to
put it back. What I say is there is another way.' Genetic engineering, as sold
to us so far, follows what Rifkin calls the 'hard path'. The body is viewed as
something to be shaped, moulded and transformed. Unfit genes are to be weeded
out, only the perfect survive. But our increasingly detailed knowledge of how
genes work could be put to an entirely different use. The medicine of the future
could follow the 'soft path', one which seeks to work with the body rather than
against it.

    The genetic revolution offers the chance of transforming the fuzzy hit-and
-miss approach of complementary medicine into something precise and effective.

    To understand how this could work, let's go back to that news report on tea.
How do we know that tea helps against cancer? Presumably researchers ran a trial
with two matched groups; one lot gets tea for months/years, another doesn't -
which one has the lower incidence of cancer? There are similar recent findings
linking vitamin E with a protective effect against heart disease, soy with a
reduction of menopausal problems and so on.

    The trouble is these findings are all terribly crude. Do some people benefit
more than others, and if so who? Does age make a difference, does gender, or
ethnic group? We don't know.

    Now suppose that you bring all the new and incredible detailed knowledge
about both plant and human genes and apply it to findings like this. 'We could
transform medicine,' says Rifkin. 'In a few years you will be able to get a
print-out of your genetic structure and know the kind of diseases and
disabilities you are susceptible to. Combine that information with the genetic
knowledge we have about which proteins, chemicals and hormones affect your
genetic weak spots and you've got something really powerful. We could begin to
see exactly who would benefit from soy, who could be helped with vitamin E and
so on.' This doesn't have to be limited to a nutritional approach either. Recent
research has shown a link between different forms of exercise and the triggering
of different genes. So hypothetically, because the precise work hasn't been done
yet, people at risk for heart disease might benefit most from swimming,
potential diabetics from running.

    Similarly, once you know people's genetic make-up, you can start to see what
things in the environment - pollutants, foods, chemicals - are likely to trigger
off their specific problems and which ones will help - a certain mineral for
one, antioxidants for another and so on. 'We could tailor food, exercise, plant
remedies to the individuals for each stage of their life. Someone with a genetic
risk of obesity would benefit from different foods at an early age than someone
who was set to be slim. Someone with a risk of Alzheimer's would benefit from a
specific regime in their fifties and sixties.' As yet no one is even looking at
these possibilities, we are all so mesmerised by the hard path. At the moment
the debate is between those who want genetic engineering and those who fear it,
says Rifkin. 'That's pointless. What we need to discuss is how to use this
knowledge. Prince Charles recently made a speech attacking genetic engineering
and in favour of organic farming, but that's not the choice. What he should be
proposing is lots more hi-tech genetic research to understand how to do organic
farming better. It's a system that involves an interaction between genes and
environment, just as the soft path in medicine does.' In the end economics may
knock us off the hard path, just as it has scuppered another hard science
triumph - nuclear power. The problems for the NHS finances created by Viagra
will be small change compared with the costs of gene therapy for all. Precisely
tailoring everyone's diet and exercise regimes may begin to look awfully
attractive by comparison.

    The Biotech Century is published by Gollancz at A17.99.


LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1998


                              123 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 8, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: Ethical dilemma of designer babies;
Gene scientist confronts taboo

BYLINE: Paul Brown, Dave King and Sarah Boseley

BODY:

    AN AMERICAN scientist is forcing the world to confront the stark ethical
choices involved in gene therapy, which could eradicate terrible diseases from a
foetus, but would also make possible the first designer babies.

    French Anderson, a pioneer of human gene therapy at the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, believes he could cure two inherited diseases.
One, alpha-thalassaemia, is a blood disorder which kills the baby in the womb or
shortly after birth.

    His revolutionary therapy involves inserting a healthy gene to replace a
damaged one. His technique is to introduce a virus carrying the new gene, which
is known as germ-line engineering. But once the method is perfected, it could
just as easily be used to exchange or add genes that determine physical
appearance. Brown eyes could be swapped for blue, short stature for height. It
might one day be possible to alter the character and the intellect of the
unborn.

    Because of the future ethical issues implicit in his research, Dr Anderson
wants the fullest possible discussion in Britain and the United States to begin
now. Although it will be perhaps three years before he is ready for clinical
trials, he has made some highly controversial applications to the American
ethical authorities.

    Dr Anderson would not be allowed to test the therapy on a living foetus with
alpha-thalassaemia, because the woman carrying such a child runs the risk of
developing pre-eclampsia, a life-threatening condition.  So he is asking for
permission to test his therapy on foetuses that women have decided to abort. The
foetus would be removed from the womb just days after conception and stored
alive in a test-tube, where the virus would be introduced. If Dr Anderson is
given permission and his therapy works, the foetus will be cured - which might
cause serious trauma.

    "The parents and the researchers will have this guilt that I'm not sure it's
possible to emotionally prepare for," says Dr Anderson in this week's New
Scientist. But they might feel comforted knowing there would be a cure for other
children conceived with the disease.

    Dr Anderson's second targeted disease is SCID - severe combined immune
deficiency - which stops the immune system developing. Children born with SCID
must spend their lives in a sterile bubble. Any infection would kill them. Dr
Anderson wants to insert healthy copies of the gene for the enzyme they lack
into the foetus.

    He says what he is doing is "a radical departure from anything that's ever
happened before in medicine". His applications to start fetal therapy have gone
before the National Institute of Health's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee in
the US.

    Experiments that would change the genetic structure of an unborn human are
banned in the US and Britain at present, but the pressure for change, to
eradicate distressing inherited medical conditions, is growing.

    Even the anti-abortion movement in the USA can see an argument on both
sides. While the American Life League called the experiments a "radical attack
on the absolutely defenceless", one member, Father Joseph Howard, said genetic
treatments that do not affect future generations could be acceptable.

    The Council for Responsible Genetics, a Massachusetts-based public interest
group, condemned the proposal: "This is it.  This is how it begins. Do we want a
future in which babies are produced according to genetic recipes?"

    Britain has more barriers to genetic engineering and fetal experiments than
the US, but the Department of Health's gene therapy advisory committee has been
looking at the issues around curing inherited diseases and is expected to report
shortly. A spokeswoman for the British Medical Association said that
experimental therapy conducted on foetuses destined for abortion would be
unlikely to find acceptability in Britain. The research would not be in the
interests either of the woman or of the unborn child.


LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1998


                              124 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 8, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 659 words

HEADLINE: Gene scientist confronts taboo;
Ethical dilemma of designer babies

BYLINE: PAUL BROWN, DAVE KING AND SARAH BOSELEY

BODY:

    AN AMERICAN scientist is forcing the world to confront the stark ethical
choices involved in gene therapy, which could eradicate terrible diseases from a
foetus, but would also make possible the first designer babies.

    French Anderson, a pioneer of human gene therapy at the University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, believes he could cure two inherited diseases.
One, alpha-thalassaemia, is a blood disorder which kills the baby in the womb or
shortly after birth.

    His revolutionary therapy involves inserting a healthy gene to replace a
damaged one. His technique is to introduce a virus carrying the new gene, which
is known as germ-line engineering. But once the method is perfected, it could
just as easily be used to exchange or add genes that determine physical
appearance. Brown eyes could be swapped for blue, short stature for height. It
might one day be possible to alter the character and the intellect of the
unborn.

    Because of the future ethical issues implicit in his research, Dr Anderson
wants the fullest possible discussion in Britain and the United States to begin
now. Although it will be perhaps three years before he is ready for clinical
trials, he has made some highly controversial applications to the American
ethical authorities.

    Dr Anderson would not be allowed to test the therapy on a living foetus with
alpha-thalassaemia, because the woman carrying such a child runs the risk of
developing pre-eclampsia, a life-threatening condition.  So he is asking for
permission to test his therapy on foetuses that women have decided to abort. The
foetus would be removed from the womb just days after conception and stored
alive in a test-tube, where the virus would be introduced. If Dr Anderson is
given permission and his therapy works, the foetus will be cured - which might
cause serious trauma.

    "The parents and the researchers will have this guilt that I'm not sure it's
possible to emotionally prepare for," says Dr Anderson in this week's New
Scientist. But they might feel comforted knowing there would be a cure for other
children conceived with the disease.

    Dr Anderson's second targeted disease is SCID - severe combined immune
deficiency - which stops the immune system developing. Children born with SCID
must spend their lives in a sterile bubble. Any infection would kill them. Dr
Anderson wants to insert healthy copies of the gene for the enzyme they lack
into the foetus.

    He says what he is doing is "a radical departure from anything that's ever
happened before in medicine". His applications to start fetal therapy have gone
before the National Institute of Health's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee in
the US.

    Experiments that would change the genetic structure of an unborn human are
banned in the US and Britain at present, but the pressure for change, to
eradicate distressing inherited medical conditions, is growing.

    Even the anti-abortion movement in the USA can see an argument on both
sides. While the American Life League called the experiments a "radical attack
on the absolutely defenceless", one member, Father Joseph Howard, said genetic
treatments that do not affect future generations could be acceptable.

    The Council for Responsible Genetics, a Massachusetts-based public interest
group, condemned the proposal: "This is it.  This is how it begins. Do we want a
future in which babies are produced according to genetic recipes?"

    Britain has more barriers to genetic engineering and fetal experiments than
the US, but the Department of Health's gene therapy advisory committee has been
looking at the issues around curing inherited diseases and is expected to report
shortly. A spokeswoman for the British Medical Association said that
experimental therapy conducted on foetuses destined for abortion would be
unlikely to find acceptability in Britain. The research would not be in the
interests either of the woman or of the unborn child.


LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1998


                              128 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 30, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 553 words

HEADLINE: The next big thing;
Five areas that will produce tomorrow's medical stars

BODY:

    Head transplant The holy grail of transplants, where the head and brain get
a replacement body. In theory, it's possible to attach a body to a head and get
it to work by pumping blood and oxygen around. The most difficult piece of the
jigsaw is connecting up the spinal cord so the head can tell the body what to
do.

    Dr Robert White in Ohio has been at the area's forefront. His team have
carried out operations on monkeys. Scientists in Cleveland kept an ape alive for
a fortnight after transplanting a head on to a new body. White says such an
operation will be feasible on humans within a year or two.

    Artificial heart With people dying while waiting for transplants, several
teams are working on pumps to replace the heart. Some believe a small and
efficient pump will make donor hearts obsolete. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and the University of California have prototypes.

    Test tube organs Tissue engineering surgeons are now working on technology
that would allow whole limbs to be grown in the lab. Dr Joseph Vacanti of
Harvard University is at the forefront of the technology and achieved worldwide
fame when his team got a human ear made from cartilage to grow on a hairless
mouse. 'We can grow new cartilage, new bone, new tendon, new liver tissue and
new urological tubes,' says Dr Vacanti, Director of the Laboratory for
Transplantation and Tissue Engineering at the Boston Children's Hospital. 'We
are at an advanced stage with cartilage and relatively close with bone and
tendon. Clinical trials are now being designed. We think we will implant grown
cartilage into a patient in two to three years.' It will, he says, make
transplants redundant: 'Why move it when you can make it? Eventually entire
organs will be designed and fabricated in this way.' Artificial blood Five
biotech companies are working on this project which would get around the world
shortage of blood and the risks of infection - some 9,000 people in the USA
developed Aids through contaminated blood.

    Gene therapy Burgeoning area of medicine where celebrity status depends on
the gene you discover. Francis Collins is the doyen of the area and is already a
celebrity for his discovery of the gene for cystic fibrosis. Next generation of
superstars will be those who develop treatments. Four-year-old Ashanti DeSilva
is the first person to undergo gene therapy, carried out by Michael Blaease,
Kenneth Culvery and French Anderson at the National Institute of Health in
Maryland.

    Cures for cancer, Aids, Alzheimer's and others So many researchers are
working in these areas, each making tiny advances, that it's unlikely anyone can
ever claim full credit. Ian Pearson, a scientist employed by BT with the job of
predicting future developments in medicine and science, predicts that there will
be a huge number of developments over the next four decades including . . .

    l 2000: Artificial ears, giving hearing to the deaf.

    l 2005: Arrival of wearable health monitors that check vital signs.

    l 2010: Artificial heart in use l 2013: Prevention of cancer.

    l 2015: Artificial lungs and kidneys.

    l 2016: Artificial brain cells.

    l 2019: Synthetic muscles.

    l 2020: Average lifespan 100.

    l 2030: Fully functional artificial eyes give hope to the blind.

    l 2035: Artificial brain.


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1998


                              129 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 30, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: Inside story: The next big thing;
Five areas that will produce tomorrow's medical stars

BODY:

    Head transplant

    The holy grail of transplants, where the head and brain get a replacement
body. In theory, it's possible to attach a body to a head and get it to work by
pumping blood and oxygen around. The most difficult piece of the jigsaw is
connecting up the spinal cord so the head can tell the body what to do.

    Dr Robert White in Ohio has been at the area's forefront. His team have
carried out operations on monkeys. Scientists in Cleveland kept an ape alive for
a fortnight after transplanting a head on to a new body. White says such an
operation will be feasible on humans within a year or two.

    Artificial heart

    With people dying while waiting for transplants, several teams are working
on pumps to replace the heart. Some believe a small and efficient pump will make
donor hearts obsolete. Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the University
of California have prototypes.

    Test tube organs

    Tissue engineering surgeons are now working on technology that would allow
whole limbs to be grown in the lab. Dr Joseph Vacanti of Harvard University is
at the forefront of the technology and achieved worldwide fame when his team got
a human ear made from cartilage to grow on a hairless mouse. 'We can grow new
cartilage, new bone, new tendon, new liver tissue and new urological tubes,'
says Dr Vacanti, Director of the Laboratory for Transplantation and Tissue
Engineering at the Boston Children's Hospital. 'We are at an advanced stage with
cartilage and relatively close with bone and tendon. Clinical trials are now
being designed. We think we will implant grown cartilage into a patient in two
to three years.' It will, he says, make transplants redundant: 'Why move it when
you can make it? Eventually entire organs will be designed and fabricated in
this way.'

    Artificial blood

    Five biotech companies are working on this project which would get around
the world shortage of blood and the risks of infection - some 9,000 people in
the USA developed Aids through contaminated blood.

    Gene therapy

    Burgeoning area of medicine where celebrity status depends on the gene you
discover. Francis Collins is the doyen of the area and is already a celebrity
for his discovery of the gene for cystic fibrosis. Next generation of superstars
will be those who develop treatments. Four-year-old Ashanti DeSilva is the first
person to undergo gene therapy, carried out by Michael Blaease, Kenneth Culvery
and French Anderson at the National Institute of Health in Maryland.

    Cures for cancer, Aids, Alzheimer's and others

    So many researchers are working in these areas, each making tiny advances,
that it's unlikely anyone can ever claim full credit. Ian Pearson, a scientist
employed by BT with the job of predicting future developments in medicine and
science, predicts that there will be a huge number of developments over the next
four decades including . . .

    2000: Artificial ears, giving hearing to the deaf.

    2005: Arrival of wearable health monitors that check vital signs.

    2010: Artificial heart in use l 2013: Prevention of cancer.

    2015: Artificial lungs and kidneys.

    2016: Artificial brain cells.

    2019: Synthetic muscles.

    2020: Average lifespan 100.

    2030: Fully functional artificial eyes give hope to the blind.

    2035: Artificial brain.


LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1998


                              130 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 22, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Feature Page; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 899 words

HEADLINE: Health: Great white hypes;
 Adrian Mourby on the dangers of talking up dubious cures for cancer

BYLINE: ADRIAN MOURBY

BODY:

    If you believe the publicity, this has been a good year so far for cancer
cures. Simetadine - the drug cocktail claimed to shrink tumours in mice - broke
into the public's consciousness in April. Then came Antisense, a drug which,
allegedly, seeks out and destroys (quite painlessly) the cell mechanism that
triggers malignant growth. Gene-therapy to transport DNA fixers into the body is
looking promising and there's still the possibility of interferons or shark
cartilage coming up with something revolutionary soon.

    Or is there? What does so much 'good news' publicity tell us about the world
of medicine? Are we really on the edge of a breakthrough? Or is everyone rushing
irresponsibly to publicity as soon as they get even a whiff of progress?

    The answer, inevitably, is a complicated one. Research funding has become
increasingly affected by the public image of the disease under study. The
Imperial Cancer Research Fund and the Cancer Research Campaign jointly spend
approximately pounds 1 million each year in the UK, so we should not be
surprised if organisations like these market themselves aggressively. Marketing,
however, is about offering hope - and hope means the possibility of cure and
prevention.

    Publishers also have their own reasons for making optimistic claims.
Although Lane and Comac, authors of the 1992 book Sharks Don't Get Cancer, later
admitted it would have been more accurate to assert Almost No Sharks Get Cancer,
the idea of shark cartilage as an inhibitor of tumours quickly took root.

    Lane and Comac's idea - that there was something in shark cartilage that
inhibited angiogenesis, the development of new blood networks that have the job
of feeding cancerous tumours- was an attractive one. It could be easily grasped,
even if understanding how humans could benefit from shark cartilage was more
complex.

    Another 'breakthrough' was heralded on both sides of the Atlantic in April.
Simetadine, a combination of two proteins, angiostatin and endostatin, was much
vaunted as able to prevent angiogenesis and metastasis - the often deadly spread
of secondary tumours. In a blaze of publicity, it was claimed that trials on
mice suggested a staggering 98 per cent success rate in shrinking tumours. This
announcement sent shares in Ontromed, the company developing the drug, rocketing
to six times their normal value, despite people like Professor Karol Sikora of
Hammersmith Hospital's Department of Clinical Oncology pointing out that mice
studies rarely translate into humans.

    A month later, in May, American Paul Zamecnik told viewers of a BBC2 Horizon
documentary of DNA fragments - known as Antisense - which it was claimed could
seek out and destroy the mechanism by which cells make the proteins that cause
and supplement the growth of cancer.

    Once again the same publicity pattern was in evidence: media exposure of a
big concept that was simple to understand, all-embracing in its effectiveness,
but brought to the public's attention far too early. Zamecnik was only able to
produce one patient who had achieved remission, though admittedly for two years.

    It was also found, on further investigation, that Zamecnik's laboratory
monkeys were dropping like flies, probably because Antisense was affecting cells
and organs other than the cancerous ones.

    The great white hope of shark cartilage is also dwindling these days. No
trials are currently being run and the wonder cure of '92 has been relegated to
the fringes of homeopathy.

    But the media circus moves on. Professor Karol Sikora's own work on gene
therapy is now beginning to attract the attention of headline writers. By
attempting to isolate the dysfunctional genes that cause cancer and make them
normal again, Professor Sikora is attempting a breakthrough every bit as
dramatic as that promised by Antisense and Simetadine, but he is cautious about
letting the publicity run away with this idea.

    However bold a concept, problems usually lie in the delivery system that
will allow a triumph to translate into a much more complex organism like the
human body, he says. Reining in the hype is important. Given that existing
therapies already give five years' survival for most cancers, new drugs must be
tested for a further five years before an informed decision to prescribe can be
made. So, even when the preliminary studies of a drug's effect look positive,
clinical trials can take up to 10 years on humans.

    It is easy to blame the media. However, reporters are not stealing this
information. The world of science is increasingly forcing its researchers to
publish. The Higher Education Funding Council now requires researchers to
publish four substantial papers every four years.

    This results in intense competition for research funding. As one insider put
it: 'In theory, grants should be awarded solely on merit, but we all realise
that a bit of publicity for our own work might influence the grant-awarding
bodies. Particularly if they, in turn, think they might be able to use the
publicity to help their own money-raising activities. This climate of
competition amongst scientists inevitably favours those who shout loudest.'
Progress is being made in curing cancer but everyone admits it's a slow
business. Those who speak of miracle cures should not insult our intelligence.
Nor raise too cruelly the hopes of cancer patients.


LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1998


                              144 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 16, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian City Page; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: Euro eye: Gene genies make dash for profits;
'Scientists have not understood: if you do things which affect society you have
to justify yourself to society'

BYLINE: MARK MILNER IN SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

    FRANKENSTEIN food or a weapon against famine? A revolutionary medical tool
kit for the 21st century or a Pandora's box of ethical dilemmas? Whether the
application is to plants, animals or humans, genetic engineering is
controversial.

    Part of the problem lies with scientists.  Images of mice with outsized ears
(the mouse is the "tool of choice" for many genetic scientists) or a sheep with
two heads are hardly reassuring. Eating food that has been genetically tampered
with is not to every taste.

    As Dr Cynthia Robbins-Roth, a California-based consultant, puts it: "The
scientists have not understood that if you are doing things which affect society
you have to justify yourself to society." The response, she says, has been more
along the lines of "don't worry your pretty little head, everything will be
fine".

    This is not the only problem.  Genetic therapy may one day provide effective
treatments for cancers, for cardio-vascular problems, even for AIDS, but on
many, though not all, reckonings that day could well be a decade away.

    Take two approaches; genomics and genetic therapy. The first is based on
identifying the genes in the human body - anything between 100,000 and 150,000
according to the latest estimates.

    The snag is that producing the genetic code book would simply provide a huge
volume of information. There is no shortage of triers, however. The Wellcome
Trust has just announced it will spend an additional $ 184 million ( pounds 110
million) unravelling the human genetic code. In the US, instrument maker
Perkin-Elmer said last week it planned to produce a complete sequencing of the
human genome (all human DNA) within three years.

    This has chief executive of California-based Incyte Pharmaceuticals, Roy
Whitfield, spitting. The news knocked a couple of hundred million dollars off
his company's market capital - all the more galling as Mr Whitfield reckons that
Incyte, using equipment partly provided by Britain's Amersham International, is
well ahead of Perkin-Elmer in the sequencing stakes.

    But bar coding the human race can be potentially lucrative. Drug companies
can use it to develop and test new drugs or even to resurrect old ones by
checking the responses of individual genes.

    Though few have yet to make a profit, the sector has already spawned around
half-a-dozen companies, including France's Genset, with market capitalisations
of more than $ 500 million. Incyte, which is profitable, is capitalised at
around $ 1 billion.

    Gene therapy is trickier. Supporters claim that cells which have gone wrong
could, say, be ordered - genetically - to repair themselves or to shut
themselves down. The body's immune system can be ordered to attack the damaged
cells.

    Two problems. The first is delivering the corrective genetic message to the
right place. The second is that while some diseases are the result of just one
gene going wrong, others have more complicated causes. Nonetheless, there is
plenty of promising progress, not least in possible cancer treatments.

    Though much of the work on gene technologies is being done in what might be
called bio-bay, around San Francisco, two of the most enthusiastic companies are
European, Switzerland's Novartis and France's Rhone-Poulenc .

    The Swiss company is estimated to have spent close to $ 500 million on
buying emerging bio-tech companies in the US, a third of the total.
Rhone-Poulenc, though its pharmaceutical subsidiary Rhone-Poulence Rorer, has
opted to build up a series of relationships with universities and small biotech
companies under the RPR Gencell umbrella. Rhone-Poulenc executives reckon it
limits the company's exposure and provides the bio-tech companies with the
research and development capital they need without restricting the
entrepreneurial approach of its partners.

    Success might be Rhone-Poulenc's biggest risk. If gene therapy proves a
winner others who have stayed out of the race will need to catch up, fast. And
it is not unknown for the pharmaceutical industry to take the view that "if you
can't beat them, buy them".


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1998


                              145 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 14, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Online Page; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: Soundbites:

BYLINE: BILL O'NEILL

BODY:

    Blue lips from Amsterdam

    'This appears to be an attempt to circumvent the public spotlight in Britain
and our rules by transferring the pigs outside the country. I would like to know
whether this has been approved by the government.' Norman Baker, Liberal
Democrat spokesman on genetic engineering, on reports that Imutran, the
Cambridge company owned by drugs giant Novartis, secretly supplied genetically
modified pigs for organ transplant experiments on monkeys in the Netherlands.
The Observer

    Junior choice

    'Before we start doing germ-line gene therapy, we need to decide whether we
want to change what it is to be human. We need to decide whether there is
something about human nature that is so valuable that we shouldn't change it,
even if it could be done.' Cynthia Cohen, of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics at
Georgetown University in Washington DC, on the temptation of being able to
dictate your children's genes. Discover

    Liver casseroled

    'Few people are aware that they are carrying hepatitis C until it has
severely damaged the liver. In the US, it's believed that only about a quarter
of the cases have been diagnosed. Approximately three million Americans do not
know that they are infected with the virus, or that they could be passing it on
to others.' Jerome Groopman, Recanati professor of medicine at Harvard Medical
School, on a disease that may be as lethal as Aids. The New Yorker

    Costly cures . . .

    'The idea that someone should try to patent bacteria and then claim a
royalty on our research if we find a vaccine had never occurred to me. I am
stunned. It could make treating children prohibitively expensive. All our money
goes on research: we cannot afford royalties as well.' Julia Warren, of the
Meningitis Research Foundation, on news that Human Genome Sciences, a US
company, has applied to patent a bacteria that causes meningitis. The Guardian

    . . . and hypocritic oaths

    'Physicians have an ethical obligation not to permit profit motives to
influence their free and independent medical judgment. For physicians to pursue,
obtain or enforce medical process patents could violate this requirement.'
Statement from the World Medical Association, which represents doctors and
scientists in 77 countries including the British Medical Association, following
publication of details about the HGS patent application. The Guardian

    Food for thought

    'Demands for food in the most populous parts of the world will double by the
year 2025, and nearly triple by 2050. Increases in food production of this
magnitude cannot be brought about in such a short period of time by conventional
breeding or by increasing the amount of arable land, which comprises only about
3 per cent of the Earth's surface and is rapidly deteriorating and decreasing.'
Indra K Vasil, graduate research professor in the Laboratory of Plant Cell and
Molecular Biology at the University of Florida in Gainsville, on the need for a
Gene Revolution in the 21st century. Nature Biotechnology


LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1998


                              146 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 5, 1998

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: Health: 'All the talk used to be about prevention. Now it's about
cure';
John Illman reports on the search for a genetic answer to cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: JOHN ILLMAN

BODY:

    The remarkable thing about 27-year-old Mark Barron is that he is alive at
all. He is part of the first generation of people with cystic fibrosis (CF) to
survive into adulthood.

    Last week he was in Downing Street campaigning for free prescriptions for
adults with CF, the UK's most common inherited life-threatening disease. The
delegation highlighted the spectacular advances in research. Forty years ago, a
baby born with cystic fibrosis was likely to live only a few months. Today,
three-quarters of CF children survive to adolescence. Of the 7,000 UK sufferers,
2,500 are adult. Mark says: 'Five years ago all the talk was about possible
prevention and more effective therapies. Now it is about a cure.' Will it be in
time to save him? 'Assuming I keep well. It could halt progression of the
illness, though it won't make good existing damage.' But isn't he now living on
borrowed time? 'At one time I thought so, but that was ignorance. Some people
with CF have turned 50. It's vital to have a positive outlook on life and I
have. I've done a lot more than many people of my age.' He spent a year as a
Benedictine monk and after studying philosophy and theology at London
University, was in publishing for three years before joining the Cystic Fibrosis
Trust as a fundraiser.

    Five years ago, he became increasingly prone to chest infections and lost
much of his energy. He started taking a new drug, DNase, which thins the mucus
clogging the lungs in CF. DNase, a genetically-engineered human enzyme, marked a
major step forward and followed the isolation in 1989 of the CF gene, which
enabled doctors to address the basic cause of CF rather than just treat the
symptoms. The 'normal CF' gene is dominant over its faulty form: if a copy of
the healthy gene can be inserted into a cell containing the faulty form, it will
take over and produce the normal protein.

    'I was 18 when the gene was isolated and really alarmed to read press
reports that the life expectancy in CF then was 20,' Mark says. 'But the doctor
told me I'd nothing to worry about so long as I looked after myself.' Today he
is looking forward to a home of his own, if he can get a mortgage. 'The problem
is mortgages are linked to life insurance and no one will insure anyone with a
terminal illness - which is how cystic fibrosis is still perceived.' He hopes
gene therapy will change all that.

    Against all odds

    Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a disease of genetic roulette. This is how the odds
stack up:

    n One in every 2,500 babies born in the UK has CF.

    n One in 25 of the population is a carrier of the faulty gene which can
cause CF in their children. Carriers are healthy because they also have a normal
gene which overrides the defective CF gene.

    If both parents have a defective CF gene, any child they have stands: n A
one in four chance of having CF.

    n A one in two chance of being completely healthy, but a carrier, having
inherited a CF gene from one parent and a normal gene from the other.

    n A one in four chance of being unaffected, having inherited normal genes
from both parents.

    Further information: Cystic Fibrosis Trust, 11 London Road, Bromley, Kent
BR1 IBY. The trust runs a network of support and advice groups.


LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1998


                              170 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 10, 1997

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients boosted by bypass surgery discovery;
 Genetic engineering breakthrough may save thousands of lives

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

    TWO genetic engineering techniques could revolutionise the way surgeons
tackle blocked arteries, affecting tens of millions of patients a year
worldwide.

    Twenty patients in the US are to spend 10 minutes longer on the operating
table in the hope of waking up with newly grafted, genetically treated blood
vessels that will last a lifetime.  And a second group who once faced gangrene
and amputation are now stepping out with new hope and new arteries provided by
gene therapy.

    The techniques could ultimately save tens of thousands of heart patients as
cardiovascular disease is the western world's great killer. According to the
British Heart Foundation it is responsible for 300,000 deaths a year in the UK.

    In recent decades, surgeons have used bypass surgery to counter blocked
arteries: taking a length of vein and grafting it around the blocked or
threatened artery to the heart. The US alone conducts 400,000 such operations a
year.

    But almost half of all cardiac and leg bypass treatments ultimately failed,
because the grafted blood vessel was being used for something for which it was
not intended, Michael Mann, of Harvard Medical School, told the American Heart
Association meeting in Orlando, Florida. The new "arteries" became clogged and
new cells grew too swiftly on the inside of the grafted blood vessel.

    He called for new genetic techniques to be used to treat heart problems.  Dr
Mann told the meeting he had tested the genetic approach on four patients who
needed bypass treatment for blocked blood vessels in the leg.

    It took only an extra 10 minutes. The surgeons simply bathed the vein,
before it was grafted, in a genetic solution to prevent it from furring up once
grafted.

    "Essentially, we are trying to manipulate the vein graft and make it behave
more like an artery," said Dr Mann. The first four patients were treated nine
months ago. Forty more have enrolled in "double-blind" trials, which means 20
will get the new treatment, and 20 will not.  There are then plans to test the
technique on more than 1,000 patients.

    The treatment is expected to help in coronary bypass surgery, but so far,
all trials are on patients who need leg bypasses.

    But a second team, from St Elizabeth's Medical Centre in Boston,
Massachusetts, told the Florida meeting of another piece of genetic conjuring,
based on discoveries made in cancer research. Tumours need a blood supply to
swell, so they secrete a special growth factor to make new blood vessels.  The
scientists "copied" the DNA for this growth factor from a human tumour and
injected it into the leg muscles of people with atherosclerotic plaques in the
legs.

    The first success was reported last year. Now eight patients have grown new
arteries to bypass the blocked sections. In some cases, leg ulcers have healed
or improved. Six of the patients reported less pain.  But the technique has so
far been tried only on cases so severe that they faced gangrene and amputation.
One of the patients, a 39-year-old woman, has since lost a limb.

    "When she came to us, she was facing two lower limb amputations. Without
this therapy, she would have been a double amputee," said Jeffrey Isner, who
pioneered the approach. How useful the technique will be will depend on future
research, he said. "Since this gene therapy approach works in the leg, it should
work in the heart."


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1997


                              171 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 10, 1997

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients boosted by bypass surgery discovery;
 Genetic engineering breakthrough may save thousands of lives

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

    TWO genetic engineering techniques could revolutionise the way surgeons
tackle blocked arteries, affecting tens of millions of patients a year
worldwide.

    Twenty patients in the US are to spend 10 minutes longer on the operating
table in the hope of waking up with newly grafted, genetically treated blood
vessels that will last a lifetime.  And a second group who once faced gangrene
and amputation are now stepping out with new hope and new arteries provided by
gene therapy.

    The techniques could ultimately save tens of thousands of heart patients as
cardiovascular disease is the western world's great killer. According to the
British Heart Foundation it is responsible for 300,000 deaths a year in the UK.

    In recent decades, surgeons have used bypass surgery to counter blocked
arteries: taking a length of vein and grafting it around the blocked or
threatened artery to the heart. The US alone conducts 400,000 such operations a
year.

    But almost half of all cardiac and leg bypass treatments ultimately failed,
because the grafted blood vessel was being used for something for which it was
not intended, Michael Mann, of Harvard Medical School, told the American Heart
Association meeting in Orlando, Florida. The new "arteries" became clogged and
new cells grew too swiftly on the inside of the grafted blood vessel.

    He called for new genetic techniques to be used to treat heart problems.  Dr
Mann told the meeting he had tested the genetic approach on four patients who
needed bypass treatment for blocked blood vessels in the leg.

    It took only an extra 10 minutes. The surgeons simply bathed the vein,
before it was grafted, in a genetic solution to prevent it from furring up once
grafted.

    "Essentially, we are trying to manipulate the vein graft and make it behave
more like an artery," said Dr Mann. The first four patients were treated nine
months ago. Forty more have enrolled in "double-blind" trials, which means 20
will get the new treatment, and 20 will not.  There are then plans to test the
technique on more than 1,000 patients.

    The treatment is expected to help in coronary bypass surgery, but so far,
all trials are on patients who need leg bypasses.

    But a second team, from St Elizabeth's Medical Centre in Boston,
Massachusetts, told the Florida meeting of another piece of genetic conjuring,
based on discoveries made in cancer research. Tumours need a blood supply to
swell, so they secrete a special growth factor to make new blood vessels.  The
scientists "copied" the DNA for this growth factor from a human tumour and
injected it into the leg muscles of people with atherosclerotic plaques in the
legs.

    The first success was reported last year. Now eight patients have grown new
arteries to bypass the blocked sections. In some cases, leg ulcers have healed
or improved. Six of the patients reported less pain.  But the technique has so
far been tried only on cases so severe that they faced gangrene and amputation.
One of the patients, a 39-year-old woman, has since lost a limb.

    "When she came to us, she was facing two lower limb amputations. Without
this therapy, she would have been a double amputee," said Jeffrey Isner, who
pioneered the approach. How useful the technique will be will depend on future
research, he said. "Since this gene therapy approach works in the leg, it should
work in the heart."


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1997


                              172 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 10, 1997

SECTION: The Guardian Home Page; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients boosted by bypass surgery discovery;
 Genetic engineering breakthrough may save thousands of lives

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:

    TWO genetic engineering techniques could revolutionise the way surgeons
tackle blocked arteries, affecting tens of millions of patients a year
worldwide.

    Twenty patients in the US are to spend 10 minutes longer on the operating
table in the hope of waking up with newly grafted, genetically treated blood
vessels that will last a lifetime.  And a second group who once faced gangrene
and amputation are now stepping out with new hope and new arteries provided by
gene therapy.

    The techniques could ultimately save tens of thousands of heart patients as
cardiovascular disease is the western world's great killer. According to the
British Heart Foundation it is responsible for 300,000 deaths a year in the UK.

    In recent decades, surgeons have used bypass surgery to counter blocked
arteries: taking a length of vein and grafting it around the blocked or
threatened artery to the heart. The US alone conducts 400,000 such operations a
year.

    But almost half of all cardiac and leg bypass treatments ultimately failed,
because the grafted blood vessel was being used for something for which it was
not intended, Michael Mann, of Harvard Medical School, told the American Heart
Association meeting in Orlando, Florida. The new "arteries" became clogged and
new cells grew too swiftly on the inside of the grafted blood vessel.

    He called for new genetic techniques to be used to treat heart problems.  Dr
Mann told the meeting he had tested the genetic approach on four patients who
needed bypass treatment for blocked blood vessels in the leg.

    It took only an extra 10 minutes. The surgeons simply bathed the vein,
before it was grafted, in a genetic solution to prevent it from furring up once
grafted.

    "Essentially, we are trying to manipulate the vein graft and make it behave
more like an artery," said Dr Mann. The first four patients were treated nine
months ago. Forty more have enrolled in "double-blind" trials, which means 20
will get the new treatment, and 20 will not.  There are then plans to test the
technique on more than 1,000 patients.

    The treatment is expected to help in coronary bypass surgery, but so far,
all trials are on patients who need leg bypasses.

    But a second team, from St Elizabeth's Medical Centre in Boston,
Massachusetts, told the Florida meeting of another piece of genetic conjuring,
based on discoveries made in cancer research. Tumours need a blood supply to
swell, so they secrete a special growth factor to make new blood vessels.  The
scientists "copied" the DNA for this growth factor from a human tumour and
injected it into the leg muscles of people with atherosclerotic plaques in the
legs.

    The first success was reported last year. Now eight patients have grown new
arteries to bypass the blocked sections. In some cases, leg ulcers have healed
or improved. Six of the patients reported less pain.  But the technique has so
far been tried only on cases so severe that they faced gangrene and amputation.
One of the patients, a 39-year-old woman, has since lost a limb.

    "When she came to us, she was facing two lower limb amputations. Without
this therapy, she would have been a double amputee," said Jeffrey Isner, who
pioneered the approach. How useful the technique will be will depend on future
research, he said. "Since this gene therapy approach works in the leg, it should
work in the heart."


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 1997


                              173 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 21, 1997

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1723 words

HEADLINE: Inside Story: The price of life ;
What links Elvis Presley, Marilyn Monroe and Abraham Lincoln? Well, a US company
wants to sell their DNA in an array of

BYLINE: MARK HONIGSBAUM

BODY:

    Earlier this year StarGene, a San Francisco-based biotechnology company, hit
on a novel marketing idea. Using the latest DNA cloning techniques it would
duplicate samples of DNA taken from the hair of deceased celebrities, enclose
them in transparent plastic and attach them to 'appropriate' trinkets. There
would be Marilyn Monroe 'earrings' Abraham Lincoln 'pens' and Elvis Presley
'belt buckles'.

    If ever there were a product designed to catch the zeitgeist, this seemed to
be it. The famed double helix has come a long way since Jim Watson and Francis
Crick cracked its structure 44 years ago. From mail-order screening tests for
breast cancer and cystic fibrosis to DNA fingerprinting of a whole Breton
village last week in the hunt for the killer of a Cornish teenager, DNA is no
longer simply the stuff of life. It is fast becoming a ubiquitous factor in our
daily lives too.

    We eat genetically-engineered apples and potatoes and US farmers are sowing
the seeds of genetically altered cotton, corn and soya beans; biotechnology
companies are developing a new generation of drugs and therapies aimed at curing
everything from cystic fibrosis to the 15 most common cancers.

    Yet for all the benefits promised by the dawning of the new 'century of
biology', there is still a widespread feeling that DNA ought not to be tampered
with and is somehow inviolable.

    When, for instance, StarGene approached Presley's estate for permission to
copy his DNA, the trustees refused, arguing that it could lead to a glut of
paternity suits against the dead singer and that, besides, they considered the
proposal 'distasteful'. The trustees of Monroe's estate refused on similar
grounds. The reaction 'surprised' StarGene's marketing director, Carole
Zimmerman: 'Basically, it was seen as invasion of privacy,' she says. 'But what
people don't seem to understand is that the duplication of DNA is really no
different from the duplication of a photograph or someone's fingerprint. In that
sense, it's public property.' David King, editor of Genethics News, a magazine
specialising in ethical issues raised by genetic research, agrees. Although it
is theoretically possible that someone could identify Elvis's offspring from a
fragment of his DNA, copying somebody's DNA is hardly a burning ethical issue.
'There is nothing holy about a fragment of someone's DNA. It doesn't contain the
essence of that individual,' says King.

    King points out that scientists at the Wellcome Trust Genome Campus in
Cambridgeshire are already mapping the DNA sequences of the human genome with
the aim of decoding all 100,000 genes governing human growth and function by
2005. Much of it has already been published on the Internet as part of an
internationally agreed policy of making information about human DNA public
property. The idea is that any research establishment wishing to develop new
drugs and gene therapies can then access that information freely, without having
to pay expensive licensing fees.

    But the genome-mapping project raises profound ethical questions. It could,
for instance, lead to doctors being able to draw up genetic 'blueprints' for
every patient in their care. Armed with these blueprints, doctors would be in a
position to tell people their chances of living to a ripe old age or of
succumbing to a genetic predisposition to illness. They might also be able to
predict a foetus's propensity to violence, crime and, possibly, homosexuality
too.

    'The fear is that the advances being made by scientists are running ahead of
our ability to deal with the ethical consequences,' says King. 'There is a new
world out there and we are unsure how to react.' One person familiar with this
ambivalence about genetics is Dr Maurice Super, a consultant clinical geneticist
at the Royal Manchester Children's Hospital. Last February, Super opened an
information kiosk at Manchester Airport called the Gene Shop, with the aim of
cutting through the hype surrounding biotech and educating people about the
benefits of the new technologies. Sandwiched between the Body Shop and the
airport's prayer room, Super's shop (motto: 'What keeps body and soul together?
Your genes') features interactive displays explaining how genes for conditions
such as haemophilia and Marfan syndrome - a rare condition that can lead to
heart problems - are passed down the generations, and how new drugs and gene
therapies might treat them in future. He also explains where people can go for
screening and counselling if they are worried about having a genetic
predisposition to these ailments.

    'The aim is to decrease the fear of a brave new world and encourage people
to be more proactive about their health,' says Super. 'A lot of the time when I
diagnose and counsel people at my clinic I see how interested they are but I am
educating people in a captive position. I have always thought it important to
talk to people before they are my patients.' So far 7,000 people have visited
the Gene Shop. But while Super says the response is encouraging, many people
remain fearful of the possible consequences of gene testing. Earlier this year,
for instance, it was widely reported that insurance companies were planning to
use information from genetic tests to calculate people's eligibility and
premiums for life insurance.

    Thus, people with a predisposition to heart disease could expect to pay more
for life insurance than those with a cleaner generic bill of health. And there
are psychological consequences too: some people might respond positively to
learning that they have a '50 per cent' chance of developing breast cancer, but
what about those who find the news depressing and treat the genetic diagnosis as
a death sentence? More worrying still is the issue of who will control the new
biotechnology and how much it will cost. Already, biotech companies are rushing
to patent newly sequenced strands of human DNA in the hope that they will turn
out to specify genes that are important in disease.

    Although religious and environmental groups object that human, animal and
plant DNA is a part of nature and ought to belong to everyone, thousands of
patents have already been granted. The vast majority have been registered by
American and Japanese companies such as Genetech, Immunex and Takeda, with
European pharmaceutical concerns such as Hoffman La-Roche coming a poor third.
So far few of the patents have been tested in the courts. But the worry is that
biotech companies will increasingly insist on patenting before agreeing to share
their research discoveries and fund the development of new therapies and drugs.
This in turn could lead to the neglect of non-lucrative lines of research and
inflated health costs as companies try to exploit demand for the gene technology
over which they hold a particular monopoly.

    The Manchester Regional Genetics Centre, for instance, recently received a
bill from a Toronto-based biotech company demanding a $ 5,000 licence fee plus a
royalty of $ 4 each time it used its patented cystic fibrosis gene-screening
test. Similarly, the American company which discovered the BRCA1 breast cancer
gene also charges for tests using its diagnostic kit. And although it has
generously waived its 'right' to charge for research into a cure, it is now
trying to patent the second breast cancer gene, even though the initial DNA
sequencing for BRCA2 was published three years ago by the Sanger Centre.

    'What we are seeing is a gold rush for the human genome,' argues King. 'In
my view it is an attempt to privatise nature and an abuse of the patent system.
I'm not against patenting, I just think it should only be permitted further up
the line.' The problem is there is no consensus on where the line should be
drawn. In July the European parliament voted to harmonise Europe's rag-bag
national patent laws by allowing continent-wide patents on so -called genetic
'inventions'. According to John Battle, the UK science and energy minister, this
means that human gene sequences and animal and plant DNA that occur in nature
are not patentable. However, British religious leaders such as the Rt Rev
Richard Harries, the Bishop of Oxford, and Jonathan Sacks, the Chief Rabbi, fear
that the European directive is unclear and that clever patent lawyers will try
to say that once a particular strand of DNA has been isolated in a test tube it
becomes a scientific invention.

    In a letter to Battle in July they argued: 'If this directive were passed,
merely extracting and describing a gene would entitle a company to patency,
allowing them not only a monopoly control over the procedure but over the genes
themselves, thus crediting them with all future unforeseen developments and
applications of that basic discovery.' This - not cloning - is the real brave
new world: the reduction of human beings to so many 'spare parts' for
exploitation by, and the enrichment of, the biotech industry.

    At the moment, the application of cloning techniques to human embryos is
considered ethically unacceptable. But as Super points out, the technology is
developing so fast and the possible benefits are so great that our objections
might soon be overridden. For instance, there are a number of inherited genetic
conditions, such as Laber's blindness - a condition passed on via faulty female
chromosomes - which could be eradicated by cloning techniques.

    'There are certain families whom you could help a great deal using cloning,
without significantly altering their overall genetic makeup,' argues Super. 'The
problem is that right now we do not know what the possible side effects might
be. But as we begin to show that these things are possible in the lab, our
attitudes may change.' In fact, they already have. Who, for instance, would have
thought 10 years ago that advances in reproductive technology would mean that a
child could have up to five parents: a sperm donor, an egg donor, a surrogate
mother and two adoptive parents? Now such variations are commonplace we no
longer consider them unacceptable or even unusual.

    As Crick, who won a Nobel prize for his work on DNA, told a US congressional
committee last year: 'We used to think that our fate was in our stars. Now we
know that, in large measure, our fate is in our genes'.

    In other words, the choice is ours.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1997


                              174 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 21, 1997

SECTION: The Guardian Features Page; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 257 words

HEADLINE: DNA: the way ahead

BODY:

    How advances in DNA technology could affect you:

    1 British companies are already offering screening tests for breast cancer
and cystic fibrosis by post. But once scientists have mapped the human genome it
should also be possible to test for eczema, asthma, heart disease, Alzheimer's
disease and other common cancers in the same way.

    2 Within two years forensic scientists expect to be able to identify crime
suspects by extracting DNA from a single human cell. In theory this means a
speck of dandruff left behind at a crime scene could be enough to produce a
genetic 'fingerprint' and obtain a conviction in British courts.

    3 British insurance companies are already seeking access to pre-existing
genetic tests to calculate premiums for life insurance more accurately. The fear
is that genetic testing will increasingly be used to calculate premiums for
those with greater health risks.

    4 Gene therapy - basically, infecting faulty human DNA with viruses
containing good genes - could eventually lead to treatments for some 30-odd
illnesses, including cystic fibrosis, vascular disease and common forms of
cancer.

    5 DNA's famed double helix is so good at storing information that it could
become the basis for a new generation of super computers, with DNA chips
replacing silicon chips as the basic unit of computing.

    6 Scientists are engineering the DNA of certain micro-organisms with a view
to creating cells that can clean up radiation and other toxic waste, leading to
a greener, more productive economy.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1997


                              181 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 9, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HIGHER EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: COURSE FOCUS: SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY: MATHS, MUSIC AND MEDICINE;
Technology-based degrees can be highly specialised. Graham Wade looks at a
handful

BYLINE: Graham Wade

BODY:


    While everyone knows roughly what constitutes a science subject, fewer are
clear about technology degrees. Perhaps the best definition of technology is
that it is the application of science to industrial and manufacturing processes
- in other words, applied science. So the term can be used to include degrees in
engineering, computer science, biochemistry and environmental technology.

    The extremely broad nature of technological degrees is shown by York
University's programmes in music technology, which can lead to a BSc, a BA, or
even a BEng.  A few vacancies appear on these degrees during the clearing
process, but more are found on York's straight electronic engineering
programmes. 'Our music technology degrees are fairly unique,' says Dr John
Szymanski, admissions tutor. 'Effectively, they are joint degrees for serious
musicians who want to understand modern technology - synthesisers, studio
recording equipment, and so on. The first year is spent on electronics, the
second is more musical and students concentrate then on one side or the other.'
This unusual mixture of arts and applied science demands virtually mandatory A
levels in maths and music, although a third qualification can be in almost any
subject. Standard entry grades are BBB and the department is generally unwilling
to weaken these, but individual circumstances are always taken into
consideration. As performance skills are needed, an instrument grade of eight is
expected. Piano, guitar, saxophone and percussion are popular among applicants.

    For those with lesser musical competence - essentially instrument grades of
five to seven - there is a three-year BEng or four-year MEng programme in
electronic engineering with musical technology systems. This pathway does not
offer students the chance to spend a year in the music department.

    While a large number of graduates from these highly specialist degrees would
like to work in recording studios as engineers, there are relatively few
openings in that area. Nevertheless, many students do manage to find jobs with
prestigious organisations such as the BBC, Roland, Dolby, and Yamaha. The awards
are also relevant to computer systems and electronic engineering.  It would be
unrealistic to suggest that places on these and similar degrees - such as
offered by Surrey and Salford - are easy to pick up in clearing. However, it is
still worth trying. But if your search is unsuccessful and your heart is still
set on such a course, it may be a good idea to give serious consideration to a
year's delay and a retake of your exams to try to get better grades. It is worth
discussing this last option with a university admissions tutor.

    As far as biotechnology goes, Westminster University offers a range of
degrees, including two new specialist BScs in microbial biotechnology, and
biotechnology in medicine. Neither appeared in the Ucas handbook because they
were only recently validated. 'Each reflects the main directions in which the
subject is developing,' explains Dr David Perry, senior lecturer and course
leader. 'The first focuses on applications that use micro-organisms in processes
like antibiotic production. The second concentrates on aspects of diagnosis and
therapy for human diseases - areas such as therapeutic proteins, gene therapy
vectors and diagnostic kits. Both fields have expanding job opportunities among
specialist and pharmaceutical firms.' Clearing places can be filled at modest DE
grades, preferably in biology and chemistry or maths. More than a third of
graduates move on to higher degrees. This year's top student is doing doctoral
research at Cambridge. 'Awareness of what biotechnology is all about needs to be
raised in schools,' Dr Perry says, 'Not enough people have a clear grasp of the
subject.' These remarks might as easily be applied to the entire field of
technology as studied in universities, and a careful reading of the prospectuses
is recommended.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1997


                              184 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 20, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN SOCIETY PAGE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1054 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: SLICE OF REAL LIFE;
The royal colleges seem to be stuck with their fusty old image. But while some
would like to tell the public the full story, others still prefer deeds to
soundbites. Caroline White reports

BYLINE: Caroline White

BODY:


    THINK of the word pathologist, and what comes to mind? Probably not gene
therapy, the development of vaccines, the treatment of cancer and Alzheimer's
disease, to name but a few. But, until recently, the Royal College of
Pathologists had not seriously attempted to counter the common misperception
that pathologists do nothing but slice up dead bodies and provide good
storylines for TV series.

    But public image is an issue for all medical royal colleges. In an era of
turbulent changes in health care and an increasing drive for public
accountability, their lack of visibility enhances the perception that they are
arcane, elitist and white male-dominated institutions, whose primary aim is to
protect the career prospects of their membership rather than the public's
health.

    Some of the older colleges have accumulated considerable financial assets
and all of them enjoy tax breaks as a result of their charitable status. In
theory, they are answerable to the Privy Council and Charity Commission; but in
practice, only to their membership, whose fees finance their existence. As a
result, there have been calls that a royal commission should investigate their
activities.

    'They do have a PR problem to overcome,' says Cathy Grizner, general manager
of the Patients' Association. 'They need to tell the general public what they
do. I think they could win them over if the public knew more about them.'
Initiated by the Royal College of General Practitioners, several of the colleges
now have patient liaison groups, and many commit extensive resources to public
education and research.

    However, Dr Naren Patel, president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists, responds: 'I know we are seen as old men sitting in fancy
offices in fancy surroundings, rather like some gentleman's club,but I don't
want soundbites - I want the deeds.' The colleges see their principal role as
guardians of standards for education, training and research within the
profession. Each college is responsible for drawing up training programmes for
its own discipline. They can effectively close down units by withdrawing college
approval for the post(s) if they consider the level of training and supervision
fail to meet agreed criteria. But, given budgetary constraints, NHS trusts often
complain that these criteria are unrealistic, with scant attention to resource
implications.

    'We are here for the patients, not our membership,' says an unrepentant Sir
Rodney Sweetman, president of the Royal College of Surgeons. 'There will always
be a mismatch, but our mission is to uphold standards.' But what about the
standards of senior doctors? Membership of the colleges is almost always by
exam, and although not mandatory for all practising doctors, is essential for
those wanting to become specialists at consultant level. But once membership has
been gained, a consultant's performance is not re-examined. 'If pilots who fly
jumbo jets have to be tested every six months, why can't we do the same for
doctors?' argues Professor Alan Maynard, who teaches economics at the University
of York.

    Working parties and guidelines can make recommendations about best practice,
while continuing medical education and professional development programmes can
keep doctors abreast of current developments. But participation is usually
voluntary and there is no way of regulating whether the knowledge gained has
been transferred into practice.

    'This is a weakness within the profession,' admits Dr David Everett, former
deputy head of the Medical Research Council. 'And the other issue is that
medical education may be good at instilling kowledge, but it is not good at
inculcating the right approach and attitudes. The colleges could take more of a
lead on that.' 'In many ways, the colleges do excellent work and have been
responsible for driving up standards,' says Philip Hunt, chief executive of the
NHS Confederation of Health Authorities and Trusts, 'but they are very reluctant
to enter the fray.' Their royal charters prevent the colleges from taking an
overtly active political role, unlike the royal colleges of nursing and
midwives, which are also trade unions. And they are keen to dissociate
themselves from any activity that might be seen to whiff of political
manoeuvring. But it is all a matter of interpretation. 'Some of their behaviour
is very trade unionist - for example, the removal of recognition for posts,'
claims Christine Hancock, the RCN's general secretary. It also means that, in
the main, issues such as equal opportunities can be left in other hands.

    The 'inside track' approach is deemed to be much more effective, and as Bill
Reith, honorary secretary of the Royal College of General Practitioners, points
out, it is no diferent from the relative secrecy of the Government itself.
'There are various ways of having influence,' says Sir Rodney Sweetman. 'We are
consulted widely, but the process is ongoing and not visible. That's no
different from the film industry, for example. But we don't feel that maximum
influence comes through shouting from the rooftops.' It is a technique that has
been used to urge the Government to look at policy on care in the community; to
make provision for women returning to general practice after having a a baby
because of the shortfall in numbers; and to resist cuts in pathology
laboratories.

    'We have much more influence by talking quietly and privately,' insists Dr
Robert Kendall, president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists. After all, it
was three former presidents of the royal colleges of physicians, surgeons and
obstetricians and gynaecologists who had a quiet word in Margaret Thatcher's ear
and started the ball rolling on the NHS reforms.

    Some of the louder campaigns have included taking a stance against alcohol
and tobacco, recognising ME, and trying to remove the stigma of depression. But
it takes a while to reach consensus to take action. 'Any organisation that is
the property of its members has to satisfy various constituencies, and that can
make the colleges overly cautious and slow to move,' says Everett.

    As there are now 15 medical royal colleges,and - with the continuing
specialisation of medicine - the possibility of several more, the
diversification could slow things up even further.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1997


                              189 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 August 1, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: HIGH HOPES FOR BOY IN PIONEER OPERATION;
Babies: The pain and pleasure: Chris Mihill on child diagnosed while still in
the womb

BYLINE: Chris Mihill

BODY:


    A BABY whose potentially fatal brain abnormality was spotted while still in
the womb was said by surgeons yesterday to be the youngest patient in the world
to undergo corrective surgery for such a condition.

    Doctors at the Wirral hospital spotted that Dylan Harris was suffering from
a sub-dural haemmorhage - a blood clot between his brain and skull - at 30 weeks
gestation using ultrasound scans.

    The condition is common in older people but extremely rare in babies. There
have only been six other documented cases spotted while babies were still in the
womb, and none survived birth.

    Dylan, whose head had swelled dangerously, was delivered by caesarean
section at 34 weeks and operated on three days later.

    Surgeons said yesterday that six weeks after the operation he was responding
well and that they were cautiously optimistic about his long-term health.

    His mother Vickie, aged 29, and father David, 30, described how they had
been devastated when a routine scan, carried out at Arrowe Park hospital,
Merseyside, showed the haemorrhage.

    Mrs Harris, who lost her first child at 20 weeks, said: "I was devastated. I
just thought 'why me?'

    "The worse part was when I had to get him baptised the night before his
operation, because we were told he might not pull through," she said.

    The couple, of Claughton village, Wirral, had been warned Dylan could die at
any time or be paralysed or seriously brain-damaged.

    Mrs Harris said: "I just think he's a miracle. He's my little fighter. He
just kept fighting all the way. There were times when we were ready to give up
on him, but he never gave up on us."

    * A 15-month-old child is today recovering from a gene therapy operation
which was the first of its kind in the world.

    Surgeons at the Royal Manchester children's hospital transplanted her own
bone marrow - which had been genetically altered in a laboratory - back into the
girl. The treatment, if successful, could be used to help hundreds of people.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1997


                              201 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 1, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. T10

LENGTH: 2027 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: CANCERS: THE FACT FILE

BODY:


    Lung 30,972 deaths a year 36,505 new cases a year The cancer with the
biggest death toll but one which is largely preventable. Research suggests that
up to 90 per cent of cases are linked to tobacco smoking. Radon in the home,
workplace exposure to pollutants and chemicals and secondary smoking effects are
also implicated. Symptoms include a persistent cough (also if sputum has blood
in it), weight loss and breathlessness.

    Trends: Lung cancer rates among men seems to be staying at around the same
level and in some instances may be going down. But in the last 20 years in the
US female death rates from lung cancer have gone up by 146 per cent.

    Therapy: Surgery, radiotherapy or chemotherapy, depending on the type and
stage of the cancer.

    Future: One of the major cancers where lifestyle changes could dramatically
reduce the number of cases, although the Macmillan report predicts a doubling of
cases among women. Current gene therapy trials are looking for a way to switch
on the body's own defences by reawakening a tumour suppressor gene.

    Five-year survival rates: Around 13 per cent on average, ranging from 40 per
cent if it is localised, to 2 per cent if it has spread to distant sites.

    Colon and rectal 15,515 deaths a year 27,739 new cases a year reported High
-fat and low-fibre diets, family predisposition and sedentary lifestyle are all
implicated in a disease which kills men and women in almost equal numbers. Blood
in the stools and changes in bowel habits are among signs to look out for.

    Trends: In the US annual rectal examinations and stool blood tests are
recommended for people over 40. DIY tests for signs of blood are gaining
popularity.

    Therapy: Surgery plus radiotherapy or chemotherapy.

    Future: Diet changes could help and new keyhole surgery techniques will mean
safer, more localised treatment and less trauma.  Screening is a possibility.

    Five-year survival rates: 62 per cent (US figure).

    Breast 13,231 deaths a year 30,595 new cases a year Two per cent of breast
cancers and 3 per cent of ovarian cancers are due to one of the predisposition
genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2 - but they may be responsible for as many as 8 per cent
of breast cancers in under-30s. Other factors include early onset of
menstruation, late menopause, the contraceptive pill, HRT and childlessness. A
lump in the breast is the common warning sign.

    Trends: Macmillan suggests breast cancer will continue to rise, though rates
have fallen in recent years.

    Therapy: Surgery and chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

    Future: Genetic testing should make big inroads into the disease among the
under-30s. The long-term effects of screening should result in cancers being
detected earlier and in a smaller state.  Screening may eventually be available
to a much wider age group.

    Five-year survival rates: Between 64 and 80 per cent, but can go down to 20
per cent if the disease has spread some distance.

    Prostate 8,782 deaths a year 13,940 new cases a year Second most common
cancer death among men but could be the number one killer soon as lung cancer
death rates decline. Advancing age and family history of the disease appear to
be risk factors.  Warning signs include frequent urination, poor flow and blood
in the urine.

    Trends: Macmillan suggests a threefold increase by 2018, because of the
increasing number of elderly men.

    Therapy: Surgery or drugs, although no action may be needed in some cases.

    Future: Pressure is increasing for a screening programme. One reason for it
not yet having been implemented is that screening based on existing tests might
lead to unnecessary anxiety because two out of every three men testing positive
would be found either to not have prostate cancer or not need therapy. Laser
surgery using robotic equipment is starting to be used.

    Five-year survival rates: Up to 98 per cent if localised but significantly
lower, about 20 per cent, if the cancer cells have spread some distance.

    Bladder 4,617 deaths a year 11,469 new cases a year More prevalent among
smokers but industrial exposure to a range of chemicals, as well as diet, may be
implicated. Warning signs include blood in the urine.

    Trends: US research seems to show that death rates have declined by about 22
per cent.

    Therapy: Surgery, chemotherapy or radiotherapy.

    Future: Special therapy with photosensitive chemicals used to light up the
tumour for a targeted laser attack is a possible develoment.

    Five-year survival rates: Up to 92 per cent if localised; 50 per cent when
there is a spread.

    Pancreatic 5,873 deaths a year 6,267 new cases a year The cancer with one of
the worst prognoses. Tobacco smoking, diabetes and high-fat diet may be
implicated. No warning signs and many tumours are hard to treat.

    Trend: Intractable cancer with little sign of improvements in mortality
rates in recent years.

    Therapy: Surgery, if the tumour is localised and small, plus chemotherapy
and radiotherapy.

    Future: Better drugs are in development.

    Five-year survival rates: 12 per cent if localised; as low as 2 per cent if
spread some distance (US figures).

    Ovarian 4,094 deaths a year 5,277 new cases a year Risks for ovarian cancer
overlap those for breast cancer. A family history may be implicated and the two
breast cancer genes so far identified - BRCA1 and, more important, BRCA2 - may
predispose women to ovarian cancer too. It is a notoriously silent disease with
few symptoms, although some women have abdominal swelling.

    Trend: There are hopes that gene therapy will make inroads.

    Therapy: Surgery can involve removal of both ovaries and uterus.
Chemotherapy may also be given.

    Skin 1,368 deaths a year 3,703 new cases a year Exposure to the sun,
particularly during childhood, may lead to melanomas in later life. Changes in
the shape or colour of texture of a mole are among the indicators.

    Trend: Health education programmes around the world have been targeting
potential victims. Some countries operate medical beach patrols.

    Therapy: Operation to remove the melanoma.

    Future: Heightened awareness of the dangers and widening range of
sun-blocker skin products , including popular cosmetic ranges, could see a
reduction in cases. Vaccines are another possibility being investigated.

    Five-year survival rates: Up to 97 per cent if melanoma is localised.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1997


                              206 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 27, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. T4

LENGTH: 7054 words

HEADLINE: 50 MOST POWERFUL WOMEN IN BRITAIN: A TO Z OF THE MOVERS PART 2

BYLINE: Edited By Katharine Viner. Interviews And Additional Research By Simon
Bowers, Emily Barr, And Hannah Pool

BODY:


    Ann Chant Director of Business in the Community, employed as head of
Opportunity 2000 campaign to boost profile of working women. Also works on Race
for Opportunity campaign and Business in the Environment. She is on a three-year
secondment from the Department of Social Security, and was chief executive of
the Child Support Agency from 1994 until this year Age: 51 Salary: c. pounds
90,000 Power: Opportunity 2000 is an industry-backed pressure group, whose 311
members represent around 25 per cent of workforce. Successes include HM Treasury
imposing 5pm deadline for the closure of ministerial red boxes. Now aiming to
stop trend of women doing better at school and university stopping abruptly in
workplace.

    Style: Effective, usually flexible, she says she varies style according to
organisation in which she is working: the CSA, where she was at the top of an
established structure, was different from Opportunity 2000, which is
'participatory'.

    Strengths: Credited with saving CSA from collapse, she is very able and
tough enough to cope with flak ('Whitehall's most poisoned chalice'). She gave
CSA a lower profile than predecessor Ros Hepplewhite, turning it, according to
the FT, 'from a complete disaster into simply a big problem'. She says: 'I'm
prepared to make decisions, to take responsibility and stick with them.'Good at
dealing with media.

    Weaknesses: Accused by a Commons select committee of complacency over the
CSA's progress. 'I'm not at all good at detail,' she says. 'Whatever job I'm
doing, I always have to have someone in my team picking up broken bits.' Future:
Going back to DSS in 2000. 'I've never really been a great one for ambitions. I
like doing a good job.' On women and power: At Opportunity 2000 she is concerned
with promoting women. 'You can't just wave a magic wand and put people in. It's
true that women do not make that last step up to chief executive level. In some
areas there's been a big shift but in others there has not been enough progress
- universities, for example - which sends a bad message to the next generation.'
When she was appointed to the CSA, Frank Field, now Social Security Secretary,
suggested that job, with accompanying vilification, was unsuitable for a woman.

    Personal background: Blackpool Collegiate School for Girls. Career civil
servant, employed by DSS, and used to run Newcastle-based Contributions Agency
employing 10,000 staff. 'I find it easy to switch off,' she says. 'I don't mind
working reasonably long hours - you have to accept that it's going to be
demanding if you're near the top of an organisation. But then you have to get
away. I love theatre, and there's nothing better than an evening nattering with
friends over a bottle of wine.'

    Kay Davies Professor of Genetics and Fellow of Keble College, Oxford Age: 46
Salary: pounds 36,000 ('which is disgracefully low,' she says) Power: Chromosome
pioneer. Gene therapist, runs 10-strong Muscular Dystrophy research team with
budget of pounds 200,000 a year.

    Style: Adores science and communicates well.

    Strengths: 'What women bring to research work is a particular ability to
collaborate and network.' Weaknesses: 'While very ambitious, I'm not ruthlessly
ambitious. I did not decide I had to be a professor of genetics when I was 20.'
Future: Excited about research and developing field of genetics.

    On women and power: 'I have experienced discrimination as a woman but I
don't want to dredge it up. It's very important not to be bitter about these
things. Science is so much fun. I try to get this message across to
schoolgirls.' Personal background: All-girl Stourbridge High School, a West
Midlands grammar, Somerville College, Oxford (BA, MA and DPhil).  Married, one
son, aged nine.

    Clara Freeman Executive director, Marks & Spencer Age: 45 Salary: pounds
150,000 Power: Director of corporate personnel and external personnel, which
involves organising staff to meet business objectives. Has six people in her
direct management team; there are 2,500-3,000 people who work in the areas she
covers and who report to personnel.

    Style: Very direct.

    Strengths: Hard working and analytical.

    Weaknesses: Can be impatient and over-critical.

    Future: Rumoured to have taken on more strategy and policy work.

    On women and power: 'I hope people respond to me for what I am, what I do,
not because I am a woman. But I hope that I encourage other women to do well
because of what I have achieved and let them know that they do have choices.'
Personal background: Manchester High School; Sherborne Girls School, Dorset;
Somerville College, Oxford. Married with two children, nine and seven.

    Carol Galley Vice-chair and fund manager of Mercury Asset Management Age: 49
Salary: Around pounds 900,000 a year Power: Controls the financial destinies of
900 pension funds throughout the UK - pounds 70 billion per day ( pounds 45
billion is directly in the hands of her institutional funds team). Sir Paul
Nicholson, chair of Vaux Group, said of her powers: 'A summons from Galley can
have the most prestigious of corporate grandees quaking.' Style: Nicknamed 'the
ice maiden' by the tabloids. Said to be relaxed with colleagues and clients but
cold towards outsiders.

    Strengths: A team player who believes in meritocracy rather than hierarchy.

    Weaknesses: Cold, but 'you will find it very difficult to find a bad word
said about Carol Galley' - well-known city analyst.

    Future: The world's her oyster. The US probably a major attraction.

    On women and power: Says she should be recognised for what she does, not
because she is a woman in a man's world. Refuses personal interviews on basis
that a man in her position would not attract extra attention.

    Personal background: Gosforth Grammar School for girls, Newcastle; modern
languages at Leicester University. Married to Reinhard Winkler, a German broker
who runs his own company, Rhine Securities.  No children. The couple spend
weekends in Provence. Galley also enjoys skiing and opera.

    Ann Gloag Executive director of international bus and rail company
Stagecoach Age: 54 Salary: Stake in her business is worth pounds 160 million.
Featured as fourth richest woman in Sunday Times list, which estimated her
personal wealth at pounds 500 million. (The Queen is sixth, with pounds 250
million.) Power: With brother Brian Souter, manages Stagecoach in Britain and
worldwide. Has more than 24,000 employees. Operates South West trains and has
bid for 12 of the 25 passenger franchises outstanding.

    Style: Stagecoach is run like a family business; staff stay for years. Very
hands-on.

    Strengths: Tough negotiator, good at organisational and personal side of
business.

    Weaknesses: Stagecoach failed financially on experiment with seats on
sleeper trains.

    Future: Developing international side of the company, concentrating not just
on Europe but also on New Zealand and southern Africa.

    On women and power: The fact that she has been a woman in a man's world has
driven her on.

    Personal background: Divorced from Robin Gloag, who left Stagecoach in 1983
with a bus, a coach and pounds 5,000 in consultancy fees. Now married to
businessman David McCleary. Later bought out her ex-husband's company.
Originally trained as a nurse. She and her brother are evangelical Christians.

    Susan Greenfield Lecturer in synaptic pharmacology, Fellow of Lincoln
College, Oxford, Gresham College Professor of Physic Age: 46 Salary: pounds
30,000.

    Power: Runs 12-person research group on Alzheimer's and Parkinson's
diseases.  Writes a science column for Independent on Sunday.

    Style: Enthusiastic and flexible.

    Strengths: Gets on well with people, good communicator.

    Weaknesses: Tries to be intellectual Jack-of-all-trades, tends to delegate
too much at a practical level.

    Future: Her new book, Pleasure ('scientific perspective on what we mean by
the feelings and emotions which shape our lives'), will be published by Penguin
next year.

    On women and power: As graduate student was patronised and ignored. 'I
thought this was because I was a lowly novice but subsequently realised it was
because I was a woman. There is a Svengali syndrome rife in academia between
self-assured male lecturers and impressionable young female students who
unwittingly learn a kind of helplessness.' Personal background: Considers a
child incompatible with her job: 'Research work involves keeping up to date with
developments. Having a baby would either mean becoming a bad scientist or
missing my child growing up.' Has unconventional background for a biochemist:
classics and maths A-levels, philosophy and psychology at Oxford. turned on to
science having seen a brain dissection - amazed that 'a sludgy boring old brain
contains our consciousness'. Attended Godolphin and Latymer School for Girls,
Hammersmith.

    Harriet Harman Social Security Secretary and minister for women's issues
Age: 46 Salary: Entitled to draw pounds 103,860 Power: Cabinet minister in
charge of the biggest budget in Whitehall - the DSS.

    Style: In tune with New Labour leadership.

    Strengths: There are no damaging U-turns in her closet - she was always a
moderniser, long before modernisers were in favour.

    Weaknesses: 'Harriet's Hypocrisy' (Daily Mail headline) continues to dog
her.  Sending son Joe to St Olave's School in Orpington, Kent (a selective
grant-maintained grammar), was seen to be contrary to the spirit of party policy
and infuriated many colleagues. Blair publicly backed her, saying she was right
to put son's educational needs before party policy. This is something which, she
admits, 'defines her now'. Women do not warm to her.

    Future: Complex pensions reform looms. She will be helped in tackling it by
Frank Field, minister for welfare reform.

    On women and power: In the next century 'the shape of women's working lives
will include working part-time, full-time, different shifts, term-time work,
job-sharing; and will include periods of time out of the workforce retraining.
But while women have moved ahead of time into the pattern of life of the next
century, the men to whom they are married, the employers for whom they work and
the Government which shapes the society in which they live remain in the 20th
century. This is the century gap.' Her book on gender is The Century Gap.

    Personal background: St Paul's Girls' School, London. Read politics at York
University. Trained as solicitor. Worked at Brent Law Centre. Legal Officer for
the National Council for Civil Liberties 1979 -82. Won Peckham byelection in
October 1982 in final few weeks of pregnancy. Front-bench spokesperson on social
services (1994-7), health (1987-92), Treasury affairs (1992-94) and employment
(from 1994). Two sons, Harry 14 and Joe 12, and daughter, Amy 10. Married to
Jack Dromey, national officer of the TGWU - 'They give street cred to each other
because she comes from this rather posh background and he's one of the workers,'
says Labour insider. Father was a Harley Street consultant and mother a lawyer.
Niece of Labour peer Lord Longford. One of the few politicians to have appeared
in Hello! magazine.

    Julia Hobsbawm and Sarah Macaulay Joint managing directors of Hobsbawm
Macaulay Communications.

    Age: Both 32.

    Salary: Undisclosed.

    Power: Modest-sized PR company with strong links to the Labour Party, whose
high-profile clients include CNN, Vanity Fair, New Statesman, the charity Refuge
and Christie's International plc.

    Style: Integrity is their stock in trade.

    Strengths: 'They only take on quality, and give even the most flaky of
causes the allure of businesslike sophistication. The 'approved by Hobsbawm
Macaulay' stamp therefore becomes a desirable and marketable commodity, even
while it confers a value far above the commercial. Clever.' - Jane Scott,
Glasgow Herald.

    Weaknesses: While they're happy to do the PR for others they are oddly coy
themselves (JH: 'put it this way: while we're flattered, we'd be more than happy
not to be included' - see background for reason).

    Future: Branching out in Scotland - last year they opened an office in
Edinburgh.

    On women and power: They did the PR for Emily's List, an organisation
established by Barbara Follett to train and financially support a select group
of women Labour candidates at the election - a pro -active attempt to break into
the male bastion of the Commons.

    Personal background: SM has been going out with Gordon Brown for two years
and there is now much speculation about an imminent engagement announcement. JH
is daughter of Eric Hobsbawm. They met at Camden School for Girls when they were
13 and kept in touch through various professional reincarnations in
communications, publishing, Labour fundraising and publicity. Hob sbawm Macaulay
Communications grew out of the Labour fundraising group, the 1000 Club.

    Anji Hunter Special assistant to Tony Blair Age: 41 Salary: 'Yet to be
established,' according to Downing Street.

    Power: Runs Blair's political office at No 10. Known as his oldest friend in
politics - they met as teenagers in Scotland, where their boarding schools were
close by.

    Style: Very Middle England. Keeps obsessively low-profile and has policy of
not speaking to the press.

    Strengths: In a world of courtiers and sycophants she is the one person
Blair relies on to give him unvarnished advice. As a politician she is
enormously self-reliant, resilient and, when she feels the need to be, hugely
stubborn.

    Weaknesses: Has been compared to Marcia Falkender, Harold Wilson's personal
political secretary.

    Falkender was viewed with suspicion inside and outside the Labour party as a
de facto deputy prime minister.

    Future: Set to be very influential in the new Government's inner circle.

    On women and power: Doesn't stand out as a campaigning feminist. However, is
said to understand the women of middle England better than most, and played a
crucial role in presenting Labour's message to this crucial section of the
electorate on May 1.

    Personal background: Married to Nick Cornwall, manager of Richmond Park,
with whom she has two children. Expelled from St Leonard's, a girls' boarding
school, in the sixth form because 'she was agin the establishment', despite
having obtained nine O-levels by the age of 14. Secretarial college in Oxford
(while Blair was at St John's College). Later studied history at Brighton
Polytechnic.

    Ruth Lea Head of the Policy Unit of the Institute of Directors since 1995.
Member of Nurses Pay review body since 1994 Age: 49 Salary: 'No comment.' Power:
Policy Unit formulates IoD policy based on consultation with its members; only
has a staff of 10 with budget of under pounds 1 million, but occupies crucial
co-ordinating position within the powerful IoD.

    Style: Good at dealing with media.

    Strengths: confesses it is an advantage to stand out as a plain-speaking
woman: 'Economics is full of jargon and full of male economists who can't speak
English properly.' Weaknesses: 'Of course, I have no weaknesses,' she jokes.

    Future: IoD's influence may decline under Labour, which these days has
closer ties with the CBI.

    On women and power: 'I take the view - and this probably makes me sound
really anti-feminist - that it is up to each woman to fight her own corner. The
doors are open to them these days. When I was first applying for jobs women
could be paid lower salaries for the same work and they were forced to leave
professions like the civil service if they had a child. While this culture of
discrimination has not entirely evaporated, things are much fairer than they
once were.' Personal background: Lymm Grammar School (mixed - 'I'm not keen on
single-sex schools'); BA York (Economics and Stats), MSc Bristol (Stats and
Quantitive Economics); Treasury; ITN economics editor 1994-95 and lapsed member
of Guardian's Seven Wise Women team. Single with cats: 'It must be difficult to
manage an ambitious career and a family. I look at people like Nicola Horlick
and think: 'how did they do it?' '

    Ruth Mackenzie Chief executive, Nottingham Playhouse Age: 39 Salary: pounds
36,000 at Nottingham Playhouse. Will be pounds 55,000 at Scottish Opera.

    Power: Raised profile of Nottingham Playhouse beyond all expectations in
four years without resorting to commercially safe programme. It now has a budget
of pounds 3 million and a staff of 100, plus artists. (Scottish Opera has pounds
8.5 million budget and 250 staff.) Style: Dedicated ('I work for fun. The other
thing I do is sleep').

    Strengths: 'Passionate about art and giving everyone access to art . . . I
operate on the Heineken principle - try to get to the parts other arts don't
reach.' Weaknesses: Workaholic. 'I'm bad at saying no.' Future: Nottingham
Playhouse this year is taking Measure for Measure on a world tour, which she set
up. But she will be moving to Scottish Opera in September on a five-year
contract - 'the next logical stage and the next ambition in my career. It is my
dream job'.

    On women and power: 'Only women could have brought (the regeneration of
Nottingham Playhouse) about. I'm about to say something a bit doubtful: I think
women are better at thinking about partnerships and developing imaginative
packages together than men. Women have less of a sense of pride about whose idea
it is.  You seldom see a man stop the car and ask somebody where they are, while
women are very good at saying 'I'm lost, please can you give me directions?'
They're better at the process of brainstorming. A lot of men would say: 'This is
my programme.  Either you buy it or you don't'.' Personal background: South
Hampstead High School (direct grant, all-girls) - 'an old suffragette school
where they simply taught us that we could be the best'. Made OBE in 1995 for
work in theatre. No family, though she insists she is not making a choice of
career over family.

    Caroline Marland Managing director of National Newspaper Division of
Guardian Media Group Age: 51 Salary: Undisclosed Power: Guardian Media Group
employs 900 full-time staff and its 1996 turnover was pounds 301,780,000. As MD,
Marland has responsibility for day-to-day running of the Guardian and Observer,
including financial and marketing decisions.

    Style: Strong believer in teamwork. Respected as formidable figure with
excellent management and presentational skills. Has ideas: pioneered idea of
specific advertising on different days, which later developed into media,
education, society, on-line and review sections. Her task - to ensure Guardian
and Observer survive and flourish in the increasingly ruthless world of national
press - is not easy.

    Strengths: Good with people and encourages teamwork. Enthusiastic about her
working world. 'Right form the beginning, I loved newspapers,' she says. Also
energetic: 'I create a lot of energy.' Lets people get on with things: 'You
should always employ people who are better than you. I am surrounded by people
who are better than me.' Weaknesses: She says she can be impatient.

    Future: 'I love working here,' she says. 'It's a fantastic place to work.'
Unlikely to move in the foreseeable future, though with her reputation and
experience doors would open if she knocked.

    On women and power: 'It gets easier all the time for women but there are
still certain jobs where it's not happening as it should. It's terribly
important for women to help each other, and that's something I enjoy.' There are
now several women on the board: a female production manager, an IT director and
deputy editor.

    Personal background: Started in advertising sales ('I only actually sold on
the telephone for a very short time. Then I was teaching others to do it.'),
then moved to the Times, training people to do telephone sales. While deputy MD
at Guardian, became non-executive director of Burton Group, a position she still
holds.  Joined board of Guardian newspapers in 1984, and was promoted from
deputy director to director on January 1, 1996. A member of the council of the
Institute of Directors, she also chaired the marketing and media committee of
the pounds 25 million appeal for Royal Marsden Hospital. She is married to Paul
Marland, former Conservative MP for Gloucestershire West, and has a daughter and
three step-children. 'I find it easy to switch off from work,' she says,
although she frequently works long hours.  'There are times when you don't
sleep, when something big's happening, like the Stoke Newington police libel
trial.'

    Barbara Mills QC Director of Public Prosecutions since 1992, when Sir Allan
Green was cautioned for kerb-crawling. First woman to hold post. Formerly head
of Serious Fraud Office Age: 57 Salary: c pounds 90,000 Power: Staff of 6,000.
As head of CPS (a government department), she controls prosecutions in England
and Wales, about a million a year. CPS has 94 branches.  Personally involved in
most major cases prosecuted, and is often consulted by Home Office about new
laws. As DPP, takes ultimate control and responsibility for everything CPS does.

    Style: Hands-on approach. 'I believe in involving as many people as
possible,' she says. Spends lots of time out visiting centres. Has an enormous
amount to manage and does so by compartmentalising her time. Appears before Home
Affairs Select Committee. Has come in for much flak: CPS only 11 years old and
police (with own agenda) have been bitterly critical, claiming they present
cases and evidence and CPS fails to prosecute. Apart from the police, however,
she's liked and admired by lawyers, who recognise she has thankless task.

    Strengths: Focused, disciplined, energetic. Doesn't give much away.
Brilliant lawyer, personable. Excellent memory. Reads and digests things very
quickly. High standards.

    Weaknesses: Has been heavily criticised by police federation for swamping
police with bureaucracy and paperwork. At SFO, presided over Blue Arrow trial
(all convictions thrown out at cost of pounds 40 million) and second Guinness
trial (abandoned). Her programme for centralising CPS powers (taking it from 31
to 13 different area offices) isn't working.  Possibly a bit
impatient/intolerant of people not being up to her speed.

    Future: Contract renewed until April 1999. It's not immediately obvious
where she can go after that: 'Two years is a long time'.

    On women and power: She was one of the first women to be head of anything
legal: now the profession has opened up a lot.  Accepts that being first female
DPP has brought much media scrutiny. 'They print photos if you're a woman, and
they're so much more interested in women's clothes and appearance.' For example,
there have been constant references to her red fingernails. 'I actively
encourage other women to have the sense they can succeed,' she says. 'The
fantastic thing about being in charge here is that I can put it into practice.
We've got family -friendly policies in place here now: part-time working,
jobshare, making it easier to return to work after having children. I don't
believe in being didactic and saying 'this is the way you should do it', but I
do want to give people options. We have flexible working hours for all our
staff. I hope on my tombstone they say: 'She made it a bit easier for the women
who came afterwards'. ' Personal background: St Helen's School, Northwood (head
girl), Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford (law).  Barrister for 27 years before becoming
civil servant. Wanted to be barrister since she was 14. Father was chartered
accountant, mother librarian. Three daughters, one son. Husband, John Mills, was
stabbed in street outside their house in May 1995. Her brother-in-law is married
to MP Tessa Jowell. Had her first baby three weeks after bar exams. Lists
hobbies as 'my family'.

    June de Moller Managing director, Carlton Communications plc since 1993; non
-executive director, Anglian Water and Riverside Mental Health NHS Trust Age: 49
Salary: pounds 308,000 last year, plus she exercised long-term incentive scheme
providing pounds 395,000.

    Power: First woman MD of a FTSE 100 Index company. Carlton has 11,000 staff,
turnover of pounds 1.7 billion, profits before tax of pounds 295 million and
capital expenditure of pounds 62.5 million.

    Style: 'In more than 20 years I have never once seen her flustered,' says
Michael Green, Carlton chairman.

    Strengths: Can be tough when needs be and, in industry smothered in hype, is
good at separating fact from fiction.

    Weaknesses: 'Forty Red Poll cows and an aged Cob. I am not very good with
babies and I'm told I am impatient.' Future: Tipped for top job at Carlton,
though she will have to wait for Green to leave, which may be some time
('Unfortunately my chairman is six months younger than me').

    On women and power: Doesn't like to be typecast as a feminist icon. (Insists
that having been the first female MD of a FTSE 100 Index company is irrelevant.)
'I have never particularly wanted children, so it has never occurred to me'.
Considers the media in general to be quite accommodating to women's employment
needs: 'Growing industries tend to attract young people who do not carry some of
the prejudices which apply in other industries.' Personal background: Divorced
from barrister husband, no children. Roedean all-girls boarding school, studied
for Bar, dropped out, worked for Green's printing company, Tangent.  Rose
through ranks of Green's empire becoming Carlton board member in 1983 and MD in
1992.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1997


                              210 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 1, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. T14

LENGTH: 1494 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: A SIMPLE TEST COULD SAVE LIVES;
Caroline Egan asks why health authorities are so reluctant to screen all babies
for Britain's most common genetic disease, and, right, she describes life with a
partner suffering from cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Caroline Egan

BODY:


    Sonny Laing suffered for much of her first year of life. Countless visits to
her GP and hospitalisation followed before she finally received the medical
treatment she needed so urgently.

    Sonny has cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common genetic disease in Britain,
and was born in an area that does not provide neonatal screening to detect its
presence. She is four-years-old and is not fit enough to start school.

    Sonny is not alone. Every week, five babies are born in Britain with CF, a
complex life-threatening disease affecting glands which secrete body fluids,
damaging many vital organs and causing malnutrition. It is estimated that one
third of cases are not diagnosed until after the child's first birthday.
Symptoms can easily be mistaken for those of more common conditions.  The sweat
test, (in which sweat samples are analysed for the amount of sodium chloride
they contain) which has remained the gold standard for diagnosing CF since 1959,
can produce results suggesting the child is normal or borderline, when the child
is subsequently found to have the disease. And there have even been cases where
adult CF patients were mistakenly diagnosed with acute asthma. Delays in
diagnosis have profound implications for the future health of patients.

    A child develops CF when it inherits a copy of the defective gene from each
of its parents. One in 25 people in Britain carries the abnormal gene, but many
are unaware of it. The disease primarily affects the lungs and, although babies
who inherit the disease are healthy at birth, they are highly susceptible to
infections, and their lungs are easily damaged.  Studies show that lung
infection and pancreatic insufficiency occur early in the lives of most
patients. Recent Dutch research indicates that once damage has occurred, the
lungs gradually deteriorate no matter how intensively they are treated.  With
early detection, however, treatment can be initiated immediately, preventing
infections and increasing life expectancy.

    Since the CF gene was identified in 1989, medical and scientific research
has made rapid progress. Both gene therapy (replacing the faulty gene with a
normal one) and drug therapy (correcting the faulty protein that the gene makes)
are being tried. Research into a genetic cure for CF is at a more advanced stage
than for almost any disease, and early gene-therapy trials on humans have shown
signs of biochemical correction in a few patients.  Although these approaches
are ambitious and it will be many years before the safety and efficacy of such
treatments can be evaluated, there is increasing optimism about finding a cure.
If early diagnosis is so crucial, why is it that only a small number of health
authorities in Britain (East Anglia, Northern Ireland, Trent and Wales) and
hospitals in Leeds and Northampton provide neonatal screening for the disease?
Cystic fibrosis meets the World Health Organisation's key criteria for genetic
disorders which justify screening newborns, and babies are already tested at
birth for other less common diseases in the routine Guthrie heel-prick test
(which tests for phenylketonuria). The same blood sample could be used to test
for cystic fibrosis.

    In July 1996, the government set up the National Screening Committee to
investigate the need to screen new-born babies. Its decision on CF will not be
released until summer. Rosie Barnes, chief executive of the Cystic Fibrosis
Trust, says: 'Many health authorities are waiting for the results, meanwhile,
more babies are going undiagnosed. Hundreds of children and their parents have
suffered unnecessarily because their local health authority does not offer
screening for cystic fibrosis.' Where programmes have been introduced, the
feedback has been positive. Research carried out at St James's University
Hospital in Leeds, where screening of all babies has been in place since 1975,
suggests that early diagnosis and treatment leads to better health and longer
lives.

    Dr James Littlewood, chairman of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust's research and
medical advisory committee, whose team carried out the research, says: 'There is
now overwhelming evidence in favour of screening. Yet there are still some
people calling for a controlled trial of its value. I feel that any more trials
would be unethical.

    'We have a disease that, if left untreated, is fatal in 50 per cent of cases
within two years, but if treated, patients can live into middle age. The latest
predicted survival rate is well over 40.' Trent Regional Health Authority set up
a screening facility eight years ago. Dr Chris Taylor from Sheffield Children's
Hospital says all those involved in CF care in the region enthusiastically
support the programme.

    In Northern Ireland, where all newborn babies are routinely tested, Philip
and Brenda Hamill were told that their daughter, Holly, had CF within six weeks
of her birth. 'We were devastated,' her father says. 'A doctor came and
explained what CF was and how it was treated, and said that if you catch it
early, that's half the battle. We really needed that reassurance.' Studies show
that early diagnosis increases parents' sense of control, helping them to cope
better. It allows them to receive indispensable counselling from specialist CF
units without delay, and to make informed decisions on family planning. If CF is
detected, there is a high risk that any more children born (one in four) will
have the disease. 'Cascade screening' of the CF child's extended family can also
be carried out to identify carriers.

    Although vagaries in neonatal testing can lead to healthy babies being
wrongly diagnosed, recent improvements in the procedure have largely eliminated
such occurrences.

    Decisions will be made over the next few months on whether or not to provide
a range of screening programmes nationally.

    'To me, and most paediatricians dealing with CF,' Littlewood says. 'It is so
obvious that babies should be screened. It is common sense.'

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1997


                              211 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 27, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 894 words

HEADLINE: MICRO-DOSE MEDICINES HIT THE RIGHT SPOT

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science Editor

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS in the US have found a new way of delivering medicine in ultra
-small doses that go right to the spot that matters.  They can deliver insulin,
DNA or even anti-clotting drugs into the bloodstream in capsules so small a
thousand could fit on a pinhead.

    The capsules are swallowed, but because they are so small they pass into the
bloodstream through the wall of the gut. Once in the bloodstream, they can
release the treatment where it is needed.

    Only a week after Leeds polymer scientists announced a new kind of smart
medical "stickytape" which could be addressed like a parcel to deliver drugs to
precise targets in the body, a team from Brown university at Providence, Rhode
Island, reports in Nature today that they have developed another way of turning
polymers into drug delivery systems. They made bio-degradable plastic spheres
which could hold drugs and at the same time grow more sticky as they moved
through the body's fluids. The spheres were engineered to stick to the
gastro-intestinal tract, liver or spleen, and then release their cargo. They
ranged in width from one-tenth of a micrometre to five micrometres. A micrometre
is a millionth of a metre.

    The Rhode Island team tested the drug carriers on rats. Within two hours an
anti-coagulant had got to the bloodstream where it lasted for three days.
Spheres containing insulin lowered blood sugar levels within two hours. Plasmid
DNA - to be used in the new science of gene therapy to help cystic fibrosis or
haemophilia sufferers - was in the cells of the liver and small intestine and
producing a protein within five days. Normally, insulin and plasmid DNA cannot
be delivered by mouth. They do not survive the digestive process. The new
technique means that insulin -dependent diabetics would not need to inject
themselves daily, but could take tablets instead.

    The Brown university team thinks that within 10 years, almost invisible
pills could be used for gene therapy and vaccination, for treating cancer, Aids
and diabetes, and for treating inflamed intestines.

    * Clinical trials are expected to start next year on a new, non-invasive
form of scanning for breast cancer, using light detection instead of mammography
X-rays, writes Martin Wainwright.

    The system was unveiled yesterday at the annual congress of the Institute of
Physicists in Leeds by scientists at the University of Hertfordshire who have
"tuned" computers to analyse jumbled and scattered images of light reflected by
human tissue.

    The project, led by Pieter Van der Zee has developed a potentially "portable
and cheap" light-scanning system, which uses visible or near-infra-red light to
shine through tissue and bone for up to 10 centimetres. He told the conference
that traditionally light signals had "become very scattered, re-emerging at the
surface very jumbled and making it hard to get a clear image of what is inside".

    The new analysis method creates images of both the absorption and scattering
of light taking place in tissue relatively near the surface, as in breasts.
Images taken at different wavelengths analyse the amount of oxygen present in
blood and muscle and can detect abnormalities which point to disease.

    The technique may also prove useful in studying the brains of new-born
babies for suspected anomalies.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1997


                              217 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 4, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 4184 words

HEADLINE: MAN OR MOUSE?
Britain's new Human Genetics Advisory Commission met for the first time last
week. John Crace looks at the recent developments in genetic engineering and
assesses the ethical implications

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:


    LAST week's announcement that scientists have succeded for the first time in
making a clone - an exact copy of an adult animal has raised new concerns about
the ethics of genetic engineering.

    Dolly, a Finn Dorset lamb, who is the identical twin of her genetic mother,
was created seven months ago at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh by taking a
single cell from its mother's udders and planting it into another sheep's egg
from which the genetic material had been removed.

    The scientists responsible for Dolly claim that their breakthrough will make
a significant contribution to our understanding of the ageing process and could
also result in the production of cheaper and more effective medicines.

    However others fear that this advance has brought us nearer to the nightmare
scenario depicted in the 1979 film The Boys from Brazil, starring Sir Laurence
Olivier, where human clones of Adolf Hitler were fashioned.

    At present human cloning is prohibited in the UK, but there are many other
countries where such laws are not in force.  Professor Lord Winston, one of this
country's leading IVF (In Vitro Fertilisation) experts based at the Hammersmith
Hospital in west London, believes that no one would dream of making a human
clone, pointing to the fact that there is no obvious advantage to be gained and
that the transfer of genetic material is inherently risky.

    Even so, Dr Patrick Dixon, author of The Genetic Revolution, suggests that
almost any technique that can be performed on an animal can be reproduced on a
human and he, himself, recently received a request from a woman who wanted to
create a clone of her dead father. Dixon goes on to say that possible uses of
cloning might include people with serious illnesses who want to create the
perfect match for transplant surgery, parents who fear losing a child to cot
death and film producers who want to recreate dead stars.

    Others fear that scientists may produce mutant animals.

    The British physicist Joseph Rotblat, who won the 1995 Nobel peace prize for
his campaign against nuclear weapons, has warned that genetic engineering may
lead to the manufacture of new weapons of mass destruction. To guard against
this he has called for the establishment of an international ethical committee
to control the work of all scientists involved in cloning.

    What are genes?

    GENES are the basic units that determine the characteristics of every living
thing and are passed on from parents to children. We inherit many factors in our
genes, from hair colour to our ability to make the necessary enzymes our bodies
need to keep us alive.

    The process by which we inherit our characteristics depends on structures in
our cell nuclei called chromosomes. These are made of long chain-like molecules
called deoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA) that carry a genetic code, made up of a
series of messages comprised of the chemicals adenine, cytosine, guanine and
thymine.  Every living organism (apart from identical twins) has its own unique
code.

    Gene therapy

    IT is estimated that humans have between 50,000 to 100,000 different genes;
some of these are linked to particular diseases and conditions. Scientists have
now identified nearly 4,000 conditions that are linked to single defects in a
person's genetic code. Researchers around the world are currently engaged in
'The Human Genome Project', which aims to identify and define the function of
every gene to be found in the human body. Through this, they hope to locate
errant genes, thereby getting a better understanding of every disease that is
genetically transmittable and, if possible, find a cure for it.  Genetic
engineering, whereby the defective gene sequence is cut and remodelled, is one
route scientists might take.

    In 1993 it was hoped to effect a gene therapy cure for adenoise deaminase
(ADA) deficiency, a rare condition which cripples the immune system. However,
this treatment has not proved as successful as had been hoped, and despite
widespread optimism among geneticists, they do not appear to be any nearer to
finding gene cures for the big killers, such as cancer and heart disease.

    Predicting disease

    AT present, genetics can be a reliable predictor of who is likely to develop
a particular fatal illness, without the capacity to offer a cure. Many feel that
this information has the potential to cause as much harm as good, among the 10
per cent of the population who may be affected. Only last month the Association
of Insurance Brokers announced that it would not offer life insurance cover for
over A100,000 for those who had a genetic test that predicted a fatal disease,
and there are concerns that such tests will promote the idea of eugenics
(selective breeding) among prospective parents. Such worries are not mere
speculation; three years ago the Chinese government banned all those with
'unhealthy' genes from having babies.

    Some also say that people would not be able to cope with the knowledge that
they were likely to contract a terminal illness, but geneticists argue that
everyone should have the right to know of any flaws in their biological make-up
so that they can plan the rest of their lives. Some women who have been told
that they are likely to develop breast cancer have opted for a radical
mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) in order to increase their chances of
survival.

    Animal experiments

    GENETIC engineering is big business, and many experiments take place on
animals. Fruit flies have been produced that have extra eyes on their wings and
legs; sheep have been treated to secrete human substances into their milk; two
years ago scientists grew an ear in a test tube and then transplanted it on to
the back of a laboratory mouse that had no immune system to see if it would be
rejected; Harvard University has even patented its own mouse, known as
'oncomouse', which has been genetically manipulated to develop cancer.

    Imutran, a Cambridge-based biotechnology firm, have produced a pig that is
transgenic (genetically altered to make its immune system compatible with
humans), from which they hope to be able to supply donor organs, such as hearts,
that are in short supply for transplantation. These hearts have already been
successfully transplanted into monkeys but, although the Government is believed
to have accepted that transplants from animals to humans are in principle
ethically acceptable, it has barred any such procedures until more research has
been completed.

    Those in favour of animal experimentation point to the fact that many of the
procedures and drugs we now take for granted, and to which many people owe their
lives, were perfected on animals. Some of those against argue that any testing
on animals is unacceptable as it is impossible to determine any levels of
suffering; when it comes to animal transplantation, others say that the risks of
new viruses developing are unquantified and that new diseases may be introduced
into humans, as happened when cows, which are natural herbivores, were turned
into carnivores by being fed ground-up sheep protein; through this practice, it
is believed that the national herd was infected with BSE (Bovine Spongiform
Encephalopathy) and some humans have contracted the human form of the disease, a
new strain of Creutzfeld Jacob disease.

    Foodstuffs

    IT is not just animals that are being genetically altered; there is a
massive market for producing crops that are larger and more pest and disease
resistant. Just how big the industry is can be judged by the fact that in 1991-2
over $ 6 billion was invested in US biotechnology companies. Already coffee
beans have been modified to produce more aroma and less caffeine, genet ically
modified tomato puree is currently on sale at leading supermarkets, and
slow-ripening bananas and pineapples are being developed. At present there are
over 2,000 field trials taking place around the world.

    The present regulations concerning disclosure of genetic alterations in
foodstuffs are likely to prove a minefield for the consumer. The European
government recently announced a proposal to make labelling of all 'genetically
modified organisms' (GMOs) compulsory. However, this is only likely to affect
products containing living GMOs; items where the GMO has been killed would need
no label.

    Furthermore, last summer the US began growing GMO varieties of two staple
foods, maize and soya, which are used in many different types of foods and
drinks. Although these made up a tiny percentage of the overall crop, both the
GMO and conventional crops were mixed together. Therefore, many of us might
unknowingly and unwillingly already have eaten GMO foods.

    The majority of scientists think that GMO foods are safe for human
consumption; however, public opinion has recently shifted towards natural
organic foods, particularly as a result of the misleading scientific evidence
that came out early in the BSE crisis, and many GMO producers are thought to be
worried that shoppers will boycott their goods.

    1. A sample of bone-marrow cells was taken from the patient and sorted to
select those that would become lymphocytes. This process used molecules called
monoclonal antibodies.

    2. These molecules had two ends. One stuck specifically to lymphocytes and
one stuck to a special plastic. The bone-marrow cells were placed in a plastic
flask that was coated with monoclonal antibodies.

    3. The lymphocytes stuck to the flask while the other cells were washed
away.

    4. A chemical was then used to wash the lymphocytes out of the flask. The
isolated lymphocytes were incubated with the retroviruses which inserted the
correct ADA gene sequence into their chromosome.

    5. The modified lymphocytes were returned to the patient's bone marrow.

    A. Take a normal gene sequence from the chromosomes in a healthy cell. Place
it into the DNA of a retrovirus.

    B. The modified retrovirus is now multiplied by incubating it in a solution
containing cells.

    C. These viruses all contain the healthy ADA gene.

    They can now inject the gene into the chromosomes in the isolated lymphocyte
cells.

    Further reading: Trying for a baby, Pete Moore (Lion); Recombinant DNA
Technology, Pete Moore (Biochemical Society).

    Related articles in Education: DNA, September 10, 1991; Genes, February 23,
1993.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1997


                              219 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 3, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 2414 words

HEADLINE: MAN OR MOUSE?
Britain's new Human Genetics Advisory Commission met for the first time last
week. John Crace looks at the recent developments in genetic engineering and
assesses the ethical implications

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:


    LAST week's announcement that scientists have succeded for the first time in
making a clone - an exact copy of an adult animal has raised new concerns about
the ethics of genetic engineering.

    Dolly, a Finn Dorset lamb, who is the identical twin of her genetic mother,
was created seven months ago at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh by taking a
single cell from its mother's udders and planting it into another sheep's egg
from which the genetic material had been removed.

    The scientists responsible for Dolly claim that their breakthrough will make
a significant contribution to our understanding of the ageing process and could
also result in the production of cheaper and more effective medicines.

    However others fear that this advance has brought us nearer to the nightmare
scenario depicted in the 1979 film The Boys from Brazil, starring Sir Laurence
Olivier, where human clones of Adolf Hitler were fashioned.

    At present human cloning is prohibited in the UK, but there are many other
countries where such laws are not in force.  Professor Lord Winston, one of this
country's leading IVF (In Vitro Fertilisation) experts based at the Hammersmith
Hospital in west London, believes that no one would dream of making a human
clone, pointing to the fact that there is no obvious advantage to be gained and
that the transfer of genetic material is inherently risky.

    Even so, Dr Patrick Dixon, author of The Genetic Revolution, suggests that
almost any technique that can be performed on an animal can be reproduced on a
human and he, himself, recently received a request from a woman who wanted to
create a clone of her dead father. Dixon goes on to say that possible uses of
cloning might include people with serious illnesses who want to create the
perfect match for transplant surgery, parents who fear losing a child to cot
death and film producers who want to recreate dead stars.

    Others fear that scientists may produce mutant animals.

    The British physicist Joseph Rotblat, who won the 1995 Nobel peace prize for
his campaign against nuclear weapons, has warned that genetic engineering may
lead to the manufacture of new weapons of mass destruction. To guard against
this he has called for the establishment of an international ethical committee
to control the work of all scientists involved in cloning.

    What are genes? GENES are the basic units that determine the characteristics
of every living thing and are passed on from parents to children. We inherit
many factors in our genes, from hair colour to our ability to make the necessary
enzymes our bodies need to keep us alive.

    The process by which we inherit our characteristics depends on structures in
our cell nuclei called chromosomes. These are made of long chain-like molecules
called deoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA) that carry a genetic code, made up of a
series of messages comprised of the chemicals adenine, cytosine, guanine and
thymine.  Every living organism (apart from identical twins) has its own unique
code.

    Gene therapy IT is estimated that humans have between 50,000 to 100,000
different genes; some of these are linked to particular diseases and conditions.
Scientists have now identified nearly 4,000 conditions that are linked to single
defects in a person's genetic code. Researchers around the world are currently
engaged in 'The Human Genome Project', which aims to identify and define the
function of every gene to be found in the human body.  Through this, they hope
to locate errant genes, thereby getting a better understanding of every disease
that is genetically transmittable and, if possible, find a cure for it. Genetic
engineering, whereby the defective gene sequence is cut and remodelled, is one
route scientists might take.

    In 1993 it was hoped to effect a gene therapy cure for adenoise deaminase
(ADA) deficiency, a rare condition which cripples the immune system. However,
this treatment has not proved as successful as had been hoped, and despite
widespread optimism among geneticists, they do not appear to be any nearer to
finding gene cures for the big killers, such as cancer and heart disease.

    Predicting disease AT present, genetics can be a reliable predictor of who
is likely to develop a particular fatal illness, without the capacity to offer a
cure. Many feel that this information has the potential to cause as much harm as
good, among the 10 per cent of the population who may be affected. Only last
month the Association of Insurance Brokers announced that it would not offer
life insurance cover for over pounds 100,000 for those who had a genetic test
that predicted a fatal disease, and there are concerns that such tests will
promote the idea of eugenics (selective breeding) among prospective parents.
Such worries are not mere speculation; three years ago the Chinese government
banned all those with 'unhealthy' genes from having babies.

    Some also say that people would not be able to cope with the knowledge that
they were likely to contract a terminal illness, but geneticists argue that
everyone should have the right to know of any flaws in their biological make-up
so that they can plan the rest of their lives. Some women who have been told
that they are likely to develop breast cancer have opted for a radical
mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) in order to increase their chances of
survival.

    Animal experiments GENETIC engineering is big business, and many experiments
take place on animals. Fruit flies have been produced that have extra eyes on
their wings and legs; sheep have been treated to secrete human substances into
their milk; two years ago scientists grew an ear in a test tube and then
transplanted it on to the back of a laboratory mouse that had no immune system
to see if it would be rejected; Harvard University has even patented its own
mouse, known as 'oncomouse', which has been genetically manipulated to develop
cancer.

    Imutran, a Cambridge-based biotechnology firm, have produced a pig that is
transgenic (genetically altered to make its immune system compatible with
humans), from which they hope to be able to supply donor organs, such as hearts,
that are in short supply for transplantation. These hearts have already been
successfully transplanted into monkeys but, although the Government is believed
to have accepted that transplants from animals to humans are in principle
ethically acceptable, it has barred any such procedures until more research has
been completed.

    Those in favour of animal experimentation point to the fact that many of the
procedures and drugs we now take for granted, and to which many people owe their
lives, were perfected on animals. Some of those against argue that any testing
on animals is unacceptable as it is impossible to determine any levels of
suffering; when it comes to animal transplantation, others say that the risks of
new viruses developing are unquantified and that new diseases may be introduced
into humans, as happened when cows, which are natural herbivores, were turned
into carnivores by being fed ground-up sheep protein; through this practice, it
is believed that the national herd was infected with BSE (Bovine Spongiform
Encephalopathy) and some humans have contracted the human form of the disease, a
new strain of Creutzfeld Jacob disease.

    Foodstuffs IT is not just animals that are being genetically altered; there
is a massive market for producing crops that are larger and more pest and
disease resistant. Just how big the industry is can be judged by the fact that
in 1991-2 over $ 6 billion was invested in US biotechnology companies. Already
coffee beans have been modified to produce more aroma and less caffeine,
genetically modified tomato puree is currently on sale at leading supermarkets,
and slow-ripening bananas and pineapples are being developed. At present there
are over 2,000 field trials taking place around the world.

    The present regulations concerning disclosure of genetic alterations in
foodstuffs are likely to prove a minefield for the consumer. The European
government recently announced a proposal to make labelling of all 'genetically
modified organisms' (GMOs) compulsory. However, this is only likely to affect
products containing living GMOs; items where the GMO has been killed would need
no label.

    Furthermore, last summer the US began growing GMO varieties of two staple
foods, maize and soya, which are used in many different types of foods and
drinks. Although these made up a tiny percentage of the overall crop, both the
GMO and conventional crops were mixed together. Therefore, many of us might
unknowingly and unwillingly already have eaten GMO foods.

    The majority of scientists think that GMO foods are safe for human
consumption; however, public opinion has recently shifted towards natural
organic foods, particularly as a result of the misleading scientific evidence
that came out early in the BSE crisis, and many GMO producers are thought to be
worried that shoppers will boycott their goods.

    Further reading: Trying for a baby, Pete Moore (Lion); Recombinant DNA
Technology, Pete Moore (Biochemical Society).

    Related articles in Education: DNA, September 10, 1991; Genes, February 23,
1993.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1997


                              220 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 3, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 2534 words

HEADLINE: MAN OR MOUSE?
Britain's new Human Genetics Advisory Commission met for the first time last
week. John Crace looks at the recent developments in genetic engineering and
assesses the ethical implications

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:


    LAST week's announcement that scientists have succeded for the first time in
making a clone - an exact copy of an adult animal has raised new concerns about
the ethics of genetic engineering.

    Dolly, a Finn Dorset lamb, who is the identical twin of her genetic mother,
was created seven months ago at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh by taking a
single cell from its mother's udders and planting it into another sheep's egg
from which the genetic material had been removed.

    The scientists responsible for Dolly claim that their breakthrough will make
a significant contribution to our understanding of the ageing process and could
also result in the production of cheaper and more effective medicines.

    However others fear that this advance has brought us nearer to the nightmare
scenario depicted in the 1979 film The Boys from Brazil, starring Sir Laurence
Olivier, where human clones of Adolf Hitler were fashioned.

    At present human cloning is prohibited in the UK, but there are many other
countries where such laws are not in force.  Professor Lord Winston, one of this
country's leading IVF (In Vitro Fertilisation) experts based at the Hammersmith
Hospital in west London, believes that no one would dream of making a human
clone, pointing to the fact that there is no obvious advantage to be gained and
that the transfer of genetic material is inherently risky.

    Even so, Dr Patrick Dixon, author of The Genetic Revolution, suggests that
almost any technique that can be performed on an animal can be reproduced on a
human and he, himself, recently received a request from a woman who wanted to
create a clone of her dead father. Dixon goes on to say that possible uses of
cloning might include people with serious illnesses who want to create the
perfect match for transplant surgery, parents who fear losing a child to cot
death and film producers who want to recreate dead stars.

    Others fear that scientists may produce mutant animals.

    The British physicist Joseph Rotblat, who won the 1995 Nobel peace prize for
his campaign against nuclear weapons, has warned that genetic engineering may
lead to the manufacture of new weapons of mass destruction. To guard against
this he has called for the establishment of an international ethical committee
to control the work of all scientists involved in cloning.

    What are genes?:

    GENES are the basic units that determine the characteristics of every living
thing and are passed on from parents to children. We inherit many factors in our
genes, from hair colour to our ability to make the necessary enzymes our bodies
need to keep us alive.

    The process by which we inherit our characteristics depends on structures in
our cell nuclei called chromosomes. These are made of long chain-like molecules
called deoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA) that carry a genetic code, made up of a
series of messages comprised of the chemicals adenine, cytosine, guanine and
thymine.  Every living organism (apart from identical twins) has its own unique
code.

    Gene therapy:

    IT is estimated that humans have between 50,000 to 100,000 different genes;
some of these are linked to particular diseases and conditions. Scientists have
now identified nearly 4,000 conditions that are linked to single defects in a
person's genetic code. Researchers around the world are currently engaged in
'The Human Genome Project', which aims to identify and define the function of
every gene to be found in the human body. Through this, they hope to locate
errant genes, thereby getting a better understanding of every disease that is
genetically transmittable and, if possible, find a cure for it.  Genetic
engineering, whereby the defective gene sequence is cut and remodelled, is one
route scientists might take.

    In 1993 it was hoped to effect a gene therapy cure for adenoise deaminase
(ADA) deficiency, a rare condition which cripples the immune system. However,
this treatment has not proved as successful as had been hoped, and despite
widespread optimism among geneticists, they do not appear to be any nearer to
finding gene cures for the big killers, such as cancer and heart disease.

    Predicting disease:

    AT present, genetics can be a reliable predictor of who is likely to develop
a particular fatal illness, without the capacity to offer a cure. Many feel that
this information has the potential to cause as much harm as good, among the 10
per cent of the population who may be affected. Only last month the Association
of Insurance Brokers announced that it would not offer life insurance cover for
over pounds 100,000 for those who had a genetic test that predicted a fatal
disease, and there are concerns that such tests will promote the idea of
eugenics (selective breeding) among prospective parents. Such worries are not
mere speculation; three years ago the Chinese government banned all those with
'unhealthy' genes from having babies.

    Some also say that people would not be able to cope with the knowledge that
they were likely to contract a terminal illness, but geneticists argue that
everyone should have the right to know of any flaws in their biological make-up
so that they can plan the rest of their lives. Some women who have been told
that they are likely to develop breast cancer have opted for a radical
mastectomy (surgery to remove the breast) in order to increase their chances of
survival.

    Animal experiments:

    GENETIC engineering is big business, and many experiments take place on
animals. Fruit flies have been produced that have extra eyes on their wings and
legs; sheep have been treated to secrete human substances into their milk; two
years ago scientists grew an ear in a test tube and then transplanted it on to
the back of a laboratory mouse that had no immune system to see if it would be
rejected; Harvard University has even patented its own mouse, known as
'oncomouse', which has been genetically manipulated to develop cancer.

    Imutran, a Cambridge-based biotechnology firm, have produced a pig that is
transgenic (genetically altered to make its immune system compatible with
humans), from which they hope to be able to supply donor organs, such as hearts,
that are in short supply for transplantation. These hearts have already been
successfully transplanted into monkeys but, although the Government is believed
to have accepted that transplants from animals to humans are in principle
ethically acceptable, it has barred any such procedures until more research has
been completed.

    Those in favour of animal experimentation point to the fact that many of the
procedures and drugs we now take for granted, and to which many people owe their
lives, were perfected on animals. Some of those against argue that any testing
on animals is unacceptable as it is impossible to determine any levels of
suffering; when it comes to animal transplantation, others say that the risks of
new viruses developing are unquantified and that new diseases may be introduced
into humans, as happened when cows, which are natural herbivores, were turned
into carnivores by being fed ground-up sheep protein; through this practice, it
is believed that the national herd was infected with BSE (Bovine Spongiform
Encephalopathy) and some humans have contracted the human form of the disease, a
new strain of Creutzfeld Jacob disease.

    Foodstuffs:

    IT is not just animals that are being genetically altered; there is a
massive market for producing crops that are larger and more pest and disease
resistant. Just how big the industry is can be judged by the fact that in 1991-2
over $ 6 billion was invested in US biotechnology companies. Already coffee
beans have been modified to produce more aroma and less caffeine, genetically
modified tomato puree is currently on sale at leading supermarkets, and
slow-ripening bananas and pineapples are being developed. At present there are
over 2,000 field trials taking place around the world.

    The present regulations concerning disclosure of genetic alterations in
foodstuffs are likely to prove a minefield for the consumer. The European
government recently announced a proposal to make labelling of all 'genetically
modified organisms' (GMOs) compulsory. However, this is only likely to affect
products containing living GMOs; items where the GMO has been killed would need
no label.

    Furthermore, last summer the US began growing GMO varieties of two staple
foods, maize and soya, which are used in many different types of foods and
drinks. Although these made up a tiny percentage of the overall crop, both the
GMO and conventional crops were mixed together. Therefore, many of us might
unknowingly and unwillingly already have eaten GMO foods.

    The majority of scientists think that GMO foods are safe for human
consumption; however, public opinion has recently shifted towards natural
organic foods, particularly as a result of the misleading scientific evidence
that came out early in the BSE crisis, and many GMO producers are thought to be
worried that shoppers will boycott their goods.

    Further reading: Trying for a baby, Pete Moore (Lion); Recombinant DNA
Technology, Pete Moore (Biochemical Society).

    Related articles in Education: DNA, September 10, 1991; Genes, February 23,
1993.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1997


                              225 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 18, 1997

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1280 words

HEADLINE: ROCK-A-BYE BABY WITH THE PERFECT GENES

BYLINE: George Monbiot

BODY:


    IS DR James Watson a Nazi? In an interview with the Sunday Telegraph, the
Nobel Prize-winning gene sleuth and author of The Double Helix suggested that if
the gene that determines sexuality could be found, a woman should be able to
choose whether or not to abort a foetus that carried it.  In the Independent, he
argued that other perceived imperfections which might be genetically determined
- such as dyslexia, shortness or poor musical ability - should also be permitted
to inform a woman's choice.

    His comments were received with fury. Dominic Lawson, Sunday Telegraph
editor and something of an obsessive in this area, contended that Watson and his
ilk "have become too big for their DNA". In yesterday's Telegraph, Katherine
O'Hanlan of Stamford University said that abortions of the sort Watson endorsed
would amount to "eugenics. . . reminiscent of the 1940s in Germany".

    At first sight, she's right. New gene technologies, if they develop as James
Watson expects, will grant us the power to pursue - and much more effectively -
Hitler's aim of eliminating what he considered to be undesirable characteristics
from the population. Thereafter, however, her comparison falls flat.

    What Hitler - and Plato - advocated was the restriction of personal
reproductive choice. What Watson espouses is precisely the opposite. Indeed, the
liberal philosopher Professor Philip Kitcher has suggested that interfering with
parental decisions about which foetuses to keep and which to lose would amount
to "centrally directed eugenics programmes" comparable to those of Nazi Germany.

    Part of the problem with the new biotechnologies is that there are so few
meaningful precedents to help us address the choices with which they confront
us. Many of the questions they raise are new ones, and we come unstuck the
moment we try to match them with old answers. According to my dictionary,
eugenics means "race improvement by judicious mating".

    This is clearly not what James Watson is talking about. Future "race
improvement" requires no shrieking Gestapo officers insisting that we choose one
mate over another; instead, some geneticists propose, existing couples might one
day be able to choose genes for their offspring much as they choose their
furnishings today.  Dr Watson argues that the termination of "genetically
defective" foetuses is good not only for parents, but also for the prospective
children. Indeed, he suggests that once effective gene testing or gene
manipulation become available, children born with genetic defects might sue
their parents for having brought them into the world. People choosing to abort
and start again would merely be seeking the best future for their children, much
as they do when deciding to send them to public school - an option which the
Telegraph presumably endorses.

    So is there an ethical difference between choosing your children's genes and
choosing to educate them privately? One of the reasons why I find the new
genetics so terrifying is that I don't believe there is. Assuming - as I think
we can - that the new technologies are likely only to be available to the few
who can afford them, then, like public school, they will confer an advantage on
some at the expense of others, irrespective of merit.

    Just as the escape hatch of the public school enables the wealthiest and
most influential people in the country to ignore the under-funding of state
education, future genetic screening or gene therapy could allow them to buy
their way out of concern for the social and environmental factors which
contribute to poor health.  Indeed, it's not hard to imagine a future in which
only the rich could - through gene technology - escape from the genetic effects
of increasing exposure to such pollutants as pesticide residues and radioactive
waste.

    So the prospective gene technologies have the capacity to petrify, even more
effectively than public school, society's heritable inequity. But there might
also be more immediate effects. The moment at which something can be fixed is
the moment at which it becomes widely perceived as broken: the possibility of
eliminating purportedly gay foetuses will surely contribute to the public
disparagement of homosexuality.

    It is also possible to picture a world in which those whose genomes have
been selected or enhanced could feel themselves set apart from those who have
not been manipulated. With some justification, the genetic elect could claim
that they did not share a common humanity with the genetically unscreened, and
the racism, sexism and classism we suffer from today would find a new, and
potentially even more virulent, outlet.

    The dangers with which Dr Watson's genetic choices confront us emerge not
from the threat of a coercive state, but from the less fashionable bogey of mass
consumerism. What is good for the individual may be disastrous for society. It's
not eugenics - or not as we know it - and it's not Nazism. But it's still wrong.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1997


                              228 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 17, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. T11

LENGTH: 1520 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: IT'S A JOINT EFFORT;
Gene therapy is not just for fatal diseases. Now it's altering the course of
rheumatoid arthritis. Jacqui Wise reports

BYLINE: Jacqui Wise

BODY:


    CARLENE Lauffer is a guinea pig in the nicest sense of the word. At 68, she
is the first person in the world to undergo gene therapy for arthritis. Gene
therapy, the delivery of genes into the body in order to treat or cure a
disease, is still an experimental area of medicine and until now has only been
carried out in fatal diseases such as Aids or cancer. The operation on Carlene
is the first time gene therapy has been used on a chronic condition.

    Although you don't die from rheumatoid arthritis it can be extremely painful
and destroys the joints and causes disability.  It affects 1-2 per cent of the
population and although it usually starts in early adulthood or middle age it
can also develop in children or the elderly. Women are three times more likely
to develop the disease than men.

    Carlene has had rheumatoid arthritis for 27 years. 'I hurt all over, and my
knuckles were swollen to the size of Ping-pong balls,' she says. There is no
cure for rheumatoid arthritis and few useful treatments. Drugs that do exist,
while decreasing the pain and swelling associated with inflammation, can not
usually alter the course of the disease. The drugs can also cause severe side
effects such as stomach ulcers and kidney dysfunction.

    In recent years, researchers have become interested in the role of a protein
called interleukin-1 which helps to trigger inflammation as part of the body's
natural protection against infection or disease. In the case of rheumatoid
arthritis, the immune system turns on and the body starts attacking its own
tissues - a process called auto-immunity.

    Once interleukin-1 is released inside a joint, it causes both inflammation
and erosion of the joint tissues. A naturally occurring second protein, called
interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, can stop this destructive action but until
now it hasn't been feasible to get this protein into the body as it is difficult
to give proteins orally or by injection.

    Researchers at the Pittsburgh Medical Centre in Pennsylvania tried a
different approach, injecting the gene responsible for making the interleukin-1
receptor antagonist directly into the affected joint.  Dr Chris Evans, professor
of orthopaedic surgery who helped pioneer the operation, said: 'This means the
joint is actually making its own medicine. And because the action is only at the
site of the problem, it should minimise any side effects.' The technique was
tried first on animals; experiments on rabbits showed that it could successfully
reduce arthritis. In July the technique was tried for the first time on humans.
Even though Carlene won't personally see any benefit, because this first
experiment was concerned with finding out if the technique could work safely,
she says she was happy to do it.  'Arthritis runs in my family and if I can be a
help in finding a cure, then I want to do it.' Researchers extracted some
synovial cells (cells lining the joints) from Carlene's hand and added a
rectrovirus containing the gene. Cells containing the gene were injected into
two of the knuckle joints and normal cells were injected into two other knuckle
joints. After a week, the four joints were removed and replaced with artificial
ones in a previously planned operation. The knuckles and joint fluid were then
tested to see if the gene had produced an effect.

    Dr Evans, a British doctor who is part of the brain drain of scientists who
now work in the US, presented the first results from this experiment last week
at a meeting in Harrogate organised by the Biochemical Society and British
Society for Immunology. He found that the technique was safe and that within a
week the gene caused the cells in the affected joints to produce interleukin-1
receptor antagonist.

    The next step is to repeat the technique in eight more patients and, if that
goes well, carry out a more ambitious trial with people who are at an earlier
stage of the disease, to see if further damage can be prevented. 'We are
confident that this technique will show a clinical benefit and I would hope to
see it widely used in four or five years time,' says Dr Evans.

    This approach may also offer hope for sufferers of osteoarthritis, a more
common condition than rheumatoid anhritis. Dr Evans says that early animal work
in this area is promising. Gene therapy won't be able to reverse any damage to
joints that has already occurred so the key is going to be identifying those
people with rheumatoid arthritis as early as possible.

    Of the 500,000 people in the UK with rheumatoid arthritis, about a quarter
will be severely affected, says Paul Emery, Professor of Rheumatology at Leeds
University. He has carried out a lot of research into identifying those patients
with the worst prognosis as early as possible through a combination of genetic,
serological and bone imaging techniques. Patients identified early and treated
aggressively with powerful drugs appear to do much better than average, he says.

    Professor Emery says this latest gene therapy work is a great technical
advance: 'We could prevent the disease from developing. The next step is to sort
out the practical details such as how long the effect will last.' A number of
genes have associated with rheumatoid arthritis but they influence the severity
of the disease and how someone will respond to drugs rather than being a risk
factor for developing the disease itself. 'If your grandmother has rheumatoid
arthritis, you do not have a much higher risk of developing it than normal, but
if she had it badly then you are also likely to have it severely,' explains
Professor Emery.

    The main disadvantage with gene therapy for rheumatoid arthritis is likely
to be cost. Dr Evans says: 'We jokingly call Carlene the 'million dollar woman"
but hopefully once the technique is up and running we can make it a more
realistic option.' Dr Evans is confident that gene therapy offers hope for the
thousands of people who suffer from the disease: 'We are optimistic that this
type of intervention will someday halt the biological processes underlying these
diseases.'

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1996


                              231 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 14, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN CITY PAGE; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1480 words

HEADLINE: MARKET REPORT: CU GIVES NERVOUS SOME ASSURANCE

BYLINE: Ian King

BODY:


    WITH the market in its current state, it has not been advisable to have too
much stock on your books at the end of the week, unless, it seems, that stock is
Commercial Union.

    Since the Guardian broke the news last week that BAT Industries had pulled
out of merger talks with CU, traders have been reluctant to go short of the
insurance group, despite the market's generally shaky state.

    The shares, which first rose sharply at the start of October, had another
good run yesterday, jumping 19 1/2 p to 663 1/2 p, amid continued chatter that a
bid from another quarter - perhaps German group Allianz - might still be on the
cards.

    CU was the subject of some heavy buying late on Thursday, which continued
into yesterday morning, although by lunchtime sceptics were suggesting it had
simply been marked higher by a market-maker who was long on the stock.

    Later still, the insurance sector saw more bid talk, this time focusing on
Sedgwick. According to the gossip, an American group - either Aon or Marsh &
McLennan - has already approached Sedgwick, whose shares advanced 5p to 126 1/2
p on the rumours.

    However, after Wall Street's heavy sell-off on Thursday night, this was not,
by and large, a day for the bulls. The Footsie was off by almost 60 points at
one stage, although, with several funds reported to be buying selectively on the
way down, the falls were always going to be limited.

    Indeed, with Wall Street slightly ahead during the last couple of hours of
trading on this side of the Atlantic, the premier index had regained most of its
losses to close down only 18.3 points at 3972.4. Volume was 609 million shares.

    Away from insurance, the main excitement was in the electricity sector,
where it looks like being open season on the remaining independent regional
companies after Trade Secretary Ian Lang's decision not to refer the bid for
Northern Electric from America's CE Electric. As Northern shares raced up 42 1/2
p to 645p, against the 650p offer price, East Midlands Electricity, which has
agreed to a 670p-a-share offer from US group Dominion Resources, jumped 28 1/2 p
to 655p.

    The three remaining independents were in huge demand, with London
Electricity crackling up 28 1/2 p to 680p, Yorkshire Electricity rallying 17 1/2
p to 760p and Southern Electric adding 25 1/2 p to 773p in lively trading.
America's Houston Industries and Entergy are considered possible predators.

    Elsewhere, with asset allocations starting to be re-jigged ahead of the year
-end, some fund managers are already turning their attention to stocks worth
backing in 1997. Indications are that industrial and recovery stocks could come
into favour, with groups like M&G making their preference clear already, and
several brokers and analysts joining the fray yesterday.

    Goldman Sachs, for instance, has identified building materials group BPB
(down 2p at 349 1/2 p) and soon-to-be-relegated Pilkington (up 1p at 145p) as
good prospects, while other stocks influenced by the analysts included Orange,
up 2p at 180 1/2 p after BZW repeated its strong "buy" stance.

    RJB Mining continued its recovery after Tuesday's carnage, when an earnings
downgrade from house broker BZW wiped out a fifth of the group's market
capitalisation. But, as news spread that BZ's analyst Alan Richards still rated
RJB as good value - especially after Tuesday's fall - the shares closed 27p
higher at 425p. Abbey Life has hoisted its stake in the group to almost 4 per
cent. In the same patch, reports that there will be a full EU investigation into
Anglo American's 26 per cent stake in Lonrho sent shares in the latter down 3p
to 116 1/2 p.

    Among smaller companies, many stocks were influenced by corporate activity,
including hi-tech group Toad, which lost 1p to 87 1/2 p, after announcing a
pounds 7.1 million five-for-nine cash call at 80p a throw. Similarly, Bandt, the
industrial products group, added 3p to 23 1/2 p after selling the rump of the
old Brown & Tawse business to Wolseley (down 15 1/2 p at 424 1/2 p) for pounds
15.6 million.

    Eidos, the computer software group, crashed 27 1/2 p to 722 1/2 p after
confirming an ADR listing in the US, raising almost pounds 22 million, while
Burnfield, the engineering group, eased 13p to 98 1/2 p after a pounds 20
million cash call to help it buy automotive equipment manufacturer LDS.

    RPC Group is to become Europe's biggest plastic tub and bottle maker,
following the pounds 63 million takeover of German rival CPE. The shares closed
down 13p at 157 1/2 p. Another gainer was Throgmorton Preferred, which rose 5
1/2 p to 70 1/2 p on confirmation of a large pay-out to shareholders following a
reduction of the fund's share capital.

    At a time when the new issues market has almost dried up, there was good
news from Crown Leisure, one of Britain's biggest one-armed-bandit makers. The
company, which will be capitalised at pounds 15.5 million on flotation, has seen
its issue oversubscribed. The shares, to be priced at 77p when trading starts on
Thursday, are expected to open at a premium.

    But the season of goodwill has not extended to everyone. Oxford Biomedica,
the gene therapy group making its debut on AIM yesterday, skidded to 47 1/2 p,
against its issue price of 88p, after two underwriters tried to pull out. Percy
Lomax, a corporate financier at Teather and Greenwood, which sponsored the
issue, said he would like to drop the pair "off a cliff", but gallantly declined
to name them.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1996


                              238 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 3, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN ONLINE PAGE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2734 words

HEADLINE: THE PEOPLE WHO WANT TO LOOK INSIDE YOUR GENES;
As our genetic inheritance is unravelled to reveal more about the diseases we
are likely to sustain, the insurance industry has started to campaign for
greater access to our most intimate secrets. Tom Wilkie listens in to the
latestdebate and assesses the implications

BYLINE: Tom Wilkie

BODY:


    Once, the 'Man from the Pru' used to ring our doorbells and be invited into
our homes to collect the family's insurance premium. Now he, and the other
insurance companies, are asking for more intimate access - to our DNA. They want
to know what genes we have inherited from our parents and, therefore, when we
are likely to die.

    For the past five years, British geneticists have been trying, in vain, to
persuade the insurance companies that they need not pry into people's genetic
inheritance. Insurers, for their part, fear that people who know from a genetic
test that they are liable to develop a fatal disease later in life will pile on
the life insurance to provide for their dependants after their death - without
declaring the test result on the application form.

    Last week, in the normally sedate surroundings of the Royal Society in
London, frustration at the lack of dialogue between the two sides boiled over
into acrimonious exchanges. Peter Harper, one of the country's leading
geneticists, sparked the furore when he warned that if applicants for insurance
feel that the results of a DNA test done by their doctor might be held against
them, they would buy do-it-yourself genetic test-kits even though they had not
received counselling about the consequences of a bad result: 'I am totally
against the uncritical and widespread application of genetic tests.' This was
all too much for Mary Reynolds, chief medical officer of Canada Life. She
promptly condemned Harper for supporting people who wanted to latch on to a
'gravy train'. Insurers are right, she insisted, to demand to see the results of
any genetic tests that an applicant may have had for other reasons.

    But at least one actuary seemed not so sure. Angus MacDonald said life
insurance companies could survive perfectly well without getting access to
people's genetic test results - at worst premiums might rise by 10 per cent for
everyone; they would not double, he said. MacDonald's Scots accent, his sober
suit, and his dispassionate discourse on the statistics of human mortality made
it seem as if he had stepped straight from one of the coolly elegant Georgian
buildings that house the great life assurance companies in the heart of
Edinburgh. In fact, he lectures in actuarial mathematics in the modernistic
campus of Heriot-Watt university on the city's fringes.

    There is something about regarding the Grim Reaper's visits not as a series
of individual tragedies but as an opportunity to compile statistics on
frequencies and distributions that seems to appeal to the Scot, for there were
many Scottish voices to be heard among the actuaries at the Royal Society. But
there was a feeling that if the insurance industry were to change its accent to
an American one, then the genetic revolution taking place in laboratories around
the world would cause the industry and its customers severe problems.

    In Britain, the development of a genetic test to pick out those who are at
higher risk of Alzheimer's disease later in life has happened just when there
are moves within the NHS to shift long-term care for the elderly from medical to
social provision for which people would be encouraged to take out private cover
for care in their old age. In the US, insurers that cover long-term care are
already interested in the genetic risk factors for Alzheimer's and in excluding
those who carry higher risk.

    Medical care, and long-term care for the elderly, the meeting heard, could
only be provided on a basis of universal solidarity - with everyone contributing
according to their ability to pay and receiving benefits according to their
need.  Genetics may make more, not less, necessary the universal provision that
the NHS once promised 'from the cradle to the grave'. One of the most surprising
aspects of the meeting was to hear geneticists, the representatives of the
actuarial profession (and a sprinkling of insurers also) praising the NHS in
terms more enthusiastic than have been heard recently from the Labour Party.

    If Britain goes down the American road towards private health insurance, or
private insurance for long-term care in old age, then insurers would be forced
to take people's genes into account. In their own legitimate commercial
interests, insurers would refuse to cover those people most at risk of, say,
Alzheimer's disease - the people who need such cover most.

    Last week's debate had its roots in two developments during the 1980s. Aids
sent the insurance companies in Britain into psychological shock. The industry
had been making a tidy living selling insurance to young males who, once they
have got past the age of 20, are relatively good risks. The possibility that
some of them might be infected with HIV made the industry nervous about insuring
people who appear healthy today but who might be at risk of illness later.

    The second development is an international scientific programme known as the
Human Genome Project whose aim is to tease out and examine every one of the
100,000 or so genes in human DNA. For obvious reasons, many researchers have
started their search by looking at the genes which, when defective, result in
disease. The hope is that when the genes are isolated and the DNA damage
identified, it might be possible to devise ways of correcting the disorder (not
necessarily by stitching in new genes - gene therapy - but by conventional
pharmaceuticals too). The search has already yielded some spectacular successes:
the genes responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis and
Huntington's disease have already been isolated, and the genetic flaws that
result in disease identified. But cures remain, as yet, elusive.

    What interests the insurance companies is that finding a gene does make
predictive testing possible. Huntington's disease, for example, is a
degenerative brain condition that usually sets in when the sufferer is in his or
her mid-40s. Healthy people in their twenties who know that they are at risk -
because one parent has developed the disease - can now have their own DNA tested
to see if they carry the mutation.

    Sensitised by their experience with Aids in the 1980s, the insurers worried
that here again could be a group of people who appear healthy at the time a
policy is taken out, but who will later suffer fatal disease. Worse was the
possibility that those who know they have the Huntington's mutation may decide
to insure their lives for hefty amounts, so that their dependants are catered
for after their death. To avoid the costs of such weighted selections, insurers
want to know the results of every genetic test that applicants for insurance
policies have had.

    But MacDonald's analysis suggests that the costs might not be so great as
had been feared - at least for average-sized policies. The costs do mount up, he
conceded, if the amount insured is twice or three times the average. In such
cases, there might have to be a limit above which insurers were free to ask for
the results of any genetic tests. Alternatively, it might be possible to have
'retrospective pricing' of insurance policies, as happens in Germany, he
suggested. Premiums are higher but if, at the end of an ordinary life insurance
policy, the company discovers it had over-estimated the risk and therefore
charged premiums that were too high, it would return some of them as a 'with
profits' payment. The higher initial premiums of a 'with profits' system meant
that German insurance companies were more relaxed about the Aids epidemic than
their British counterparts. The German companies, said MacDonald, could adjust
to unforeseen claims by reducing the with-profits payout at the end of normal
policies.

    But another American development may undermine the chances of the insurance
industry being able to dispense with genetic information for all but the biggest
of policies. In Britain, 95 per cent of applicants get life cover at standard
rates, about four per cent have to pay higher premiums because they represent a
higher risk, while one per cent are rejected as uninsurable. In the US, however,
some companies are starting to give cheap rates to 'preferred lives' - the
superfit and healthy. The British industry has a choice: it can try to expand
the insurance market to reach more than the 30 per cent of the population who
are insured at present, or it can differentiate within the existing assured
population.

    One of the factors that American insurers take into account in determining
who are the 'preferred lives' is family history of disease. Although the health
of one's parents is a crude measure of the genes that they have passed on, one
speaker drew gasps of incredulity when he asserted that the insurance industry
did not regard family history as 'genetic information'. In theory, genetic tests
would make this crude information precise.

    And information about the genetics of common diseases is going to be
available, said John Bell, professor of clinical medicine at Oxford University.
At first, the genome project succeeded in teasing out only the genes for
comparatively rare disorders, such as Huntington's, which are due to damage in a
single gene. Now the emphasis is shifting, said Bell, 'to more common diseases
which are more interesting to the pharmaceutical industry', such as cancer and
heart disease. But it is not just the drugs companies that are interested in the
shift, he noted dryly: 'the insurance industry may have more interest in
understanding conditions that have high prevalence'. At Bell's own laboratory in
Oxford, scientists have already started to identify genes that confer a
susceptibility to hypertension (high blood pressure), asthma, adult-onset
diabetes and inflammatory bowel disease. He warned though that, for common
diseases, there is no simple 'if you have the gene you will get the disease'
link. The diseases involve a complex interplay of genes with each other and with
the environment (including diet) that may confer a high risk on some
individuals. 'Stop thinking about them as genes but instead as 'risk factors'.'
At present, the available genetic tests are for such rare conditions that it is
not worth the insurers demanding that everyone should undergo a test before
being granted insurance. But when tests for Bell's 'risk factors' for common
diseases become available, will the insurers then demand that we undergo them?
Well, the geneticists and the actuaries at the Royal Society meeting displayed,
in the flesh so to speak, a clear difference of view about the relative
importance of genes and environment. Despite their professional belief in the
importance of genes, every one of the scientists had the lean look of people who
jogged or took other vigorous exercise regularly - they were clearly not leaving
their chances of heart disease up to their genes. In contrast, the insurers were
trenchermen - implicitly relying on their genes to ensure that regular good
business lunches would not adversely affect their actuarial chances of heart
disease.

    Tom Wilkie's book about the impact of the new genetics, Perilous Knowledge -
The Human Genome Project and its Implications, is published in paperback by
Faber and Faber at pounds 7.99

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1996


                              248 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 25, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: LETTER: THE PATENT ROUTE TO A CURE

BYLINE: (Dr) Trevor M Jones

BODY:


    WE would support widening the debate on genetic-engineering issues (Wars of
the genes, May 23).  But the subject should not be confused with the important
issue of patents. Scientists cannot patent life, as David King seems to suggest.
A patent is an instrument which grants a right to prevent others making, using
or selling somebody else's invention; it involves no concept of "ownership".
Indeed, in registering a patent, companies must publicly declare full details -
and so increase public knowledge.

    Because patents relate to inventions, the patent system is not an effective
way to enforce any controls society feels are needed to meet concerns over the
use of human genes. In fact, it is highly desirable for patent protection to be
sought in the area of research into human genes. Prohibition of patents would
have an adverse effect on the number of innovative medicines, severely hampering
the introduction of new approaches, such as gene therapy, where there exists the
very real possibility of a cure for serious disorders. People suffering from
these illnesses, their carers and families must not be denied the opportunity
for medical advances to be made. Without patents, there would be no cures.

    (Dr) Trevor M Jones.

    Director-general,

    Association of the British

    Pharmaceutical Industry.

    12 Whitehall,

    London SW1A 2DY.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1996


                              249 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 23, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1147 words

HEADLINE: GIANT LEAP IN GENETICS;
Obituary: Julius Marmur

BYLINE: Anthony Tucker

BODY:


    WORKING in the 1950s with Paul M Doty at Harvard University, the biochemist
and geneticist Julius Marmur, who has died aged 70, made the unexpected
discovery that after being pulled apart biochemically, strands of genetic
material (DNA) possess the natural ability to recombine into their correct
functional form.

    The significance of this discovery, on which much of modern genetic
engineering and laboratory hybridisation now rests, was not grasped at that time
even by the world's leading molecular genetics research groups. James Watson,
who in 1953 with Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins published the famous but then
still hypothetical double-helix structure of DNA, acknowledges that Marmur's
crucial discovery fell on scientifically unreceptive ground.

    It would be two decades before Paul Berg, working with bacterial genetic
material and using bacteriophages (bacterial viruses) as carriers of DNA
fragments, was able to show that DNA recombination and the specific deletion and
insertion of genetic material into an existing organism's genome is not merely
possible but, within limits, a natural process. However, when the huge range of
new possibilities became clear, including those of the transfer of genetic
material from widely separated species - a process that is essentially unnatural
- Berg rang the scientific alarm bells vigorously. In 1978 an emergency
conference called for the tight control of all experimental research involving
genetic transfer.

    Marmur, who by 1970 was professor of biochemistry and molecular genetics at
the Albert Einstein College in the Bronx and deeply involved in new academic
experimental criteria, played a role with Berg and others in the subsequent
framing of guidelines for the ethical control of all recombinant DNA techniques.
The furore simply confirmed that as in much of science, Marmur's seemingly
simple discovery that DNA strands will reassemble naturally, although only
belatedly understood and exploited, opened up a wide and challenging range of
new options.

    Once it became possible to select fragments of DNA and insert them into the
genetic material of a new host, then the loudly trumpeted concept and practice
of gene therapy could become reality. However, it also became possible to breach
natural barriers and produce cross-species hybrids - the artificial creation of
transgenic animals - an experimental pathway which, according to fellow
biochemists, Marmur found distasteful and unacceptable.  Yet his discovery, and
Berg's triumph and warning, were preceded by many experiments attempting the
transfer of DNA.

    The initial demonstration that DNA is the essential genetic material was
confirmed by Oswald Avery and Maclyn McCarty in the 1940s who showed that
specific strains of bacteria can be transformed in culture to another strain
through treatment with highly purified DNA from that strain. Subsequently, many
others attempted to modify microorganisms by culturing them in conditions rich
with DNA and RNA from other species of organisms.

    None was successful, primarily because the host organism's genetic material
was intact, closed, and hence inaccessible. But the identification of DNA as the
transforming principle resulted in the focus of research on to its structure
and, in particular, into the biochemical mechanisms of coding which enabled it
to encrypt huge amounts of structural information.

    In retrospect it can be seen that in the 1950s the emerging infant science
of molecular genetics was so obsessed with the questions of coding and structure
that Marmur's crucial discovery went unremarked and unrewarded in any major way.
As a successful academic who remained in research and in advisory bodies
throughout his life, there is nothing to suggest bitterness.

    Marmur was born in Poland but emigrated with his family to Canada during the
prewar anti-Jewish turmoil.  In 1946 he graduated from McGill University, where
he also took his master's degree, travelling to Iowa State University to gain
his doctorate in bacterial physiology in the early 1950s. Already involved in
the isolation and purification of DNA and revealing unusual gifts as an
experimental scientist, he was invited to work at Harvard with Paul Doty, one of
the most eminent biochemists and physiologists of the era. The result was a
triumph, long unsung. He leaves a wife, Mildred, and two sons.

    Julius Marmur, biochemist and geneticist, born March 22, 1926; died May 20,
1996

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1996


                              253 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 12, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS ATTEMPT TO TURN AIDS VIRUS INTO THERAPY AGENT

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science Editor

BODY:


    US RESEARCHERS are proposing the ultimate in swords-into-ploughshares
biotechnology. They plan to convert the Aids virus into an agent for gene
therapy.

    Because viruses are little more than strips of genetic information which can
smuggle themselves inside cells and hijack the victim's DNA to replicate, they
have been used as carriers or vectors in genetic engineering. Viruses for mouse
leukemia have been "tamed" and used to deliver experimental gene therapies. They
have not, so far, been very successful.

    Didier Trono and Inder Verma of the Salk Institute in La Jolla, California,
and a team from Cambridge, Massachusetts, report today in the US journal Science
that they have taken the most dazzlingly effective virus of them all, HIV. They
altered it so that it would be safe and converted it into a potential vehicle
for delivering a different kind of gene into target cells.

    Alan Kingsman, who heads a University of Oxford group pursuing similar
research, yesterday warned that it would be a long time before there could be
any tests on humans. "My own view is that vectors will only be used for gene
therapy treatment of Aids patients."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1996


                              258 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 21, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN ONLINE PAGE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: DAEDALUS: SELF-CONTAINED ADDICTION

BYLINE: David Jones

BODY:


    What's so criminal about taking addictive drugs? The term 'substance abuse'
suggests sympathy for the unhappy substance being abused. But the true motive is
less elevated. We sense that pleasure should only be doled out as a reward for
socially useful activities like working, buying and selling things or doing
good. Someone who gets pleasure for free, by a simple injection or inhalation,
is dodging the work ethic which enslaves the rest of us. And it isn't fair.

    The reality, of course, is different. A drug addict may start by enjoying
the careless rapture granted by his narcotic. But the pleasure gets ever feebler
and briefer, and soon he is driven merely by the need to avoid pain - the agony
of withdrawal.  He turns to crime to feed his illicit habit.

    A few doctors in Britain are allowed to prescribe narcotics to registered
addicts, who are thus kept stable and out of crime, and can even hold down a
job. But health authorities dislike abetting such wickedness. A doctor near
Liverpool has recently been ordered to stop prescribing, with predictable
effects on local crime figures.

    So Daedalus suggests a variation. Some diseases may soon be curable by 'gene
therapy'. A few living cells are taken from the patient's body and cultured in a
Petri dish. A new or improved gene is put into them. They are then implanted
back into the patient, where they settle down as before. Thereafter, however,
they release continuously the biochemical the gene has 'taught' them to make.
With luck, it cures the disease. That's the hope, anyway.

    The major addictive drugs are, of course, made by genes - those of the opium
poppy and the coca tree. Animal and plant genes are quite compatible - firefly
genes have been inserted into tobacco plants, which have thereupon glowed in the
dark. So it should be possible to extract narcotic-making genes from the drug
plants, and insert them into a few inessential cells (ideally brain cells)
removed from a volunteer addict. When the cells are put back into his brain,
they will leak the narcotic steadily and stably for the rest of his life.

    With a secure supply of the drug inside him, the addict will be freed from
his addiction. The pangs of withdrawal will no longer force him into crime; he
won't even be able to sell his supply to other addicts. He will get no sinful
pleasure from his implant - that stage of his addiction passed long ago - but he
will at least feel normal. He should be able to take up the burdens of
responsible citizenship once more.

    Such a simple, permanent solution won't be popular. Drug barons and pushers
will lose their profits, addicts will lose their dramatic pose as defiant
losers, drug-rehabilitators and the police will lose a steady occupation, and
the respectable public will lose the spectacle of wickedness meeting its just
deserts. But, says Daedalus, never do by law what you can do by engineering,
particularly if the law doesn't work.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1996


                              260 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 16, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 2400 words

HEADLINE: TALKING 'BOUT MY GENE RATION - THE PORNOGRAPHER OF SCIENCE;
JOHN CUNNINGHAM meets biologist Steve Jones, whose TV series In The Blood traces
DNA's history.

BYLINE: John Cunningham

BODY:


    IN A shabby building in a furtive street beside Euston station in London, a
small, wiry man with a hairy chest and exhibitionist tendencies is preparing to
seduce a crowd of punters who've dodged the five o'clock rush to listen to his
spiel on all they don't know about sex.

    By the time you read this, Steve Jones will have stimulated several hundred
people, anonymous in their overcoats, on the theme The Meaning Of Sex.
Stimulated but not titillated, for Jones is an exhibitionist in the way of
brilliant academics and last night, as one of our best science communicators, he
gave the annual Haldane Lecture at University College London, where he is
professor of genetics.

    It was one small though prestigious window through which the public peers
during Science Week. But after the annual binge of boffins which the Government
promotes to convince us it's doing right by science, we'll be seeing Jones the
Genetic Wiz through the huge window of BBC2 in a six-part series which will make
our genes as familiar to us as the cast of EastEnders.

    The series airs in May, but before that Jones is doing his bit for Science
Week, happy to oblige an interested public, but unashamedly cynical - as a
proclaimed socialist - about the Government's motives. After all, there have
been three such weeks, with a different departmental minister in charge each
time, he says. He fishes out a Downing Street invite from the rubble of his
office. "How John Major can have a reception to 'Celebrate the excellence of UK
science, engineering and technology. . . ' - that has a hollow ring to anyone
working in these fields.  'To mourn the death of UK science' would be more
accurate."

    You can see what he means. After a year's unpaid leave to make the series,
In The Blood, Jones, now 51, is back in the lab with no research funding. His
last 10 or so applications have been turned down, so intense is the competition.
It seems a rum way for the grant-givers to treat a leading geneticist, who has
set a fast pace through his research with those slowest of creatures - snails.

    "My strong desire now is to get back into biological research. It's hard to
get money, but that's not unique, although I do make a point of whining and
bitching about it in a particularly graceless fashion. But it happens to lots of
people and I will shortly be putting in two more applications. And long may they
float."

    Jones is a great one for self-deprecation, and he's lethally accurate about
the dilemma of being a biologist with a public following. "I'm a sort of
pornographer of science. The role of being a communicator of science is far more
ignoble than being a scientist. But someone has to do it."

    His clarity is captivating, but when you see him on screen, it won't be as
the up-date on AJP Taylor's lecture-slabs of the 1960s. We're going to have six
highly sophisticated documentaries with an engaging guide. The Taylor approach
was tried in a pilot, says Jones, but audiences wouldn't put up with so bald a
presentation.

    Instead, he's Attenboroughed his way round the world, pinning down the myths
that cultures have about genes. So he traces the lost tribes of Israel,
investigates the royal families where genetic risk is taken into account when
members marry. And he shows how genetic differences across the planet are
disappearing thanks to the possibility of transglobal travel for more and more
of us.

    There's a bit of glamour attached to all this. After all, says Jones, laying
aside his wand, it's fairly obvious that half the population of England is
descended from William the Conqueror. And that "we're all a Lost Tribe of
Israel".  There's quite a whiff of the Bible about Jones - it was the first book
about heredity and descent, as he point out. But also, the Good Book possibly
appeals to his long-forgotten chapel-going as a boy, not that he's keen to
resurrect it.

    Anyway, away with belief - "I'm the worst sort of agnostic imaginable - I
can't be bothered to go into it". What he is most concerned with is offering
guidance at a time when the media is stuffed with tales of sheep being cloned,
the battle of good genes versus the bad, and muddles over whether it's desirable
to manipulate the genes of a tomato or a brain.

    It's fortunate the call came to him, completely out of the blue, as he puts
it, from BBC TV's Alan Yentob, who heard his lucid Reith Lectures of five years
ago, and wondered if he'd like to take on the task of keeping us televisually
abreast of advances in genetics. You bet, he said. However, Jones the Cautious
added the rider: that he wanted to keep viewers' expectations realistic. With
good reason: "My feeling is that people have extraordinarily over-stated hopes
about what genetics will do for the future and what genes do for the present."

    He reckons we're all avid for news of advances in his sector, and his
integrity leads him to warn that "there is a strange return almost to the middle
of the 19th century, that everything is working itself out in the public mind
according to some giant biological plan - people with good genes do this; people
with bad genes go to prison. But it ain't like that."

    The problem is that every little thing in genetics makes front-page news
now.  "The classic case is these sodding sheep," says Jones the Vernacular.
Monsters or Miracle? screeched the Daily Mail's front page over the cloning
story. "I mean, do me a favour, that work was done in 1963. Biologists got
excited about it then, but I don't think it got into the papers. Science hasn't
changed - it's developed somewhat - but the public is on one of its periodic
feeding frenzies."

    And there lies the danger, for it seems we want to believe all of the
wizardry all of the time, and gene therapy is a good example. Jones the Teacher,
Jones the Preacher puts us right: "Gene therapy is unlikely to work in the next
50 years.  Nevertheless, 50 per cent of people would accept gene therapy if they
thought their baby was going to be born homosexual."

    But if he's fairly gentle with a self-gulling public, he's aware that
notions of genetic pre-disposition can become dilemmas that are exploited by
interested parties. And he doesn't exempt some of his own tribe from this
failing: "Some scientists would love to be able to take over the function of the
law, and say this person was condemned because of his genes, and that person was
not. But the answer is that this is beyond the remit of science.  Science has
limits where race is concerned, where law is concerned."

    Fair enough, but as Jones gets known more and more outside his lab, and as
the mantle of authority that a telly series bestows falls on him, isn't he under
pressure to take a line on such issues?

    "I do take a line," says Jones the Guardian reader. "My views about almost
everything are utterly predictable. They are standard milk-and-water Old
Labour." Getting on a soapbox to air them is one thing, but taking the soapbox
into the genetics forum is less successful, he says. In particular, this is
because in part of the media "genetics equals fascism". But, he counters, "It
doesn't. Genetics equals genetics; it is value-free."

    Yet in spite of his caution, Jones the Visionary is present, too, and that's
one attribute that's going to make compelling television. It's the way he tells
his tales of futurology: "The extraordinary fact is that if I cut my fingernail,
it keeps growing. But if I cut my finger off, it doesn't. Why the hell is that?
My guess is that in the next two or three years, we'll know the answer, then
suddenly all kinds of big things will become possible.

    "We're moving from understanding we have a message to being able to
translate it into a language - how you get from a cell to a human being, that
kind of stuff." Then, comes the cool coda: "But basic genetics is really over
now."

    If so where's the new magic? Jones replies that if he knew, he'd be on his
way to a Nobel Prize. But he points out that the future of biology lies in what
Darwin called "the mystery of mysteries" - what does a species consist of?

    "Modern genetics has broken down the species barrier; we can move genes
between species in a test-tube, which is far more mind-blowing than cloning
sheep.

    "But we can only do it with particular genes. Maybe we will get to the
situation where we'll have an animal that is simultaneously a cow, a sheep and a
wheat plant. I think it is very far from impossible." He grins. There's a bit of
the wizard in even the most level-headed genetecist.

    This one is likely to have both a top-rated series and a best-selling book
that goes with it to his credit. In spite of his wish to go back to academia,
it's hard to believe he won't keep a foot both there and in the media. Jones is,
after all, a practitioner of the up-dated version of CP Snow's Two Cultures. Now
the division is not between arts and sciences, but within single disciplines. So
there's a gap between the enclosed researcher and the academic the public loves.
The good news is that Steve Jones strides that gap in genetics. The pulling
power of the gene, you might say.

    A theory he wouldn't deny.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1996


                              262 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 22, 1996

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN ONLINE PAGE; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 146 words

HEADLINE: ONLINE LETTER

BYLINE: Nigel Chaffey

BODY:


    YOUR Off Line 'A Tropical Paradigm' (OnLine, February 8) suggests two
corollaries. First, if the anthropoid apes are so similar to us, and they are
immune to SIV (HIV-1 and HIV-2 in humans), why aren't we looking for the genes
that confer that immunity? Second, if we want to succeed in gene therapy, what
better vehicle than a retrovirus? Incidentally, I have not seen any reference to
the use of phage as a gene carrier.

    Nigel Chaffey London SE23

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1996


                              272 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                December 5, 1995

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1827 words

HEADLINE: MAD SCIENTIST DISEASE;
The dangers of genetic engineering underline science's need to take moral
responsibility for the results of its actions

BYLINE: George Monbiot

BODY:


    A COUPLE of months ago, a breakthrough was announced in Scotland. Scientists
had inserted genes from a luminous jellyfish into crop plants, so that they
would glow in the dark when they were attacked by fungus. The aim of the
project, according to its supervisor, was to help farmers to manage the "ever
larger fields to grow the food . . . needed to keep pace with the population
increase." They could overfly the vast new tracts at night and check which parts
were being attacked.

    It all made perfect sense, apart from one inconvenient consideration: the
world will only be fed if fields get smaller, not larger. Soil erosion, which
results partly from increasing field size, is perhaps the greatest threat to
food security. Huge fields mean an increased risk of catastrophe through insect
plague, as well as the displacement of small farmers, who are often the main
producers of staple foods. Had the researchers spoken to anyone who has
witnessed the ravages of the Green Revolution, they would have learned that
their basic premise was dismissed as simplistic nonsense years ago. But there
was nothing particularly surprising about the vacuous euphoria which greeted the
development. Genetic engineering's usefulness is routinely exaggerated and its
dangers downplayed. Part of the reason is that many researchers are woefully
ill-equipped to make judgments about whether their work helps to solve the
world's problems or simply exacerbates them. There are morally responsible,
self-questioning people among them; but much of the distrust with which the
public views scientists is well-founded. The life sciences are no longer engaged
in the delivery of benefits to humankind.

    There seem to be three main reasons why scientists have lost their ability
to assess the utility of their work. The first is the pressure on universities
to find new money. The interests of many researchers are now indistinguishable
from those of the corporations funding them. While claiming scientific
detachment they are, in reality, no more than obedient employees of industry,
which is governed not by an unbiased assessment of human need but by the hope of
making money. As the disadvantaged of the world are the least able to pay, they
are the least likely to be helped by this kind of science.

    The second is naivity. Many researchers could fairly be described as idiot
savants, brilliant specialists neither trained nor expected to see beyond what
they are doing. Recently I met a plant scientist who had just completed the
first of four years of research into the genetics of a crop plant. I asked her
what her work would achieve. After some deliberation, she hazarded that it would
"help feed the world." I pointed out that the plant she is working on is an oil
crop, not a food crop. She greeted the news with astonishment.

    The third is the hardest to pin down, but by far the most important. This is
what the philosopher Mary Midgley describes as the assumption "that the
prestige, the value of science centres on never making a mistake - on precision,
specialisation and infallible correctness." There is a pervasive belief that
professionalism depends on the performance of unitary tasks in isolation from
the distracting concerns of the rest of the world. Science merely gathers the
data, but has and should have nothing to say about its pertinence.

    This position is, of course, riddled with self-deception. Many of those who
espouse it also claim that the message of science is the only one worthy of
consideration and that the world's problems can only be addressed by an
objective assessment of the data they gather.

    Having cut themselves off both from other people's lives and from other
academic disciplines, professionally-blinkered scientists are clearly
unqualified to determine whether or not they are studying something worthwhile.
By striving never to get the details wrong, they ensure that they will never get
the overview right.

    The result of all these factors is that science, if it ever was before, is
no longer governed by objectivity. The means of gathering and assessing data
remain dispassionate, but the much more important assessment - of which research
to embark on - is driven by wholly partial considerations. The science drives
the perception of the world's needs, rather than the world's needs driving the
science. Science has ceased to be a force for reason in society.

    Nowhere is this better demonstrated that by the claims made for genetic
engineering. Gene therapy, we are told, will become a major determinant of human
health. Genetically modified bacteria and viruses, as well as new genes inserted
into crops, will do away with the need for pesticides and help feed the world.
There's no doubt that some applications of the technology will be indispensable
- gene therapy offers the only imaginable remedy for cystic fibrosis sufferers,
for example - but the briefest glance at reality shows that gene manipulation
offers more potential problems than solutions.

    Genetic engineering provides, more poignantly that almost any other
technology, a means of transferring power from the poor to the rich.
Corporations are now winning patents for engineered crop plants.  They obtain an
unassailable advantage over the farmers whose ancestors developed the original
crop. Their ownership of what previously had no owner - the germ line of living
creatures - represents a significant loss to the common weal.

    Transferring genes from one species to another - in both medicine and
agriculture - is more hazardous than we've been led to believe. Transplanted
genes may be released from the checks imposed by their original host. They may
recombine to form newly virulent organisms which could attack other species. The
chance of accidentally engineering new viral plagues is, while small, a real
one. When a "transgenic" organism has been released into the environment, there
may be no means of recalling it if it starts to run amok.

    Regulation, both in Britain and abroad, is desperately inadequate. The EU in
particular seems to have bowed to the will of the corporations, to the extent
that some US companies are now coming here to test their engineered products. If
the possible disasters do not materialise, it will be through good fortune
rather than good planning.

    The problems inherent in genetic engineering arise, of course, from many
sources, but it is scientists, the brains behind these schemes, who carry the
greatest moral responsibility. Before deciding what is fit to study, they must
first review the great complex of issues which determine whether or not people
survive and prosper. They must be prepared to run the risk of occasionally being
wrong on the detail, in order to admit the possibility of getting the broader
picture right.

    There is, of course, a fictional predecessor for researchers who fail to
raise their heads from the workbench: a man whose introspection and moral
suspension, combined with the best intentions, allowed him to create an
engineered organism of horrifying power, which was accidentally released into
the environment. For our sake and for theirs, we must hope that the names of
today's genetic engineers will not be linked with that of Dr Frankenstein.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1995


                              273 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 14, 1995

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE: GENETICS AND GENE THERAPY;
Today people in Britain can expect to live for far longer than was possible 100
years ago. This is largely as a result of medical research

BYLINE: Susan Aldridge

BODY:


    Many medical researchers say that 21st century medicine will be based on
genetics. The human genome project, an international research effort to discover
all the genes in the body, will have a huge influence. In the past year, genes
that play a part in the development of diabetes, kidney disease, and breast
cancer have been identified.

    Gene-based medicine opens up the possibility of a completely new form of
treatment - gene therapy. People with a faulty gene - sufferers from cystic
fibrosis for instance - may be given normal copies of the gene.

    Or genes may be made to 'turn off' when they are over-active, as in some
types of cancer.

    New types of microscopes have made it easier to study the activities of
cells and molecules. A confocal microscope, for instance, allows scientists to
view cells in three dimensions. This offers new hope for curing Alzheimer's
disease and Parkinson's disease, in which brain cells die when they should not.

    By studying this kind of cell death, researchers might find drugs that could
stop it happening and so keep the brain healthy. Exploring cells with these, and
other new tools, may also lead to better cures for cancer, asthma, allergy and
muscle disorders. But there is much more to a human being than DNA, genes and
cells. Epidemiology, the study of patterns of disease, is a crucial part of
medical research. The discovery of the link between smoking and cancer was an
early example of epidemiology. Today epidemiologists are looking at the effect
of diet, chemicals and pollution on our health. They also trace the source of
outbreaks of disease.

    Written by SUSAN ALDRIDGE, a science writer. Her most recent book is
Biochemistry for Advanced Biology (Cambridge University Press, 1994). SCIENCE.
CROSS-CURRICULAR THEMES. The exhibition Science For Life at the Wellcome Centre
for Medical Science, 210 Euston Road, London NW1 2BE (tel: 0171-611 8727), is
free and has exhibits on topics such as mental health, epidemiology, gene
therapy and cancer. The Medical Research Council, 20 Park Crescent, London W1,
produces a free quarterly magazine; they also produce careers leaflets and
teaching materials.

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1995


                              277 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                November 4, 1995

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN WEEKEND PAGE; Pg. T22

LENGTH: 7120 words

HEADLINE: THE DNA WE'VE BEEN DEALT;
Gene research will one day provide each of us with a personal map of the future,
showing in detail how our health will develop as we age and the disorders we may
be destined for. Should we embrace such knowledge and tailor our
livesaccordingly, or should we just stick to the business of living in the
present?

BYLINE: Charles Siebert

BODY:


    On the back wall of his cramped office at the clinical center of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, MD Dr Lameh Fananapazir has a
huge map of the United States. Stuck all across it are hundreds of pins with
tiny white pennants atop them bearing the family names of his patients. It's not
your typical patient roster, but then Dr Fananapazir, one of the country's
leading cardiologists, has an expansive practice.

    Tacked all around the map, spreading to the room's corners, and then
spilling over along the side walls, are photographs of some of the patients.
Most are of children, smiling brightly before those dark blue back-drops of
department store portraits.  One is of a wide-eyed toddler with a fun head of
blond curls and the faintest rim of blue across his forehead. 'We couldn't
figure out what that was at first,' explained Dr Fananapazir, a deeply
distracted man with paunch-loosened shirt-tails and a voice, although it barely
registers above a whisper, still bearing strong traces of his Iranian heritage.
'Then we realised that the child's heart would go into very slow rhythms,
sometimes stopping completely. He kept passing out and bumping his head on
things.' All of the people in the doctor's photographs, all of the families
marked on his map - a total of 8,000 patients - have in common an incurable form
of heart disease known as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, or HCM. The disease is
most often characterised by a thickening of the heart muscle, in particular the
walls of the left ventricle, the heart's main pump, and of the inner septum
muscle, which separates the heart's right and left chambers. The thickening
impedes both the flow of blood through the heart and the heart's ability to pump
blood to the rest of the body. Struggling to overcome its own inefficiency, the
heart works harder and, like any muscle, thickens more.

    Victims commonly suffer from chest pain, shortness of breath, dizziness and
fainting spells. Over time, HCM often leads to congestive heart failure. It can
also cause sudden death, most commonly in the young. Death, in fact, is often
HCM's first symptom.

    Now, however, researchers such as Dr Fananapazir are unravelling the mystery
that has long shrouded this disease, a disease my father succumbed to 15 years
ago at the age of 59. When my father died, a few of his doctors had mentioned
the possibility of his condition being genetic, but it was one my family and I
had long been conveniently able to delete from our own list of suspects - a list
that included the effects of the malaria my father nearly died from in New
Guinea during the war, the stress of a job he didn't like much and, we even
conjectured, the stress of us, the seven children that he and my mother, in a
classic post-war Catholic frenzy, saw fit to spawn. But when I first read about
Dr Fananapazir's discovery in this area, I realised that my father's heart, and
thus my own, was always set to break. I anxiously picked up the phone, dialled
the NIH and began arranging for myself a long journey into the dark, coiled
recesses of my own genome.

    My call was directed to Barbara Biesecker, co-director of the Institutes'
genetic counselling programme. She explained that research was under way in
which members of numerous families were being tested for various genetic
mutations related to HCM and that, while no simple, doctor's-surgery-type test
was yet available, I and other members of my family could participate and become
part of the research protocol. 'The question is,' Biesecker went on to ask, 'Do
you want to know this information?' She told me that in her research she had
found that when it came to being tested for a genetic predisposition to diseases
that have no real cures and whose date of onset cannot be predicted, there were
basically two types of people.  There were 'want-to-knowers' and there are
'avoiders'.

    These are the categories that the science of genetics will soon have us all
sorting ourselves into. Like many of the patients that Drs Fananapazir and
Epstein work with in their HCM study, I didn't go to the NIH this summer because
I was sick. I was there as one of the 'presymptomatic ill' - healthy people who,
as a result of ongoing scientific explorations of the full human DNA sequence,
or genome, and of the genetic roots of disease, are now getting unprecedented
peeks at the probable future course of their health's decline.

    Perhaps the most immediate life-altering result of current genetic research
will be the development of quick diagnostic tests to detect the presence of, or
predisposition to, a broad array of disorders.  People such as Dr Fananapazir
foresee that in another 10 years or so we will be but a routine physical or even
home-test kit away from knowing what kind of cards we've been genetically dealt.
The day is not far off when a doctor's visit will yield personal genetic report
cards, indicating which disorders we may be destined for and how to tailor our
lives accordingly. The future, in other words, is about to impinge more than
ever upon our thinking about the present.

    Of course, when there are cures or preventive measures, such insight is
precious. But for the great majority of the diseases that we are now discovering
the genetic origins of, there are no cures.

    I knew, as I sat in Dr Fananapazir's office that first day, that I was the
last person in my family who should be there. In fact, my father - the very one
whose suspect genes prompted me to go - would have been the most disdainful of
my presence there. It was he, after all, who had to tell me to stop thinking
about his heart, just to get on with living. When he died, I didn't cope very
well, kept reliving that moment when his heart finally stopped.

    Dr Fananapazir sat before me, calmly flipping through my father's medical
records, which he had asked me to dig up. Then he set them down and, for a brief
moment, focused his divided attention fully on me. 'There is a 50 per cent
chance of your having inherited the gene from your father. Of course,' he added
thoughtfully, having noted, no doubt, the blood draining from my face, 'there is
a 50 per cent chance that you haven't.' Dr Fananapazir went on, saying something
about HCM genes found on chromosomes 1, 14 and 15 and a new one they've found on
chromosome 11, though they don't know where exactly, and I just sat there
staring up at the map on his wall. He was telling me about strange new
localities from some as-yet-uncharted world. Suddenly, I was looking too hard at
the people in the photographs on Dr Fananapazir's wall, looking directly into
their hearts.

    Up the road from Dr Fananapazir's office is lab building No 9, a
single-storey, flat-roofed brick structure resembling an old army barracks.
Building 9 houses what's known as a sequencing laboratory, where a section of
the new world Dr Fananapazir had described to me was being mapped. This work is
part of the Human Genome Project. Often described as the biological equivalent
of the Apollo moon mission, the Genome Project is expected to leave us with a
complete readout of our biological blueprint by the year 2005 (at a cost of
around pounds 2 billion).

    Genes - random, isolated stretches of DNA, totalling no more than 5 per cent
of the entire genome - synthesise, or 'code for', the variously arranged
proteins that, whether in the form of a knuckle or a heart, ultimately make up
each of us. As for the other 95 per cent, often called 'junk' DNA, no one knows
for sure what it does.

    As recently as the early 1950s, genes were merely some surmised cellular
substance believed to be involved in the inheritance of traits. Now the
estimated 100,000 or so genes within each human cell are being identified and
explored like so many new islands in an archipelago. Since 1983, when the first
partial gene map was assembled around the discovery of the specific mutation for
the devastating neurological disorder known as Huntington's chorea, the genes
responsible for hundreds of so-called 'monogenic', or single-gene diseases, such
as cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell anaemia, have been found. Along with these,
researchers have discovered a number of genes implicated in 'polygenic'
disorders - including coronary heart disease and most forms of cancer in which
genes, in conjunction with environmental and behavioural factors, work their
harm.

    In the past year and a half alone, a gene for a form of melanoma has been
isolated, along with genes associated with breast cancer and one responsible for
the early onset of Alzheimer's. Thus far, information has been collected on only
about 6,300 human genes (around 6 per cent of the total). About half of these
cause disease when present in mutated form; most have been traced to specific
locations on chromosomes.

    The once-uncharted expanse of microscopia is now crowded with explorers.
Biotechnology firms seeking both their Fountains of Youth and El Dorados in the
form of new, life-prolonging gene therapies have already laid claim to stretches
of our genome with patent requests. A growing number of new commercial
laboratories, meanwhile, are rushing into the fray, marketing genetic tests for
an ever-increasing number of gene-related disorders. Hundreds of these tests -
including nearly 200 prenatal tests - are already available.

    At one point during my visit to Building 9, I asked Dr Eric Green, a
somewhat highly-strung molecular geneticist, whose genome it is exactly that
gets to be the paradigm of all humanity. Looking a bit annoyed, he replied that
DNA from many people was being used but that it didn't matter because everyone
on the planet is 99.9 per cent the same DNA-wise anyway, a revelation I wasn't
sure whether to be comforted or depressed by.

    'We are getting a crude read-through now of a consensus human,' he said.
'And then, after we've filled in all the pages, we'll be able to develop quick
tests for various inherited diseases. A diagnostician will turn to page 250,
let's say, in chapter 10, and, comparing it with your genomic readout, see how a
misspelling or typographical error in your DNA might give your family HCM and
not mine.' All families have their own private death lore. They don't really
need a geneticist around to help them recognise certain patterns. Everyone in my
family has been sufficiently spooked by the fact that my father was only 49 when
he was first stricken with HCM, and we know, too, that his father and his
father's brother also died of heart failure, causes unknown. Still, however grim
certain precedents may be, we still tell ourselves that there are exceptions.
HCM is a monogenic disorder, but 'monogenic' does not mean 'simple'.

    'It's like you have over 30 separate diseases on that one gene,' Dr
Fananapazir explained. 'Most families we've studied have their own private
mutation, but some have exactly the same one. The risk varies from one mutation
to another. In some families, the symptoms develop at a much later age and the
disease has a benign diagnosis. In others' - he glanced furtively at a file box
on the floor beside my chair - 'they have a mutation that wipes out everyone
before the age of 40 or 50.' At one point, Dr Fananapazir went to a file drawer
to get me a copy of an article he and Dr Epstein had written describing the
dizzying variance among the effects of specific mutations found on the 'beta
-myosin heavy-chain gene'. I couldn't make much sense of it - page after page of
impenetrable arcanum - but one minor detail did catch my attention: the way each
mutation was identified as a number, the '403' or the '908'.

    'That means,' Dr Fananapazir explained, 'the mutation occurs at the 403rd,
or the 908th codon within the beta-myosin gene.' Genes, like the larger DNA
strand they are found on, also have noncoding stretches of filler, called
introns, within them.  These noncoding introns are interspersed with
protein-coding regions called exons and special DNA sequences known as control
elements, which modulate the duration, the amplitude and the area, or tissue
site - like the liver, brain or heart - of protein expression. Within the exons
are the codons - sequential triplets of DNA bases that specify which of the
body's 20 amino acids will be added next to the long chain of amino acids that
make up different proteins.

    In essence, those numbers I was looking at in Dr Fananapazir's article are
some of the newest addresses in that suburban development I'd imagined earlier,
the addresses, in this case, of the houses of heartbreak. And then Dr
Fananapazir led me inside one, at codon No 403, in the beta-myosin gene on
chromosome 14, where I learned just how surrealistically specific and arbitrary
heartbreak can be.

    The 'myosin heavy-chain gene' codes for myosin, one of the main proteins of
the heart. Myosin is what's known as a molecular motor. It works in concert with
another muscle protein called actin to coerce and control contraction of the
heart. At one point, Dr Fananapazir led me down the hall to Dr Epstein's lab,
where I was actually shown this dynamic on a screen - myosin and actin, little
glow-worms working like hands, one over the next, pulling a chain.

    Back in his office, Dr Fananapazir showed me a first ever, 3D X-ray
crystallography photo of myosin. It has a round head and a tail like a sperm.
Myosin is composed of thousands of amino acids, which are programmed in protein
synthesis by the codons in the myosin gene. But patients who have a misspelling
at codon 403 get one wrong amino acid in the chain of thousands. This is what a
mutation is. Each genome is filled with such minuscule misalignments. Some never
manifest themselves; some cause allergies. But a misspelling at 403 can kill
you, misshaping the head of the myosin protein in such a way as to impair the
interaction of myosin and actin, causing the heart, second by second of each day
over the course of a life, to contract improperly and so thicken.

    The morning after talking with Dr Fananapazir about the genes that might
take my heart, I sat in a large solarium on the clinical center's 10th floor
waiting for my test. It wasn't a genetic test, however. I had not made up my
mind about joining the protocol and having one of those. For now, I would just
be having an echocardiogram to determine whether my heart was showing any signs
of thickening.

    Of course, the people seated around me in the solarium that morning all knew
the score. Two young women to my right, in their mid-thirties, kept comparing
symptoms, beseeching each other, really, to say, Yes, I've felt that too - the
skipped beats and dizziness, the tightening in the chest and up into the neck
when walking too fast. I thought of my father telling me how he had felt that
tightening when he hurried through an airport, and about the time he became
short of breath just brushing his hair. 'And sometimes even when I'm just
sitting down,' one of the women said excitedly, putting her hand on the arm of
the other, who nodded vigorously.

    I started to sweat, my right hand repeatedly drifting to my left wrist for
pulse checks. I shouldn't be here, I kept telling myself. I'm healthy, and
besides that, I'm an 'avoider'. I remembered Barbara Biesecker, the genetic
counsellor, telling me that I might be totally freaked out if I learned that I
had a genetic misspelling. 'It might stop you from exercising and taking care of
yourself,' she had told me. 'And what if they did work out all the complications
and the various interpretations of the test and could tell you that you are
going to have a heart attack at age 50 or 60? You still might not care.' Dr
Fananapazir stepped into the solarium, sharp in a blue suit and tie, and
motioned me toward the back. There, in a cramped room diced by pale,
hospital-room dividers, I took off my shirt, lay on a bed and never stopped
watching the eyes of the woman watching my heart on the monitor behind me.
Passing the imaging wand across my chest, she stared up at the screen and made
small talk. She went on about how she was still trying to get the kinks out of
this new machine, interrupting herself only briefly to note: 'Your heart's fine,
by the way. No thickening at all.' That night I phoned the woman I live with
back in New York and told her everything was all right. Then I wandered out of
my hotel room, found a restaurant that served Maryland blue crabs (my father's
favourite), ate a dozen and got fully drunk.

    The following day I dropped by Dr Fananapazir's office to thank him. He
quickly got up and closed the door after me and then, in a grave tone, explained
that, upon closer examination, all wasn't exactly right with my test - that my
left ventricle, the heart's main pump, appeared to be a little large, or at
least on the 'upper limits of normal', meaning that I have either a big heart or
the beginnings of another form of cardiomyopathy - dilatory rather than
hypertrophic - a condition in which the heart walls expand and thin out and lose
their pumping power, symptoms sometimes associated with people who have the HCM
mutation. The doctor wanted to see me again in six months to do another test.

    A few weeks later, on a sweltering morning in early July, I found myself
driving alone on a highway, driving towards the heart of America, toward one of
the towns on Dr Fananapazir's genome map, a town I can't name because among
those working the new, unchartered genomic terrain are insurance companies that
immediately delete from their rolls people with defects in their genes like the
HCM mutation on chromosome 14 that lords over one large multigenerational family
in, I'll call it, Lawton.

    I stopped at Lawton's main square and asked if I was going the right way to
the house of, I'll call them John and Karen Alston. Lawton being a town of about
2,000 people, everyone knew, pointed me farther down the main road. The Alstons
knew I was coming, had agreed to see me. John Alston was working the late shift
at a factory a few towns over. John's is the gene that has made their life so
hard. Karen 'married into the curse', as she put it, smiling, a kind, lovely
woman in her early thirties. Their three children were there, playing around us
in the living room. Karla, nine, their oldest child, does not have the gene.
Mary, seven, does, and began to develop symptoms a year after the birth of her
younger brother, Arthur, the blond-haired baby with the rim of blue on his
forehead that I'd seen in the photo on Dr Fananapazir's wall. Arthur, five, has
a pacemaker, which rights the rhythm of his heart. And, to both Dr Fananapazir's
and Dr Epstein's surprise and delight, the thickening of Arthur's heart muscle
has also reversed. He was non-stop action while I was there, wrestling with his
sisters, swinging baseball bats, getting chased out of the house by his mother.

    John's father, George Alston, who passed the HCM gene on to all four of his
children - Barbara, Sophie, John and his younger brother, Jim - has made it a
custom to buy all of his grandchildren life insurance policies on the day of
their birth. 'I think he feels bad about the gene,' Karen told me. 'It's kind of
his way of making it up to everyone.' Life insurance is the only policy that
George, who can't get insurance for himself, can secure for the children,
provided, of course, they're born healthy. But Arthur emerged from the womb
struggling for breath with HCM. Karen had to administer cardio-pulminary
resuscitation to him four times in his first 11 months of life. He has no bottom
front teeth, all of them lost as a result of oxygen deprivation, his brain
having grabbed for every last ounce during his repeated lapses on consciousness.
'He'd get this look,' Karen said. 'He'd be running around and then just stop.
His eyes would get all glassy and fixed, and he'd turn a bluish grey. Sometimes
I'd just have to shake him to kind of jump-start him again. I never let him out
of my sight.' When Mary started having her chest pains and fainting spells,
Karen tried to keep her close by as well. Some nights she would sleep holding
baby Arthur to her chest and her other hand pressed to Mary's.

    'It got to the point where the slightest bad rhythm in her heart would wake
me,' Karen said. She told me that there are times when she'll get angry at the
gene, at John and his gene, at God, wondering why he chose her children.
'Because he thinks we could handle it?' she asked, her voice cracking. 'Is this
a test? John blames himself, and I know his dad does. I tell them it's not their
fault.' Karen mentioned more than once that she and John would not have had
children if they knew then what they do now. They scratched plans to have more
children when Arthur came along and have had to put all other plans on hold
because of the tenuousness of their children's health. John can't leave his
factory job for a higher-paid one because his company insurance plan, which
automatically covers any child born while he's employed there, is the only way
he can get coverage for his family. They've tried several times with other
insurance companies, but none will touch them.

    'We had it all planned out,' Karen said. 'Have kids and then save money to
build the home we want. Now it's one day at a time because we don't know what's
going to happen.' I asked Karen if she and John had spoken about the disease
before they were married, before the genetic connection had been confirmed.

    'Oh, yeah,' she said. 'He even told me maybe I should marry someone else and
have kids because there's this disease in his family and he might pass it on.
I'd say, 'You're okay, and besides, they'll have a cure by the time we have
kids. I guess I was blinded. You are when you're younger.' Alone in my motel
room that night I began to ask myself, at what point do we stop letting our new
knowledge about the influence of genes upon our lives influence our life's
choices? Had my father gone for a test and learned of his HCM gene, would he
have chosen not to have had the family of seven that has thus far - for reasons
no geneticist can explain - emerged unscathed? And even if some of us develop
symptoms in the coming years, haven't we already had substantive, relatively
pain-free lives compared with what some people have to endure? And what if I did
decide to have a test and it revealed one of the culpable mutations: where would
that leave me?  A justifiable hypochondriac, waiting around - fingers pressed to
pulse - for the other shoe to drop. I might well have a mutation that is, as Dr
Fananapazir so consolingly phrased it, 'compatible with a long life'. Or I might
be what's known as a 'skip', one who has the mutation but never develops the
symptoms and instead passes the bad gene on to the next generation - if, knowing
what I now do, I decide to risk that and have children. I might, too, walk
outside tomorrow and, as happened to my cousin, be killed by a falling piece of
scaffolding. The problem with genetics is that it's at once so central to who
and what we are and yet so beside the point of just being us, of going about the
business of living from day to day.

    On my way out to the Alstons' Independence Day family picnic, I passed a
train depot, which also doubles as Lawton's historical museum. There was no one
around, but the door was open, so I went inside. Among the exhibits was one
devoted to early medicine. Arranged in a glass cabinet were old lancets and
forceps, an assortment of needles, a medical saddlebag and a phrenological bust,
used in the 19th-century practice of measuring character and mental capacity by
the contours of the skull.

    It was, in a sense, an earlier, much cruder attempt at mapping the human
essence, but as I surveyed the labelled puzzle-piece quadrants etched across the
skull - 'Animal Propensities', 'Selfish Sentiments', 'Conservativeness',
'Destructiveness', 'Individuality', and so on - I thought that for all of the
precision and exactitude of current genetic mapping, we're really not that much
closer to pinpointing the locales, or calibrating the amounts, of the
characteristics labelled there before me.

    I had spoken with Dr Collins about this facet of the genetic revolution, the
propensity to assign all aspects of our character and behaviour to genes - to
say, in essence, that our genes are us.

    'I worry about this a lot,' he told me. 'I am, of course, a major proponent
of genetics because I think this is a fantastic revolution in medicine, the
ability to develop new drug therapies and treat people more effectively.
Normally, you pull out 35,000 different compounds and try them on a lab animal
and see what works. Now we have a way of developing medicines that is predicated
on finding out what genes are involved, which tells you, in turn, what
biochemical pathway you've got to help along. This will be the true outcome of
the Genome Project. But I think in our excitement we forget that there's still
the nurture part of the equation. It hasn't gone away just because we have the
opportunity to understand the nature part more quantitatively. I saw a cover of
a magazine last summer: 'Infidelity: It May Be In Your Genes.' It drove me nuts.
It's absurd. DNA will never explain things like the meaning of love or most
human behaviour. That's just the way it is, I'm afraid. It may explain some
predispositions to certain types of behavior, but they will be modest compared
with the effects of things like education and environment.' It came to me as he
spoke that, as much comfort as I'd come to take in the commonality of all life,
the bond we share with all other assortments of DNA, what so isolates us and
ultimately confounds genetically determined explanations of us, is that our DNA
assemblage - either by accident or by the purposeful work of evolutionary or
divine forces - spills over into consciousness. We have the singular capacity to
regard and reflect upon our own DNA assemblage, to argue with it, to want to fly
the confines of it, a desire best expressed for me after all these years of
bearing the burden of my father's failed heart by Yeats's words in Sailing To
Byzantium: 'Consume my heart away; sick with desire/And fastened to a dying
animal/It knows not what it is; and gather me/Into the artifice of eternity.'
All that human beings have created, all of culture and history, is the result
and the record of that argument, that urge, one that continues to inform and
shape us even as we go on reshaping it. We are each, then, indecipherable
amalgams of our genes and of the influences of the environment and culture that
our genes compelled us to create. It's a constant, variable exchange, a
to-and-fro that continually affects in shifting and cyclical measures our
physical and psychological states, and makes each of us, in the end, as
unknowable as the makeup of our very next thought, or walk, or days.

    'These are the things we get in our minds,' Karen Alston told me, she, John
and I standing in a huge clearing amid endless rows of corn where the other
members of the Alston clan were playing softball with some folks from town.
There are hundreds of Alstons, 50 or so in the Lawton area alone, the rest
scattered about in Michigan, Florida and California. A few years ago, Drs
Fananapazir and Epstein brought them all to a big Middle Western city to do one
of their pedigree studies.

    'Everyone co-operated,' John said in his sleepy drawl as he watched his son,
Arthur, smack a line drive and then tear off in the general direction of first
base. 'Of course, one cousin got a little fed up with all the talk about this
heart gene and punched a hole in the wall right by Dr Fananapazir's ear.' In
truth, I felt a little uneasy standing there, watching the Alstons dash about
with their suspect hearts, but none of them seemed to be holding back. George,
57, and still working nine to five in an iron foundry, stood against a pasture
fence, beaming at his grandchildren, cheering them on, all the Alstons doing
what my father had instructed me to do years earlier, just getting on.

    We ate fried chicken brought out in buckets by the owner of a local
restaurant. I talked with George's daughters - Barbara, a mother of two, and
Sophie, of four. Both said they'd go ahead and have their children again knowing
what they do. Sophie can't bring herself even to find out the results of the
tests that have already been done at the NIH on her and her children.  Barbara
and one of her sons, Seth, have the gene; Kerry, the twin of her son Carson, who
is gene-free, was born with a malformed heart and died when he was three days
old.

    'Yes,' Barbara said, 'I'd have my kids again. I live for my kids.' Jim shot
off fireworks that night when darkness fell, and later, as I was saying goodbye,
George took me aside to say that I, or anyone in my family, should always feel
free to call them to talk about 'this disease'. When I left, Jim walked me to my
car. He wanted to explain that if I was going to write a story about my trip, he
was the reason I couldn't use his family name. He told me that everyone else in
the family had already lost their insurance battles, so it made no difference to
them, but he and his wife had just made the decision to have their own children,
and Jim was holding out hope for them.

    'Do us right,' he said.

    I drove away, a dome of stars capping the dark rows of corn all around me.
I'd decided there would be no genetic test in my life, that I didn't need to
know. I would drive all night to get back home - to get back, in a sense, to my
own unknown. I had a right to that. As I drove I thought of something that Dr
Fananapazir had told me in his office that first day. 'When the excitement of
all the science, all the new genetic discoveries has died down,' he said, 'you
have to get back to the particulars of the human being.'

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1995


                              284 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 14, 1995

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN ONLINE PAGE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: EUREKAS

BYLINE: Jonathan Sale

BODY:


    TODAY - September 14 On this day in 1933, one-valve radio sets were issued
to 30 Brighton policemen. In 1990, gene therapy was performed on a girl
suffering from immune deficiency in Bethesda, Maryland. In 1987 it was revealed
that the German hackers known as the Data Travellers had broken into the Nasa
computer network.

    Friday Cocaine was first used as a local anaesthetic on the eye of a patient
at a 1884 Heidelberg ophthalmology conference.  William Burroughs, the adding
machine pioneer, died in 1898. Britain saw its first robot demonstrated at the
1928 Model Engineering Exhibition in London and its first Polaris submarine
launched in Barrow in 1966.

    Saturday The first photograph was printed in a British magazine in 1859.
Cinemascope was first seen in a 1953 New York screening of the religious epic
The Robe.

    Sunday RCA-Victor launched the 331/3 rpm long-player in 1931; unlike the 78,
the LP could fit a complete orchestral piece on a single record.

    Monday In 1879, the first seaside illuminations were switched on in
Blackpool.  A Chaparral 2E, the first car with aerofoils, raced in a Canada v.
USA contest in 1966. Jean Foucault was born in 1819; with his pendulum he was to
demonstrate the rotation of the earth.

    Tuesday At Versailles in 1783, a manned hot-air balloon made the first
ascent, watched by Marie Antoinette and Louis XV1. In 1876, Melville Bissell
patented the carpet-sweeper; allergy to dusty straw used for packaging in his
china shop had led him to invent his brush roller device. JVC launched the
Camcorder in 1976.

    Wednesday The first prenatal blood transfusion was performed in an Auckland,
New Zealand hospital in 1963. Sir James Dewar, the Scottish physicist who
invented the vacuum flask to hold liquid oxygen, was born in 1842.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1995


                              311 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 4, 1995

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN WEEKEND PAGE; Pg. T12

LENGTH: 7747 words

HEADLINE: COVER STORY: THE HUMAN FACTOR;
When questions of animal rights focus on the crating of calves to make tender
meat, the moral issues are clear. Further down the road, where scientific
research can save people's lives, the debate is far more complex

BYLINE: Catherine Bennett

BODY:


    ANDREW BLAKE suffers from Friedreich's ataxia, an incurable disorder of the
central nervous system. Understandably, he campaigns for the continuation of
medical research requiring experiments on animals. In consequence he receives
many letters from animal lovers. From Rose Cottage, for example, a lady animal
lover writes: 'Your horrible face portrays your evil soul, you awful man.' Her
pastel writing paper announces that it is 100 per cent recycled, and comes from
'a supporter of the League Against Cruel Sports'. A picture of a baby fox lies
beneath her neat rows of maledictions: 'You are not just sick in body but sick
in mind. May the rest of your life be a misery and I wish you all the suffering
that you are wishing to inflict on animals.' A pretty reciprocity.

    The most passionate animal lovers prefer anonymity. One, describing him or
herself as 'An Animal Lover and Ugly Scum Hater', has sent Andrew Blake a nicely
typewritten message on notepaper printed with a picture of a rat, beneath the
slogan 'Rats Have Rights'.

    'To the Ugly Bastard in the Wheelchair,' the rat-fan begins. 'I'm so glad
you're in a wheelchair, you don't deserve to live on this earth. If I had my own
way, I would stick a blazing tyre round your neck and laugh as your ugly, evil
face melts off.' Another nameless writer informs Blake: 'I think spastics like
you should be banished off to a land of your own, your wheelchairs are no better
than pushchairs - you're in the fucking way you ugly loser.' Some, stressing
that they are not violent, animal liberationist types, offer him health tips.
'Why don't you do these experiments on yourselves?' asks 'Animal Lover'. 'I am
not an Animal Rights Extremist,' stresses another moderate, adding: 'People like
you should be Put Away, you are IGNORANT and Disgusting and EVIL.' Then there
are shorter missives, scrawled capital letters scored into lined paper torn from
notebooks: 'Giving your support to vivisection makes you a target. You have been
warned.' Anyone who becomes publicly identified with experiments on animals
receives similar correspondence. If a sufferer from a hereditary disease
receives such treatment, you can imagine what professional scientists get. If
they are particularly prominent, or vociferous, they may also receive obscene
telephone calls, death threats, graffiti, parcels of razor blades, or bombs.
They will have to check under their cars, request ex-directory telephone
numbers, install intruder alarms and automated lights around their homes.
Sometimes this is not enough. Colin Blakemore, Oxford's Waynflete Professor of
Physiology, thought he had kept his address a secret, until he came home one
evening in December 1993, to find his children had taken delivery of a Post
Office mailing tube. 'If the plastic plug had been pulled out of the end, then
it would have gone off - half a pound of explosive with needles in it. It was
very big and potentially lethal.' Blakemore and his family have suffered for his
willingness to speak openly in defence of his experiments on the eyes and brains
of cats and monkeys, for which he has, on the other hand, been acclaimed by
opthalmologists, and awarded a medal by the American Academy of Optometry. In
1987, a leading animal welfare group, Animal Aid, made him the target of a
personal campaign, which began with a legal challenge. 'As soon as an attack on
an individual becomes public, however reasonably it's done, then the extremists
will tag onto it,' Blakemore says. 'Whether they're just harmless loonies, who
just write horrid letters, or serious ALF members who would contemplate killing
or carrying out some material damage - there's no way of distinguishing from the
hate mail. I get lots of unsigned mail, usually on purple-coloured lined paper,
saying we're going to kill you, or kidnap your children or whatever. The police
were particularly worried about kidnap, and they kept our kids under constant
surveillance for about a two-month period.'

    Max Headley, a physiologist at Bristol University, was lucky to survive when
his car was blown up in 1990. He was not a public figure and had received no
prior threats or warning, both facts which carried an obvious message to other
scientists: it could happen to you, any day. In a recent review of animal rights
extremist activity, the Research Defence Society (RDS) counted over 100
'anti-personnel' attacks between October 1993 and '94, compared with around 25
in the preceding 11 years.  These attacks included the 13 tube bombs sent out
before Christmas in 1993, one of which was addressed to the RDS office in
London. The more violent attacks have dwindled recently, but there is no reason
to believe they will not be revived. From the prison where he is now serving a
14-year sentence for an assortment of terrorist activities, Keith Mann recently
told the Guardian: 'What they have done is put the bullet in the gun. For a long
time people in our movement have been talking about killing vivisectors, and the
vivisectors know that. Eventually, someone's going to get shot or otherwise.'
Not all intimidation is so direct. Some activists work as undercover
technicians, hoping to expose malpractice in laboratories, or break into
research institutions where they 'liberate' mice, rabbits and dogs.  More
moderate protesters may confine their protests to affrighting volunteers in
cancer and heart research charity shops, superglueing locks, or writing abusive
letters to known researchers. And the majority of animal rights activists are,
of course, decent, peaceful citizens who prefer to argue, rather than fight
their cause. Richard Ryder, for example, is the Westminster lobbyist for the
Political Animal Lobby.  What does he think about the intimidation of
scientists? 'Well, I deplore, obviously, violent tactics,' he says. 'But I don't
know whether these scientists are really expressing a realistic fear, or whether
somehow it is an expression of their guilt.' Well, Blakemore's fears were
realistic enough, weren't they? Max Headley's bomb really did go off, injuring a
passing baby.  'Look,' Ryder says, 'the history of violence in this movement
shows quite clearly . . . there hasn't been any vivisector or other animal
exploiter killed, or indeed seriously wounded. But the other way around. There
have been very many animal campaigners and indeed Green campaigners who have
been killed and seriously wounded in the last 20 years. The serious violence has
come from the other side!' Who are these homicidal vivisectors?  'I'm talking in
general terms about the violence of the animal user,' Ryder said. 'I'm not
saying any vivisectors have used it, but it tends to be a bit of a cliche to
assume that the animal rights movement is violent, and that all the fault lies
on their side.' The degree of violence and threats in animal rights activity has
been enough to reduce most researchers to a cowed silence, and to turn
laboratories into grim-looking, windowless bunkers, bristling with security
cameras, locks, entry points and infra-red alarm systems.  Inevitably, the
spectacle of such intense security further inflames and inspires animal rights
activists, who make comparisons with concentration camps, and redouble their
efforts to expose the torturers within. 'Direct intimidation is pretty
effective,' says Ian Hart, Dimbleby Professor of Cancer Research at London's St
Thomas's Hospital. 'It's been effective in South Africa and Soviet Russia over
the years, there's no reason why it shouldn't work at this level, and I think it
has worked, in as much as it's made us very reticent about going out to the
general public and saying, these are the benefits that have accrued from animal
experiments.' In short, bullying has worked, with the rhetorical advantage
obviously going to anti-vivisectionists. After all, few emotional appeals for
vivisection can be made. Even scientists themselves dislike experimenting on
animals, and the reasons for having to do it sound dull. Perhaps only the ill,
who could hope to benefit, could make an emotional appeal. Even then, a cancer
sufferer is less televisual than a beagle. We don't like to think about the ill,
and we don't think of ourselves as ill until we actually are.

    Since 1975, when Richard Ryder produced Victims of Science and Peter Singer
published Animal Liberation, the peculiarly British zeal for animal protection
and horror of vivisection, has revived and intensified, launching scores of new
pressure groups and bringing new life to venerable organisations such as the
RSPCA, the National Anti-Vivisection Society (NAVS) and British Union Against
Vivisection (BUAV). Between 1978 and 1985, BUAV membership alone is said to have
risen from 4,000 to 16, 000. By 1991, the major anti-vivisection groups had a
total of 47,000 members and are now thought to command an annual income of
around pounds 3m. Not much compared to the armies anglers could wield, if they
ever got organised, but enough for an effective lobbying group, or guerrilla
movement. Such impressive growth in organised activity has been matched by
widespread change in public attitudes, particularly among women and the tender
young.

    In his recent book, Animals, Politics And Morality, Robert Garner quotes a
'remarkable' poll conducted for Sky magazine in 1989, in which one in four of
those aged between 16 and 19 said they supported the Animal Liberation Front's
terrorist campaigns, and 40 per cent said they did not approve of animal
experiments under any circumstancs. In 1991, a Mintel poll showed that animal
testing appalled more people than any other ethical or environmental issue.

    What makes all experiments on animals indefensible? At first, the new
generation of animal advocates argued very much like Jeremy Bentham: 'The
question is not, can they reason, nor can they talk? but can they suffer?' Both
Singer and Ryder based their case on the idea of 'sentience', the ability to
feel pleasure and pain, and Ryder coined the expression, 'speciesist' to
describe those who feel that the sentience of an animal is of less importance
than the sentience of a human being. Like racism and sexism, the expression
struck a tremendous chord with well-meaning liberals, even if it seemed to
equate women and blacks with mice and hamsters. 'It's very difficult to find
rational grounds for distinguishing between human and non-human animals,' Ryder
says now. Not rational? This is a widely accepted point, but you need to be
human to think it. 'The suffering of a dog or a cat is of equal validity, in my
opinion, as the suffering of human animals,' Ryder continues. 'I'm against all
of it.' Presumably then, he believes the evil of Auschwitz is utterly dwarfed by
the activities of Dewhurst's.

    An American, Tom Regan, took the argument further by investing animals with
rights. To him, the question of suffering was subordinate to the argument that
using animals - even in the Pony Club - is a form of injustice. This was not an
approach ever fully endorsed by Peter Singer, though he happily adopted the
expression.  'The language of rights is a convenient political shorthand,' he
explained. 'It is even more valuable in the era of 30 -second TV news clips than
it was in Bentham's day; but in the argument for a radical change in our
attitude to animals, it is in no way necessary.' This slogan appealed mightily
to animal protection activists, who were pressuring the government to reform and
extend the 1876 Cruelty to Animals Act. Their arguments revolved around the
moral status of animals. 'We got commitment to new legislation in 1979,' says
Ryder, 'and we used almost entirely the ethical argument.' In 1986, Parliament
passed the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act, widely considered to be the most
stringent piece of legislation on animal experimentation in the world. Its
effect was nonetheless to polarise the animal protection movement, setting
animal rights absolutists against animal welfare moderates.

    Groups such as FRAME (Fund for the Replacement of Animals in Medical
Experiments) and the British Veterinary Association were prepared to accept the
new Act as a genuine, if limited advance in reducing the suffering of laboratory
animals. Radical anti-vivisection groups labelled the Act a 'vivisectors'
charter', and formed a coalition, 'Mobilisation Against the Government White
Paper', to fight its progress. Nowadays the three main participants, BUAV, NAVS
and a younger group, Animal Aid, are no longer a coalition, in fact they seem
unwilling to work together, but all three groups have spent the last decade
devotedly opposing the 1986 Act and campaigning for total abolition of animal
research.

    'Vivisection' means cutting up a living animal. The word conjures up images
of struggling, agonized dogs, pinioned to tables before a rapt huddle of male
scientists. Nowadays most experiments do not involve cutting up the animal and
those which do, require the animal to be anaesthetised. For obvious reasons, the
word is more often used by animal rights campaigners than it is by scientists.
There are similar difficulties when the animal rights groups use words like
'torture' and 'cruel', where the scientific community prefers 'procedure' or
'severe'. But this does not explain why dialogue between the two sides has all
but died out.

    The reason for that can be found in the leaflets and literature distributed
by the main anti-vivisection groups. Take Animal Experiments, The Facts,
published by NAVS. Illustrated with a sad-eyed beagle, it declares: 'Our
research indicates that not only are animal experiments misleading, they can
actually hold up medical progress.' The leaflet, which makes no mention of
ethical notions like animal rights, sentience, or speciesism, relies entirely
upon an argument which has dominated radical animal rights campaigns since the
late 1980s, a tactic variously known as 'practical anti-vivisection', 'species
difference' or 'the invalidity argument'. Crudely, it goes: a mouse is not a
man. Ergo, there is no scientific justification for experimenting on mice to
find out things applicable to people.

    In the NAVS head office, a substantial house in West London, I asked the
director, Jan Creamer, what was wrong with limited, regulated experiments on
animals. Immediately she said they were useless.

    'Underpinning the whole thing, is our belief that animal experiments are
unjustified, they don't work, and we need to move towards a better system of
medical and scientific research.' So, how would she study the spread of
cancerous tumours, other than observing them in an animal model, as Professor
Hart is now doing with mice? 'It's still in a mouse, isn't it?' she objected.
'Everything that's flowing through it belongs to a mouse, not a person. The
results that he gets at the end of that experiment will tell him about mice, it
won't tell him about people.' Nonetheless, Professor Hart has applied for
permission to conduct human trials of a gene therapy for malignant melanoma,
which has already proved effective in animal tests. If you believe the BUAV,
these tests were quite irrelevant. 'Animal experiments not only give the wrong
answer,' the organisation claims, in a leaflet called Health With Humanity, 'but
they also divert attention and resources away from other more relevant sources
of information.' BUAV recommends complementary medicines, such as homeopathy, as
an alternative: 'These are known to be safe and effective and treat a person as
a whole instead of like a disconnected assortment of parts.' At Animal Aid,
Gillian Egan also offers a vague, yet confident speech on scientific
shortcomings: 'In forms of research when they're looking at certain things,
you'd be better off tossing a coin, quite frankly, than using animals. Because
the amount of times that the y correlate with anything to do with humans, it
just doesn't work.' Asked to elaborate, all three organisations produce lists of
diseases which, they say, were conquered by improvements in public health,
rather than by drugs. This may be true, but when you have the disease you may
not be content with preventable medicine alone. They mention Thalidomide and
Opren, drugs which were tested on animals, yet produced catastrophic side
effects in humans. Asked how they would proceed without animals, they sing the
praises of tissue culture, computer modelling or epidemiology.

    Stripped of vogueish scientific jargon, their argument is nothing new. When
ethical opposition failed to achieve abolition, Victorian campaigners also moved
on to deny the utility of vivisection, opposing vaccination, for example, on the
grounds both that it degraded human beings (by injecting them with diseased
animal matter), and that it obscured the primacy of vice and filth in spreading
infectious diseases. 'Provided it's sincerely offered, I suppose it's
politically fair game,' comments Richard Ryder, who prefers to argue on ethics.
'It's just that I don't actually believe that all their arguments are true.' But
invalidity appears to be an argument that appeals to the general public, baffled
by complex ethical dilemmas. It's often repeated in letters from outraged animal
lovers, such as this: 'Don't work, does it, vivisection - go back to the Stone
Age, dickhead.' Anti-vivisection groups say they receive constant enquiries from
people who don't want accidentally to give money to charities that conduct
experiments on animals. The better to starve them of funds, NAVS has produced a
Good Charities Guide, in which the 'Bad Guys' are marked by a cross. Bad Guys
include the British Heart Foundation, the Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust, the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund (ICRF) and the Muscular Dystrophy Group.

    Nick Wright is Scientific Director of the ICRF, Professor of Pathology at
Hammersmith Hospital, and chairman of the Research for Health Charities Group, a
group of 14 of Britain's largest medical research organisations founded five
years ago to combat the anti-fundraising efforts and adverse publicity flooding
from anti -vivisectionist groups. Plainly exasperated, he says that only 2 or 3
per cent of their funds are spent on animal experiments; in any case, these very
charities have helped develop 'alternatives', such as tissue culture and
population studies which anti-vivisectionists accuse them of ignoring.  'The
main contribution to tissue culture in the 1940s and 1950s was in this
institution. They talk about epidemiology - we have major epidemiological
laboratories, we do research on human beings, we have many laboratories just to
do research on human tissue simulation, we do computer simulation, we're the
people that actually make the alternatives. Most of the advances which have
stopped the use of animals have actually come from orthodox scientists.' What
does he say to the claim that reductions in infectious diseases were entirely
related to improvements in living standards? 'Okay. Let's talk about 1958, when
living standards in this country were pretty high compared with the rest of the
world, then the polio vaccine was introduced. We had 150 cases of deaths from
poliomyelitis. Within two or three years this was down to seven deaths a year.
Are you telling me that this had nothing to do with that?' Wright bangs the
table: 'They say yes, it had nothing to do with it!' He describes the use of
animals in organ transplantation, in the discovery of insulin, anaesthetics,
canine distemper - all medical advances which are now claimed by
anti-vivisectionists to have owed nothing to animal experiments. 'If you were
knocked down, broke your leg and you were taken to hospital, you might need a
blood transfusion, with immunology that was animal based; you'd need an
anaesthetic, that came from animal experimentation; you'd need antibiotics,
again tested on animals; and if you had surgery, the techniques were probably
tested on animals as well. So if you said I want nothing to do with animals,
you'd have to sit there and die.' Would Jan Creamer sit there and die? Would she
refuse anaesthetic? 'It would depend really,' she said. 'Because original
anaesthetics came about not as a result of animal experiments, but because of
experiments on people.' But not modern anaesthetics, surely? How can she bring
herself to accept most of contemporary medicine? 'I would then say,' Creamer
responded, with the air of one producing a clinching rebuttal, 'if you were in
favour of animal experiments, then you should refute everything that hasn't been
brought about as a result of animal experiments.' This is a sad step away from
logic, isn't it? Scientists are not trying to ban non-animal experiments. They
don't shun computers. 'It's just as valid,' she insisted. 'If a member of the
opposition is saying we can't have any medical progress without animal
experiments, then if they feel that strongly, they shouldn't be taking anything
that has been developed without animal experiments.'

    In an attempt to restore some common sense to the debate, the ICRF
occasionally invites visitors, including schoolchildren and animal rights
supporters, to tour Clare Hall, its rigorously guarded compound of laboratories
just off the M25. Behind the barriers and security cameras are colonies of
rodents, toads, and a staff of nervous technicians, some of whom refuse even to
show their faces during such visits, for fear of becoming a target. Yet far from
being animal-fiends, the technicians say they work here because they like
animals. One wanted to be a gamekeeper, another a zoo-keeper, another formerly
worked in a veterinary surgery.

    How can she both like animals and experiment on them? 'Actually, I found it
more upsetting working for a vet than anything I've done here,' she said. 'I
think people's cruelty to their own pets is quite amazing.' Most of the
technicians would disapprove of veal-crating and animal-testing on cosmetics,
claiming sympathy with much of the animal welfare argument. 'I've never worked
in a research place with dogs and cats,' says one. 'I don't think I could. I
think the animal libbers have done a lot of good, they've swayed public opinion
and probably got the government to tighten up, which has been a good thing.' It
has not, however, been pleasant for the technicians themselves. 'You can never
talk about what you do,' said one woman. 'If someone asks what I do for a
living, I just say I work in research.' Another technician, now working on
transgenic mice, used actively to disapprove of animal research. 'Then I got
interested in transgenics, and I saw there were questions you could only answer
by using animals.' Transgenics, in which an animal's DNA sequence is altered,
allowing the study of a function of a particular gene, now accounts for around
70 per cent of the ICRF's work on mice. If, in mice, researchers can establish
how to knock out defective genes which allow cancer to spread, or to introduce
healthy genes which inhibit the process, they might, in the future, be able to
apply gene therapy to humans. The work is still, the scientists admit, at an
exploratory stage, involving a high wastage of mice, and has therefore been
singled out for attack by anti-vivisectionists who claim the research is
particularly cruel, misleading and pointless.

    'It's not true,' says the transgenics technician. 'It's as simple as that.
It's not true. There's a whole range of experiments which can be done, and are
done, as steps before producing the mice, but to look at the effect of a gene,
not just one cell to another, but from one organ to another, from one end of the
mouse to another, you can only do that by having the whole animal model there.'
In one laboratory, the homology between mice and humans is employed in
experiments on mice which have been injected with human ovarian cancer. A
compound developed by British Bio-Technology has proved so effective in
'freezing' tumours in mice, that it is now being tested on women with ovarian
cancer. 'It's a classic example of how useful mice can be,' says the technician
supervising the experiment.

    It is his task to feed, water, clean and monitor the mice, taking out the
controls which have developed tumours; watching for toxicity or other
side-effects in the survivors. 'If we're worried about a mouse, we may check her
two or three times a day, constantly watching her, and when we're not happy with
the way she's moving, the way she's reacting with her other friends in the cage,
then we take her out, she's no use to us. We don't want her to suffer. We
humanely kill her. We then go in and look and see what's going on.' He picks out
a seemingly healthy, tumourless mouse from its plastic cage. 'This mouse goes
right back to September, so she should be long dead, and if you look, it's
basically a healthy mouse, so we see a direct example of the drug working.'
Doesn't he find the work disturbing? 'That's the normal human response, but when
we're on an up, it does make our job slightly easier. It's a very hard job this,
you know, it's one of the hardest jobs around. But you have to weigh up your
personal stress and grievance with hopefully the outcome. And when the results
are good, and you can see mice sort of saving human lives, perhaps other
animals' lives, you're getting a good result.' To the anti-vivisectionists, this
is not good enough. A mouse is not a man. 'The assumption is that they're very
similar,' says BUAV's spokesman, Malcolm Eames. 'That simply isn't true'.

    In the face of such intransigence, scientists have begun to retaliate with
speakers and literature. The RDS (Research Defence Society), formed in 1908 to
answer early anti-science agitation, recently launched a propaganda effort,
producing handy lists of diseases whose cure owed much to animal experiments.
Confusingly, for the layman, many of the same cures and diseases are mentioned
by anti-vivisectionists trying to make the opposite point. Hip replacement is
claimed by NAVS as a triumph of 'progress without animals', but advertised by
the RDS as a technique practised on dogs, sheep and goats. There are
straightforward wrangles over historical fact: NAVS claims that circulation of
the blood was a non-animal discovery; the RDS points out that it was discovered
by Harvey in 1628, using about 40 different species.

    Two years ago Professor John Martin, Professor of Cardiovascular Science in
the Department of Medicine at King's College Hospital, decided the
anti-vivisectionists were winning the argument. It was time to speak up. 'I felt
that if I believed in it, I had to be open about it, and I felt the public had
been misled, and that the moral high ground had been taken by the
anti-vivisectionists . . . I now feel that because people who really know what
they are talking about are starting to talk, it's really moving the other way.'
Martin experiments on rabbits, in an attempt to understand the early cell
changes in artery walls which can lead, in man, to strokes and heart attacks. He
ridicules the BUAV leaflet, Health With Humanity, which instructs him to use
alternatives such as tissue techniques - 'I've used that' - or computer
modelling: 'I've published on that. It doesn't work, it gives me a very partial
answer. What I don't like is the amateurishness of all this. It's almost
medieval, Luddite - commenting on the reality of something that has data in it,
that has means and statistics and a peer-reviewed self-criticism, and then to
say 'oh that's rubbish because I believe it's rubbish'.' Professor Hart, working
in cancer research, has the same problem confronting simple belief with
convoluted scientific qualifications. 'I know that, as a scientist, much of that
animal experimentation will be useless, in the way that much of scientific work
is useless,' he says.  'Because being a scientist is a bit like being a
bricklayer on the Great Wall of China . . . What you do is you just put in one
piece of information into the mass of information. So you can't say, 'well, yes,
I cured cancer,' or it's very unlikely.  You've got to beaver away at these
things, and add what little piece of information you can glean without knowing
perhaps whether that is going to be useful. That's how science evolves. It's
tough to get that over, and it's tough to make it a soundbite. Whereas, 'Look at
this cat, it's being tortured,' hits you in the gut and is a very potent
approach to your heart.' But even if Professor Hart could make a simple,
tempting offer: give me 500 mice and I'll give you a cure for colonic cancer,
BUAV's Malcolm Eames would not do a deal. 'No. If they said give me 500 orphans
from the other side of the planet, somewhere you'd never have to visit, and you
won't see, I'd say no as well.' So he's comparing the life of a mouse to the
life of a child? 'Yeah. Because I think those individual people, and those
individual animals have a value in their own right.' How far down does he go? Do
individual flies have a value in their own right? 'I'm not convinced that flies
experience the conscious world in the same way that we or many other animals do,
therefore I wouldn't rank them as a priority in terms of campaigning.' Here, Jan
Creamer of NAVS would disagree. Fly life must be respected. 'We don't support
anything like that.  No.' At Animal Aid, Gillian Egan concurs. 'We're complete
abolitionists, we want to see an outlaw of all of them.' So why don't insects
feature on any of the three groups' publicity material? Doesn't Animal Aid's
emphasis on monkeys, dogs and mice imply that they, too, are speciesist, or at
least, fur-ist? 'I wouldn't say there's a hierarchy,' says Egan. 'But when
you're trying to get a message across to the public, you have to attract them to
your message in some way, you have to make them realise these creatures do feel
pain. It's the same with the whole live export thing, it's much easier for
people to get emotive about a veal calf than it is about a broiler chicken.
Bring out something about veal calves, and because they're cute and fluffy,
people immediately go, 'Oh, that's terrible, they're suffering terribly'. I
mean, that's what humans are about.' British humans, anyway. It is Andrew
Blake's aim to remind them that humans can suffer terribly too. In 1990 he
founded a group called Seriously Ill For Medical Research, and now tours
schools, reminding children to look beyond the pictures of caged dogs, cats and
monkeys. 'I always say, we've got to look at patients suffering in hospitals,
that is where you really want to see suffering. You must look at the balance.'
In schools, with their soaring population of urban, environmentally correct
vegetarians, anti-vivisection campaigners have found it easy to engender
distrust of scientists. A colourful BUAV leaflet, Animal Experiments, A
Reference Guide For Schools, plays on childish sentiment, with a caged white
bunny on its cover. Inside, the Animals Act of 1986 is travestied as a law which
'protects scientists from being prosecuted for cruelty to animals'.

    Dissection has already ceased to be compulsory in school, and scientists
fear that talented children are now being deterred from studying science, while
a justifiable fear of martryrdom dissuades graduates from undertaking research
involving animals. As Blakemore says: 'If I'd known what was going to happen to
me, if I'd known that in advance, I'd have found some nice backwater of
biochemistry or something to work in, where there are only test tubes.' Few
researchers would deny there are important moral questions to be asked about
experiments on animals, indeed they are increasingly setting up ethical
committees to monitor work in animal houses. They will often concede that there
are bad experiments and arrogant scientists, agree that the law could be better
policed, and endorse FRAME's objectives of reduction, refinement and
replacement. Apart from anything else, animal experiments are costly, difficult
to control, and an instant security risk. 'I'd be the first to pop the champagne
on the day the last animal has to be used for research,' says Blakemore, who is
now attempting to encourage dialogue between the two factions.

    Underlying this often ignorant, grotesquely violent dispute over dumb
animals, is an attack on the validity of science itself. From their different
corners, the campaigner Richard Ryder and the scientist Stephen Rose, Professor
of Biology at the Open University, both recognise that the fervour with which
the invalidity argument is expressed reflects the public's suspicion and
distaste for science. 'It comes on the crest of a wave of ecological and
environmental concern,' says Rose, 'and also at a time when there is a rising
anti-science within the population at large, which is partly to do with a fin de
si. . .ecle thing, in which people are happier with Nietzsche than Voltaire, and
it's partly, I think, because many of the promises of science are seen to be at
best, double edged.' If the scientists are scared of the extremists, the
extremists are scared of science. Transgenic experiments are linked, in their
minds, with the nuclear bomb, with Dr Mengele and the abuse of psychiatric
patients. Any work without an immediate clinical raison d'etre, such as
Blakemore's early work on the development of the visual system, is condemned
outright as 'curiosity driven'. 'The bottom line here,' says Blakemore, 'is that
if we're willing to eat animals for the pleasure of how they taste, then what
value does society place on knowledge?' Not as much as one might imagine. 'Not
all knowledge is good,' says BUAV's Malcolm Eames.

    In what deserves to be an intelligent debate, the level of argument is low.
On the one side is wilful nescience, blind faith and emotional overspill. On the
other is fear and laborious factuality, also known as scientific research. We
might as well accept that the two are never going to get on.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1995


                              316 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 12, 1995

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: LABOUR MP AIMS MEDIA CURBS BILL AT 'UNREGULATED MARKET BARBARISM'

BODY:


    A BACKBENCH bill to limit the holding any individual could have in
newspapers and television was introduced in the Commons yesterday.

    Chris Mullin (Lab. Sunderland S) said his Media (Diversity) Bill aimed to
"protect our democracy and our culture from the barbarism of the unregulated
market".

    The bill, which has cross-party support, got its first reading without a
vote, but stands no chance of reaching the statute book due to lack of
parliamentary time. It would ban non-EU citizens from holding more than 20 per
cent of any company owning British national or regional newspapers, or British
terrestrial or satellite television.

    Mr Mullin said that "many of our national and regional newspapers are
controlled by unscrupulous megalomaniacs. Now the same people are taking control
of our television".

    Michael Green, of Carlton, had acquired Central Television, and with it a 36
per cent stake in ITN. "Granada Television, headed by a ruthless profiteer, Mr
Gerry Robinson, has acquired London Weekend Television, and with that a 36 per
cent stake in ITN - and all this in defiance of the 1990 Broadcasting Act which
says that no shareholding in ITN may exceed 20 per cent."

    Mr Mullin claimed that "the rise of Messrs Murdoch, Green, Robinson and
others has already led to a marked decline in standards".

    He criticised ITN's "reluctance to invest in foreign reporting" and "an
increasing tendency to conduct long and pointless live interviews between an
anchorman in Gray's Inn Road and a correspondent rarely more than two or three
miles away."

    Opposing the bill, Michael Fabricant (C. Mid-Staffordshire) said that, while
Mr Mullin criticised Mr Murdoch's empire, the Guardian Media Group owned the
Guardian, the Observer and 36 local weeklies and had 15 per cent of GMTV and 20
per cent of Trans-World Communications. "But I would rather have them operating
successfully than have the Berlusconis of this world dominating the media in the
UK, Europe and the rest of the world."

    TODAY IN PARLIAMENT

    House of Commons: Home Office questions. Questions to the Prime Minister.
Town and Country Planning (Cost of Inquiries) Bill, second reading. Debate on
childcare facilities for the House.

    House of Lords: Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill, committee. Debate on gene
therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1995


                              319 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 31, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS VICTIMS GET GENE THERAPY HOPE

BYLINE: Chris Mihill, Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS involved in gene therapy research today report a small but
significant advance in using the revolutionary procedure to treat sufferers of
cystic fibrosis, the inherited lung disease.

    Although directly "implanting" good genes to produce the missing proteins
caused by the single gene defect responsible for cystic fibrosis is still a long
way off, researchers hope to use repeated applications of gene therapy in the
form of an aerosol spray.

    Doctors say that preliminary trials using a spray to the nose, rather than
to the lungs, in order to test the procedure, has produced a small improvement
over a short period.

    Scientists from the Royal Brompton Hospital, London, St Mary's Hospital,
London, and the Medical Research Council's Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, have
used a spray of DNA coated with a layer of fat globules, called liposomes, to
transfer copies of the normal healthy gene to patients to compensate for the
defective gene.

    Fifteen patients took part in the study, which is reported in the medical
journal, Nature Medicine. There was a 20 per cent correction of the defect,
which lasted for about four days.

    The scientists are cautious about the results, saying that much more work
needs to be done in improving the absorption of the fatty globules carrying the
genes, and in extending the period they are effective for. But the work
indicated they were on the right lines and that further trials using the spray
directly into the lungs were justified.

    However, both the researchers and the Cystic Fribrosis Trust emphasised that
it would be several years at least, and would take a great deal more research,
before the technique was perfected as a widescale treatment.

    Researchers in America are using an alternative procedure to get the genes
inside the body, tying them to certain viruses such as the common cold virus,
although there have been reports of problems with this approach. The UK
scientists, who include Professor Bob Williamson, of St Mary's Hospital, who
helped track down the CF gene, said yesterday: "The success of the trial in the
cells lining the nose is an important step towards the goal of safe gene therapy
for the lungs."

    Dr Martin Scott, of the trust, said: "The result of these trials represent a
significant step forward, and will give hope to the thousands of children
affected by CF and their families. We now need more money to ensure that the
work continues as quickly as possible in these centres and others throughout the
UK."

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common genetic disorder in Europe, with about
one person in 25 carrying the faulty gene. If two carriers produce children,
there is a one in four chance of the baby having the illness.

    It results in the build-up of heavy mucus in the lungs, causing lung
infections and eventually lung failure. It also damages the pancreas, stopping
it producing digestive enzymes which means children have problems absorbing
food.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1994


                              320 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 14, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FOREIGN PAGE; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: EU SCIENTISTS DEMAND BAN ON 'RISKY' GENETIC EXPERIMENTS

BYLINE: John Carvel In Brussels

BODY:


    HUMAN experiments which aim to make genetic changes inheritable should be
banned, a panel of scientific and legal experts set up by the European
Commission president, Jacques Delors, to determine the ethical limits of
biotechnology, proposed yesterday.

    Their findings, published by the European Commission as the basis for future
legislation and funding of genetic research, distinguished between two types of
therapy involving genetic manipulation: "somatic therapy", where genetic change
is not inheritable, and "germline therapy" which could produce genetic changes
in the human embryo capable of being passed on to future generations.

    Subject to strict controls, the panel said there should be support for
somatic therapy which can adjust an individual's DNA to correct a defect such as
cystic fibrosis or an acquired disease such as cancer, but said germline therapy
was not ethically acceptable.

    Noelle Lenoir, the panel's chairwoman, said germline therapy was far too
risky. "We have said such experiments should not be conducted on humans, given
the current state of the art . . . We are dealing here with future human
beings."

    Mr Delors, who demonstrated his commitment by attending the presentation of
the panel's highly technical report, said there had to be a rational approach to
the emotive issue of genetic engineering.

    "This is a question of applying good sense . . . One wants to protect human
life but on the other hand one doesn't want to close the door on scientific
progress," he said.

    David Williamson, the commission's top permanent official, said the public
should be made aware that biotechnological experiments involved different
degrees of risk. Human germline therapy was excessively dangerous, but the
commission would consider supporting somatic gene therapy which could eradicate
a disease at its genetic origins.

    The report called for "appropriate measures" to ensure that European Union
pharmaceutical companies developed genetic treatments for rare diseases as well
as for more lucrative common complaints.

    John Maddox, page 22

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994


                              326 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 15, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN CITY PAGE; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: CHIRON OFFERS CIBA A $ 2BN STAKE IN BIOTECHNOLOGY

BYLINE: Mark Tran In New York

BODY:


    CHIRON, a leading American biotechnology firm, is negotiating to sell a 49
per cent stake to the Swiss pharmaceutical group Ciba-Geigy for $ 2 billion (
pounds 1.3 billion).

    Shares in Chiron soared last week when the California company disclosed that
it was holding talks about selling a "very substantial minority stake" to an
unnamed buyer.

    Chiron has developed treatments for multiple sclerosis and cancer as well as
products that test blood for infections and correct vision through surgery. By
acquiring a stake in Chiron, Ciba would become the latest big pharmaceutical
player to invest in the biotechnology field, which has been hit by recent
disappointments. The traditional pharmaceutical companies are allying themselves
with biotech firms in an effort to find new products and cut internal research
costs.

    Roche, another Swiss pharmaceutical group, was the first big company to put
money into a biotech firm, Genentech, in 1990.  For their part, firms like
Chiron need outside investment to develop bio -engineered drugs. Chiron's annual
research and development spending is running at an annual rate of $ 130 million.
It had $ 403 million in cash as of September 30.

    Chiron said that a deal was not assured and one of the sticking points was
the price Ciba would pay for its stake. There is also the possibility that other
suitors will emerge now that Wall Street knows of Chiron's willingness to have a
partner.  Chiron could use a cash infusion because its top-selling product,
Betaseron for MS, has fallen short of expectations.

    * Rhone-Poulenc Rorer is to collaborate with several institutes, including
the Human Genome Centre at Lawrence Berkeley Centre, California, and small
companies to form a research network dedicated to development of cell and gene
therapies.

    RPR said in New York it was investing $ 300 million in the venture. Some of
that is funding for previously announced deals.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994


                              327 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                November 9, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 381 words

HEADLINE: NEW CANCER VACCINE TO GO ON TRIAL

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science Editor

BODY:


    THE world's first anti-cancer vaccine cloned from the patient's own tumour
is to be tested on 10 people in Cambridge and Dorset.

    In effect, scientists will be studying 10 "personalised" vaccines which they
hope will trick the body's immune system into mounting a defence and help
protect from the tumour by producing specific antibodies.

    The technique, developed by Robert Hawkins, of the Cancer Research Campaign,
and Stephen Russell, of the Medical Research Council's centre for protein
engineering in Cambridge, will be tested on patients with B-cell lymphoma, a
relatively uncommon type of lymph node cancer, which affects 2,500 people in
Britain each year.

    "The hope is that by immunising the patient in this way, it will tip the
balance of the patient's immune system's ability, hopefully, to eradicate the
tumour," said David Secher, director of drug development for the Cancer Research
Campaign.

    Each of the 10 patients chosen for the trial will receive six injections
over a five-month period, and will be carefully monitored for possible side
effects - although since the vaccine harnesses the body's natural defence
system, there should not be any. The disease was chosen because B-cell lymphoma
tumours are marked by a very specific cell molecule on the surface not found in
normal cells. This, however, means even if the trials are a success, it may be
some time before the technique can be turned against other cancers.

    The trials, just approved by the Government's gene therapy advisory
committee, are at the forefront of a worldwide shift in the battle against
cancer. American researchers have been planning vaccine therapy against kidney
and lung cancers, scientists in Australia and Holland are proposing genetically
engineered vaccines against malignant melanoma.

    British scientists are planning clinical trials of a vaccine aimed at the
Epstein-Barr virus, linked with glandular fever and Hodgkin's disease in
Britain, and in Africa with another cancer called Burkitt's lymphoma. German
scientists have been testing a vaccine against the same virus in China, where it
is linked with nose and throat cancer.

    Earlier this year, the Cancer Research Campaign also announced promising
initial results with a vaccine for bowel cancer.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1994


                              332 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 29, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN ONLINE PAGE; Pg. T3

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: BITES

BODY:


    Bad mouthed

    A well-to-do Egyptian matron, mummified 3,000 years ago, died because of a
'horrendously large' dental abscess, the journal Science reports. Canadian
scientists used a CT scan to make the diagnosis.  Peter Lewin, a pediatrician
and paleopathologist of the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto said: 'With no
antibiotics I'm sure she had blood poisoning and generalised disease and died.'

    Hard choice

    When doctors in Jerusalem told 886 male smokers to stop smoking to improve
their sexual performance 88 per cent did so. But wh en doctors in Tel Aviv told
cardiac patients to stop, only 15 to 40 per cent obliged. Dr Alexander
Olshanyetsky, of Jerusalem's Impotency and Infertility Medical Centre, said:
'The fear of a complete loss of sexual ability is a stronger incentive to give
up cigarettes than fear of dying from a heart attack.'

    Tall tale

    The town of Gonfreville L'Orcher near Le Havre awoke on Friday to reports
that it had been struck by two meteors. Local newspapers and radio stations
waxed lyrical on its 'night of fear'. It turned out to be a mock disaster,
staged by a local theatre group (and approved by town officials) to mark the
opening of a science fiction exhibition. Civil defence officials were neither
informed, nor amused.

    Talking genes

    Forty-two youngsters aged 15 to 18 from six European countries are being
invited by the Science Museum in London to take part in a three-day debate from
November 18 on gene mapping, gene therapy, and genetically modified plants and
animals. Dr Graham F armelo, the museum's head of programmes, said: 'It is vital
that young people throughout Europe become engaged in scientific debate so that
they can make informed decisions.' The debate, the New Genetics, is part of the
European Week of Scientific Culture from November 21 to 25.

    Rocky purchase

    A rare fossil pterosaur, found in 153 million-year-old rocks in Bavaria, has
been bought for pounds 55,319 by the National Museums of Scotland. The flying
reptile, which had a wing span of 130 centimetres, caught its prey of fish in
the subtropical seas which covered southern Germany in later Jurassic times. Dr
Michael Taylor, curator of vertebrate palaeontology said: 'This is an exciting
purchase for us. Our Victorian and Edwardian predecessors were so fond of fossil
fishes that they never got around to buying a decent pterosaur when they were
readily available.'

    Good old Urn

    Marble funerary urns and the remains of 12 people had been found in an
ancient cemetery near the Honduran capital of Tegucigalpa. 'The ceramics we've
found date back at least 500 years before the birth of Christ,' said US
archaeologist George Hassiman. He said the cemetery contained the remains from
the Pech or Tawanka civilisations.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994


                              335 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 7, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 276 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF: TREATMENT NEARS FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BODY:


    Gene therapy to treat the fatal lung disease cystic fibrosis will be in
routine use within five years, scientists said yesterday.

    Although there remain crucial questions to be answered researchers said
their approach seemed to be safe and initial studies suggested it was working.

    Scientists so far have only tested the technique in the nose lining of
patients severely ill with CF. But trials are to start soon into its
effectiveness in the lungs, assuming that permission is given by the committee
monitoring gene replacement studies.

    Dr Duncan Geddes, of the Royal Brompton Hospital, London, told the British
Association that British researchers were using fatty globules called liposomes
to carry the missing gene to the nose and lungs.

    The researchers are soon to publish results of the early studies but Dr
Geddes said nasal trials showed a 20 per cent correction of the CF defect. One
of the questions was how much correction was needed before patients improved. It
was also not known what dose was most effective, or how frequently treatment
needed to be given. American and French scientists are using a different
approach, harnessing a common virus to get the CF gene inside cells, but Dr
Geddes said there were safety questions over this as the virus itself could
cause illness.

    CF is the most widespread of inherited genetic illnesses, affecting one in
2,500 babies, and with some 5,000 sufferers in the UK. The defect means people
cannot deal with salt and water in their lungs, leading to a build-up of sticky
mucus as well as causing digestive problems and damage to organs. Most sufferers
die before the age of 30.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 1994


                              341 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 22, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 509 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS QUIT OVER NHS MARKET ETHOS

BYLINE: Chris Mihill, Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    FIVE leading professors of molecular biology, at the forefront of developing
techniques such as gene therapy, are to leave London - two to go abroad -
because of their bitterness and frustration with the Government's health
changes.

    The scientists say they are not quitting because of the general underfunding
of research, or even the temptation of better salaries and facilities in other
institutes. Instead, the destruction of the spirit of co-operation and its
replacement by a market ethos that forces hospitals to compete against one
another is driving them out.

    Professor Bob Williamson, of St Mary's hospital, one of the co-finders of
the cystic fibrosis gene and a pioneer of gene replacement therapy to treat
inherited diseases, is to leave Paddington to become a professor of genetics at
Melbourne university, Australia.

    Professor Lucio Luzzatto, head of haematology at Hammersmith hospital, a
world renowned expert on sickle cell disease and thalassaemia, is to set up a
new department of genetics at the Sloan Kettering memorial hospital in New York.
He moved to this country 13 years ago because of the interdisciplinary freedom
which the NHS then allowed.

    Professor Martin Bobrow, head of paediatric genetics at Guy's hospital, is
to to set up a new unit in Cambridge, frustrated at the closure of research
facilities at his hospital and its proposed merger with nearby St Thomas's.

    Professor Kay Davies, who was to direct the new pounds 21 million clinical
sciences centre at the Hammersmith hospital, has resigned from the job to move
to Oxford, citing continuing uncertainty about the future of the hospital as a
main reason.

    Professor Keith Johnson, of the Charing Cross hospital, who is at the
forefront of work into conditions such as muscular dystrophy, is about to accept
a job offer in another part of the country.

    He warned that although London was suffering catastrophic damage from the
health service changes, the culture of competition was being imposed in all
parts of the country, to the detriment of scientific research.

    Prof Williamson said he was extremely sad to be leaving Britain, and had in
the past turned down lucrative job offers, but had finally decided to go because
of the "competitive and bureaucratic nightmare" which the modern health service
had turned into.

    The Government yesterday rejected claims of a research crisis at London
hospitals. The junior health minister, Lady Cumberlege, said at Commons Question
Time that people often changed jobs for a variety of reasons including family
reasons.

    She added: "Scientists with international reputations are few in number.
They work all over the world and it is not surprising that two should choose to
go abroad. Many in fact choose to come to the UK from abroad and the net result
is that we attract marginally more than we export." She insisted that many NHS
staff rejoiced in the Government's reforms. Those in trust hospitals "never had
the freedoms they can exercise today".

    NHS 'nightmare', page 6

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1994


                              342 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 22, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 536 words

HEADLINE: BRAIN-DRAIN SCIENTISTS BLAME NHS 'NIGHTMARE'
Chris Mihill talks to researchers leaving London

BYLINE: Chris Mihill

BODY:


    PROFESSOR Bob Williamson, one of the five leading medical researchers who
have announced they are leaving London, said yesterday that although a new job
in Australia exerted a considerable pull, it was the push of the Government's
health service changes that decided him to go.

    "I've spent 20 very exciting years in London but as a result of government
policies, carrying out medical research in London teaching hospitals has become
progressively more difficult.

    "The collaboration and friendly spirit of the National Health Service has
turned into a competitive and bureaucratic nightmare."

    The five scientists are all at the cutting edge of developments in gene
therapy and other biotechnology procedures. They warned yesterday that although
London was seeing the most extreme effects of the drive towards competition in
the NHS, scientific co-operation throughout the country was being thrown into
doubt.

    The closure or merger of many leading research institutions in London and
uncertainty over future funding have increased the scientists' demoralisation.
But it is the belief that the Government does not understand or care about the
impact of its policies that is causing most disquiet.

    Prof Williamson, whose work at St Mary's and the Royal Brompton Hospital on
cystic fibrosis is world renowned, said: "I'm moving to an absolutely first rate
post in Melbourne, but it is as a result of government policy here that I have
accepted this. I have turned down great jobs in the past."

    Prof Williamson said that although the research would continue in other
cities and abroad, there would be damaging effects on the scientific community
in the capital.

    "The health services in the capital have turned into a disaster scene, and
if any backbench Conservative MP, or Labour MP for that matter, is in any doubt
about this I suggest they visit some of the hospitals or present themselves at
their accident and emergency departments.

    "Here, it is competition, not co-operation. Every unit in London is expected
to compete with every other unit for money and patients, so you get St Mary's
competing with the Hammersmith, with Charing Cross, with the Royal Free.

    "A few years ago we used to co-operate to offer the finest health care and
research we could. I haven't taken the decision to leave Britain lightly, but
there comes a point when you have to say things have gone too far."

    Professor Keith Johnson, of Charing Cross Hospital, said: "At administration
and management level there is a definite 'us against them' attitude between
hospitals. Within the research community there is still collaboration between
groups, but it is becoming commonplace to preface any discussion about new
initiatives with a discussion about the local implications.

    "London is under the spotlight first - but what we are seeing in London will
happen in other parts of the country if these reforms are pursued."

    Professor Lucio Luzzatto, of the Hammersmith Hospital, was in New York
yesterday and unavailable for comment. However, in an interview with the London
Evening Standard, he said: "What the Government is doing to the NHS is suicidal.
They are repudiating its research base."

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1994


                              346 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 31, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 205 words

HEADLINE: NEWS IN BRIEF: GENE THERAPY OFFERS NEW HOPE FOR TREATING BREAST CANCER

BYLINE: Chris Mihill

BODY:


    A NEW approach to treating breast cancer may be possible using gene therapy
to trick tumour cells into activating a drug that will kill them, researchers
said yesterday, writes Chris Mihill.

    Scientists from the Imperial Cancer Research Fund's unit at the Hammersmith
Hospital, London, have applied to the Government's gene therapy advisory
committee for permission to begin work with 10 volunteers with advanced cancer.

    Dr Nick Lemoine, leader of the research team, said: "This is the first time
anyone has attempted to use a cancer gene to destroy a cancer cell."

    The approach, outlined in the journal Gene Therapy, has been made possible
because researchers have identified the molecular switch controlling the
relevant corrupted gene.

    Scientists are also focusing on nodules in the lymphatic system just under
the skin, which can occur in breast cancers which have spread. These are
accessible and it is relatively simple to check whether a drug has been
activated and taken up by the tumour cells.

    However, Dr Lemoine cautioned that the research was at an early stage. "The
first trial will not be an attempt to cure. We are checking whether we can make
the cells activate the drug in the nodules."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1994


                              352 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 13, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH OF THE NATION: DOCTORS CALL FOR 30 CANCER UNITS

BYLINE: CHRIS MIHILL

BODY:


    THIRTY cancer units should be set up around the country to bring expert care
to local populations far from regional centres, cancer doctors said yesterday.
Fewer that half of cancer patients see a specialist, and in some areas care is
"outdated and inadequate", says a report from the Association of Cancer
Physicians.

    The doctors say that although local cancer facilities exist in many large
district general hospitals, these are usually based on radiotherapy departments
and do not contain the full range of diagnostic expertise and treatment skills.

    Most hospitals do not have a full-time medical oncologist, a cancer
specialist trained in chemotherapy. Often patients are left with long journeys
to regional centres, and in some regions even specialist centres are hard to
find.

    The report says there are 15 centres in England and Wales, based mainly at
large teaching hospitals, which have the expertise and staff to act as regional
cancer centres.

    Using these as the "hub of a wheel", smaller units should be built at large
district general hospitals where these are more than a 30-minute car journey
from regional centres.

    The units would be staffed with doctors trained and supervised by the
regional centres, and experts from the centres would travel to the units,
reducing the need for patients to make long journeys.

    The report says cancer services are fragmented and offer different standards
of care. "Access to modern resources and expertise is poorly co-ordinated and
poorly integrated.

    "The current on-site resources for the delivery of cancer care in acute
general hospitals are inadequate. Furthermore the resources that exist are often
unevenly distributed and supervised by consultants who do not have specialist
training in cancer care.

    "In many parts of the country this leaves the patient with the unattractive
options of inadequate and perhaps inappropriate care in a local general hospital
or frequent long journeys to a distant radiotherapy unit or cancer centre."

    The report points out that one in three people in the UK will develop
cancer.  Each health authority, with an average population of 300,000, will see
1,500 new cases of cancer each year, and 900 deaths, but the UK has one of the
lowest numbers of cancer specialists per head of population compared with
European countries or the US. There is one medical oncologist per 1 million
people, compared with one per 100,000 in the US.

    Professor Michael Whitehouse, chairman of the ACP, told a press conference,
in London: "Cancer services in the UK have never really had any national
planning. Radiotherapy units were set up in the 1940s and 50s and other services
tacked on to them.  In some areas they are excellent, and in others not as good
as they might be."

    - Scientists working on a gene therapy to combat cancer were given pounds
1.25 million yesterday by the Medical Research Council for a project to develop
treatment for tumours.


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1994


                              355 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 5, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 360 words

HEADLINE: BRITAIN 2020: ROAMING WOLVES AND METERED NOISE

BYLINE: PATRICK WINTOUR

BODY:


    WITHIN 25 years, children will be driven around a predominantly forested
Britain by their privately insured parents in electronic cars on privately run
motorways, in search of free-roaming wolves, bears and beavers. This was,
anyway, the bizarre vision proffered yesterday by the Adam Smith Institute, one
of the think tanks claiming to influence the thinking of Downing Street.

    The vista conjured up by Dr Madsen Pirie, director of the ASI, is designed
to give John Major a new challenge with which to enthuse a disenchanted country.

    Dr Pirie claims his objectives are obtainable and yesterday invited a
depressed nation to lift its eyes beyond the recession to Britain in the year
2020.

    Participants in a newly legitimised black economy will be granted an amnesty
and reclassified as employed in a sheltered part of the economy for fledgling
businesses.

    The basic rate of income tax will have fallen to 10p and the top rate will
be only 20p.

    Criminals will have a guarantee that they will face trial within a month of
their arrest. After that, however, the goods news ends for them. Offenders will
be electronically tagged, making it possible to detect whether they are at the
scene of any future crime. Persistent young offenders will be held on an island
detention centre.

    Private security firms will patrol villages and housing estates and
surveillance cameras will cover the bulk of Britain.  On-the-spot noise meters
would detect excessive noise.

    "An aggressive planting policy" by a privatised Forestry Commission would
see the proportion of Britain covered by forests increase from 5 per cent to 65
per cent, with trees planted on farmland, former mines and industrial wasteland.

    A successful campaign, the ASI claims, would lure wolves back to Britain,
something that would prove attractive to eco-tourists. If Britain is lucky, the
new wooded habitat would also attract bears and beavers.

    The NHS will have been transformed into a privately run Health Maintenance
Organisation, charged with creating an average life expectancy of 100 years,
thanks to gene therapy eliminating dementia, cancer and Aids.


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1994


                              357 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 15, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: LETTER: GUY'S HOSPITAL AND FUTURE OF CHARITY CASH

BYLINE: (PROF) NICHOLAS WRIGHT

BODY:


    WE AT the Imperial Cancer Research Fund sincerely hope that Virginia
Bottomley knew more than we do (Guy's falls victim to changes, February 11) when
she said that charities who had invested in Philip Harris House would be highly
unlikely to ask for their money back.

    Our pounds 1.7m investment in Philip Harris House was intended to bring
together our Breast Cancer Unit's clinical researchers and research
pathologists, currently scattered across the Guy's campus, and the cornerstone
of our pounds 5m a year breast cancer research programme. Most important, we
planned to open a new laboratory there, dedicated to working towards what we
believe will be the much more effective breast cancer treatments of the future,
using biological and gene therapies.

    We have repeatedly asked for assurances that, should breast cancer treatment
move to St Thomas's, we would be given similar accommodation on that site of the
same quality and at no further cost to the charity. No such undertaking has been
forthcoming.

    We must hope that Virginia Bottomley knows we are getting what we need.
Otherwise, there is no question whatsoever that we should have to demand our
money back.

    After all, we have a duty to the public - it was their great generosity that
provided the pounds 1.7m for Philip Harris House in the first place. We also
have a duty to breast cancer patients of the future to do the best we can to
find ways of preventing and curing this all-too-common illness.

    (Prof) Nicholas Wright.

    Director of Clinical Research,

    Imperial Cancer Research Fund,

    London WC2.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1994


                              359 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 25, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: ECZEMA SUFFERERS 'WOULD PAY THOUSANDS OF POUNDS FOR A CURE'

BYLINE: LOUISE JURY

BODY:


    SEVERE eczema sufferers would pay thousands of pounds to cure the skin
disease which hampers their lives, researchers said yesterday.

    In a survey for the National Eczema Society, 80 per cent of sufferers felt
their family life had been ruined, half said the disease affected their career
choice, and 57 per cent said its debilitating effects made sexual relationships
a problem.

    However, Dr Roger Allen, of the Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, said
yesterday: "I do believe there is hope."

    In trials, cyclosporin, a drug used in transplant surgery to prevent organ
rejection, has reduced significantly the blistering and weeping skin.

    Chinese herbal remedies are being tried in studies controlled to reduce the
their toxic risk to the liver. Gene therapy may be a hope for the future.

    Dr Andrew Finlay, who carried out the survey, said the cost of treating
sufferers in Britain was not known, but the United States spent $ 364 million (
pounds 242 million)last year. He said the drastic effect of the disease on
people's lives justified the spending.

    The survey found that severe sufferers had on average 10 working weeks off,
losing an average pounds 7,236 in income, a year.

    Almost half said they would spend pounds 10,000 for a cure, and given the
choice between a cure and pounds 1,000, none chose the cash.

    Sue Curson, a teacher aged 30 of Nottingham and a lifetime sufferer, said:
"People don't seem to think it's anything to worry about." She has to wear dark
clothing in case of bleeding and long sleeves and high necklines to hide scars.

    Before receiving cyclosporin treatment, her arms were "like raw meat." She
woke nightly to find blood on her sheets.

    Terry Mayor, a physicist aged 38 of Nottingham, said sport was another
problem for sufferers. "The sweat stings as well as bringing up the
inflammation," he said.

    "But the most debilitating effect is the weariness. You wake up throughout
the night."

    Christina Funnell, the society's director, said 11,000 adults had severe
persistent eczema, and 5 million people suffered some form of the disease during
their lives.


LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1994


                              362 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 6, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: LETTER: FOETAL EGGS A FERTILE GROUND FOR DEBATE

BYLINE: ALASTAIR KENT

BODY:


    RECENT advances in reproductive technology have done much to enable some of
those hitherto unable to have children to become parents. These developments
have given hope to some, while causing many to consider the ethical and moral
dilemmas created by our newfound ability to control aspects of our reproductive
potential.

    The fact that some may choose to use this knowledge to enhance socially
beneficial tots must not blind us to their potential for helping others at risk
of having children affected by disabling or even fatal genetic disorders. Until
gene therapy techniques can provide effective treatment for these then the
appropriate use of reproductive technology may provide the best hopes of having
a healthy child for those at risk.

    Clearly there is a need for a wide ranging and informed debate, if suitable
limits are to be established. The Department of Health, the regulatory bodies,
professionals and the public all have a role to play in determining where these
limits should be drawn.

    However, we must take care to ensure debate is not clouded by excessive
anxieties about the possibility of abuse by a few at the expense of significant

    benefits for many others. The issue is too important for knee-jerk responses
to be substituted for informed and those involved.

    Alastair Kent.

    Director,

    Genetic Interest Group,

    John Radcliffe Hospital,

    Oxford.


LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1994


                              366 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 3, 1994

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1229 words

HEADLINE: MADE TO MEASURE;
Can we deny a mother's right to shop in the genetic supermarket for healthier
babies?

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD

BODY:


    SEVEN Christmases ago, Professor Lewis Wolpert, a biologist at University
College London, delivered a series of Royal Institution lectures on the mystery
of the human embryo and called it Frankenstein's Quest.

    Scientists are often exasperated by the cliche, but the Frankenstein analogy
will not go away. People are now being made to order. Last week doctors
announced that two black women were to have children born of eggs donated by
white women. A woman, aged 59, gave birth to test tube twins and another woman,
aged 62, was reported to be pregnant after similar treatment. At the weekend, Dr
Roger Gosden of Edinburgh confirmed that he was seeking approval from the
British Medical Association to work with eggs taken from aborted foetuses. If
the research is pursued, it could result in the birth of children whose
biological mothers themselves had never been born.

    After all this, the cliches multiplied. One MP talked of "grave-robbing".
Another used the word "Orwellian". Other commentators reached for Pandora's Box,
and Aldous Huxley's Brave New World.

    The problem is that science has once again apparently outpaced society's
ability to absorb it. Baron Frankenstein's original ambition - to recreate a
perfect human being from spare parts - was a kind of clumsy one-off success. And
anyway, it was a fantasy. Now humans are routinely restored with living tissue
taken from donors who are dead.

    But the understanding of how life works has gone much further. In theory, at
least, ever since scientists learned enough about embryology to perfect
artificial insemination and embryo transplants in animals, "designer babies"
have been possible.

    Carefully selected British cattle embryos are routinely shipped abroad in
rabbits to be transplanted into the wombs of African or Australian stock, so
that the calves have the virtues of yield or fecundity from one line and the
immune responses of another. Nobody objected: they were only animals, and
anyway, there was a market.

    But humans are animals, too, and there is also a market. The problem facing
bodies such as the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, which keeps an
eye on test-tube baby clinics in Britain, and for that matter the Nuffield
Council on Bioethics, which has to think about genetic research, is that both
have to balance individual human need with a confused public sense of what is
right.

    Nobody knows quite how to do it. An infertile woman's yearning to have a
baby can be - and has been, many times - met by science. What, actually, is
wrong with a black mother receiving an embryo donated by a white woman? Who is
to decide that a woman in her fifties who desperately wants a baby to love will
not be a good mother? Who is to say that if abortions are permissible, the
foetal material may not be used to better other humans?

    One microscopic cell - a fertilised egg - contains all the information
needed to produce a complete working human, and long before birth that cell
develops into a foetus which itself contains the seeds of potential for millions
of humans to come.  Put like that, an embryo seems too wonderful to abort. Once
aborted, it seems too precious to destroy.

    But abortion and after is often at the heart of the sudden eruptions of
concern about human biological research. The latest branch of medical concern is
known as genetic counselling. People who carry defective genes are being advised
about the likelihood of passing these on to their children, and embryo children
with these genes are already being aborted. All of this stems from a greater
understanding of the cell.

    The same pursuit of the understanding of what life is, and how it works, is
already raising huge and difficult problems. What orders a single cell into a
potential Linford Christie or a Dr Crippen is a mysterious length of information
in the cell's chromosomes, called DNA. When, 40 years ago, Francis Crick and
James Watson at Cambridge deciphered the riddle of its structure - the famous
double helix - they knew they had done something of enormous importance, but
nobody foresaw how swiftly this information would be used.

    Until recently, James Watson spearheaded the vast, international effort to
unravel human DNA in its entirety, and map the 100,000 genes that program human
growth and development. Now, rather gingerly, scientists have begun to tackle
family tragedies in the shape of phenylketonuria and cystic fibrosis: the first,
by advising on care for the suffering infant, the second by gene therapy.

    Abortion, however, remains as the ultimate solution. It may in future be
possible to alter the inheritance and eliminate diseases that have plagued
generations of families - porphyria, haemophilia, Huntington's chorea and so on.
As far as scientists are concerned, there is no ethical problem. They cannot do
it, so there is no point in discussing it, and anyway it is not their job to
decide on the genes of their children's grandchildren.  That is society's job.

    But in other spheres of biology, the future has already arrived. Scientists
have already begun "pharming": redesigning plants to produce plastics instead of
food; reprogramming sheep to produce human proteins for the treatment of
emphysema more efficiently than laboratories can do it; devising pigs with
designer hearts which can be transplanted into humans.

    If you can redesign an animal to produce, say, human growth factor to
correct dwarfism, it may seem only a small, sensible and entirely humane step to
apply the same technique to the animal who needs it most: the sufferer and his
or her future generations. It cannot be done now, but the betting is that it
will be possible, because humans are animals and most human DNA is like most
animal DNA. The difference between human DNA and that of a chimpanzee is less
than 2 per cent.

    Within science, and among those who have taken it upon themselves to think
about science, there is a not-very-subdued debate about how far this knowledge
should be pursued, and how it should be used. At the crudest level, mankind
began trying to take its own future in its hands almost a century ago, with the
notorious eugenics movement which advocated improving human stock by eliminating
the feeble-minded and the genetically-harmed. Although both Sweden and America
officially incorporated eugenic policies (for a while) the movement's most
notorious hold was in Nazi Germany.  At the heart of the alarm about the human
genome project to unravel all human DNA is the spectre of eugenics.

    This time, it could take a more subtle form. As scientists identify genetic
components in heart disease, or propensity to cancer, employers and insurance
agencies will start taking note. It would be quite easy to imagine the creation
of a new underclass, discriminated against, because of its inheritance.

    Once this happens, mothers who want designer babies won't be asking only
about colour or cystic fibrosis genes. There will be a whole shopping list of
questions. There are genes, not yet found, for stature, eye and hair colour and
possibly intelligence too. There are scientists who believe - although there are
more who don't - that there are genes for alcoholism, aggression and sexual
orientation. Would a mother-to-be be wrong to ask about these? And what answer
is society to give her?


LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1994


                              379 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 14, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FOREIGN PAGE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: NOBELS FOR GRAVITY AND GENETIC LORE

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD, SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:


    TWO US astronomers who discovered the first indirect proof of the existence
of gravity waves shared the pounds 550,000 Nobel prize for physics yesterday.

    A Canadian and an American took the chemistry prize for devising methods
that made possible gene therapy, the detection of the Aids virus, and the
multiplication of DNA from fossils.

    Russell Hulse, aged 42 and Joseph Taylor, aged 52, both now at the
University of Princeton, were using a 300-metre telescope at Arecibo in Puerto
Rico when they spotted the first binary pulsar stars - a pair of ultra-dense
rapidly rotating stars transmitting astonishingly precise signals.

    The first pulsar was discovered by a British team in 1967, and was so
puzzling that it was nicknamed LGM, short for Little Green Man.

    The British team - Martin Ryle and Antony Hewish - won the Nobel prize in
1974, the year that Hulse and Taylor discovered their binary pulsar.

    But the later discovery, said the Royal Swedish Academy Of Sciences in
Stockholm yesterday, gave science a "new, revolutionary space laboratory . . .
for testing Einstein's general theory of relativity and alternative theories of
gravity."

    It verified Einstein's prediction that a pair of orbiting stars should lose
energy by emitting gravitational waves. Gravity waves have yet to be observed
directly, even though US scientists are spending pounds 50 million on
supersensitive detectors.

    One of the two chemistry prizewinners is Kary Mullis, aged 50, of San Diego,
who invented the "polymerase chain reaction" method of making millions of copies
of a single length of DNA: the technique which makes it possible to analyse the
DNA from a single drop of blood or a hair found at the scene of a crime.

    The other is Michael Smith, aged 61, born in Blackpool, Lancashire, but now
a Canadian citizen and director of a biotechnology laboratory at the University
of British Columbia in Vancouver. He worked on "oligonucleotide-based
site-directed mutagenesis and its development for protein studies."

    With this technique it is possible to rewrite the genetic code and put
specific amino-acids inside proteins. This has opened the way to engineering new
crops, curing hereditary diseases, or tailoring antibodies to attack cancer
cells, the academy said.

    Both techniques were employed in the plot of Steven Spielberg's Jurassic
Park to retrieve and amplify fossilised and partly damaged DNA and fill in the
blanks.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                              386 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 26, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 855 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY EASE CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD, SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:


    NINE men who suffer from the inherited fatal disease cystic fibrosis are to
be treated with altered DNA in the first experiment of its kind. It will be the
first all-British gene therapy experiment with humans.

    Gene therapy - a kind of tinkering with the inherited workings of the cell -
is a technique in its infancy.

    So far only about 60 people worldwide are involved in trials. One of them is
a child at Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, suffering from a very rare
immune system defect, who is taking part in an international experiment.

    The new cystic fibrosis therapy is the result of a collaboration between
doctors at the Royal Brompton National Heart and Lung Hospital, and St Mary's
Hospital medical school, in London, and the Medical Research Council's human
genetics unit in Edinburgh.

    The cystic fibrosis gene was identified in 1989. "The wonderful advances in
molecular genetics are reaching the stage where they are going to be translated
into practical terms for the benefit of the patients with cystic fibrosis, and
ultimately other inherited diseases," Professor Bob Williamson, a biochemist at
St Mary's Hospital medical school, said yesterday. "It is the first, I am sure,
of many trials."

    One of the first group in the trials will be 23-year-old Darren Keen, a
caterer from Hemel Hempstead, who has been taking treatment since he was two. He
needs physiotherapy twice daily to clear congestion in his lungs, and takes
about 70 tablets each day.

    He is one of more than 6,000 victims of cystic fibrosis in Britain. More
than 2 million healthy Britons carry copies of the cystic fibrosis gene. Any
child which inherits a copy from each of its parents will develop the disease.
The new treatment offers hope for Darren Keen - but not a cure.

    "This could slow it down, but I know I have got damaged lungs already," said
Mr Keen. "It might stop me catching chest infections as quickly as I do. It
seems a good idea." As he spoke, he gestured to a dressing covering an
intravenous injection for a new lung infection.

    The technique chosen for the trials that he will now face is simple, and
will not affect what scientists call "the germ line" - the chromosomes that
dictate the inheritance of future generations.

    The possession of a defective cystic fibrosis gene leaves the sufferer open
to lung infections, because it interferes with the flow of salt and water across
the cell membranes. A thick mucus builds up, and lung tissue becomes damaged by
infections.  To counter this, medical scientists will spray the airways of the
human "guinea pigs" with tiny particles of fat called liposomes, each of which
has a normal gene attached.

    Because cell membranes are, in effect, also fat, the liposomes will fuse
with them, and the theory is that the DNA from the "good" gene will migrate and
hang around inside the cell, operating as a policeman does when traffic lights
break down, to keep the traffic flowing anyway.

    "As far as that cell is concerned," said Dr Duncan Geddes, clinical director
of respiratory medicine at the Royal Brompton, "it should be cured, and for as
long as that works, the lungs should be working as normal."

    The first trials - to perfect technique and check for safety - will
concentrate on nasal passages, and the second stage will involve treatment of
the sufferers' lungs. If the results are promising, the trials will be extended.
The treatment will need to be repeated as lung cells die and are replaced. The
aim ultimately would be to treat young sufferers before the airways are damaged
or scarred by infection.

    Scientists were careful not to raise immediate hopes for sufferers and their
families. The treatment is a first step, and routine therapy could be years
away. Trials in the US - using the same approach, but with an altered common
cold virus as a ca rrier, rather than a liposome - were halted because the
treatment in some cases provoked lung inflammation.

    Gene therapy has also raised concern because it is a new and unproven
technology with a potential effect on future generations. But the Royal Brompton
trials create no problems, say the scientists.

    "All of us feel that this raises no ethical problems," said Dr Geddes. "We
are using a gene to treat a disease, not to modify the genetic make-up of future
generations, or to try to produce people who are different from the way they are
born.  We are just trying to correct an abnormality."

    Until 1985 scientists had no information on the underlying genetic defect.
The faulty gene was "located" on chromosome seven in 1985 by three teams, one in
Toronto, one in Salt Lake City, and the third at St Mary's Hospital, London. It
was identified by the Toronto group four years later.

    Almost every day, a child is born with cystic fibrosis. "Twenty years ago,"
said Professor Williamson, "it was a disastrous disease. Already, the quality of
life of those with cystic fibrosis has improved greatly. Even five or 10 years
ago, it would have been unimaginable for these sorts of new therapies to become
available. I am extremely optimistic."


LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1993


                              394 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 22, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS: HOW A BLINKERED APPROACH MAY HAMPER GENETIC OPPORTUNITIES

BYLINE: ALASTAIR KENT

BODY:


    TIM RADFORD, in his thoughtful article Code of conduct (Guardian 2, July 21)
draws attention to the dangers as well as the possibilities inherent in our
increased understanding of human genetics.

    In truth, there is no absolute distinction between the "good" uses of this
new knowledge and the "bad". Defining the limits of what ought or ought not to
be allowed is ultimately a matter for legislation, but legislation which has
been drafted after the widest possible public debate to establish where the
boundaries should be drawn.

    As the national umbrella group for voluntary organisations for people with
genetic disorders, of which there are over 4,000 separately identified
conditions, resulting in the birth of about 13,000 seriously affected babies
each year, causing half of all deaths in childhood - about 500, or 10 coach
loads, the Genetic Interest Group has been calling on the Secretary of State for
Health to initiate and promote such a debate. Her response has been to refer to
the establishment of an Advisory Committee on Gene Therapy which will examine
the ethics of proposed treatment trials. But the issue is much wider than that.
The Department of Trade and Industry is proposing to permit the patenting of
human genes outside the body. Such a move would block much of the progress
towards an essential cure for genetic disorders in that it would stop the free
flow of ideas and much collaboration between scientists. The Advisory Committee
will not address this issue, and government policy is in danger of contradicting
itself if it fails to establish a mechanism for reconciling the human, the
technical and the agricultural issues raised by genetic technology.

    Few would argue that a cure for genetic disorders was anything other than
wholly desirable.

    If a natural disaster or a terrorist attack killed 10 bus loads of children
year on year, no effort would be spared to stop this. Genetic disease deserves
no less a priority.

    Increased scientific understanding of human genetics offers potentially the
most radical spur to change in medical practice this century. We must not lose
the opportunity through a failure of our vision, or through fear of the possible
negative consequences. Instead we must seize the moment and control the use to
which our understanding is put for the ultimate benefit of us all.

    Alastair Kent.

    Director,

    Genetic Interest Group,

    Institute of Molecular Medicine,

    John Radcliffe Hospital,

    Oxford.


LOAD-DATE: July 22, 1993


                              395 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 21, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2299 words

HEADLINE: CODE OF CONDUCT;
The so-called homosexual gene highlights the dramatic advance in DNA research.
It can save lives and alleviate suffering but it also poses huge ethical
problems. Tim Radford reports

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD

BODY:


    LAST week five US scientists announced what the media dubbed "the
homosexuality gene". People who worry about the uses to which such scientific
knowledge might be put may be missing the point. Genetic research is already
changing our lives in astounding ways. Plants are being programmed to grow
plastic. Sheep are producing human hormones by the bucketful. There are already
genetically engineered pigs with hearts that could be transplanted into humans.

    A length of chromosome inherited from the mother, which could predispose the
male inheritor to homosexuality is, alongside all that, just another piece of
knowledge in a worldwide $ 2bn blitz on the human DNA blueprint. The discoverers
of the link made it quite clear that they hadn't found a homosexuality gene, and
didn't believe there was one. And that the knowledge ought to be of no practical
use to anyone.

    On the other hand, very big money rides on plastic plants, and the hormone
sheep are already saving lives. The DNA business has barely begun, and it has
some startling uses already. The original idea was that, by understanding the
fundamental chemistry of life, you could enhance it: prevent cystic fibrosis, or
cure muscular dystrophy.

    But by the end of the decade farmers could be sowing sugar beet and reaping
granules of plastic, bagging it and shipping it straight to factories. The
plastic - known as PHB for short - is a feedstock for the chemical industry: the
Germans, for instance, turn it into shampoo. It could probably even be used to
make artificial flowers.

    Farmers could be doing this because it would be cheaper to convert carbon
from sucrose or starch in a real plant than in a chemical plant. They will be
able to do it because of the new understanding of DNA, the genetic code.
Industry is already using a bacterium to make PHB in fermenters, in the way
microbes make beer.  American scientists have snipped two genes from the
bacterium's genetic code and inserted them into a weed and watched the plant
grow PHB in its leaves. The next trick is to insert it into plants which make a
lot of starch and sugar: once they have potatoes or beet that make PHB by the
ton, they will literally reap a chemical harvest.

    So far so innocent. Scientists at Pharmaceutical Proteins in Edinburgh have
a sheep called Tracey. Tracey is precious. In each litre of her milk - thanks to
a gene transfer - are 35 grams of a protein called human alpha-1-antitrypsin.
Laboratories can extract it from human blood at enormous expense and in limited
quantities, but Tracey and her fellows churn it out every day, just from grass.

    In Cambridge, a small biotechnology company called Imutran is working on
heart transplant on demand. They have concocted a length of human DNA and
inserted it into the embryo of a pig. On December 23 last year, the first pig
was born. It has a heart that the human immune system would "recognise" as
human. It is still a pig's heart, but it carries a factor that will prevent its
rejection after transplant. If the line breeds true, cardiac units could have
organs for transplant whenever they want them.

    How you feel about all this depends on how much you know about the science.
Plastics are made from feedstocks of coal or petroleum, which are only fossil
plants, altered by time and pressure. All the genetic scientists are doing is
finding a quicker route from field to factory: about 100 million years quicker.
The PHB gene didn't have to be invented. Nature had already done that. And
anyway farmers have got to grow something. Why not plastic?

    Nobody had to invent the Tracey protein programme either. Most humans have
it.  Some don't, and their lives are perilous. How you feel about transferring a
human gene into a sheep depends on whether you suffer from emphysema, or liver
failure, or whether you have a child with cystic fibrosis, because in each case,
suffering results from an inability to supply, or manufacture enough,
a-1-antitrypsin. And nobody should worry about Tracey. She has a golden future.
However, many people will feel more uneasy about a race of pigs bred for
transplant surgery; bred, what is more, with a piece of artificial DNA, but
there have already been attempts to use pig organs for human sufferers. There
are scientists who worry about it too. Dr Bernard Dixon, co-author of the
British Medical Association report last year called Our Genetic Future, has a
hand in next month's International Congress of Genetics, in Birmingham. He says
scientists should not dismiss public anxieties as irrational or based on
ignorance.

    "Genetically engineering animals is different from genetically engineering
bacteria," he says. "Many people are concerned about these things - and not
necessarily because they believe them to be unsafe, or cruel, but simply because
they have an intuitive unease about interfering with life."

    INSIDE the cell is the nucleus. Inside the nucleus is the DNA. Biologists
can get mystical about it. Sometimes it is called the Code of Codes, or the Holy
Grail. Each of us exists because we inherited one half of our DNA from each
parent.

    Until 40 years ago, nobody was sure what it looked like, or how it encoded
the secret of all life, and then transcribed it for a new generation. The
difference between human DNA and chimpanzee DNA is about 1.6 per cent. It is a
reminder that we are animals under the skin. Until a decade ago, nobody
seriously expected that the code could be deciphered in its entirety. Now, there
is a strong possibility that by 2003 - 50 years from the discovery of the
structure of the double helix in Cambridge - humankind will be able to examine
its own blueprint.

    This extraordinary knowledge - of which plastic plants, pharmacological
sheep and surgical swine are only the first, tentative manifestations - will do
what it promises. It will save many lives and alleviate a lot of suffering. But
it will bring with it huge ethical problems and awkward decisions for society.
The research is unstoppable, because it is being done for a mixture of reasons,
some of them entirely noble, some of them concerned with glory, and some of them
shamelessly commercial.

    It is being conducted on a broad front. Because all life depends on the
spiralling chain of nucleic acids which are the bequest of generations past and
which order generations to come, geneticists are examining it everywhere.
Britain's agricultural scientists are part of an international project on
Arabidopsis, or thale cress, because if they can understand just one very simple
little weed, they will understand life's recipe for a plant. There is deep
interest in cattle DNA, and that of sheep and pigs. The first genome project to
be completed will be the simplest, and that is likely to be a little nematode
worm, one millimetre long, which has only 959 cells (humans have billions) and
matures from egg to parenthood in four days. Worldwide, 1,000 people are working
on it. What makes a worm tick also makes a human tick, only there is less of it
to dismantle.

    HOW you feel about that depends on whether you feel living creatures are
just very successful machines or something rather more. But there is no doubt
that what makes us tick starts with DNA. The human genome project is a
co-operation of 26 nations and can be made to sound very simple.

    The code is ultimately reducible to a four letter alphabet which twists like
a spiral through life itself. The rungs are easy to remember. Each rung is
composed of two kinds of nucleic acids, so-called because they are found in the
nucleus of the cell. They are complex assemblies of phosphoric acid and a sugar
called deoxyribose, but the bits that matter - and the way by which they are
remembered - are the bases of these assemblies. Adenine pairs with thymine.
Guanine pairs with cytosine.  They are called A, T, G and C. Because of their
sugar base, they are called deoxyribonucleic acid: DNA for short.

    Bacteria, plants and yeast have a slightly different sugar - ribose - and
uracil instead of thymine, but the arrangement is the same: the double helix
deciphered by Francis Crick and James Watson 40 years ago in Cambridge.

    Even if you have an alphabet with only four letters, you can compose a word
with a meaning. Words with a four letter alphabet will be longer than one with
26 letters. So inside the chromosomes of every human being are three billion
pairs of these letters, and each one is a recipe for a complete human being.

    There the difficulties begin. Somewhere along this three-billion letter
recipe, 90 per cent of which seems to be gibberish, are the genes. A gene is a
kind of biological atom: it is the smallest thing about us that defines a bit of
our animal nature, or our humanity. There are genes that instruct a single
fertilised cell to double, and keep on doubling. There are genes that turn tiny
embryo paddles into fingers and toes. There are genes for liver cells and blue
eyes, and genes for Huntington's chorea, and sickle cell anaemia.

    And each of these has to be found, threaded like beads along a string of
letters that seem to be meaningless. But the work is steaming ahead, with the
help of computing, robotics and very sophisticated biochemistry. There are
triumphant claims every week. Last week - during the furore about the
"homosexual predisposition" DNA - somebody claimed a gene for dyslexia.

    These are difficult claims. Some of them have been made and withdrawn. The
schizophrenia gene. A gene for alcoholism. Every now and then someone raises the
possibility of a "crime gene" because there seems to be a familial pattern to
the likelihood of arrest and imprisonment. This one gets howled down quickly,
because there are other, more convincing explanations as to why the sins of the
fathers behind bars are visited on the children, and why one ethnic group rather
than another might seem "over-represented" in the jails.

    The most bitter opponents of the human genome programme agree that the
knowledge will alleviate suffering, particularly in single gene defects like
cystic fibrosis or Huntington's chorea. What they object to most hotly, however,
is the argument that somehow the knowledge of the full genetic code - rather
than an understanding of discrimination, race hatred, economic oppression and so
on - will help us understand what it is to be human. The danger they see is that
the identification of a "bad" gene will be seen to make for a bad or faulty
human being, or at least a bad or dodgy employment or insurance risk.

    Professor Steven Rose of the Open University - a long-standing opponent of
the "reductionist" approach to humans as organic machinery - argues that humans
are more than just their genes: "Nothing in biology makes sense except in the
context of history - our personal development, our evolutionary development and
our own life history. In order to understand who we are biologically and
psychologically, we have to understand all these histories.  The problem with
the reductionist approach is that it ignores history. It assumes this very
simple relationship between a gene and a piece of behaviour, a gene and an eye
colour and so on, as if there was nothing intervening. It's the myth of the
empty organism."

    IN OTHER words, it isn't the genotype - the inheritance of genes - that
makes a criminal. It is the phenotype, a biological shorthand for the whole bag
of environmental and historical pressures.

    But there are less obvious pitfalls. One child in 10,000 in Britain is born
with phenylketonuria. Children born with this genetic defect are unable to
metabolise a particular amino acid and grow up irreversibly mentally retarded.
"A very simple blood test will reveal this disorder, and you simply change the
child's environment by changing its diet, and the child grows up normally," says
Professor Rose. "So the same gene, in two different environments, produces two
different phenotypes."

    But the genome project has other problems. One is that it has been hi-jacked
by big money. According to the US journal Science, more than 30 leading genome
scientists have already made deals with venture capitalists. To the alarm of
European nations, who argue that research paid for by the taxpayer should be
freely available to everyone, some American scientists in the project have been
furiously applying for patents on lengths of genetic code by the thousand, and
the big companies have been taking an ever-greater interest in every aspect of
their work.

    The whole project, begun in hope, could turn sour. There is not, however,
much doubt in the world of commerce. With the knowledge to hand already about
the switching mechanisms encoded by genes, two major companies have produced a
tomato that doesn't go squashy: longer shelf life means better returns.

    Medical scientists are experimenting in "gene therapy": if they win, there
will be many happy returns for children who might otherwise die, and fairly
happy returns for those who hold the patents, too. The human genome project is
an issue so complex and alarming that people might be tempted to turn against
science altogether.

    That would be a mistake. Until people understand the science, they cannot
make sensible political decisions. But anyway, DNA technology is here to stay.
It has been big business for years, and getting bigger. In the UK alone, it is
doubling every 3.5 years. The world market in biotechnology should grow to $
90bn by 2000, almost entirely without benefit from the additional knowledge
being assembled right now. Tracey the sheep is the new golden fleece. The pigs
with human hearts promise to bring home a different kind of bacon. The
genetically-altered weed is the first step to growing money on trees.


LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1993


                              396 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 20, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 884 words

HEADLINE: BOOK REVIEWS

BYLINE: STEPHEN YOUNG

BODY:


    The Language Of The Genes

    by STEVE JONES

    251pp pounds 16.99

    HarperCollins

    Perilous Knowledge: the human genome project and its implications

    by TOM WILKIE

    195pp pounds 14.99

    Faber & Faber

    GENES have so much power over our lives that it comes as something of a
shock to discover that they do business in a language that reads like guttural
baby talk. Here is a snatch from the gene that makes human embryos develop into
boys, written out in the standard form employed by geneticists: GAT AGA CTG AAG
CGA CCC ATG AAC GCA TTC. . . It takes around 100,000 genes to create a human
being and geneticists are planning to read them all in the course of the much
discussed "human genome project".

    This grand scheme will make us all fluent in the language of the genes.
Everyone carries potentially harmful genes and two-thirds of us will suffer from
a genetic disease - if you include heart disease and cancer (both of which are
influenced by heredity). The genome project will make simple tests available for
many of these genes - a development that can either be regarded as a boon or a
curse. Within 15 years, geneticists will have perfected tests capable of
revealing 1,000 inherited illnesses.

    The genome project gets its fair share of attention, but Steve Jones sets it
in a wider context of what genes can tell us about human affairs (the subject of
his 1991 Reith Lectures). It makes a great story, not least because our genes
turn out to be surprisingly communicative - and their collective memory
stretches back as far as you could wish. In modern Umbria, it is still possible
to make out the genetic signature of the Etruscans; in China, researchers have
found a glistening trail of genes left behind by traders as they travelled the
Silk Road. Genetic variation among living Europeans can be traced back to the
spread of agriculture across Europe thousands of years ago.

    Yet despite these differences, humans are a rather uniform lot compared to
other species, whatever racists down the ages may have said to the contrary. The
snails of adjacent valleys in the Pyrenees have diverged further in genetic
terms than Europeans and Australian aborigines. Jones thoroughly demolishes the
old myth that human races are distinct genetic entities, arguing that there is
almost as much variation between neighbouring countries as there is between
races. In any case, skin colour always was an arbitrary marker. If we classified
humanity by blood type rather than skin colour, Armenians and Nigerians would
form the nucleus of one group, Australians and Peruvians another.

    The nature-nurture debate also receives an infusion of sense, this time with
the help of the Siamese cat - a creature whose coat is painted by an
indissoluble alliance of genes and environment. (Its genes make black pigment
only in the cold, so the warm bulk of its body stays light, while ears, toes,
testicles and tail go black.) Ask Steve Jones whether the cat's coat is the work
of nature or nurture and you are likely to be told, with more than a hint of
exasperation, that the question is meaningless. The same applies to the diabetes
that afflicts something like eight of 10 adults on the Pacific Island of Nauru.
The Nauruans are genetically prone to diabetes, but the illness only appeared
when phosphate mining made the islanders rich enough to eat a high calorie diet
- a process that geneticists are wont to call Coca-Colonisation. Disentangling
the effects of nature and nurture, says Jones, is like trying to unbake a cake.

    Nevertheless the human genome project seems likely to throw the emphasis
back onto genetic influences on our behaviour - a point made by Tom Wilkie in
Perilous Knowledge. Wilkie invites us to imagine how competitive couples of the
future might react if any links were to be found between genes and intelligence.
Will they turn to genetic screening - and selective abortion - in the quest for
a child whose genes will nudge it in the direction of high intelligence? Another
vision of the future has people injecting themselves with extra shots of natural
substances identified as important in brain function. It sounds far-fetched, but
there is already a black market in human growth hormone.

    Wilkie offers a perceptive and level-headed analysis of the likely
consequences of genetic research, treating the key issues of genetic screening,
gene therapy and the like with admirable clarity. He also argues, convincingly
in my view, that the genome project will have other, more subtle consequences
for society. In genetic terms, humans and chimpanzees are 98.4 per cent similar
- a figure that makes us closer to chimps than chimps are to gorillas. "Will
there be any genes at all which turn out to be distinctively human and without
precedent in the rest of the plant and animal kingdoms?" asks Wilkie. The gene
that makes men male is similar to the gene that does the same job in the mouse,
and it bears more than a passing resemblance to a gene involved in the sex life
of a type of yeast.

    By revealing similarities between humans and other animals, genetic
knowledge could make the idea of human uniqueness harder and harder to sustain -
a point not lost on supporters of the animal rights movement.

    Dr Stephen Young is a zoologist


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1993


                              398 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 5, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 2215 words

HEADLINE: THE MAN WHO CAN HAVE A GOOD GO;
Nick Ross is Mr Crimewatch, a hero for ordinary people who fear for the future
of their car radios. He'd like to be Jeremy Paxman. Could he revise his bland
youthful image?

BYLINE: JUDY RUMBOLD

BODY:


    ALTHOUGH Nick Ross signs off from Crimewatch with earnest assurances that
serious crime is rare, that we should sleep well and not have nightmares, he has
himself skipped from the studio only to find crime on his own doorstep.

    He's not a big man - 5 foot 9 inches and slightly-built - but size didn't
stop him seeing off a gang of burglars. More heroism in 1988 when Ross heeded
his own advice and Had-A-Go, fearlessly chasing a 6 foot 4 inch maniac who tried
to strangle two teenage girls outside the BBC Crimewatch studios. Forget the
emergency services, you might conclude; far better to call Nick Ross.

    "A hero, me? It's just not true," he says, making priestly steeples with his
forefingers. But although he's a convincing wimp in the looks department - his
polyester-mix shirts and side-parting would cut no ice in Stallone's mirror - he
can't fool us.

    In a country run by pedantic do-nothings, Ross is The Man Who Can. He's our
own TV vigilante, the original Mr Neighbourhood Watch, a hero for ordinary
people who fear for the future of their car radios.  Spunky little Nick Ross
isn't afraid to sink his teeth into the ankles of bluster, humbug and hypocrisy
and chew away, fighting the little man's fight.

    Wasn't it Ross who, when chairing a BBC debate in Edinburgh two years ago
pressed John Birt for an answer to the question that really needed to be asked -
under the new Birtian ethos, what exactly was going to happen to Blind Date and
Neighbours?  Straight-talking Ross, never one to let journalistic objectivity
stand in the way of the truth, last week spoke out about law and order, saying:
"Home Secretaries don't have any balls basically, and are clueless about crime.
Lots of solutions are lying around but they come at it like amateurs talking in
a pub."

    This raises serious questions about the wisdom of a journalist turning
polemicist. Where does the desire to convey honesty and conviction blur into
naivety?

    It won't be the first time Ross's candid off-guardedness has been pounced
upon by the press. Much was made of a casual admission by everybody's favourite
goody-goody that he was in fact a baddy and had stolen sweets from Woolworths at
the age of 10. And Ross - "Hunky Crimewatch hearthrob" - allowed himself to be
drawn, by the News Of The World, on such subjects as teenage spots ("I have
discovered that spots have an advantage - because it means your skin is very
oily, and therefore tends not to age as fast as dry skin") and women ("I was
very lacking in confidence with women - the first girl I invited out never
turned up, so I always appreciated it when girls made advances to me").

    "I probably should have learned to be a bit more measured by now," he sighs,
"but as a journalist, you want to help other journalists, and give a good quote.
Often I read things I've said and think; God, that's boring."

    But as a journalist, shouldn't he know that not all of his colleagues are as
scrupulously nice as Nick?

    Just back from a trip to Geneva, Ross expresses shock and surprise that his
answering machine is replete with requests for interviews following his law and
order outburst. "Maybe I was wrong," he reflects, "I'm not sure it's the role of
a broadcaster to say that sort of thing."

    Victims of his desire to truffle out the truth might agree. Under Ross's
tenacious questioning, John Birt is said to have turned puce with rage and was
heard to comment "that man is disgusting."

    The Tory MP Peter Butler, on hearing of Ross's appointment to a government
think-tank on crime prevention, said it was "absurd. Apart from chairing the
press conferences I can't see what possible use having a minor TV personality
would be." Minor TV personality? Now that really hurts. His appearances may have
dwindled lately, but there was a time in the mid-eighties when he presented
Breakfast Time, Out Of Court, made documentaries, chaired discussions as well as
fronting Channel 4's A Week In Politics. Yet however loud his CV screams
"major", his looks and media profile will persist in whispering "minor".

    "He feels very aggrieved," says an ex-colleague, "that he isn't in the front
line of candidates considered for the top interviewers' jobs."

    It was probably his decision to join Breakfast Time - at the time when the
sweaters, sofas and sweet-talk were at their squidgiest - that really did for
any aspirations to status on a par with Peter Sissons, Jeremy Paxman or Jonathan
Dimbleby.  That, and the fact that the highly successful Crimewatch and Crime
Ltd - a new series of which starts this week - have a touch of the tabloid about
them. But what many of his colleagues perceive to be his real handicap to
achieving gravitas in political broadcasting is that, although he is pushing 46,
he will always look 12.

    "He suffers from the opposite of me," says Andrew Neil, editor of the Sunday
Times, who worked with Ross on the BBC's The World At One after graduating. "He
looks a lot younger than he is. He needs a few lines on his face, a little grey
hair at the temples." It is doubtful that even the cruellest ravages would
dispel the Cornflakes 'n' Crime image. Among colleagues, friends and Radio 4
listeners, Ross is highly regarded as a man with great skill at the political
interview. His expertise in debate, in making intelligent broadcasters of
averagely-bright people - "Eileen from Romford, what's your perspective on
this?" - is second to none.

    "I place an enormous value on what he does once a week for me," says Michael
Green, controller of Radio 4. "In a world of a lot of phone-ins, Call Nick Ross
is a very distinctive animal. Nick is a sympathetic listener, allied to sharp
journalistic antennae and a good nose for how the debate is developing."

    There are are areas of media exposure that appear to have been roped off to
him forever. Call Nick Ross Certainly, but Question Time, never. Radio Times
cover boy, yes, but Esquire - forget it.  "He's Mr Bland, really," says Tim
Hulse, deputy editor of the men's title, explaining why Ross would never get to
wear smart Harvie-and-Hudson tailoring and pout sexily from the newstands the
way that Jeremy Paxman has. "I can't imagine why anyone would be interested in
him. He doesn't seem to have any weight. He also looks wrong. He looks ordinary,
whereas Paxman has a beaky nose and savages people." Worse still, says Hulse, he
looks like a non-smoker, "and I bet he jogs".

    Ross actually likes glamorous things like skiing and scuba diving. The third
recreation in his Who Who entry is "observing (and occasionally influencing)
issues of public policy." Recreation or deep-seated conviction? What is it that
drives him to get involved with the Committee on the ethics of Gene Therapy and
the Wider Working Group on Health of the Nation? (He's also President of
Saneline, Vice Chairman of the National Road Safety Commitee and Chairman of
Crime Concern's National Youth Campaign.)

    His social purpose comes from his parents, who did voluntary work for the
Citizen's Advice Bureau and the Marriage Guidance Council. "Every Sunday, my
brother and sister would make coffee at around five in the morning and we'd take
it up to our parents and they'd tell us stories." It wasn't your usual
lightweight pap about goblins and naughty puppies though; this was heavy stuff
about eviction and custody battles. "They were driven by a genuine concern for
people's problems."

    The concern rubbed off on him. And then some. "He has the most remarkable -
sometimes most irritating - social conscience," says Richie Cogan, an
independent producer responsible for inventing the format for Crimewatch. "Most
of us will pass by, but Nick will insist on going to help . He chases people.
His wife says, for God's sake, Nick, don't do that, but he doesn't listen."

    He went to Queen's University, Belfast, in 1968 ("If you weren't in Paris or
Woodstock, you might as well have been in Belfast") to read psychology. "It was
absolutely the most wonderful part of my life. It opened up all sorts of things
that, at school, I'd always found rather dull. I discovered that scientists
weren't all pimply, spotty people who bumped into walls all the time. I loved
the social life, the independence, I felt I was in the cockpit of the
university, the cockpit of the union, the cockpit of life. And then came
broadcasting, which was the icing on the cake."

    Wary of journalism after hearing an Australian prime minister whose name he
forgets describe the profession as being "lower than a snake's belly", he got
involved after the students' union asked him to defend, in radio and TV
interviews, a decision to put contraceptive machines in the male and female
toilets.

    He's never looked back. "I'm a frustrated politician, but what journalist
isn't?" he says. "It seems to me that so many issues are soluble and don't get
solved." Ross likes to think he does his bit.  Take, for instance, the changes
he managed to effect in road safety. "Ten or 15 years ago, only cranks were
interested in road safety. Me and Richie Cogan made a programme about it, and
casualties came down. There were solutions lying around - seat belts and road
humps - just waiting to be picked up. It's the same with crime."

    What kind of solutions? Ross is saving his best shots for the Crime
Prevention Board's first meeting, but he says a bit more curtain-twitching
wouldn't go amiss, and a bit more concern from parents as to the wherabouts of
their children would be a start. "It's going to take effort by us all." Would
the man who once had-a-go himself condone vigilante-ism? "The convenient thing
about crime is to leave it to the courts and punishment and the police," says
Ross. "To that extent I think it's good that vigilante-ism is back on the
agenda. The citizen can't just leave it to the government."

    Ross is well-known among friends and colleagues for being highly
opinionated.  "He's an extraordinary man, Nick," says Peter Salmon, head of
factual programmes at Channel 4, who worked with Ross on Crimewatch. "He's got
very forceful views. He's prepared to be the only man in the room backing a
cause when everyone else is saying the opposite. He's the original member of the
Awkward Party."

    "He's always fighting with producers," says Richie Cogan, "and making
himself cussedly unpopular with production teams. If there's an accepted view,
Nick feels there must be a case for the opposite."

    It's a trait that carries over into his private life. "He's straight-talking
to the point of being awkward socially," says Cogan, and, by all accounts, he
sounds like the dinner-party guest from hell.  "He enjoys getting lots of his
friends from work together and setting up an argument or a debate. To my horror,
this would even extend to holidays. One of the more memorable ones was - Do Fish
Feel Pain? It's these fundamental silly little questions that really absorb him.
I remember standing outside a restaurant in France with loads of people shouting
at each other and Nick stomping off."

    Ross thinks it all jolly good sport. "I enjoy disputation. I enjoy
challenging assumptions and taking a Cinderella line. For instance, I hate it
when people get carried away with political correctness.  One example I remember
was when we were talking at a dinner-party about preservation of the
countryside. Well, as you can imagine, attacking that is like attacking
motherhood and apple pie. . ." Ross being Ross, he went in there like the SAS
storming a creche.

    DESPITE the fact that he never gets to dessert without having made enemies
of at least half the other guests, friends testify to Ross's good-blokishness,
his high score on the New Man scale, and that he is not only lovable and
generous but honourable with it.

    This last quality was exemplified by his conduct during the time when,
working with Andrew Neil at the BBC, Ross clearly had romantic inclinations
towards Neil's girlfriend at the time. Nick being the decent chap he is, he
waited until they'd split up before making his intentions known.

    What a guy.

    "I'm not nice and reasonable," Ross protests. "I have temper tantrums like
everyone else. I have my bad days." But you sense they are fewer and further
between than they used to be. He certainly won't give Paxman a run for his money
if he carries on like this.

    "If he was really serious about a future in current affairs," says an
ex-colleague, "he'd get himself some ugly-making glasses and bark a bit." But
you can bet it would be worse than his bite. And in any case, whoever heard of a
heavyweight political interviewer called Nick?

    Ross is comfortable now, earning a nice pile from corporate videos, chairing
discussions and his highly successful series of crime shows. Why would he want
to give it up?

    Ross says now that he's not sure where his future lies anymore. "I honestly
don't know. My natural home is news and current affairs, but I'm not so sure
I've got the drive or ambition anymore." He is married to Sarah Caplin, editor
of the BBC's Watchdog, is a committed family man, and lives in a house crammed
with photos of his three young sons. Returning from school, one of them shouts
up the stairs: "I love you, daddy!"

    I think it's fair to say that he speaks for us all.


LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1993


                              399 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 3, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN WEEKEND PAGE; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 3427 words

HEADLINE: THE STORY OF AIDS: PART THREE/TIMES ENEMY;
Where does Aids come from? And why should the epidemic strike now?
Paradoxically, the astonishing advances medicine has made this century in
tackling the killer diseases of the past may themselves have made the spread of
this new virus inevitable. MIKE BYGRAVE examines the conditions which turn an
illness into a plague and back again

BYLINE: MIKE BYGRAVE

BODY:


    Before Aids,the last great global epidemic was the influenza epidemic of
1918-19. Known as the forgotten epidemic, it killed 20 million people in a
single year before vanishing as suddenly and mysteriously as it had come.
Thousands of brain-damaged survivors ended up in mental hospitals where, many
years later, the neurologist and author Oliver Sacks found them and described
them in his famous book, Awakenings.I remember the flu epidemic, writes my
mother, who is now in her 80s. I was very young, but remember this was a really
terrible time. My father, my mother and I were all in bed and so were all our
relatives and most of our neighbours. We survived by my parents getting up to
collect soup or milk drinks which those of our neighbours who could get out
would leave for us on the porch.During her childhood, my mother had mumps,
measles and chicken pox. But the diseases her parents dreaded on her behalf were
diphtheria and scarlet fever. She escaped both, but at one point my own mother
had TB and was sent to a sanitorium in Derbyshire. The patients slept in small
huts in the fields. They lived and slept in the open air as much as possible for
about nine months, and that was the cure at the time.My mother grew up to be a
healthy young woman, a dancer and a teacher of dance in her 20s and 30s. She
married my father during the second world war. At the end of the war they heard
about cholera and smallpox from the families of soldiers returning from abroad.
I was born in 1945. My parents dreaded the same diseases on my behalf that had
threatened their childhood: diphtheria, scarlet fever, whooping cough. In the
1950s there was a major scare over polio among children. Along came a brand-new
vaccine, but my parents worried about that too. There were rumours it was
ineffective or, worse, that the vaccine had given some children polio. In the
1960s, my mother continues, doctors started calling everything a virus. If you
ask me, whenever they didnt know what was wrong with you, they said, Youve got a
virus, and they still do the same today. All they ever tell you is, Theres
nothing we can do. Just rest and drink plenty of liquids. Well, I dont need to
be told that. I can do that for myself, thank you very much.Pathogenesis is a
medical concept, meaning the natural history of a disease in the body. My
mothers memory offers a sort of psycho-social pathogenesis a natural history of
diseases in the consciousness of the community. All the diseases which haunt her
are infectious diseases. Diphtheria, scarlet fever, TB, cholera, are bacterial
diseases, along with leprosy, gonhorrea, syphilis and the bubonic plague (the
Black Death). While, smallpox, polio, flu, mumps, measles and chickenpox, plus
mononucleosis, rabies and the common cold, are caused by my mothers bte noire,
the virus.Her account ends in the 1960s. If someone were to write a comparable
account for the next generation, say from 1960 to 1980, the dreaded,
life-threatening conditions they would list would be very different. The big
killers of those years were (and still are) things like cancer, heart attacks
and strokes. The threat from infectious diseases has dwindled rapidly, within a
single lifetime.From the point of view of doctors and scientists, the story of
this century is the success of modern medicine in defusing and disarming
epidemics and infectious disease (which is not the same as wiping them out. Only
one infectious disease has ever been eradicated from the world smallpox in 1979.
Hence the current controversy over what to do with the few remaining specimens
of smallpox frozen and stored in research labs. Should they be destroyed for the
sake of safety or preserved for the sake of science?)Starting in the late 19th
century with pioneers like Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch, medicine moved first
against bacteria, eventually developing the antibiotics to treat most bacterial
diseases. Progress against viruses was much slower. Although both microbes are
invisible to the naked eye, viruses are much smaller than bacteria. It was only
with the development of the electron microscope in the 1940s that researchers
could see a virus. The major advances in understanding viruses followed on
between 1950 and 1960.  Neverthless, it remains a medical rule of thumb that
there are no cures for viral diseases.But the question of a cure seemed largely
irrelevant. What medicine couldnt cure it could prevent with vaccines. The
mechanism of vaccination was well understood and, as the example of the polio
vaccine showed, seemed to provide an unlimited answer to viruses. The many viral
infections that remained, from the common cold to unpleasant illnesses like
mononucleosis, were, in medical parlance, self-limiting. You got sick but you
got well again. Just rest and drink plenty of liquids.In other words, in the
medical version of the story, my mothers scornful attitude towards doctors was a
luxury they themselves had afforded her. She could stay clear of the GP because,
to an extent unparalleled in human history, her life was not threatened by
epidemic and infectious diseases. In the developed West, average life expectancy
rose from 50 at the turn of the century to 75 today, largely for this reason. By
the early 1980s, less than 5 per cent of US medical costs were due to infectious
diseases and doctors and scientists sounded like generals trumpeting the
Ultimate Victory. The 1979 Cecil Textbook of Medicine, a standard reference
work, boasted of an array of triumphs that make our current management of
microbial diseases one of the finest chapters in the history of science for mans
benefit.Biomedical science turned to so-called basic research, aimed at
understanding complex conditions like cancer on a molecular level.  Public
health and the public mood, especially in America, turned to self-help, to a
health and fitness boom which led millions to stop smoking, start exercising and
cut alcohol, salt, fat and sugar down or even out of their diets.ALL OF that
changed on a November morning in 1980 in Los Angeles. Dr Michael Gobtlieb was a
young immunologist four months into his first professional post at UCLA. Already
bored with messing about with mice the fate of young researchers at the bottom
of the academic ladder he spread the word among the doctors at UCLAs hospital to
let him know of any interesting cases. Thus Gottlieb found himself at the
bedside of a gay artist, 31 years old and Gottliebs exact contemporary.The man
was critically ill, literally choking to death, with a yeast infection in his
lungs. Tests showed the infection was pneumocystitis carinii pneumonia, a rare
and very lethal pneumonia associated with a failure of the immune system. It was
interesting and extraordinary and horrifying at the same time, Gottlieb recalls.
Over the next few months, four more similar cases surfaced around Los Angeles,
all of them gay men, all of whom would die. At the time, says Dr Gottlieb, we
thought theyd been exposed to something in common, and it was probably a virus.
But, ironically and somewhat naively, we thought they could reconstitute their
immune systems and probably survive. We didnt really know what we were looking
at, but it was clearly something new and clearly something important. What
Gottlieb and his colleagues were looking at was Aids.Twelve years later, when
you talk to people dealing with the Aids pandemic, they use phrases like a
watershed in the discovery of human disease, and a turning point in the history
of medicine. Yet plagues and epidemics are nothing new and Aids itself, while it
may or may not be a new disease, is not a unique one. In Plagues And Peoples,
his classic 1976 account of infectious diseases in history, William H McNeill
describes the human condition in stark but realistic terms as caught in a
precarious equilibrium between the microparasitism of disease organisms and the
macroparasitism of large-bodied predators, chief among which has been other
human beings.Despite the inevitable gaps, we know a surprising amount about
plagues and epidemics of the past. We know that millions died in them. And we
know that plagues and epidemics, while they come, also go. For centuries,
untouched by medical science, they vanished of their own accord, sometimes
slowly, sometimes swiftly, like the 1918-19 flu epidemic. Evolution, in this
instance running at fast-forward, took care of them. The bacteria and viruses
that cause them are parasites and therefore subject to Professor Bohmans law.
Unsuccessful parasites are the ones that kill their hosts and soon run into an
evolutionary cul de sac themselves. Successful parasites learn to coexist with
their hosts (and vice versa), settling down to a stable, long-term relationship,
a biological marriage as opposed to the fatal attraction of a killer epidemic.
Plagues of the past become the childhood diseases of the present. We are most at
risk from infectious diseases when we are children.  Were generally healthy in
our 20s and 30s. As we move into middle-age, we face the chronic and
degenerative diseases of ageing, including cancer.IF IT IS relatively easy to
understand why epidemics go away, its more confusing to try to grasp how and why
they begin. The psychological impact of Aids was the greater because of the
general complacency that medicine had defeated plagues. Where did Aids come
from? Where, for that matter, did the 14th century Black Death or smallpox or
cholera or all the other great epidemics of history come from? Remembering
McNeills graphic description of the human condition, the remarkable thing is not
how many epidemics there have been, but how few.  Epidemics, like serious
accidents, ought to happen more often than they do. But, again like serious
accidents, such as plane crashes, it takes a combination of circumstances,
various factors coming together at the same time, each of which might not be
catastrophic in itself, to create an epidemic.  Among these factors are: an
infectious disease jumping from animals to human beings; the evolution of a
microbe itself into a more virulent form; density of population, ie enough
potential hosts for the microbe to keep transmitting between them without
running into Professor Bohmans cul de sac; contact between a population already
immune to a disease and a virgin population (the most famous example being the
total destruction of the Aztec and Mayan civilisations by diseases brought by
small forces of conquistadores in the 16th-17th centuries); and large-scale
global socio-political changes.Scientists call the result of all this an
ecological niche. We have a picture of millions of micro-organisms pullulating
all over the place, looking for their chance to adapt and survive, be fruitful
and multiply, in us. Most are benign or harmless. Some are crippling or lethal.
We can plot the precise historical periods when we gave the lethal ones their
best shot, their niche, and all those periods have one thing in common. They are
times when the world moved closer together. Remember the Sixties talk about the
global village? The spread of jet travel, the development of instant
communications, emigration, immigration, the mixing and matching of peoples, the
rise of the global economy. We are in just such a period now. Aids ought not to
have surprised us.Change, not stability, is the universal law, constant change
at every level. And very small changes at the microscopic level can lead to
important results farther down the line at the macrocosmic level. In these
incredibly complex, interdependent, multi-layered systems, only a few patterns
are as yet discernible to us. But they are what people mean when they call Aids
the first post-modern disease. Like a hand into a glove, Aids fits the two key
paradigms of post-modern thought the idea of the essential unity and wholeness
of everything, familiar from the environmental movement; and the less familiar
idea that tiny, seemingly inconsequential changes in systems can produce major
results later on. The latter is the subject of chaos theory and the new
discipline of fractals. You can get a hint of it from the TV weathermans maps
and diagrams showing how a minor storm on one side of the world ends up causing
devastation on the other.Precisely which variables came together to cause the
Aids epidemic, and where, remains in dispute. Most researchers think Aids began
in Africa, as a result of the virus passing from monkeys to men. Simian
Immunodeficiency Viruses (SIVs) in apes and monkeys resemble HIV. The SIVs are
more varied than the HIVs, which suggests they are older. Men have hunted and
killed monkeys for thousands of years, providing endless opportunities for
cross-species transmission.Detailed arguments aside, we know that most (some say
all) major infectious diseases began by crossing from animals to man. We also
know that Africa, just as its believed to be the birthplace of mankind, is the
home of human parasites par excellence.Susan Sontag is among those who argue
vigorously against the African hypothesis. She points to our long, dismal record
of blaming epidemics on other people. Plague always comes from somewhere else,
somebody else, usually from the Dark Continent or the Mysterious East. Sontags
warning is well-taken. Besides there are sound scientific reasons for doubting
an African origin for Aids. There is a genetic gap for example between HIV-1,
the virus that causes the majority of what we knows as Aids, and both the SIVs
and HIV-2 (which undoubtedly began in West Africa). Researchers who want to
claim they are part of the same virus family have to postulate an as-yet
undiscovered virus as the missing link always an uncomfortable position for a
scientist.If humans and monkeys have interacted for thousands of years, why did
it take so long for the virus to transmit? And why did it do so now? We know
that Aids appeared as a collective, epidemic disease in both Africa and America
at roughly the same time, the late 1970s. But there are a small number of cases
in the West, going back as far as the early 1950s, which have been
retrospectively diagnosed as Aids. Not all of these cases seem to have an
African connection.Lastly, microbes evolve, mutate. They can assume more
virulent forms in and of themselves without any need for cross-species
transmission. Aids may be an old disease in human beings, around for centuries
before it became a lethal epidemic.EITHER way, African or not, brand-new or
age-old, by far the most important of the factors that combine to create an
epidemic is man himself. Different but comparable socio-political changes
existed in parts of Africa and the big American cities at the same time. In
Africa, there was war, famine, revolution, social chaos, mass migration from the
countryside to the cities together with the resulting breakdown of old values.
In America, in cities like San Francisco, there was a unique concentration of
homosexuals along with the amplification system of the bathhouses and sex clubs.
The Aids pandemic may have begun in both places independently; though, 12 years
on, its worth noting that most of the estimated 12 million HIV infections
worldwide spread from America.In his The Origin And History Of Aids, French
medical historian Mirko Grmek coins a new concept he dubs pathocenosis. At any
given time, Grmek argues, there is an equilibrium, a stable distribution among
diseases and the microbes that cause them. The existence of some diseases
literally prevents others. Virulent strains of HIV, for instance, may not have
been able to survive when their potential hosts died of TB or smallpox or
something else. The very success of science against other infectious diseases,
the success scientists crowed about in the Sixties and Seventies, may have
opened up the ecological niche for HIV/Aids to become an epidemic. If Grmek is
right, its a fascinating irony, the very triumph of science becoming its own
nemesis.For a long time, the debate over the origin of Aids sat on the
sidelines, overshadowed by the search for treatments and a cure. Recently, it
has come to the fore, not for what it tells us about the past but for what it
can tell us about the future. Getting an accurate evolutionary perspective on
HIV/Aids has vital implications, ranging from strategies for treatments aimed at
the viruss mutation, to strategies for prevention.At the extreme of this view,
Professor Roger Bohman believes evolution may take care of Aids before we do.
Weve learned more about viruses because of Aids than weve ever learned before,
but we still have this tragic assumption that knowledge equals control. It hasnt
proved true with cancer and there are important similarities between Aids and
cancer. Historically, epidemics have come and gone without our curing them and
that may be the case with Aids too.Aids, says Dr Jay Levy of the University of
San Francisco, is the hardest thing second only to cancer to control. In fact,
Aids and cancer are the same disease in many ways. They work in the opposite
direction: with cancer, cells grow out of control and with Aids they die out of
control.  But you have to kill off a virus-infected cell and you have to kill
off a cancer cell. And the cancer cell produces a cytokines that work against
you and the virus produces cytokines that work against you. The cancer cells
distribute themselves all over the body including the brain and so does the
virus. The immune system is important in controlling cancer and the immune
system is important in controlling the virus. And so you begin to realise, for
example, if we havent made a cancer vaccine, how are we going to make an Aids
vaccine?There are optimists and pessimists about Aids and some people are both,
depending on the day. To the optimists, Aids will soon become a chronic disease,
something we can live with. To the pessimists like Professor Bohman, thats
bullshit. This is a fatal disease. You die and its a miserable death. You just
have to look at someone whos got it and you say, Chronic, my ass! Optimists tend
to believe in the link between knowledge and treatment and a future where more
drugs and multiple therapies will manage HIV, even if they cant cure it. And the
optimists are in charge.  The princes of the Aids research establisment, as they
have made themselves the princes of medicine in general, are the molecular
biologists, still operating on old-fashioned 19th century notions of causality
materialist, reductionist and rigid. Their current Holy Grail is genetic
therapy, within five years, a new genetically engineered golden age for medicine
which remains, as it has been for the last 30 years, just around the corner.
Here is the real significiance of the anti-HIV lobby. When they attack the
molecular biologists and criticise the gap between HIV as a virus and Aids as a
disease they make a valuable point its just not the point they think theyre
making. HIV certainly causes Aids. But the precise mechanisms of causation in
living organisms (and perhaps elsewhere also) are complex, multi-layered, more
like patterns than straight lines, involving interactions, feedbacks, chance,
emotional and environmental factors. While molecular biologists argue that, once
the precise causes of things like Aids and cancer are understood, we shall find
cures, full understanding may not be possible on any traditional model of
cause-and-effect or, for that matter, at all.PESSIMISTS tend to pin their faith
on evolution in one guise or another, on the fact that past plagues came but
also went (interestingly, William McNeill in his metahistory found a pattern, an
average time period of 100-120 years it took a virgin population to adjust to a
novel disease). Combining the two approaches are recent, faint experimental
indications that HIV might be artificially speeded on its evolutionary way by
drugs that force it to mutate into insignificance. Until then, as Warren
Winkelstein notes, all we have is prevention and the equally experimental
business of trying to change human habits. Tom Donohoe, responsible for various
Aids education programmes at UCLA, says, All those social skeletons are coming
out of the closet because of Aids teenage sex, abortion, sexually transmitted
diseases, family values, drugs. Aids has a foot in every one. And Mark Katz
feels, I wish it wasnt the case, but the way were going, Aids could become the
entire curriculum for a university education. This is the greatest challenge to
education, to politics, to health-care rationing, philosophy, history . . . its
all there.


LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1993


                              400 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 3, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN WEEKEND PAGE; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 3458 words

HEADLINE: THE STORY OF AIDS: PART THREE: TIMES ENEMY;
Where does Aids come from? And why should the epidemic strike now?
Paradoxically, the astonishing advances medicine has made this century in
tackling the killer diseases of the past may themselves have made the spread of
this new virus inevitable. MIKE BYGRAVE examines the conditions which turn an
illness into a plague and back again

BYLINE: MIKE BYGRAVE

BODY:


    Before Aids,the last great global epidemic was the influenza epidemic of
1918-19. Known as the forgotten epidemic, it killed 20 million people in a
single year before vanishing as suddenly and mysteriously as it had come.
Thousands of brain-damaged survivors ended up in mental hospitals where, many
years later, the neurologist and author Oliver Sacks found them and described
them in his famous book, Awakenings.

    I remember the flu epidemic, writes my mother, who is now in her 80s. I was
very young, but remember this was a really terrible time. My father, my mother
and I were all in bed and so were all our relatives and most of our neighbours.
We survived by my parents getting up to collect soup or milk drinks which those
of our neighbours who could get out would leave for us on the porch.

    During her childhood, my mother had mumps, measles and chicken pox. But the
diseases her parents dreaded on her behalf were diphtheria and scarlet fever.
She escaped both, but at one point my own mother had TB and was sent to a
sanitorium in Derbyshire. The patients slept in small huts in the fields. They
lived and slept in the open air as much as possible for about nine months, and
that was the cure at the time.

    My mother grew up to be a healthy young woman, a dancer and a teacher of
dance in her 20s and 30s. She married my father during the second world war. At
the end of the war they heard about cholera and smallpox from the families of
soldiers returning from abroad. I was born in 1945. My parents dreaded the same
diseases on my behalf that had threatened their childhood: diphtheria, scarlet
fever, whooping cough. In the 1950s there was a major scare over polio among
children. Along came a brand-new vaccine, but my parents worried about that too.
There were rumours it was ineffective or, worse, that the vaccine had given some
children polio. In the 1960s, my mother continues, doctors started calling
everything a virus. If you ask me, whenever they didnt know what was wrong with
you, they said, Youve got a virus, and they still do the same today. All they
ever tell you is, Theres nothing we can do. Just rest and drink plenty of
liquids. Well, I dont need to be told that. I can do that for myself, thank you
very much.

    Pathogenesis is a medical concept, meaning the natural history of a disease
in the body. My mothers memory offers a sort of psycho-social pathogenesis a
natural history of diseases in the consciousness of the community. All the
diseases which haunt her are infectious diseases. Diphtheria, scarlet fever, TB,
cholera, are bacterial diseases, along with leprosy, gonhorrea, syphilis and the
bubonic plague (the Black Death). While, smallpox, polio, flu, mumps, measles
and chickenpox, plus mononucleosis, rabies and the common cold, are caused by my
mothers bte noire, the virus.

    Her account ends in the 1960s. If someone were to write a comparable account
for the next generation, say from 1960 to 1980, the dreaded, life-threatening
conditions they would list would be very different. The big killers of those
years were (and still are) things like cancer, heart attacks and strokes. The
threat from infectious diseases has dwindled rapidly, within a single lifetime.

    From the point of view of doctors and scientists, the story of this century
is the success of modern medicine in defusing and disarming epidemics and
infectious disease (which is not the same as wiping them out. Only one
infectious disease has ever been eradicated from the world smallpox in 1979.
Hence the current controversy over what to do with the few remaining specimens
of smallpox frozen and stored in research labs. Should they be destroyed for the
sake of safety or preserved for the sake of science?)

    Starting in the late 19th century with pioneers like Louis Pasteur and
Robert Koch, medicine moved first against bacteria, eventually developing the
antibiotics to treat most bacterial diseases.  Progress against viruses was much
slower. Although both microbes are invisible to the naked eye, viruses are much
smaller than bacteria. It was only with the development of the electron
microscope in the 1940s that researchers could see a virus. The major advances
in understanding viruses followed on between 1950 and 1960. Neverthless, it
remains a medical rule of thumb that there are no cures for viral diseases.

    But the question of a cure seemed largely irrelevant. What medicine couldnt
cure it could prevent with vaccines. The mechanism of vaccination was well
understood and, as the example of the polio vaccine showed, seemed to provide an
unlimited answer to viruses. The many viral infections that remained, from the
common cold to unpleasant illnesses like mononucleosis, were, in medical
parlance, self-limiting. You got sick but you got well again.  Just rest and
drink plenty of liquids.

    In other words, in the medical version of the story, my mothers scornful
attitude towards doctors was a luxury they themselves had afforded her. She
could stay clear of the GP because, to an extent unparalleled in human history,
her life was not threatened by epidemic and infectious diseases. In the
developed West, average life expectancy rose from 50 at the turn of the century
to 75 today, largely for this reason. By the early 1980s, less than 5 per cent
of US medical costs were due to infectious diseases and doctors and scientists
sounded like generals trumpeting the Ultimate Victory. The 1979 Cecil Textbook
of Medicine, a standard reference work, boasted of an array of triumphs that
make our current management of microbial diseases one of the finest chapters in
the history of science for mans benefit.

    Biomedical science turned to so-called basic research, aimed at
understanding complex conditions like cancer on a molecular level. Public health
and the public mood, especially in America, turned to self-help, to a health and
fitness boom which led millions to stop smoking, start exercising and cut
alcohol, salt, fat and sugar down or even out of their diets.

    ALL OF that changed on a November morning in 1980 in Los Angeles. Dr Michael
Gobtlieb was a young immunologist four months into his first professional post
at UCLA. Already bored with messing about with mice the fate of young
researchers at the bottom of the academic ladder he spread the word among the
doctors at UCLAs hospital to let him know of any interesting cases. Thus
Gottlieb found himself at the bedside of a gay artist, 31 years old and
Gottliebs exact contemporary.

    The man was critically ill, literally choking to death, with a yeast
infection in his lungs. Tests showed the infection was pneumocystitis carinii
pneumonia, a rare and very lethal pneumonia associated with a failure of the
immune system. It was interesting and extraordinary and horrifying at the same
time, Gottlieb recalls. Over the next few months, four more similar cases
surfaced around Los Angeles, all of them gay men, all of whom would die.  At the
time, says Dr Gottlieb, we thought theyd been exposed to something in common,
and it was probably a virus. But, ironically and somewhat naively, we thought
they could reconstitute their immune systems and probably survive. We didnt
really know what we were looking at, but it was clearly something new and
clearly something important. What Gottlieb and his colleagues were looking at
was Aids.

    Twelve years later, when you talk to people dealing with the Aids pandemic,
they use phrases like a watershed in the discovery of human disease, and a
turning point in the history of medicine. Yet plagues and epidemics are nothing
new and Aids itself, while it may or may not be a new disease, is not a unique
one. In Plagues And Peoples, his classic 1976 account of infectious diseases in
history, William H McNeill describes the human condition in stark but realistic
terms as caught in a precarious equilibrium between the microparasitism of
disease organisms and the macroparasitism of large-bodied predators, chief among
which has been other human beings.

    Despite the inevitable gaps, we know a surprising amount about plagues and
epidemics of the past. We know that millions died in them. And we know that
plagues and epidemics, while they come, also go. For centuries, untouched by
medical science, they vanished of their own accord, sometimes slowly, sometimes
swiftly, like the 1918-19 flu epidemic. Evolution, in this instance running at
fast-forward, took care of them. The bacteria and viruses that cause them are
parasites and therefore subject to Professor Bohmans law. Unsuccessful parasites
are the ones that kill their hosts and soon run into an evolutionary cul de sac
themselves. Successful parasites learn to coexist with their hosts (and vice
versa), settling down to a stable, long-term relationship, a biological marriage
as opposed to the fatal attraction of a killer epidemic. Plagues of the past
become the childhood diseases of the present. We are most at risk from
infectious diseases when we are children. Were generally healthy in our 20s and
30s. As we move into middle-age, we face the chronic and degenerative diseases
of ageing, including cancer.

    IF IT IS relatively easy to understand why epidemics go away, its more
confusing to try to grasp how and why they begin. The psychological impact of
Aids was the greater because of the general complacency that medicine had
defeated plagues. Where did Aids come from? Where, for that matter, did the 14th
century Black Death or smallpox or cholera or all the other great epidemics of
history come from? Remembering McNeills graphic description of the human
condition, the remarkable thing is not how many epidemics there have been, but
how few. Epidemics, like serious accidents, ought to happen more often than they
do.  But, again like serious accidents, such as plane crashes, it takes a
combination of circumstances, various factors coming together at the same time,
each of which might not be catastrophic in itself, to create an epidemic. Among
these factors are: an infectious disease jumping from animals to human beings;
the evolution of a microbe itself into a more virulent form; density of
population, ie enough potential hosts for the microbe to keep transmitting
between them without running into Professor Bohmans cul de sac; contact between
a population already immune to a disease and a virgin population (the most
famous example being the total destruction of the Aztec and Mayan civilisations
by diseases brought by small forces of conquistadores in the 16th-17th
centuries); and large-scale global socio-political changes.

    Scientists call the result of all this an ecological niche. We have a
picture of millions of micro-organisms pullulating all over the place, looking
for their chance to adapt and survive, be fruitful and multiply, in us. Most are
benign or harmless.  Some are crippling or lethal. We can plot the precise
historical periods when we gave the lethal ones their best shot, their niche,
and all those periods have one thing in common. They are times when the world
moved closer together. Remember the Sixties talk about the global village? The
spread of jet travel, the development of instant communications, emigration,
immigration, the mixing and matching of peoples, the rise of the global economy.
We are in just such a period now. Aids ought not to have surprised us.

    Change, not stability, is the universal law, constant change at every level.
And very small changes at the microscopic level can lead to important results
farther down the line at the macrocosmic level.  In these incredibly complex,
interdependent, multi-layered systems, only a few patterns are as yet
discernible to us. But they are what people mean when they call Aids the first
post-modern disease. Like a hand into a glove, Aids fits the two key paradigms
of post-modern thought the idea of the essential unity and wholeness of
everything, familiar from the environmental movement; and the less familiar idea
that tiny, seemingly inconsequential changes in systems can produce major
results later on. The latter is the subject of chaos theory and the new
discipline of fractals. You can get a hint of it from the TV weathermans maps
and diagrams showing how a minor storm on one side of the world ends up causing
devastation on the other.

    Precisely which variables came together to cause the Aids epidemic, and
where, remains in dispute. Most researchers think Aids began in Africa, as a
result of the virus passing from monkeys to men.  Simian Immunodeficiency
Viruses (SIVs) in apes and monkeys resemble HIV. The SIVs are more varied than
the HIVs, which suggests they are older. Men have hunted and killed monkeys for
thousands of years, providing endless opportunities for cross-species
transmission.

    Detailed arguments aside, we know that most (some say all) major infectious
diseases began by crossing from animals to man.  We also know that Africa, just
as its believed to be the birthplace of mankind, is the home of human parasites
par excellence.

    Susan Sontag is among those who argue vigorously against the African
hypothesis. She points to our long, dismal record of blaming epidemics on other
people. Plague always comes from somewhere else, somebody else, usually from the
Dark Continent or the Mysterious East. Sontags warning is well-taken. Besides
there are sound scientific reasons for doubting an African origin for Aids.
There is a genetic gap for example between HIV-1, the virus that causes the
majority of what we knows as Aids, and both the SIVs and HIV-2 (which
undoubtedly began in West Africa). Researchers who want to claim they are part
of the same virus family have to postulate an as-yet undiscovered virus as the
missing link always an uncomfortable position for a scientist.

    If humans and monkeys have interacted for thousands of years, why did it
take so long for the virus to transmit? And why did it do so now? We know that
Aids appeared as a collective, epidemic disease in both Africa and America at
roughly the same time, the late 1970s. But there are a small number of cases in
the West, going back as far as the early 1950s, which have been retrospectively
diagnosed as Aids. Not all of these cases seem to have an African connection.

    Lastly, microbes evolve, mutate. They can assume more virulent forms in and
of themselves without any need for cross-species transmission. Aids may be an
old disease in human beings, around for centuries before it became a lethal
epidemic.

    EITHER way, African or not, brand-new or age-old, by far the most important
of the factors that combine to create an epidemic is man himself. Different but
comparable socio-political changes existed in parts of Africa and the big
American cities at the same time. In Africa, there was war, famine, revolution,
social chaos, mass migration from the countryside to the cities together with
the resulting breakdown of old values. In America, in cities like San Francisco,
there was a unique concentration of homosexuals along with the amplification
system of the bathhouses and sex clubs. The Aids pandemic may have begun in both
places independently; though, 12 years on, its worth noting that most of the
estimated 12 million HIV infections worldwide spread from America.

    In his The Origin And History Of Aids, French medical historian Mirko Grmek
coins a new concept he dubs pathocenosis. At any given time, Grmek argues, there
is an equilibrium, a stable distribution among diseases and the microbes that
cause them. The existence of some diseases literally prevents others. Virulent
strains of HIV, for instance, may not have been able to survive when their
potential hosts died of TB or smallpox or something else.

    The very success of science against other infectious diseases, the success
scientists crowed about in the Sixties and Seventies, may have opened up the
ecological niche for HIV/Aids to become an epidemic. If Grmek is right, its a
fascinating irony, the very triumph of science becoming its own nemesis.

    For a long time, the debate over the origin of Aids sat on the sidelines,
overshadowed by the search for treatments and a cure. Recently, it has come to
the fore, not for what it tells us about the past but for what it can tell us
about the future. Getting an accurate evolutionary perspective on HIV/Aids has
vital implications, ranging from strategies for treatments aimed at the viruss
mutation, to strategies for prevention.

    At the extreme of this view, Professor Roger Bohman believes evolution may
take care of Aids before we do. Weve learned more about viruses because of Aids
than weve ever learned before, but we still have this tragic assumption that
knowledge equals control. It hasnt proved true with cancer and there are
important similarities between Aids and cancer. Historically, epidemics have
come and gone without our curing them and that may be the case with Aids too.

    Aids, says Dr Jay Levy of the University of San Francisco, is the hardest
thing second only to cancer to control. In fact, Aids and cancer are the same
disease in many ways. They work in the opposite direction: with cancer, cells
grow out of control and with Aids they die out of control. But you have to kill
off a virus-infected cell and you have to kill off a cancer cell. And the cancer
cell produces a cytokines that work against you and the virus produces cytokines
that work against you. The cancer cells distribute themselves all over the body
including the brain and so does the virus. The immune system is important in
controlling cancer and the immune system is important in controlling the virus.
And so you begin to realise, for example, if we havent made a cancer vaccine,
how are we going to make an Aids vaccine?

    There are optimists and pessimists about Aids and some people are both,
depending on the day. To the optimists, Aids will soon become a chronic disease,
something we can live with. To the pessimists like Professor Bohman, thats
bullshit. This is a fatal disease. You die and its a miserable death. You just
have to look at someone whos got it and you say, Chronic, my ass!  Optimists
tend to believe in the link between knowledge and treatment and a future where
more drugs and multiple therapies will manage HIV, even if they cant cure it.
And the optimists are in charge.  The princes of the Aids research establisment,
as they have made themselves the princes of medicine in general, are the
molecular biologists, still operating on old-fashioned 19th century notions of
causality materialist, reductionist and rigid. Their current Holy Grail is
genetic therapy, within five years, a new genetically engineered golden age for
medicine which remains, as it has been for the last 30 years, just around the
corner.

    Here is the real significiance of the anti-HIV lobby. When they attack the
molecular biologists and criticise the gap between HIV as a virus and Aids as a
disease they make a valuable point its just not the point they think theyre
making. HIV certainly causes Aids. But the precise mechanisms of causation in
living organisms (and perhaps elsewhere also) are complex, multi-layered, more
like patterns than straight lines, involving interactions, feedbacks, chance,
emotional and environmental factors. While molecular biologists argue that, once
the precise causes of things like Aids and cancer are understood, we shall find
cures, full understanding may not be possible on any traditional model of
cause-and-effect or, for that matter, at all.

    PESSIMISTS tend to pin their faith on evolution in one guise or another, on
the fact that past plagues came but also went (interestingly, William McNeill in
his metahistory found a pattern, an average time period of 100-120 years it took
a virgin population to adjust to a novel disease). Combining the two approaches
are recent, faint experimental indications that HIV might be artificially
speeded on its evolutionary way by drugs that force it to mutate into
insignificance. Until then, as Warren Winkelstein notes, all we have is
prevention and the equally experimental business of trying to change human
habits.  Tom Donohoe, responsible for various Aids education programmes at UCLA,
says, All those social skeletons are coming out of the closet because of Aids
teenage sex, abortion, sexually transmitted diseases, family values, drugs. Aids
has a foot in every one. And Mark Katz feels, I wish it wasnt the case, but the
way were going, Aids could become the entire curriculum for a university
education. This is the greatest challenge to education, to politics, to
health-care rationing, philosophy, history . . . its all there.

    Copyright Mike Bygrave


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1993


                              406 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 10, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN CITY PAGE; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: AMERSHAM TO LAUNCH DNA ROBOT

BYLINE: RAY MGADZAH

BODY:


    AMERSHAM International, the health science group privatised in 1982, is to
launch a robot which uses an automated magnetic kit to separate human genes and
to speed up the detection of genetic sequences in DNA.

    One market for Amersham's molecular biology robot and fast magnetic
purification kit will be scientists involved in the Human Genome Project, a
worldwide research programme aiming to define the complete sequence of DNA.

    Identification of genetic sequences in human DNA can be used to help detect
susceptibility to hereditary diseases. Gene mutations are identified and gene
therapy, which is now being developed, may be used to correct defective genes.

    Amersham chief executive Mr Bill Castell said the robot, which will be
launched with other products during the next nine months, will free highly
qualified researchers from drudgery, enabling them to focus on more
intellectually demanding work.

    Yesterday, Amersham report-ed a 27 per cent jump in pre-tax profits, from
pounds 20.7 million to pounds 26.3 million, for the year ended March 31. The
total dividend rose by 8 per cent to 13.5p, while earnings per share advanced
from 23.7p to 30.4p.

    The Amersham robot has been developed by combining the company's advanced
robotics and cell separation know-how with the leading-edge gene sequencing
skills of its recent American acquisition, USB.

    Other products to be launched by Amersham include DNA sequencing reagents
and assays to aid drug research. Research and development spending, which
included money spent on the robot, rose by 7 per cent to pounds 15.9 million.


LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1993


                              409 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 13, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGE; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 175 words

HEADLINE: SELF-HELP

BODY:


    (An alphabetical directory of self-help groups)

    British Retinitis Society, PO Box 350, Buckingham MK18 5EL. Tel: 02806 363.
(Helpline: 9am-10pm, Monday to Friday.)

    History: Founded in 1975 to provide advice and support and to raise money
for research. Retinitis Pigmentosa is the name given to a group of hereditary
diseases of the retina, the light sensitive tissue at the back of the eye. Some
sufferers lose all their sight; others retain some. RP is the largest cause of
blindness in the working population. There is no known cure. Research is aimed
at developing gene therapy. The society brings together fellow sufferers to pass
on tips and advice about the everyday problems of living with the disease and
prepare sufferers for further visual deterioration.

    Branches: 40 in England, Wales and Scotland.

    Membership: pounds 5 a year.

    Finance: by subscription and voluntary donation.

    Publications: An annual report, quarterly newspaper plus booklets. A
publications list is available on request; please send SAE.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993


                              420 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 12, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 45 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FIRST

BODY:


    Carly Todd, aged eight months, from Glasgow, will next week become the first
patient in Britain to undergo gene therapy, a treatment hailed as the next
revolution in medicine. Approval for treatment was given yesterday by the
Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993


                              422 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 1, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 241 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS HOPE GENE INJECTION MAY RELIEVE SKIN CANCER TUMOUR

BYLINE: CHRIS MIHILL MEDICAL CORRESPONDENT

BODY:


    RESEARCHERS hope that a gene therapy injection may offer a new way to treat
cancer, in particular advanced skin cancer for which currently nothing can be
done.

    The treatment is highly experimental and has yet to be used with humans but,
if it works, it is possible that within five to 10 years it could be applied to
other major cancers.

    Trials could start within a year on skin cancer patients for whom all other
treatments have failed, if ethical permission is given by the Clothier
Committee, the Government's adviser on gene therapy, scientists from the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund said yesterday.

    Each year 3,300 people are diagnosed with malignant melanoma in Britain.

    Dr Ian Hart and Dr Richard Vile, of the fund's biometastasis laboratory,
have discovered genes can be spliced to a piece of DNA called a promoter which
controls production of the body pigment melanin, and then react inside the
melanin cells.

    The Interluekin 2 gene stimulates the immune system to attack cancer, but by
linking it to the promoter the attack can be directed at only cancerous cells,
rather than causing side-effects.

    The scientists stress that as yet they do not have a possible cure, but
rather that the treatment if successful in shrinking tumours should
significantly extend patients' lives. Details of the treatment, given as an
injection into the tumour, are published today in the American journal, Cancer
Research.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993


                              424 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 25, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 272 words

HEADLINE: GENE LINK TO LORENZO DISEASE

BYLINE: TIM RADFORD, SCIENCE EDITOR

BODY:


    DOCTORS have greeted a London premiere of the film Lorenzo's Oil with the
discovery of a gene which may be linked to the disease that Lorenzo's oil is
supposed to alleviate.

    In the same issue of the journal Nature another scientist has condemned the
film as "pernicious".

    The gene report - by scientists in France, Germany and the US - refers to a
"putative" gene involved in adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD. This is the disease
inherited by Lorenzo Odone, and the film, starring Nicke Nolte and Susan
Sarandon, is the true story of his parents' pursuit of a cure.

    ALD is passed only to males. Sufferers usually have an excess of fatty acids
in the blood, and may progressively lose their ability to see, hear, eat, move
and breathe.

    Dr Patrick Aubourg of the Rene Descartes University in Paris and colleagues
in Strasbourg, Heidelberg and Baltimore have identified a gene involved in
protein transfer which is abnormal in ALD patients, and which might suggest a
strategy for gene therapy.

    They have nothing to say about the oil - derived from rapeseed - that has
helped Lorenzo. But Dr Fred Rosen, of the Centre for Blood Research in Boston,
has pronounced views about the film. "We learn in the course of two hours that
nurses are heartless, physicians pompous fools and parent support groups as
mindless as a herd of sheep," he says.

    He adds that a forthcoming paper by one of Dr Aubourg's colleagues, Dr Hugo
Moser, of Baltimore, will reveal that 40 per cent of ALD patients who take the
oil treatment develop a reduction in the blood platelets involved in clotting.

    Derek Macolm, G2, page 4-5

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993


                              425 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 22, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. E17

LENGTH: 466 words

HEADLINE: GENES: ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

BYLINE: PETER MOORE

BODY:


    DIFFERENT people hold different views about the ethical implications of
genetic engineering. The answers to some of the key questions facing scientists
vary according to people's own beliefs.

    Question: By changing someone's genes, do you change their personality?

    Yes. Genes form the blueprint that builds you. They are inherited from your
parents and determine how you will grow, what you will look like and how you
will behave.

    No. Genes may dictate your physical make up, but other factors also
determine how you behave and what sort of person you are. It is not as if
identical twins have identical personalities.

    Question: Gene therapy is new. We do not know the outcome of the treatment,
so the patient is part of an experiment. Is it right to experiment on humans?

    Yes. Animal experiments show that the process is safe and that it works.
Conventional treatments are probably more dangerous for the patient.

    No. It is never right to use humans in experiments. It undermines respect
for and dignity of human life.

    Question: Discovery and testing of this treatment involved animal
experiments.  Is it right to use animals in medical research?

    Yes. Animal research in the UK is regulated by strict legislation. The
animals are treated carefully and suffering minimised. Without this work new
treatments would never be tested to see if they are safe.

    No. Animal experiments are wrong. You do not know if an animal is suffering.
Research should only be carried out using non-animal techniques, even if that
slows progress.

    Question: If you discover the code of a gene, should you claim to own that
information and restrict its use by placing a copyright on it?

    Yes. Research is very costly and copyright allows researchers to recoup the
money they have spent. This will enable further research which would not
otherwise be done.

    No. Even if researchers find a sequence, they did not design it. So they
have no right to own it.

    Question: Can you change the DNA in sperm cells or ova and affect all future
generations?

    Yes. Failure to treat these cells endangers the patient's offspring anyway.

    No. At the moment we do not know tha these techniques are safe enough to
impose on future generations.

    Question: Some protein molecules needed by conventional medicine are
difficult to make. However, a sheep's genes can be altered so that it produces
these protein molecules in its milk. For example, 50 sheep could produce enough
clotting factor to treat all the haemophiliacs in the UK. But is it right to
engineer animals for our benefit?

    Yes. The animals will be extremely valuable and treated extremely carefully.
They will not know that it has happened.

    No. It is never right to use animals for human benefit.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993


                              426 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 22, 1993

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGE; Pg. E16

LENGTH: 1118 words

HEADLINE: GENES: BREAKTHROUGH IN GENE WARFARE;
As doctors prepare to change the genes in a young person's cells for the first
time, we look at the latest developments in this technology and examine the
arguments for and against genetic engineering

BYLINE: PETER MOORE

BODY:


    PERMISSION was recently given for doctors in Britain to start using a new
method of treating patients. The technique, called gene therapy, could
completely change health care over the next few years.

    Genes are the units that determine the characteristics of every living
thing, and they are passed on from parents to children. This means that children
can inherit unhealthy, or "incorrect", genes from their parents.

    Gene therapy will first be used to treat a child who suffers from a disease
called adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. It is revolutionary because it will
change the genes in the patient's own cells.

    Doctors will add a healthy gene to cells that were unable to grow properly
because they had inherited an incorrect gene. The new gene will cause the cells
to build an enzyme, a large protein-based molecule that controls the chemical
reactions within the cells. This will allow the cells to work.

    Scientists are linking more and more diseases with faults in a person's
genetic code. Up to 4,000 such diseases have now been recorded. And of babies
admitted to intensive care, more than half have a disease they have inherited
through their genes. These range from rare diseases such as ADA deficiency to
asthma, haemophilia, diabetes, cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
colour-blindness.

    Inheriting disease

    WE INHERIT many factors in our genes - from our hair colour to our height.
We also inherit the ability for each of our cells to make the enzymes it needs
to control the chemical reactions in our bodies. Without enzymes our bodies
would not function and we would die.

    The process by which we inherit our characteristics depends on structures in
our cell nuclei called chromosomes. Chromosomes are made of long chain-like
molecules called deoxyribose nucleic acid (DNA) that carry a code. When a human
sperm fertilises an egg, two half-sets of chromosomes, one from each parent,
combine to form a new embryo. You can think of the code as a message written
using only four "letters", in three-letter "words". Some of the sequences (the
genes) form sentences that cause individual protein molecules to be made.

    At either end of a gene there are sequences that form "punctuation" for
these sentences. They might say "start reading here" or "stop reading here".

    The relationship between the gene's code and the protein it makes is very
precise. If a change occurs in this message - called a mutation - the sequence
no longer reads correctly. The cell cannot then produce that protein. This
inability can cause very specific diseases.

    So if the code on one of your parents' chromosomes is faulty, then you might
inherit that mistake and suffer as a result.

    Genetic engineering

    SCIENTISTS have estimated that humans have between 50,000 and 100,000 genes.
They have learned how to locate genes in chromosomes and have found out how they
are controlled.

    They can also cut a gene sequence out of one cell and place it into another.
In this case the recipient cell now starts to produce the protein coded for by
that gene. This can change a cell's function, or can correct the function of a
cell that is not working properly.

    These scientists are called genetic engineers. Genetic engineering is not
restricted to medicine. It is used to design plants that can grow faster,
produce bigger fruit, survive harsh weather conditions, or resist disease
better. New genetically engineered plants should help to provide the increased
amount of food needed to feed the world.

    The same techniques have other uses. They can increase the speed of
animal-breeding programmes. They also offer future generations of farmers and
gardeners the hope of using engineered bacteria rather than pesticides to kill
pests.

    Life saver

    ADA deficiency is first suspected when a patient cannot fight infections and
is found to have no (or very few) white blood cells (called lymphocytes).

    Lymphocytes help us combat infection. They recognise and destroy any foreign
particles, such as bacteria, that get into the body. So if you cannot make
lymphocytes, you cannot fight infections.

    Normally the ADA enzyme is made in all the body's cells. But if it is
absent, it is the lymphocytes that are particularly vulnerable. Removing an
enzyme from a cell blocks chemical pathways, much as removing a bridge from a
city street system blocks traffic flow. This means that the chemicals that would
have passed through the enzyme build up very quickly. Ultimately, the cell's
chemical balance is destroyed and it fails.

    The cell's function can be restored only by replacing the enzyme or, better
still, by enabling the cell to make the enzyme itself.

    The ADA gene was first identified in 1982, but it has taken a decade for
scientists to develop this treatment and show that it is safe. ADA deficiency
was chosen as a suitable disease for the first trial as it is caused by damage
to only one gene.

    The doctors will take an ADA gene from a healthy cell, along with the DNA
that controls it, and make thousands of copies. There are many ways of copying
DNA sequences, some of which make use of the natural biochemical machinery
inside cells and viruses (see diagram, below left).

    Doctors can use special, safe viruses (called retroviruses) to inject the
ADA gene into the chromosomes of the lymphocyte cells, found amongst bone-marrow
cells. These retroviruses will then also place the DNA into the patient's
bone-marrow cells, where the lymphocytes are produced. The hope is that these
modified cells will multiply and spread throughout the bone marrow.

    As the gene is contained within the chromosomes of the lymphocytes, it will
be carried into future generations of cells as they divide. If successful, the
treatment could last a life-time.

    But the gene will not be able to leave the lymphocytes, so it will not
travel into the sperm or ova. This means that it cannot be passed on to future
generations.

    The next step

    IN 1989 the Government set up the Clothier Committee to draw up ethical
guidelines for the medical profession on the treatment of genetic disorders by
genetic modification of human body cells. The committee reported that treatment
affecting the cells of the patient only (not future generations) would be
acceptable, as long as the patient was informed about all possible side effects.
It also recommended that the first treatments should be on single gene
disorders, giving greater possibility for success.

    However, no treatment should be undertaken that would affect future
generations. The Government is about to establish a permanent regulatory
authority to oversee genetic therapies.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993


                              443 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 29, 1992

SECTION: THE GUARDIAN HOME PAGE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: CANCER DRUG FOR LUNG DISEASE

BYLINE: CHRIS MIHILL

BODY:


    NEW treatment for young people suffering from the lung disease cystic
fibrosis may be possible with a drug used for cancer therapy, according to a
professor of child health, writes Chris Mihill.

    John Warner, of Southampton University, said that although gene therapy
remained many years away, a growing understanding of the disease, where cells
are unable to deal with salt, was opening up new possibilities.

    In CF patients the levels of an immune system protein called IL8 were raised
so massively that tissue damage resulted. Steroids used to suppress IL8 have
produced side effects but low doses of the cancer drug methotrexate had been
found to deal with it efficiently.

    Professor Warner said that a boy so ill he was being considered for a lung
transplant improved dramatically after two years on methotrexate.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1993


                              447 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 29, 1992

SECTION: EG; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1889 words

HEADLINE: ANIMALS: TESTING TIMES;
Scientists have to consider the balance between human health and animal welfare
as they push forward the frontiers of research

BYLINE: SUSAN ALDRIDGE

BODY:


    MANY people hold strong views about the use of animals for research. Action
by opponents of animal testing - for cosmetic products or medical purposes -
often makes headlines.

    Only last week a campaign was launched by the British Union for the
Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV) to make it illegal for medical experiments to be
conducted on primates such as apes and baboons. The animals have been used in
research on vaccines, transplants and brain disorders such as Parkinson's
disease. Researchers say that work on primates was central to the development of
polio vaccines and treatment of hepatitis and malaria. The BUAV says the animals
suffer unnecessarily and often not for medical purposes.

    The Animal Liberation Front (ALF), another campaign group, has threatened to
destroy one of the centres involved in the work, which is run by the Medical
Research Council (MRC) in Edinburgh. The MRC says it is satisfied that the use
of the primates is justified, and that no unnecessary suffering is caused.

    From Galen to insulin

    The use of animals in medical research has a long history. The Greek
physician Galen (129-199) was among the first to carry out experiments on
animals. Using pigs and monkeys, he put forward ideas about how the body works
which were to dominate science for centuries. His animal studies showed that
arteries contained blood, not air, as had been thought. But he wrongly thought
that the heart caused an "ebb and flow" movement of blood.

    Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564) was forced out of his post at the Spanish court
when he published his book, On the Structure of the Human Body, which criticised
Galen. Yet the work of Vesalius, who had dissected corpses, formed the basis of
modern anatomy.

    William Harvey (1578-1657), physician to Charles I, was allowed to
experiment on the deer in the royal parks. He also worked with human corpses.
Harvey is now mainly remembered for discovering - in work with snakes - that
blood circulates around the body through the heart's pumping action.

    Many medical scientists of the 19th century supported the experimental use
of animals. Louis Pasteur (1822-1895), for instance, made discoveries in the
field of infectious diseases, based upon work with animals. These led to the
development of antibiotics.

    Another case was the research into diabetes, a condition which affects
750,000 people in the UK.

    About 25 per cent of all diabetics depend on daily injections of insulin.
This type of diabetes is known as insulin-dependent diabetes and is caused by
the failure of the pancreas to produce insulin, which

    regulates the amount of glucose in the blood. The remainder use insulin,
drugs and a modified diet to control their condition.

    Diabetes was first described in Egypt in about 1500 BC. The remedy was a
mixture of bones, ground earth, wheat and lead. For centuries no one knew its
cause and the outlook for diabetics was bleak. Then, in 1869, Paul Langerhans
discovered some unusual cells in the pancreas. Twenty years later it was shown
that removal of the pancreas caused diabetes. It was assumed that these cells -
the Islets of Langerhans - secreted a hormone essential to life.

    Other scientists found that if they removed the pancreas from dogs, the
animals developed diabetes. They began to look for the substance which was made
by the pancreas which could treat the disease.

    Insulin was finally discovered by the Canadian surgeon Frederick Banting and
his partner Charles Best. The two scientists tried it out on a diabetic dog
called Marjorie. She was restored to health with an injection from a healthy
pancreas. But she only survived for 70 days, so the extract had to be refined
until it became more effective.

    The first person to receive insulin was 14-year-old Leonard Thompson in
1922.  Insulin was then made from pigs and cattle. Today, some of it is made by
genetic engineering from bacteria which have had a human insulin gene inserted
and are grown in

    fermenters.

    Medical developments

    TODAY animals are still used to try and improve our basic understanding of
how the body works both in health and in disease.

    A recent development is the breeding of transgenic animals for medical
research. Transgenic animals have had foreign genes inserted into their own DNA,
altering their biological blueprint. For example, "oncomouse", developed at
Harvard University, is a breed of mouse which contains human cancer genes and
develops tumours soon after birth. This animal has been used to try out possible
cures for human cancer.

    Some genes for inherited diseases such as cystic fibrosis and haemophilia
have now been identified. Transgenic animals with genetic defects could be used
to test gene therapies which may cure people with these diseases.

    Animals can also be used to make biological products. Antibodies are
proteins that can stick to specific antigens, chemicals on a cell's surface
inside the body. They can be used to deliver drugs or poisons directly to a
diseased cell. In addition, they are used in diagnosis, for example in pregnancy
testing. They can be made in mice by injecting them with the protein which will
produce the desired antibody in the animal.

    Alternatives to animals

    ANIMAL experiments are only one of three stages in the testing of new
clinical drugs. At first research is done in the laboratory using computers,
test-tube experiments, etc. Drugs that pass this stage are tested on animals,
and those which are successful here are then taken to clinical trials with human
volunteers. So if the animal stage is to be bypassed, alternatives will have to
be found.

    Scientists can learn a great deal about a new drug in the early stages of
development. Computer

    graphics can be used, for example. An image of the drug molecule is created.
It can then be manipulated on a computer screen in an attempt to predict how it
will act at the molecular level.

    The computer-designed drug must then be made and tested in a test-tube. At
this stage, many potential drugs will be discarded because they do not work or
are dangerous. If the chemicals pass this step, they then have to be tested on
animals to discover their effect on a whole body.

    In certain cases, organisms such as invertebrates, plants and microbes are
now used in some testing in place of animals. For example, cells from animals or
humans can be grown in a test-tube. This is known as in vitro testing. It may be
useful in screening new chemicals for toxicity.

    new "monoclonal antibody" technology makes it possible to produce an
unlimited supply of certain antibodies that were previously made in laboratory
mice. No further animals need be used.

    Before a drug can be made commercially available, it must be tested with
human volunteers.

    What the law says

    EC regulations and most countries' laws require that drugs, agricultural
chemicals and cosmetics are tested for safety before being put on sale. Animals
are often used in these tests; their use for these and other experimental
purposes is controlled by the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986.

    Under the Act, experiments on vertebrates must be approved by the Home
Office.  The researcher and the project must be licensed. The researcher must
convince the Home Office that the benefits of the experiments justify the costs
to the animals involved.

    Experiments may only be carried out where there is a named person in charge
of the care of the animals and a vet to look after their health and welfare.
Special permission is needed to use dogs, cats and primates and the use of stray
animals is forbidden. The Act also states that animals may be used only where no
alternative exists.

    Arguments for and against

    For: Most significant advances in human health have involved the use of
animals.

    The human right to health ultimately takes priority over animal welfare.

    All responsible medical research involves the use of animals at some stage.

    The public demands increasingly high safety standards for chemicals used in
everyday life - reliable information is only available from animal tests.

    The use of animals in research is carefully controlled by law and abuses are
rare.

    Against: Advances in human health owe more to better standards of nutrition
and hygiene than to experimental science based on the use of animals.

    There are valid and cheaper alternatives to animals which could be used in
medical research.

    Animals have the same rights as humans.

    Many of the chemicals used in everyday life are unnecessary and so tests on
them cannot be justified.

    Performing animal experiments degrades those who carry them out and should
not be permitted.

    Animals in education

    THE LAW does not allow schools to conduct

    experiments which could cause vertebrates pain or suffering. However,
animals may be kept for breeding or for studying behaviour. Younger children can
learn to respect animals and care for school pets.

    Dissection is still allowed in schools. Until a few years ago, it was part
of the requirements of the

    A-level biology course. Some students said this put them off science. So
dissection is now voluntary.

    In colleges, dissection is still part of many undergraduate courses in
medicine and biology and some of these courses involve experiments on live
animals or animal tissue. Vets in training learn anatomy by dissecting animals
but they are not allowed to learn surgical skills on live animals in the UK.

    But what do students themselves think about the use of animals? A group of
A-level biology students at Islington Sixth-Form Centre, London, gave their
views. Most have looked at sheep hearts and fish gills, and several have already
carried out dissection on fish. Looking after hamsters and observing breathing
rates in locusts were other common activities.

    "It [voluntary dissection] is better than forcing the squeamish to be
involved and shows consideration for vegetarians and students who object on
moral grounds." Michael Johnson, 17.

    "If people are really serious about biology, then they usually do the
dissection. In some cases, it is essential for the course." Anna Gordon, 16.

    "Dissection gives students who want to study medicine a better understanding
of internal structure." Sadia Kayani, 17.

    "If an animal is killed solely for the dissection, then I wouldn't be happy
to carry it out." Laura Simpson, 16.

    "I don't like the fact that animals are killed just so a few kids can peer
inside them." Sophie Howard, 17.

    "Animals should be used mainly for simple experiments, such as measuring the
breathing rates of locusts." Fola Awofadeju, 16.

    "In most scientific experiments, animals get a raw deal." Andrea Cathnott,
16.

    "We can look at their body functions while they are living." Laura Simpson.

    "I will not be joining any course that involves an

    obvious over-use of animals." Michael Johnson.

    "I intend to study genetics, so animals will be used. But this will not
alter my choice." Cassell Bailey, 17.

    "I want to go to medical school. The use of animals won't affect my plans,
but I would prefer not to use them." Sophie Howard.

    What do you think? Write to eG, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London
EC1R 3ER with your views.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1993


                              450 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 22, 1992

SECTION: EG; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: AFTER HOURS

BYLINE: ANDREW JACOBS

BODY:


    DESCRIPTION: I have haemophilia, which is a hereditary blood-clotting
disorder. You get bruises inside the body which bleed, but you can't see them.
To stop myself having bleeds I inject myself about three times a week. I take
bottles of clotting agent to school and, if I need to, I inject myself.

    I can usually sort the bleed out before it really starts to hurt. It's a
certain kind of pain, which is more than an everyday pain but nowhere near as
bad as having broken a leg. It's not too bad when it first starts but after a
couple of hours it can really hurt. I used to have bleeds every week, but now
it's only once a fortnight.

    I don't mind people knowing about it. I think you have to be open about
these things. After all, no one is perfect. I can do most sports, but not rugby
and football. I play tennis and I'm in the chess club. I went away with the
school to Spain last year and only had one bleed. We did everything: water
skiing, canoeing . . . If you don't go for it, life can be really boring.

    VERDICT: Some people are born ugly or get spots. You can't change what you
have so you have to live with it. Some people at school call me "a little
bleeder" but I don't mind it. I think some of them have learning difficulties
and don't understand. Haemophilia has made me very positive. I think it's made
me more sympathetic and more determined to enjoy life.

    AMBITION: I want to play for England in table tennis, which I'm quite good
at.  I want to be a Grand Master at chess. And I want to help to find a cure for
haemophilia, even if it's not for me. I want to help the Royal Free Hospital in
London in their work on gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1993


                              463 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 28, 1992

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 2024 words

HEADLINE: PRE-PERSONS AND THE ETHICS OF EXISTENCE;
Janet Radcliffe Richards calls for logic, not hasty invocations of danger, in
judging the rights and wrongs of biotechnology

BYLINE: JANET RADCLIFFE RICHARDS

BODY:


    SOME months ago I ran into a Department of Health official who was deep in
the formulation of government policies to cope with the advance of biotechnology
and who had just heard John Harris speaking at a conference.

    I have forgotten his account of the paper, but not his reaction to hearing
it.  It was rather as though Captain Cook had just met his first duck-billed
platypus. He had noted this unknown species in the human zoo with bemused
fascination, but manifestly with no suspicion that its eccentric utterances
might have any relevance to real life and the DH.

    Now Harris is neither a spouter of nonsense nor a perpetrator of controversy
for its own sake; but it must be conceded that he has been regarded as a kind of
enfant terrible of applied philosophy, whose conclusions are more than usually
out of line with average opinion. He was once - perhaps still is - best known
for a paper called The Survival Lottery, in which he pointed out that since many
people die every year for want of spare parts and since a single person could
supply enough organs to keep, say, half a dozen others going we could increase
everyone's life expectancy by sacrificing one person whenever several others
were in need of organs and choosing the victim by lot. And perhaps it is not
surprising that most people who reject this modest proposal out of hand are
quite unperturbed by being unable to find a flaw in the argument.

    So it was clear in advance that there were going to be two kinds of question
to ask about this book. First, obviously, about the inherent merits of the
arguments; but second, almost as important for a book whose specific purpose was
to reach practical conclusions, about the chances of their being at all
politically persuasive. Persuasion is not the same as proof, and if people just
glaze over when the arguments appear the philosopher will make little
impression, reason he never so wisely.

    In fact the subject matter of this book is a good deal closer to the ground
than one might think from the title. Wonderwoman and superman appear only
briefly, rather late; and when they do they have neither winged feet nor stares
that can pulverise evil at 50 paces. They have not even supercomputer brains or
legs that will carry them over a two-minute mile. The "new breed" under
discussion turns out to be altogether more sober, very like us except for
genetically engineered resistance to disease and ageing.

    And anyway, the book is concerned with more than just the potential of
genetic engineering. It deals with problems of all kinds that arise, or are
likely to arise soon, in the field of human biotechnology. After providing just
enough scientific background to get the discussion going, it launches into a
wide range of ethical issues.

    Some of these are already familiar - embryo research, use of foetal tissue,
choosing the sex of children, organs for transplant, commercialisation.

    OTHERS are gradually becoming so - somatic versus germ line gene therapy,
xenografting (use of animal parts in humans), social justice and genetically
engineered advantage. Some are, although important, rather mudane - insurance
and employment law, confidentiality, ownership of knowledge and dead bodies.
Others are, at least in the case of humans, still exotics - hybrids, chimeras,
cloning and parthenogenesis. From the diveristy of this list it will be apparent
that the book has no single thesis; many of these topics can be and are
discussed in their own right. Nevertheless, there is a clear underlying theme.
Harris starts, as did Jonathan Glover in his admirable Penguin, What Sort Of
People Should There Be?, by pointing out that the advances in biotechnology give
us tremendously enhanced abilities to do good, and that if we are not going to
take the opportunities that arise we need very good reasons. And the conclusion
he reaches, in one context after another, is that many of the justifications
typically produced to defend conservatism and caution just do not work.

    In effect he has two kinds of opponent to deal with. First, there are the
ones who think human life is sacred from the moment of conception, and
accordingly are opposed on principle to abortion, experiments on embryos and the
use of foetal tissue. And second, there are the all-purpose conservatives
obsessed with vague fear of hubris, and convinced that tampering with Nature or
playing God will usually end in tears. (The second category includes most people
most of the time.)

    To confront the sanctity of life contingent, Harris starts with the idea,
now familiar to moral philosophers, that although anyone whose life is worth
living may reasonably be said to have benefited from being brought into
existence, the converse is not true: you cannot harm someone by failing to bring
them into existence, because there is no one you can have harmed, or even failed
to benefit.

    HARRIS adds an extra element to this by distinguishing between a person (by
which, in line with many other philosophers such as Tooley, he means a being
that values its own existence, and therefore, he claims, can be harmed by losing
it) and a pre-person (which may become, but is not yet, a person).  Accordingly,
the argument goes, a person can be benefited or harmed by things that happen at
earlier stages in her own pre-personal history (Harris uses the feminine
throughout); what happens to the ovum, sperm and embryo that eventually become
you may harm or benefit you. But a pre-person, in contrast, cannot be harmed by
being deprived of its existence, since (ex-hypothesis) existence is not a thing
it values, and if it ceases to exist there is no person for whom this can be a
(direct) loss. There is, he concludes, no harm in (painless) research on such
pre-persons or in the use of their tissues - or at least, no harm remotely
comparable with the harm to actual persons that will come of failing to do these
things.

    This is only the barest outline of a complicated argument which, with its
various ramifications (such as questions about whether you can wrong people by
bringing them into existence), runs over several chapters, and anyone who wants
to assess it must obviously look at the full version. This, it must be said, is
not easy going. But readers who find themselves stuck in the mire, or who are
too disgusted by the prospect of the conclusion to bother with trying, should
not abandon the book. Later arguments do not depend on these controversial
conclusions and are also much easier to follow.

    The second batch of opponents is characterised by the kind of attitude
reflected in the map maker who worked on the principle "Where Unknown, there
mark Terrors". It is easy to sympathise with this attitude. But, as Harris
persistently points out, in contexts where doing nothing means allowing
suffering, doing nothing cannot be presumed the safest option. And he proceeds
to a series of arguments, often of a very satisfying neatness, against the
barrage of platitudes, preconceptions and fallacies thrown in the way of
progress.

    IT is said, for instance, that one reason for limiting the correction of
defective genes to the "somatic line" (the cells of one individual) rather than
treating the "germ line" (whose changes would be transmitted to offspring) is
that there may be some hidden benefit in the defective gene, which it would
therefore be rash to elimate. But somatic gene therapy for all sufferers would
conceal any such benefits just as effectively as germ line therapy. It is also
said that if we reduce genetic diversity by gene therapy we may prevent the
future discovery of cures that do not involve genetic intervention. But it is
extraordinarily perverse to suggest that we should choose to remain susceptible
to genetic disease "on the off chance that this present vulnerability might
somehow reduce our susceptibility at some future time".

    It is essential to be clear about the status of arguments like these, which
appear in many different contexts throughout the book. Readers will probably
find, as I did, that they keep thinking "yes but" and raising objections to germ
line therapy, or parental choice of children's characteristics, or whatever,
that Harris does not consider. But even if any of these objections were
decisive, that would still not affect the value of his arguments. His concern is
not to prove that there are no grounds for concern about any of these things,
but rather to clear the way for proper discussion by removing the litter of
hopeless arguments which have seemed - to people already convinced of their
conclusions - to prove the case in the other direction. And as long as this is
understood, the work Harris does should easily be recognised as both good and
important.

    I did have some problems with the book. For what it is worth (not much,
without explanation) there are several aspects of the long argument about
persons, pre-persons and the rights and wrongs of beginning and ending existence
where, if Harris is not confused, I am. There seems, for example, to be a good
deal of slipping between the person-affecting morality he officially espouses
and quite different impersonal arguments about reducing the total of avoidable
suffering. And in some parts of his more straightforwardly political discussions
I suspect him of falling into his opponents' trap of overlooking the inadequacy
of arguments because he is already convinced of the truth of the conclusion.
(Does he really believe, for instance, that it is never possible to make
reliable predictions about the likelihood that particular individuals will or
will not be good parents?) But whatever truth there may be in these and other
criticisms, there is still no doubt that the book contains a great deal of
material that is interesting, acute, persuasive and important.

    How much persuading it will actually do is another matter; and that brings
me again to the question of how the book is likely to strike the concerned
non-philosopher. It is certainly not bizarre or extreme - not by any means in
the Survival Lottery class - but it does go against much deep feeling; and
accusations of "repugnant" and "playing God" will always lurk in the background
"ready to break out", as J.S. Mill said about appeals to the Natural, "whenever
. . . the native promptings of the mind have nothing to oppose them but reason".

    My own suspicion is that the early arguments about the moral status of
pre-persons will simply float over everyone not already disposed to think in
that way, even if they bother to read it. People who seriously hold that human
life is sacred from the moment of conception are unlikely to be shifted by
arguments of this sort. From the point of view of practical politics it would
probably have been more effective to spend less time on these fundamental
problems, and concentrate more on the fact that most people in our society, when
it comes to the point, really have no such view. Few think that abortion is the
same as murder; and anyone who accepts the legitimacy of abortion, but rejects
embryo research to the same stage of development and fusses about the use of
foetal tissue, needs to explain what makes these cases so different.  This is
not at all easy to do.

    But the other arguments against the hasty invocations of danger that
obstruct the full use of new technology probably have a good chance of practical
success. Many people will find them alarming, but if they can be brought to
recognise the harm done by their caution, they may also see how inadequately
grounded much of it is.

    I hope that this time Harris's challenges to received opinion will be seen
as reasons for doubting that opinion, rather than as further justification for
regarding philosophers who reach uncomfortable conclusions as irrelevant
oddities. If books such as this sit on the shelves of DH officials' offices only
as a curious exhibits, the cost in unrelieved suffering and unnecessary death
may be considerable. That would be a serious matter by anyone's standards.

    Janet Radcliffe Richards is an Open University lecturer in philosophy.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993


                              465 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 13, 1992

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 948 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH: THE FOETUS AS PATIENT;
Doctors are beginning to perform transplant operations in the womb. Diana Austin
reports

BYLINE: DIANA AUSTIN

BODY:


    CHRISTINE Pericleous understands the agony of couples when they are told
their unborn baby has the life-threatening genetic blood disorder thalassaemia.
She has had two late terminations herself after finding she was carrying babies
with this incurable disease, not to mention a miscarriage after pre-natal
testing of her last pregnancy.

    As co-ordinator for the UK Thalassaemia Society, she helps families affected
by the world's most commonly inherited genetic disease.

    "If both partners are carriers there is a 25 per cent chance with each
pregnancy that the baby will develop the disease, but I've known women who have
had up to five terminations,"she says. "It's devastating. Physically you may be
able to keep trying, but emotionally many women find they can't cope with
repeated terminations."

    Yet an end to this heartache may be in sight. Doctors at Kings College
Hospital, London, believe they could provide a cure for thalassaemia and other
incurable genetic blood and metabolic disorders, including sickle cell disease
and congenital immune deficiency, by giving bone marrow transplants to unborn
babies.

    They have recently attempted the technique on an 11 week old foetus with the
blood disorder rhesus disease, but believe it may not have been successful
because it received insufficient bone marrow. The foetus is now 22 weeks. Its
health is being maintained by regular blood transfusions.

    Mr Kypros Nicolaides, of the hospital's Harris Birthright Centre for Foetal
Medicine, says: "We won't really know if it has definitely failed and why, until
the baby is born. But we still believe foetal bone marrow transplantation has
the potential to save thousands of lives."

    The technique involves using an ultrasound guided syringe to inject donor
marrow through the mother's abdomen and womb, and into the abdomen of a tiny 11
to 13 week foetus less than two inches long.

    Nicolaides says: "Marrow transplantation has the potential to change the
blood of the baby. If you alter the marrow in babies with genetic blood
disorders you end up with what is called a chimera. You have the baby's own
marrow producing defective cells and the transplanted marrow producing normal
cells and hopefully there are enough normal cells to keep the baby alive and
well."

    And if it can be successfully carried out while the baby is still in the
womb it will have tremendous advantages over post-natal transplantation.

    "Transplantation has been done after birth for the last ten years, but only
half of the children who undergo it survive," says Nicolaides. "They often die
of trivial infections, because in order to get them to accept even carefully
matched transplanted marrow, you have to suppress their immune system with
drugs. As a result you almost produce a situation like someone with Aids, who
has no resistance to infection.

    "If you can carry out the transplant in the womb when the foetus is still
immunologically 'incompetent', you can give it donor marrow from almost anybody
and the foetus should accept it, without the need for drugs. What's more the
uterus is the perfect sterile environment for the baby to recover in."

    The world's first marrow transplantation on a human foetus was carried out
by the Kings' team in 1985. This was followed last year by three further
attempts by a group at the University of California, San Francisco.

    Nicolaides says: "Our work shows these all failed because they were done too
late. To avoid the risk of rejection the transplant needs to be done before 13
weeks, when its immune system has not fully developed."

    News of the Harris Birthright teams' latest attempt at marrow
transplantation comes barely a month after they saved the life of baby Natalie
Robertson, who had been doomed to die in the womb because of a rare blood
disorder called thrombocytopenia. Nicolaides used the same "needling" technique
to give Natalie antibodies and platelets, to protect her from her mother's
immune system which would otherwise have destroyed her blood.

    These recent developments give just a glimpse of the rapidly advancing field
of foetal medicine. "The foetus is now a patient. We can now do a lot that was
impossible just a few years ago," claims Nicolaides.

    Within the last five years, ultrasound has vastly improved so doctors can
get a very clear picture of even a young foetus. This coupled with earlier
methods of testing for genetic abnormalities, such as chorionic villus sampling,
has allowed doctors to pinpoint abnormalities at a stage when they may one day
be able to treat them and before they cause serious damage.

    The "open" approach to foetal medicine where a foetus would be taken out of
the womb, operated on and put back, has been largely abandoned as too risky, in
favour of various needling techniques which can be used to drain excess fluid,
clear internal blockages, deliver drugs and blood transfusions to foetuses.

    The Harris Birthright Centre has already developed the technique of giving
blood transfusions to foetuses like the one which recently underwent marrow
transplantation. It has already saved the lives of more than 300 babies with
rhesus disease.

    Needling has successfully opened up blockages in kidneys, can deliver drugs
to regulate abnormal heartbeat in the foetus, and to drain off fluid build-ups
in its developing lungs, kidneys and heart.

    In future, doctors may be able to remove excess fluid from the brains of
foetuses with hydrocephalus, providing scanning techniques could be developed to
assess whether the brain had not been seriously damaged by the fluid.  Another
possibility is for gene therapy to be given in the womb.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993


                              472 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 7, 1992

SECTION: HOME; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TO TREAT CYSTIC FIBROSIS 'WITHIN 10 YEARS'

BYLINE: CHRIS MIHILL

BODY:


    GENE therapy to treat the lung disease cystic fibrosis as well as other
hereditary conditions such as haemophilia will be in general use by doctors by
the end of the decade, a leading researcher predicted yesterday.

    Professor Bob Williamson, a pioneer of cystic fibrosis research, said
transplanting genes to provide a kind of permanent medicine for certain
inherited diseases would become a reality within 10 years.

    Professor Williamson, head of biochemistry at St Mary's Hospital, London,
was speaking at the launch of a research programme into gene therapy made
possible by a pounds 1 million donation to the Cystic Fibrosis Trust. "The grant
is for CF, but the great thing about this research is that it is an enabling
technology. It doesn't only bring hope for CF, but for Friedreich's Ataxia,
Alzheimer's Disease and many other genetic diseases."

    He said 7,000 children had CF, and despite modern care they faced a life
that might not extend beyond their 20s.

    The pounds 1 million donation comes from the trustees of the estate of the
late Leopold Muller, founder of the De Vere hotels group, who died in 1988
leaving almost his entire pounds 15 million fortune to charity.

    Professor Williamson said: "We are going to see the first attempts at gene
therapy for CF in America within two years."

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993


                              475 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 17, 1992

SECTION: HOME; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: VIRUSES POINT WAY TO CURE

BYLINE: CHRIS MIHILL

BODY:


    THE basic theory of gene therapy is the replacement of a defective gene with
a healthy one. The biggest practical problem is how to get the healthy gene to
the right place and make sure it only does what is intended, without
causingside-effects, and keeping it in operation once delivered.

    The techniques of molecular biology have allowed the identification of a
growing number of single genes responsible for illnesses such as cystic
fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, sickle cell disease and haemophilia.

    A vast international project, called the Human Genome Project, is under way
to map all the genes in the body, estimated at between 50,000 to 100,000, in an
attempt to produce a Book of Man which might be able to predict what diseases
people are likely to suffer from.

    Genes produce proteins, and it is the absence of these proteins in defective
genes that leads to illness.

    The most favoured "delivery system" to get healthy genes inside a person's
body is the use of viruses, which are designed by nature to penetrate cells. The
trick is to splice the desired gene to a relatively harmless virus and target it
at the cells that are affected.

    Some areas are easier to get at, for instance the lungs in cystic fibrosis,
the blood cells for sickle cell anaemia, or the liver in haemophilia. It is far
harder to get a gene into the brain or the muscles, which are relatively fixed
tissues.

    Another problem is that once the cell dies with the new gene inside it, the
"medicine" comes to an end, so will have to be given on a repeated basis.

    Most research, for ethical and technical reasons, is concentrating on "body"
cells, sometimes called somatic cells, which cannot be passed on to future
generations. Treating such cells will act as a kind of medicine for the patient,
but will still allow him or her to pass on the genetic defect to children.

    However, interfeering with the reproductive cells, or germ line cells, in
the sperm and eggs, which might in theory eliminate the disease from future
generations, is seen as far too risky because its consequences are
unpredictable.

    Experiments in animals have been successful in treating cystic fibrosis, and
in America human treatments are under way against a rare immune system defect,
caused by the absence of an enzyme called ADA which allows the body's white
cells to function.

    Ten children are visiting Washington every month, where blood is taken and
the white cells isolated. These are penetrated by a form of virus to which the
healthy gene which makes the enzyme has been added, and the blood is then
returned.

    One girl who has received the healthy gene every month for a year is living
a normal life rather than having to live in a "bubble tent" to guard against
infection.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993


                              476 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 17, 1992

SECTION: HOME; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TREATMENT TO FIGHT FATAL DISEASES;
Ten-year study offers hope in battle against cystic fibrosis and crippling
illnesses

BYLINE: HRIS MIHILL

BODY:


    ROBERT Williamson has been professor of biochemistry at St Mary's Hospital
in London since 1976 and for more than 10 years has been researching the gene
responsible for cystic fibrosis, the fatal lung disease.

    Working in cramped premises, designed for 40 scientists but accommodating
100, he heads a research department that has done pioneering work not just on
cystic fibrosis but also muscular dystrophy, and the dementia condition
Alzheimer's Disease.

    He and his colleagues isolated the genes responsible for haemoglobin, the
chemical which makes blood red and carries oxygen around the body.

    Professor Williamson, aged 53, was responsible for localising the general
whereabouts of the cystic fibrosis gene within the human chromosomes.

    He was beaten in the race to find the gene itself in 1989 when researchers
from the United States and Canada got there first.

    Far from expressing disappointment he heralded the discovery because it
meant the chance to help people facing a cruel disease.

    He has helped develop screening techniques to detect cystic fibrosis in
unborn children, and has invented a technique using a mouthwash which can
identify carriers.

    Some two million people in the United Kingdom may carry the cystic fibrosis
gene without any ill effects to themselves. But if two carriers meet and have
children, there is a one-in-four chance a child will be a sufferer.

    Prof Williamson, orginally from New York, still talks with a slight American
twang despite being educated in south London and University College, London.

    He is at the forefront of the scientific movement determined to publicise
the benefits of molecular biology and genetic engineering, while at the same
time acknowledging that the public do hold legitimate fears about scientists
playing God and manipulating the building blocks of life.

    He has been outspoken in calling for legislation to protect patients of the
future from being discriminated against by insurance companies who might want to
obtain a "genetic printout" and penalise those at higher risk of developing
disease because of genetic predispositions.

    He believes that if people are given the truth about gene therapy they will
see it as no more threatening than organ transplants, and will not wish to
exploit it for trivial reasons, such as getting a baby with blue eyes.

    "I don't think parents do want designer babies. Most parents like the fact
that the genetic make-up of their children will be a lottery.

    "What they want to be sure of is that it will be a safe lottery. The use of
this new technology can help us prevent serious diseases."

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993


                              477 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 17, 1992

SECTION: HOME; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 614 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TREATMENT TO FIGHT FATAL DISEASES;
Experts rule out alteration of intelligence and personality characteristics -
Pioneer welcomes breakthrough - Chris Mihill reports

BYLINE: CHRIS MIHILL

BODY:


    THE use of gene therapy for patients with life-threatening illnesses has
been given the go-ahead after experts agreed that the technology raised no more
ethical problems than organ transplants.

    They stressed in a report, however, that the techniques, which could be
introduced in the next few years, should only be applied to treating disease,
not to altering characteristics such as intelligence or personality.

    Nor should such procedures be used, at least for the moment, on sperm or
female eggs, where the changes could be passed on to future generations.

    The committee on the ethics of gene therapy, chaired by the former
Ombudsman, Sir Cecil Clothier, accepts that there will be public concern about
manipulating genes, and "irrational" fears that it might become some form of
"Frankenstein" medicine.

    It was suggested, therefore, that all such treatment should be regarded as
experimental research, rather than routine therapy, and require special approval
from a specifically established national supervisory committee.

    All patients receiving gene therapy, including babies who might benefit
most, should be placed on a central register and followed throughout their
lives.  Where possible, their children, and even successive generations, should
be followed to see that no adverse changes have arisen.

    Initially, it is hoped that replacing faulty genes with healthy ones will
allow the treatment of inherited conditions such as cystic fibrosis, muscular
dystrophy and haemophilia.

    Eventually, the procedures could be applied to more complex diseases where
genetic factors and environmental factors interact, including cancer, heart
disease and some forms of dementia.

    The report, which was welcomed by the Department of Health yesterday, says:
"Genes are the essence of life. They carry the coded messages that are stored in
every living cell, telling it how to function and multiply and when to do so.
Until recently a genetic message could be altered only by accident and chance.

    "Now human ingenuity makes it possible to manipulate these messages
deliberately and with increasing precision.

    Genetic disorders "are an important cause of prolonged and life-threatening
illness, commonly in childhood, and they inflict much distress upon families.
Although there are effective treatments for some of these disorders,
conventional treatments for most are inadequate, and for many they are limited
to the relief of symptoms. Gene therapy offers for the first time in many
genetic disorders the prospect of effective treatment and cure."

    Virginia Bottomley, the Health Minister, said ministers wanted to hear
reactions to the report from professionals and lay people. The Goverment would
decide what steps to take after the consultation period ended in May.

    The committee's conclusions were welcomed by Professor Bob Williamson, of St
Mary's Hospital, London, a pioneer in tracking down the gene responsible for
cystic fibrosis, carried by an estimated 2 million people in this country.

    "It is an excellent report. It has given the green light for an ethical
approach which will be of great help to many seriously ill young people with
cystic fibrosis and other inherited conditions. It has given the red light to
those things which people are worried about."

    Professor Williamson said the first experimental approaches using gene
therapy for cystic fibrosis, where the lungs become clogged with mucus, would
take place within the next two to three years, although it would be five years
or more before all the difficulties were overcome.

    Report of the Committee on the Ethics of Gene Therapy; HMSO; pounds 6.90.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993


                              482 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 13, 1991

LENGTH: 1098 words

HEADLINE: Patriarchs of eternity: Everybody is living longer because of medical
research and everybody wants to find a cure for Aids. But, asks Luc Montagnier,
will we agree to the price for endless age?

BYLINE: By LUC MONTAGNIER

BODY:


    THE 20th century has witnessed prodigious success in humanity's fight
against infectious diseases - so much so that the number of inhabitants of our
planet has risen from 1,600 million in 1900 to nearly 6,000 million today.

    These advances - such as the introduction of innoculations and antibiotics -
have caused the decline, at least in the northern hemisphere, of mortality due
to tuberculosis, diphtheria, typhoid fevers, tetanus, rabies, poliomyelitis,
measles and influenza. However, all these illnesses are still prevalent in
tropical regions, especially those still affected by the major parasite-borne
diseases, notably malaria.


    Now, in addition, Aids is ravaging the Third World and, to a lesser extent,
the northern countries. The lessons of Aids to some extent counterbalance the
progress made in other fields. What is more, the fight against Aids raises
scientific and policy questions which affect the entire preventive health field.

    Biologically, Aids is highly complex. If the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) is its basic agent, it is probable that the bacterial infections which
produce its clinical symptoms also have an activating and intensifying effect of
their own in encouraging the action of the virus. In Africa and Asia a vicious
circle involving tuberculosis and Aids is becoming endemic, with HIV aggravating
the tuberculosis and the tuberculosis accelerating the development of the virus
and the resultant harm.

    Additionally, the immune system's own reactions to these activating agents
may also play a harmful role in the clinical phase of the illness. Aids seems to
me to be the prototype of the chronic and multifactoral illnesses which
constitute the basis of the pathogens likely to be inflicted on our descendants.

    As a result, while it has been relatively easy - in only a matter of half a
century - to rid ourselves of the germs which cause acute illness, it will now
be more difficult to eliminate the germs adapted to chronic infections, such as
the Aids virus.

    There is hope that before the year 2000 progress in treatment and a
protective innoculation against the infection could slow down, and even halt,
the development of Aids in those who are HIV-positive. But there will be huge
costs involved too - probably prohibitive for the developing world.

    The consequence could therefore be that the rich countries will make a
fundamental choice between an isolationist option, in which the tropical and
equatorial world will be left alone to suffer, and a universalist option, which
is more typical of the West's traditional global values.

    MORALLY, the only defensible option is the latter, even though it implies
enormous financial sacrifices for the developed nations. Although the public
health measures to combat Aids would no doubt also be used to fight other
pathogens, to maintain them would depend on economic improvement,
'westernisation' of African economies and mentalities and a progressive
reduction in the demographic explosion. Those are pretty formidable conditions.
Against this background, the world therefore faces increased spending on health
as well as the likelihood that other disasters lie in wait for the ageing human
in the developed nations. These multifactoral diseases include:

    - Cancer - Prevention and traditional treatment have made great advances but
there are only two ways in which the relative stagnation in current treatment
methods can be overcome, namely immunology and molecular biology (gene therapy).

    Each individual's immunological resources could be cloned. If any 'holes'
are found in them, they can be repaired, thus providing resistance to the
development of cancer (and other diseases) to which these 'holes' would
otherwise predispose the individual. However, this approach would be extremely
lengthy and expensive, and only a limited number of people could benefit from
them.

    - Degenerative nervous diseases - These probably originate from infection
whose prolonged latency causes auto-immune reactions which are fatal to the
nervous system. The discovery of infectious factors in these diseases would thus
be of supreme importance. However, this would not deal with the formidable
'unconventional' viruses or prions, which are behind diseases that are rare in
humans but common in domesticated animals, causing conditions such as scrapie in
sheep and bovine spongiform encephalopathy 'mad cow disease'. These agents,
which appear to be modified proteins, do not induce any immune response and are
thus completely undetectable.

    - Ageing - If ageing is looked at as a multifactoral disease, certain
analogies with Aids are obvious. In many of its symptoms, including that of
immune deficiency, Aids is a sort of accelerated senility. A therapeutic
breakthrough against Aids could thus have important consequences in slowing down
'natural' senescence, in which there is a similar combination of infectious and
immunological factors. Cardio-vascular diseases themselves, essentially caused
by lifestyle and diet, may also be exacerbated by infectious and immunological
factors which could thus be combated.

    - Genetic diseases - Medical treatment is a form of counter-selection. In
the past, infant mortality destroyed many mutations which are now able to
continue and reproduce. Current genetic diseases are already quite numerous and
could, in principle, be cured by gene therapy. But it is not just a matter of
extending to the multitude what is currently available to only a few
individuals. The probability must be that more varied genetic defects will
become prevalent.

    OVERALL, the conclusion is that medical research will bring us some
wonderful solutions in the 21st century. They will be extremely effective in
terms of the tragedies with which we are afflicted - cancer, degenerative
nervous diseases, cardiovascular and genetic diseases. They will lead to more
preventive treatments.

    As a result, senility and death are likely to be delayed by perhaps as much
as 20 years by the end of the 21st century. The social consequences of these
upheavals are currently incalculable. But, even before they happen, the question
arises: Who will benefit? Clearly a human population of 10 billion could not, so
treatment is likely to be unevenly applied. The end result will be a world
peopled by patriarchs, assisted by robots, devoting most of their income and
expenditure to health care. This may seem fanciful - but all the other scenarios
are even more catastrophic.

    - Luc Montagnier is a professor at the Pasteur Institute in Paris.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              483 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 13, 1991

LENGTH: 1131 words

HEADLINE: A genetically perfect generation: Within 20 years we will be able to
have our genotype analysed at the local supermarket, then sit down at home,
assess our defects and adjust our life accordingly

BYLINE: By JURGEN LANGENBACH

BODY:


    'AS OF now we can define the human being,' proclaimed Joshua Lederberg
during a legendary geneticists' conference in 1962. 'Genotypically at least, he
consists of a six-foot-long string of molecules in the nucleus of every cell.'
Practical applications from that moment onwards, according to Lederberg's
colleague J. B. S. Haldane, would be the breeding of 'radiation-resistant
beings' or, to enhance suitability for space travel, the crossbreeding of
'anthropoid' pilots with 'prehensile tails'.

    Today we live in an age, not of the bomb-proof apeman, but of a project
aimed at complete decryption of that six-foot length of genetic code (genome)
with its estimated three billion units of information. 'Haldane came from
another generation, one which had grown up in the tradition of racial hygiene.
None of us thinks that way any more.' This voice of moderation belongs to
Lennard Philipson, who represents the European Microbiological Laboratory of
Hugo, the co-ordinating body for the Human Genome Project, which began plotting
the genetic map in the US in 1988 and - under the guidance of James Watson -
aims to have finished the task by 2005.


    Besides the human atlas in general, they are also addressing the diagnosis
and therapy of individual illnesses and standard hereditary diseases, right
through to psychological disorders. Within 20 years, according to Hugo's
co-initiator Walter Gilbert, anyone will be able to have their genotype analysed
at the local supermarket, after which they can sit down at home and assess their
defects - such as proneness to heart disease or depression - and adjust their
way of life accordingly, or else strike at the genetic root of the evil.

    German biologist Rainer Hohlfeld says: 'This reduces sickness and health to
a matter of molecular biology, opening the door to a new type of eugenics in
which life expectancy is determined by genetic criteria,' be it through gene
testing before entering a new career, or through pre-natal diagnoses before
embarking on life itself. Citing the American geneticist Bentley Glass, Hohlfeld
says: 'In a future like that, no parent will have the right to burden the world
with a deformed child.'

    'The legacy of history in Germany makes it difficult to discuss these issues
objectively,' says Philipson who, in his work for Hugo, sets greater store by
basic research, into 'the common structure of all life: in the same way that
Darwin showed that the apes are our cousins, we wish to show that yeast is our
cousin too'. Philipson shares fears about misuse of individual genome analyses,
but regards them as capable of being disarmed by democratic means. He believes
that this kind of knowledge must become common property - 'the genome is your
personal right' - and society should formalise certain basic rights; the 15
years until the completion of Hugo is not a very long time.

    Since 1972, a technique (DNA-recombination) has been available, allowing
pieces of one sample of genetic information to be extracted and implanted in
another, across all boundaries, from humans to, for example, mice or bacteria.
By 1982 we had everything: the first transgenetic animal, the giant mouse, the
first transgenetic plant and the first drug to be created by genetic
engineering, insulin.

    Since then, the pharmaceuticals industry has brought a range of specialities
to a market which, according to an Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) forecast for 1995 will be worth Dollars 4.5 billion; the same
organisation describes any putative Aids vaccine as 'priceless'.

    'In the case of Aids, the traditional path of development through breeding
and destruction of a virus, to its use as a vaccine, is far too risky.' This is
Eugen Rufingshofer's preamble to an account of the tortuous Aids strategy
practised by his firm, Immuno of Vienna, one of the leading producers of
vaccines. The procedure is to isolate from the Aids gene that part which
controls production of a protein (gp160), by which the virus latches on to
healthy cells.

    This scrap of Aids gene is then built into a cowpox virus which in turn is
multiplied on a monkey kidney cell culture. The gp160 ultimately obtained
carries no genetic code from Aids itself, but has the latching ability to which
the body's own defences can adjust after vaccination. After controversial but
successful trials on chimpanzees, clinical trials have been under way for the
past year in the US. Rufingshofer's estimate of 'five to 10 years' future
development time is based on analagous cases of difficult vaccines.

    In the second great area of hope, cancer research, they talk in similar
terms. Once again in Vienna, at the Institute for Molecular Pathology (IMP),
researchers are attempting to work out strategies to impede cell growth and
division processes by studying their functional control, in brewers' yeast for
instance. This has put Kim Nasmyth on the trail of a very close relationship 'of
a carrier (kinase) which controls cell division in yeast, in frogs and in
humans'. If a cell generates too much, it develops cancer; for therapy it is
thus essential to know how the gene, which in turn controls production of the
carrier, functions.

    AT SOME time, either a treatment for the symptoms may be found, or else a
gene that has gone out of control may be repairable. The 'how' is an awkward
question, and not only in technical terms. Two basic routes are open to gene
therapy. The first is

    somatic therapy, in which the incorrectly functioning gene is repaired on
the spot.

    Preliminary trials on humans are taking place in the US, so somatic therapy
is a reality. It is hoped by those involved that the second option, 'germ line'
therapy, will never happen, because it implies not only that outside information
is imported into a cell, but that it also becomes inheritable - a technique
which 'paves the way for the design of tailor-made humans', according to a
German Bundestag inquiry into gene technology. The problem lies in the use of
germ line manipulation in research into the bases of somatic therapy, where, for
instance, mice are built to order.

    'There can be no doubt that no one is going to start studies on humans,'
says Erwin Wagner of IMP, who was honoured with an EMBO prize by the European
molecular biology community for his development of a particularly elegant mouse
germ line technique. 'But if you're asking whether such methods are the
harbingers of possible directed attempts to interfere with human germ lines,
then I must answer 'Yes'.'

    Wagner would never tinker with humans, and trusts in the self-control of
others in the scientific community. Yet he admits: 'We cannot know what the
future will bring.'

    - Jurgen Langenbach is a freelance journalist.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              484 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 12, 1991

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy studies to be stepped up

BYLINE: By CHRIS MIHILL, Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    GENE transplant techniques for the treatment of diseases such as haemophilia
may be available in this country within a few years, the Medical Research
Council said yesterday.

    Announcing that research into genetics would be one of the funding
priorities in coming years, council secretary Dr Dai Rees said some people felt
ethical concerns over the idea, but he viewed it as no more controversial than
organ transplants.


    Gene therapy - the replacement of defective genes with healthy equivalents -
has been tried experimentally on humans in the United States.

    At a London press conference to publish the council's annual report, Dr Rees
said certain diseases lent themselves more easily to gene therapy, because clear
delivery routes existed to get the genes to specific organs.

    It would be relatively simple, he said, to put healthy genes into bone
marrow and transplant this into patients with diseases such as the anaemia
condition thalassaemia.

    The liver could also be easily targetted, possibly allowing for gene therapy
against haemophilia, when the body cannot produce blood-clotting agents.
However, trying to target replacement genes at the heart and the brain would be
much more complex.

    Dr Rees said all responsible scientists accepted that gene therapy should
not be used on embryos, or on sex cells which could be transmitted to future
generations. Legislation on embryo research also forbade this.

    But for other cells he saw few ethical problems, although it was right the
public was involved in debate on such procedures.

    'I don't myself see serious ethical problems. It is just like organ
transplants.'

    Dr Rees suggested that more serious ethical problems might arise from the
growing ability to screen for genetic diseases, raising difficulties over how
much information about someone's future health should be given to them,
insurance companies and employers.

    'We will create new opportunities and new problems. It is a major
responsibility of the MRC to anticipate developments and ensure there is a
proper ethical debate before dilemmas hit doctors.'

    Apart from in genetics, the council also plans more research into mental
illness, dementia and other brain disorders, and has set up a 'brain repair'
centre at Cambridge - looking at what goes wrong in the mind and how it might be
treated.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              487 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 23, 1991

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: Genetic data 'needs legal protection'

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS, Science Correspondent

BODY:


    LEGISLATION is urgently needed to prevent potential misuse of human genetic
information, an international meeting was warned yesterday.

    Baroness Warnock, of Girton College, Cambridge, said that there would be
legal confusion if the rapid molecular advances now taking place were to be
exploited by insurers, employers and educational institutes before legislation
was in place.


    At the London meeting, part of a pounds 2 billion project to map all the
human genes over the next 15 years, more than 600 new genes were mapped,
bringing the total to around 2,500 out of the estimated total of 50,000 in the
total human genome.

    The new genes, which include a number associated with inherited forms of
cancer, blindness, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, and hand and foot deformity,
add to a list that could be used to screen people for susceptibility to a
growing number of diseases.

    Lady Warnock said that people feared they would be forced to undergo genetic
screening which could affect their employment and insurance prospects.

    'Society needs to make up its mind on the degree of access life insurers and
others have to genetic information.

    'It is much more difficult to introduce retrospective legislation once tests
become established.'

    She believed that access to genetic information could form part of wider
health screening of individuals with potential benefits.

    'Universities need to know more about their students. There are far too many
suicides, and any indication of susceptibility to problems would be helpful.'
She called on the Government to make the Nuffield commission on bio-ethics a
statutory committee or to set up a royal commission on genetics.

    The Nuffield commission was established this year because of a lack of
debate on genetic issues.

    Professor Bob Williamson, of St Mary's Hospital, London, said the immediate
importance of the human genome project would be in helping families with serious
genetic diseases. A test that could detect 85 per cent of those carrying a
defective cystic fibrosis gene, costing around pounds 2, could now be carried
out on cells obtained by a simple mouthwash.

    Lady Warnock, who chaired the committee on human embryo research, said that
the ultimate possiblity of manipulating human embryos, to create changes that
could be inherited by future generations, should not be entirly ruled out.

    Professor Williamson said that this possibility, which has caused
considerable public anxiety, could be of enormous benefit for families with
genetic diseases. But it could only be considered when the consequences were
much better understood.

    Insight into the nature of the genetic defects could lead to the development
of conventional drug treatments and also opens up the possibility of gene
therapy.

    Gene therapy, which involves insertion of a normal gene into the patient,
began its first trial in the US last year. The trial had already led to an
improvement in the condition of a child with an inherited immune defect,
Professor Williamson said.

    More than 3,000 inherited disorders are known to cause disease, and affect
around 5 per cent of the population.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              490 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 17, 1991

LENGTH: 1444 words

HEADLINE: Society: To the heart of a clinical matter - A biological programme
which could reveal the molecular basis of intelligence, musical ability and
sporting skills is focusing debate on the ethics of genetic research

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS

BODY:


    LATER this month Britain's first committee on 'bioethics' sets up in
business with the announcement of its chairman. Organised and funded by the
Nuffield Foundation, the committee hopes to channel national debate on the
ethical questions arising from modern developments in genetics and medicine that
go way beyond the clinic.

    At the heart of these developments is the Human Genome Project, a massive
biological programme aiming to produce a precise map of all the human genes.


    The project, driven by the United States but with significant input from
many other countries, including Britain, is promoted enthusiastically by many
scientists who believe it will give unprecedented insight into disease but
ultimately may reveal the molecular basis of such human abilities as
intelligence, musical prowess and sporting ability.

    It's not beyond the wildest speculation that the search for genes involved
in cancer may ultimately lead to the formula for Linford Christie's sprinting
speed. Coupled with new embryology techniques and in vitro fertilisation, such
prospects are condemned as a nightmare 'Frankenstein' venture by the bitterest
critics.

    Different countries are gearing up to tackle the issues. 'There's something
of an ethics industry springing up,' says Bronwen Loder, who works on the
European Community's section of the human genome project, which also includes
funds to research ethical questions.

    'Louise Brown, Britain's first 'test-tube' baby, was six years old before
the Government set up the Warnock committee to study in vitro fertilisation,'
says David Shapiro of the Nuffield Foundation. 'We hope to anticipate some of
the issues.'

    In spite of pressure from some senior scientists, the Government has so far
shown little interest. The Clothier committee on the ethics of gene therapy,
which was due to report last autumn, is not expected to complete its study
before the summer and is being left behind by events.

    The first gene therapy experiments to treat cancer and another disease that
cripples children's immune systems are now under way in the US, following
unprecedented scrutiny, and France has also this month approved similar
experiments.

    Gene therapy, the insertion of genes into patient's cells which cannot be
passed on to any children, similar in essence to an organ transplant, raises
serious questions of safety and effectiveness, but many believe it is ethically
one of the least troublesome of the new technologies.

    Heart transplants, when first carried out, raised fears of whether some of
the donor's personality might also be passed on. Nowadays people may still
question the technique but ethical issues have largely vanished. 'Some of the
wilder fears will disappear with experience but there are serious worries that
will not go away,' Shapiro says.

    But the Human Genome Project dwarfs previous advances. Everyone knows that
traits are passed on from parents to children, but only in the fifties did
Watson and Crick discover that the vital genetic information was held in the
precise sequence of four simple chemical building blocks strung together to form
the DNA molecule.

    In humans, long threads of DNA are bundled into 23 pairs of chromosomes, one
of the pair inherited from the mother, the other from the father. Scientists
estimate these chromosome threads contain 50,000- 100,000 genes within a
sequence of three billion chemical building blocks.

    The crux of the project is to map these genes along the chromosome threads.
This is real map-making; we each carry the genes for the same traits at
precisely the same positions along the threads.

    But the map is only the first part; it will provide scientists with the
vital navigational tool then to unravel the chemical sequence of the genes. We
share a map but we vary uniquely in the collection of genes we have inherited at
sites on the map.

    Some genes, such as those that code the proteins that keep the DNA in shape
within cells show little variation between people. Their function is so crucial
that variation would tend to be lethal. But the majority of genes are thought to
vary widely between individuals, such as those determining the blood groups.

    Two major ethical concerns that will emerge from the project are already
apparent. As the compendium of genes is developed, the pressure for genetic
screening of individuals will grow. It already happens in families at risk from
genetic diseases such as cystic fibrosis. Screening of relatives can reveal
non-affected carriers of the disease gene and has largely been welcomed by
families affected.

    But as the project takes shape, it looks set to throw more light on commoner
diseases such as diabetes, heart disease and mental disorders, susceptibility to
which involves a number of genes.

    At this stage genetic screening becomes far more complex - and controversial
- as the assessment involves a mix of probabilities, risks, and environmental
effects to tax the most skilful scientist.

    So to know that you carry genes giving you, say, a tenfold greater chance of
developing diabetes is to what benefit? What would be the response of your
insurance company, or a health service strapped for cash?

    'The questions raised by genetic screening and insurance is one of the first
issues facing the committee,' Shapiro says. 'Once a risk is known to be inherent
to a policyholder is it reasonable for others to pay?'

    Another problem looming as the genetic catalogue develops is the screening
of embryos. Again, this technology has been developed to help families at risk
of producing children with some fatal genetic diseases. Embryos produced by in
vitro fertilisation in the laboratory can be screened before reimplantation in
the mother to check that they have not inherited the disease genes.

    But what happens if genes linked with much prized talents are discovered?
Will doctors come under pressure from yuppie parents to screen for embryos
carrying preselected genes? Will the go-ahead fertility clinic promise 'designer
babies'?

    One of the most sinister 'Frankenstein' prospects, however, is not likely to
emerge. It may be possible for parents to select embryos but it will not be
possible to genetically engineer 'designer' genes into them. The most
nightmarish prospect raised by critics has already been banned by last year's
Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act. Embryos will be stuck with the genes
they have acquired from their parents. And there is a remarkable remix mechanism
that prevents parents from perusing their genetic catalogues and predicting the
characteristics of their children.

    We each inherit a chromosome from our fathers in the sperm and from our
mothers in the egg. This represents something of a duplication of information
and we act as mere carriers of some of the genetic information from our
grandparents that is not expressed in us but could be in our children. Likewise,
a father's proud sporting talents could easily get lost in the genetic mix
producing his son.

    One of the most important findings of modern research is that general
notions of genetics and inheritance, which can appear deterministic and even
simplistic, are often found to be much less so on fine scrutiny.

    Prospects of large-scale screening of populations for particular genes are
beginning to look more, not less, difficult as molecular studies advance. Cystic
fibrosis, one of the simplest inherited diseases caused by a single defective
gene, turns out to be highly complex. Scientists have discovered that a number
of different mutations can cause the defect. The information has proved vital in
improving understanding of the disease but means a reliable test for the general
population would be bewilderingly expensive and difficult to interpret.

    Genetic research will never provide all the answers. Scientists argue that
any trait that can be measured can be studied genetically, but how much can the
genes reveal about human characteristics such as intelligence, when there is
little agreement on an acceptable test, and a controversial chunk of
environmental input to consider?

    Teachers or potential employers might, even with a basketful of genetic
information, learn something more useful from a few sharp questions.

    The scale and scope of the issues raised go far beyond any individual
imagination. The Nuffield Foundation's initiative has been widely welcomed as a
first effort to keep Britain in the debate. But there is little doubt that much
more will be needed if the value of the compendium of human genetics is to be
kept in perspective and firmly within the public interest.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              492 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 16, 1991

LENGTH: 3418 words

HEADLINE: Future Shock: The Frankestein factor - The row over the so-called
'virgin births' has focused attention on the science of reproduction and our
attempts to unlock and change the code of life. Does everyone have the right to
raise children? Perhaps. But behind the technology that fulfils our desire to
raise a family lurks the sinister shadow of gene bending and social control

BYLINE: By ANDREW TYLER

BODY:


    THE OLD eugenics was willed by the state. It came to grisly life in the
first decades of the century and reached its apotheosis in the racial hygiene
programme of Nazi Germany, where Jews, gypsies, alcoholics and the tubercular
were exterminated as enemies of the state (and also in the US and Denmark which
were some years ahead of the Germans in the forced sterilization of the mentally
ill and criminally insane).

    Eugenics - the desire to purify the human race - is not a dream that was
ever exclusive to the repressive right. Bertrand Russell, in 1927, toyed with
the idea of exterminating the 'inferior negro' but, on balance, found the idea
morally wanting and, more importantly, regarded negroes as too useful for their
work in the tropics.


    But if the old eugenics was state willed, the new eugenics will be self
willed. It will be wished upon themselves by the populations of the devel oped
economies who will seek biological perfection for themselves and their children
in order that they keep pace in an ever more rigorous social marketplace. In
this new marketplace, it is not just goods and services that are expertly
packaged but the purveyors and makers of the goods themselves.

    This has always gone on to an extent - people dressing up, putting on an act
to get a job or get promoted. What's new is the latest technology, a technology
that will permit people to transform themselves, literally from the inside out:
gene technology.

    Gene technology already allows the routine screening of populations for
'defective' traits that predispose the carriers to disease - this, with a view
to terminating a pregnancy. More recently, it has opened the way to surgical
interventions that can fundamentally reconstitute the body - either before or
after birth.

    But the power of gene technology is to be increased a millionfold through an
unfolding, publicly funded global enterprise whose aim is to map out, in the
finest sub-molecular detail, the interior of the entire human body. It is called
the Human Genome Project and it will change everything. Have you even heard of
it?

    Genes, according to the bioscientific consensus, are the smallest units of
inheritance, bequeathed to us at birth in equal measure by our mothers and
fathers and containing, from the moment sperm fuses with egg, the biologi cal
code that determines how we develop. All the genes together are known as the
genome.

    Eugenicists, in their deterministic frenzy, have always tried to crack this
genetic code and thereafter play the decisive part in shaping the emergent
human. The early eugenicists were confined to grading the population and de
ciding who could procreate and who was to be terminated.

    The 1953 discovery of the shape of DNA by Watson and Crick seemed to lay
bare the secret text itself. The code that makes us what we are, they declared,
is written in a chemical alphabet of just four letters, these letters are strung
out in ever possible permutation in long twisting strands of DNA, millions of
letters long and located in the centre of every cell. Usually, two strands are
twisted around each other in the famous double helix. The enormous complexity of
programming that the creation of a human being demands is achieved by the length
and varying order of the alphabet strands.

    At a critical time in a cell's life, the consensus goes, the DNA strands
form into chromosomes - short, thick, rod-shaped bodies that come in 23 basic
formats. Every human has two copies of the 23 in nearly all the millions of
cells in his or her body.

    As to the gene itself. this is merely a small segment of chromosome, a chunk
of DNA alphabet whose specific function is to set in motion the manufacture of
one of the proteins that form the physical structure of our bodies, or which
take part in its chemical management.

    And there, in brief, is the shape of it. The code of life, the magic text,
revealed. Except, what would really complete the picture, it has been decided,
would be to work out the precise order in which those millions of chemi cal
letters fall: from the base of chromosome one to the very tip of chromosome 23,
the complete human genome of some three billion chemical letters. This is the
Human Genome Project (HGP), a task of mind boggling complexity and tediousness,
for which no suitable 'sequencing' technology yet exists and which, at the
official reckoning, would take three billion dollars (more realistically, ten
billion) and 15 years to complete.

    Audacious? Scary? Certainly it is scaring those few critical scientists
alert to the potent uses such information could be turned to. They have in mind
eugenically minded embryo surgeons and social reformers: employers who would
want individual genetic profiles of prospective employees to see where their
defects lay; insurance companies who would seek to 'tax' those defects with
higher premiums; the defence establishment which could fashion new, more
terrible race-specific biological weapons; an insatiable commercial sector,
bereft of any sense of moral direction, and the masses themselves, driven as
they are by fear of failure, sickness and death, and for whom such a scheme
promises the final solution.

    HGP began rolling seriously some three years ago and despite amounting to
the most significant global endeavour in the history of biological science, it
has yet to receive a proper critical analysis in the mainstream media, least of
all from science correspondents themselves, who see their duty less to alerting
the public where required than cheerleading on behalf of the latest gee whizz
technology.

    THE genesis of HGP lies with the US Department of Energy rather than the
biomedical community. The DoE is the atomic bomb agency and, having come to the
end of a long post World War II project that was analysing the human mutational
effects of its handiwork, it was looking for something to do with its bomb
research facilities at Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore as well as the tax
dollars with which to do it. The National Institutes of Health, seeing the
funding po tential, muscled in on the act and, ultimately, became the lead
agency. The project was sold to Congress, says Ruth Hubbard, emeritus professor
of biology at Harvard University, in the time hon oured way.

    'The standard method of getting legislators on board for any kind of
scientific project in the biological field is to promise cures. You promise
those ageing members of Congress that they'll be able to live for ever. With
this one, everything was thrown in the way of cures and early (even prenatal)
diagnosis: cancer, coronary heart disease, strokes, mental illness, maybe
alcoholism, maybe the answers about people's tendency to commit crime, as well
as all the things we're used to thinking of a genetic diseases.'

    Having got Congress on board, the serious positional scrambling started.
Martin Rechsteiner, biochemistry professor at Utah University, complains that
already Dollars 90 million has been shared out between just 10 big centres, a
discrepancy that is causing deep rancour among biologists, most of whom never
wanted the project anyway. Yet getting such objections aired in the technical
press has proved almost impossible for Rechsteiner.

    HGP has also caused quarrels between nations. Jim Watson, the co-discoverer
of DNA who now effectively heads up the HGP from his National Institutes of
Health base, told the Japanese at the end of 1989 that they'd be treated as 'the
enemy' unless they started sharing the results of their own genome 'mapping'
activities more equitably. They won't get to see what Ameri cans are finding
out, he told a Senate sub-committee, 'certainly not until American
pharmaceutical companies had capitalised on useful findings.'

    Watson has described the HGP in terms of the American moonshot, only with
'implications for human life that are likely to be far greater.'

    SIR WALTER BODMER is president of the HGP global coordination body known as
the Human Genome Organisation (HUGO) and he also believes that HGP will be one
hell of a giant step for mankind.

    Echoing recent gene-linked promises in the national press ('Secrets of
Ageing Found In DNA' .. 'Golden Bullets That Offer Life' .. 'Gene Study Offers
Hope On Cancer'), Sir Walter promises much by way of understanding the basis of
common lethal and disabling diseases and, thereby, the means to prevent or cure
them.

    And like Watson, he too anticipates big rewards for the medical business.
'The pharmaceutical industry of the future, the medicine of the future, will, in
my view, depend very largely on what is discovered through the Human Genome
Project,' he said.

    But Bodmer, whose full-time post is research director at the Imperial Cancer
Research Fund, will know all about the gap between what is aspired to and what
is accomplished. In his own field, cancer, there has been no real progress
during the last 20 years in extending the survival rate of patients with the
most common solid malignant tumours - the ones that kill the majority of people
- despite a massive and ceaseless flow of research donations from the public.

    A look at how the ICRF spends its money offers a clue as to why the war is
being lost. Sixty per cent goes on fundamental research, 30 per cent on clinical
research, and just 10 per cent on research into prevention. If the ICRF were to
spend its Pounds 27 million annual public donations on an educational campaign
based on prevention, it would achieve more in one year than it has achieved in
its 90-year history. The Human Genome Project will take us further down the same
high tech road to failure, not least because the paradigm on which it rests is a
faulty one.

    In an age when the scientific certain ties of the past have been shattered
by the advent of chaos theory and quantum logic, it is simple-headed, not to say
old-fashioned, to look at human beings, or any other organism, in terms of a
semi static chemical formula.

    Harvard's Professor Hubbard shaped a recent position paper on HGP for the
Boston-based Counci1 for Responsible Genetics in which she warned fellow
scientists about the folly of assuming that just because they have the tools to
detect more of the tiny increments of life, they necessarily see things any
clearer.

    'Molecular geneticists,' she wrote, 'assume that a better understanding of
these smaller components will provide better insights into how whole organisms
function, individually and in society. However, this reductionist view ignores
the fact that molecules and subcellular structures, and tissues and organisms
and, indeed, whole societies, all interact with each other and with everything
that goes on around them, so that it is impossible to predict how changes in the
molecules or genes will affect what happens at other levels.'

    Others caution more strongly about over-estimating the extent of human
knowledge. DNA, nearly 40 years after its discovery, is not half so well
understood as is assumed. Only three per cent of DNA forms into genes that
'code' for the manufacture of our physical bodies. The rest is still a mystery.
And even that three per cent, argued biologist Richard Tapper in a recent
article in New Scientist, is poorly understood. Rather than genes containing the
code of life, said Tapper, they are merely part players in a far more complex
picture that involves different cellular compo nents fulfilling different
functions depending on time, place and local micro- environment: that is, just
like the real world.

    As research goes on to discover the 'defective' genes linked to important
inherited diseases such as muscular dystrophy, this is indeed found to be the
case. Genes, defective or not, are refusing to behave as anticipated. They
undergo unexpected mutations and some of them manufacture more than the one
protein they were thought to code for: it depends on when and where they are
located.

    The accuracy of programmes screening people for these inherited diseases -
either adults suspected of being carriers, or their embryos with a view to
termination - is also, at best, mixed. And yet pressure is on both in the UK and
in the US for screening of the entire population: starting with cystic fibrosis.

    More discoveries of alleged disease genes, together with techniques for
testing earlier in an embryo's life, will lead to more abortions of
'substandard' foetuses. US surveys show that the abortion rate is already going
up as a result of these two factors.

    EVEN MORE severe problems will arise when the gene screeners advance upon
the so called polygenic ailments, complex phe nomena like alcoholism and mental
illness. 'For months they said they had the gene that indicated a predisposition
to alcoholism,' says Andy Kimbrell, attorney for the Washington-based social
watchdog group Foundation for Economic Trends. 'They thought they had it down -
that if you had this particular gene you were disposed to alcoholism. Now they
say they don't have it. But criminality they think is pretty much sewn up and
they certainly thought they had the predisposition to manic depression.'

    What worries Kimbrell is that decisions about life and health insurance
premiums, as well as who gets hired and dumped, will be taken on the basis of
such faulty data, with scare following scare as each new disease gene is
sequenced under the HGP programme. And these decisions are being taken already.
As long ago as 1982, a survey of 366 leading US companies showed that 77 of them
were about to or already had used genetic screening when hiring new staff.
Carriers of the gene associated with sickle cell anaemia - invariably of
Afro-Caribbean descent - have been shown to be a particular target of such
employers and insurers, a number of whom have used the genetic trait as an
excuse to refuse to take on blacks.

    Harvard's Professor Hubbard anticipates the creation of a victimised class
of 'healthy ill', fretting over the years as to when their predisposition might
strike. Andy Kimbrell sees them as forming 'a biological underclass', unable,
because of their personal genome, to get employment or adequate health care -
and all this based on untrustworthy data.

    But such voices of dissent are comparatively rare in the US, where to
complain, even temperately, is to be accused of being 'anti-science'. Even
scientists who dissent were described in these terms by Dr Victor McKusick,
president of the HGP's ethical, legal and social committee. But as feminist
academic, Janice Raymond of Massachusetts, argues in the current issue of
Reproductive and Genetic Engineering Journal (Pergamon), the genome project is
itself anti-science, in that it is an enterprise shackled to and driven by
industrial technology (the manufacturers of gene sequencing machines and related
high tech, high cost paraphernalia). Its goals, from start to finish, lie in a
market place that exists to exchange products for profit, rather than produce
improved health for the masses. It is a giant juggernaut of a scheme guaranteed
to inhibit the independent spirit of inquiry, the 'autonomous ways of knowing',
that are science's ideal.

    In the UK, there is precious little debate. In Germany, where a sensitivity
still exists about Nazi eugenics, opposition is considerable; not just to HGP
but to a whole range of biotechnological projects aimed at 'improving' female
reproductivity and manufacturing and patenting various 'novel' animal life
forms.

    That the German authorities take the opposition seriously - especially the
advent of a militant feminist group known as Red Zora which has attacked
numerous 'strategic' properties - can be seen from a December 1987 search and
arrest operation carried out by 200 armed Federal police: it was directed mostly
against women critical of genetic and reproduction technologies and who had set
up communication networks. Thirty three premises were raided across three
provinces, including a medical practice and the Gene Archive at Essen.

    Paula Bradish, Hamburg-based biologist and social scientist, points to a
very contemporary reason for Germany's sensitivity. In investigating what has
become of German human genetics research since 1945, she has discovered a
'frightening degree of continuity' with the work of the concentration camps.
Organs and tissue collected from inmates are still being worked on in German
universities. And data from those times, especially relating to the incidence of
genetic disease within families, is also still active.

    But of course the new eugenics isn't about mutilating defectives in
concentration camps. It is about a voracious commercial sector exciting the
public's insecurities and then meeting the needs they will have themselves
created.

    Disease aside, if the Human Genome Project uncovers a gene that allegedly
contributes to athleticism or intelligence (short-sightedness and high IQs seem
to go together in children) then how many parents will want their embryos
altered accordingly, and which free market government is going to deny them that
right of choice.

    'Even if we find such uses trivial or repugnant,' Bernard Davies of Harvard
Medical School told New Scientist in 1989, 'a world that accepts cosmetic
surgery and the injection of silicone to enlarge breasts, and that cannot
prevent the use of hormones by athletes, may find it difficult to limit
non-medical uses (of gene surgery).'

    THE problem with gene surgery at the embryo stage is that if you insert the
desired gene in the wrong place, the error doesn't end with that half formed
patient, it will be passed on in the form of genetic mutations to the
grandchildren, on and on down the generations.

    Can we have confidence that mistakes won't be made during such demanding
sub-molecular procedures when surgeons currently have trouble fixing whole limbs
(they needed two goes at Prince Charles's broken arm, for instance). In fact, it
is already known how easy it is to err at the genetic level from the large
amount of gene surgery currently being practised on livestock - undertaken with
a view to increasing farmers' profits. The Beltsville pigs are a famous example:
a genetically altered group that not only failed to grow to slaughter weight in
double quick time, as intended, but were racked with arthritis, lethargy,
abnormal skull growth, pneumonia and early mortality. Many other animal failures
are on record.

    Embryo surgery on humans (or 'germ line therapy' as it is innocently called)
is still some years away. But whereas men like the Imperial Cancer Research
Fund's Walter Bodmer get anxious when the subject is even raised, preferring to
view the phenomenon as a distant hypothesis, that it will come is inevitable.
History shows that scientists first practise on animals what they eventually do
to humans: for instance, techniques of artificial insemination and test tube
fertilisation were both first 'perfected' on cattle.

    Gene therapy performed after a person is born is not thought to have an
effect on the offspring of that patient (in the way that a resculptured nose
isn't passed on). But the risks of new genes landing in the wrong place and
becoming cancerous is still considerable.

    While US doctors practise their high tech surgical strikes, a London health
visitor working in Los Angeles reports to the Evening Standard of seeing the
poor of the city giving birth in parked cars near to hospitals; two-fifths of
emergency admissions having their tubes and infusions taken out when it's learnt
they lack adequate health insurance.

    Here in the UK, funding cuts put thousands of hospital beds out of
commission, yet there is always money for dazzling high tech failures like last
year's heart operation, without anaesthetic, on a near full-term baby who was
still in his mother's womb. He had two more operations after delivery, then his
miserable life ended.

    Such distortions are a natural feature of societies that are not merely
unequal but bored by commonplace health strategies of prevention and healthy
living, and where the limits to what the medical industry will contemplate are
not yet in sight.

    The Human Genome Project, based as it is on defective science and logic,
will greatly extend those limits by holding out more tantalising promises. The
New Eugenics will thus be self-willed, a product of the coercive strategies of
big science and big business and of the terror of ordinariness that lurks in the
natural woman and man.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              493 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1991 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 20, 1991

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Pioneering gene therapy shows signs of success: The annual meeting of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS in Washington

BODY:


    PRELIMINARY results from the world's first test of gene therapy on patients
with serious disease suggest it may be working.

    Dr Michael Blaese, one of the team pioneering the techniques at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, told the association meeting that
the first child to receive the new form of treatment, which began in September,
is showing signs of improvement.


    The child, aged four, has an inherited disease which cripples the immune
system, leaving it vulnerable to infection. Without treatment, children must be
shielded in a sterile 'plastic bubble'.

    'The child is now showing an enhanced immune response after gene therapy,'
Dr Blaese said, but he warned it was too early for definite conclusions.

    The disease, called adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, is caused by a
single defective gene which affects the body's ability to break down some toxic
waste products.

    The aim of gene therapy is to give patients the normal gene for ADA to
correct the defect. To do this Dr Blaese and his team have genetically
engineered a virus to contain the ADA gene. The team extract T cells from the
patient's blood which are stimulated to grow in the laboratory. The genetically
engineered virus is used to insert the ADA gene into the T cells which are then
transfused back into the patient.

    The same team recently began a second gene therapy experiment to treat
cancer. Dr Steven Rosenberg said the first two patients in a trial of up to 50
people with advanced skin cancer were receiving transfusions of their own T
cells, after a gene for a natural body substance, called tumour necrosis factor,
had been inserted into them in the laboratory.

    A previous study showed that transfusion of the patient's T cells alone led
to a substantial remission in 40 per cent of patients, but it was too early for
any results from the new experiment, Dr Rosenberg said.

    Approval for these trials has been won after exhaustive scrutiny. Fears of
genetic engineering have led to some fierce opposition, but two public opinion
polls in the US found that between 77 per cent and 84 per cent of respondents
approved the use of gene therapy.

    Dr French Anderson, also in the NIH team, said several groups of researchers
in the US were seeking approval for gene trials in patients. An experimental
treatment for Aids was likely 'within a year or so'.

    However, he warned that gene therapy was 'a hi-tech, expensive, esoteric
procedure that would need substantial improvements before it could gain wide
application.'

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000


                              495 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               December 28, 1990

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: Environment/Science: Message received but not quite understood -
Science

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS

BODY:


    WARNINGS about the threat of global warming achieved unprecedented political
profile for science in the run-up to the World Climate Conference in November.
The predictions published in May by researchers on the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, led by Dr John Houghton of the UK's Meteorological Office,
not surprisingly sparked controversy but also gained wide endorsement.

    By comparing the output of computer models the IPCC scientists predict that
the amount of carbon dioxide will double between 2025 and 2050 if nothing is
done to reduce emissions. By the year 2020, global mean temperatures are
expected to rise 1-2C over pre-industrial levels and these increases will be
accompanied by a rise in sea level of around 20-30 centimetres by 2030.


    The predictions quickly came under attack from the independent, US-based
Marshall Institute, which is thought to have influenced White House thinking. At
a June press conference in London, Professor William Nierenberg said that
climate forecasts for the next century are so unreliable that they are useless
to policy makers. 'Attempts to predict temperature changes in the next century
on the basis of current data would be foolhardy,' he said.

    But the arguments masked the enormous importance of the IPCC report. From
assessment of a wide range of data, the panel are now confident they understand
the key features of the greenhouse effect. Carbon dioxide, water vapour, methane
and other gases such as the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) allow light from the sun
to pass through the atmosphere but trap some of the infrared heat given off by
the earth's surface as result.

    And there is no doubt that levels of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases have been rising over the last century largely as a result of burning of
fossil fuels and deforestation. There is further confidence that increasing the
amount of these gases will increase the heat trapped by the atmosphere and warm
the climate.

    But predicting the consequences is fraught with difficulty and acknowledged
by all researchers. The best guesses are that it will be about ten years before
scientists can start to have real confidence in their models of how the climate
might change around the world in response to increasing concentrations of
greenhouse gases but, in the light of their findings, the IPCC urged immediate
action.

    They achieved considerable success in November with political endorsement of
the seriousness of the threat and an agreement aimed at preventing potentially
catastrophic man-made climate change signed by Predicting the consequences is
difficult .

    137 nations in Geneva, including the US. Dr Houghton said: 'The scientific
community has clearly got its message across that the climate is changing
because of the emissions of greenhouse gases.'

    Gathering some of the data vital to crank up climate models began in January
when the biggest global study to chart the effects of the oceans was launched
from international headquarters at the Institute of Oceanographic Sciences in
Surrey. The World Ocean Circulation Experiment (Woce) involves more than 40
countries over the next seven years. All scientists agree on an urgent need for
a better understanding of the oceans' role in climate. The project, which is
expected to cost Pounds 300 million excluding satellites and ships includes
long-term studies by satellites to record global sea surface temperatures, winds
and currents. Surface and deep-water measurements will be made from ship-based
surveys covering hundreds of thousands of miles.

    Away from climate, an attempt to get an unprecedented view of the universe
produced a bleary-eyed look instead. The Dollars 1.5 billion Hubble Space
Telescope, launched by space shuttle in April, returned less-than-sharp pictures
because of a defective main mirror.

    Since this realisation, hopes have lifted that useful astronomy can be
achieved before correcting the problem with compensating instruments delivered
by a later shuttle flight. Astronomers have been developing computer
'deconvolution' techniques to improve the resolution of the fuzzy images
received, which have turned out to be surprisingly successful.

    Overshadowed by Hubble's problems was the quiet success of Rosat, a joint
UK-German space mission to study x-ray and ultraviolet emissions from some of
the hottest and most violent events in the universe invisible from the ground.
Launched in June, the telescope is working perfectly and has already discovered
the hottest known star with a surface temperature of 100,000 degrees Celsius.

    The techniques and applications of genetic engineering, which are advancing
on a broad range of fronts, made a significant leap with their first use in
human treatment. Two trials of so-called 'gene therapy' began in September in
the US; one on cancer and the other on a rare inherited disorder of the immune
system. Both trials involve gene therapy of blood cells, as these can be easily
removed from the body to add the new genes and then returned to the patient.

    The year ends with the the loss of one famous tradition. The Royal Greenwich
Observatory gave up its pips in February to the BBC. The famous time signal,
transmitted from the RGO since 1923, was handed over before the observatory
moved from the splendour of Herstmonceux Castle in Sussex to purpose-built
accomodation in Cambridge.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                              498 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 21, 1990

LENGTH: 1161 words

HEADLINE: Science: Promise in the performing gene - New research offers hope of
genetic 'surgery' for one of man's most common inherited diseases. Nigel
Williams reports, and below outlines the first tests on this radical form of
therapy

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS

BODY:


    TODAY'S announcement by two separate groups of researchers that they have
corrected the defect in cystic fibrosis cells in the laboratory raises hopes
that therapies can ultimately be developed for the most common fatal genetic
disease amongst Caucasians affecting 1 in 2,000 births in the UK.

    After the hectic race to discover the defective gene causing the disease
found last year scientists have now shown that abnormalities found in cystic
fibrosis cells can be overcome by insertion of a normal gene into the cells.


    British-born Alan Smith, former head of biochemistry at the National
Institute for Medical Research in London and now at the US biotechnology company
Genzyme near Boston, has led one team that will publish its results in Nature
next week. The other, Michigan-based group, led by Francis Collins, publishes
its results today in the journal Cell.

    Both teams used knowledge of the gene to make copies of the normal and
defective forms in the laboratory. They then constructed viruses into which the
gene had been inserted and used these to carry the normal gene into cystic
fibrosis cells in the laboratory.

    Dr Smith said the results lived up to his best expectations. 'These were
technically difficult experiments but they show the normal gene can correct the
defect.'

    His team used vaccinia virus used to immunise people against smallpox as the
vector. Dr Collins used a retrovirus to transport the gene. The scientists are
encouraged that treatment might be developed by the fact that the two different
techniques were successful.

    One of Dr Smith's team, Michael Welsh, said the new work raised exciting
possibilities. 'There is a real chance that some form of gene therapy could be
developed over the next decade.'

    People with cystic fibrosis produce large amounts of thick mucous in their
lungs which blocks the airways and promotes bacterial infection. Over the years,
chronic lung infection results in gradual lung destruction and in spite of
improvements in treatment, patients often die before the age of 30. As yet there
is no cure.

    'About 90 per cent of the problems for cystic fibrosis patients are
concerned with the lungs. If the normal gene could be introduced into the lung
cells many of these could be alleviated,' Dr Collins said.

    The main challenge now is to develop ways to get the gene into the patient's
cells. Both teams point out that this still presents major hurdles. 'Safe and
effective delivery of the gene to a large proportion of lung cells is the big
question now,' Dr Collins added. The viruses used in the laboratory experiments
would not be suitable for patients.

    The astonishing speed of research developments results from an armoury of
remarkable new techniques. The classic biochemical approach had involved the
laborious dissection of the complex and delicate cellular machinery in an
attempt to unravel what was wrong in cystic fibrosis cells.

    Researchers have known for some time that the disease is associated with
impaired salt chloride ion transport in and out of cells in the lung, sweat
glands, intestine and pancreas, but the precise defect has remained elusive.
Further insight has been hindered by lack of information about the structure and
regulation of ion channels and their associated molecules.

    The new approach, called reverse genetics, sidesteps the complexity of the
cellular machinery and heads straight for the genes that underlie the problem.

    Inside almost every cell in the body, our human complement of 50,000 to
100,000 genes are packed and arranged in 23 pairs of chromosomes. The genes
carry precise instructions for the construction of cellular components which can
now be read and decoded by researchers. One of the triumphs of modern molecular
genetics is the growing ease of access to this vast database. Much remains
unknown, and it is the enormous task of the human genome project over the next
15 years to unravel it all, but the database is no longer entirely daunting.

    Using this information, reverse genetics first locates the target gene on a
chromosome. Genetic 'markers' are then sought to pin down its location. When
scientists have homed-in on a sufficiently small area, the DNA the chemical from
which genes are made is 'cloned', that is chunks spanning the relevant region
are isolated and multiplied in the laboratory. These clones should contain
copies of the required gene.

    The first breakthrough in the hunt for the cystic fibrosis gene came in
1985, when researchers in London, Toronto and Salt Lake City simultaneously
reported it was on chromosome 7. The position of the gene was rapidly refined
with the discovery of other markers on the chromosome, and the race was on to
find its exact location.

    The Canadian team, led by Lap-Chee Tsui at the Hospital for Sick Children in
Toronto, then joined forces with a competing team led by Francis Collins at the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University of Michigan in 1987. The group
announced it had finally found the gene in September last year. Narrowly beaten
to the goal was Bob Williamson's group at St Mary's Hospital in London.

    THE NEWLY discovered gene was found to be only active in those tissues
affected by cystic fibrosis, and it had all the hallmarks of a gene controlling
ion transport across cell membranes. The team called the gene cystic fibrosis
transmembrane regulator (CFTR).

    They found that in cystic fibrosis patients, a small part of the gene was
missing when compared to the gene in individuals not suffering from the disease.
A study of several Canadian cystic fibrosis families revealed that 70 per cent
of cases involved this single missing gene fragment. The remaining cases showed
a number of different changes in the gene. The faulty gene prevents cystic
fibrosis cells from making a normal CFTR protein.

    Dr Collins hoped that an experimental animal which mimics cystic fibrosis
would be developed within the next year there is no natural animal equivalent of
cystic fibrosis to test therapeutic approaches. Production of useful amounts of
CFTR in the laboratory also provide a powerful new test-tube system. Dr Welsh
agrees: 'We can now learn the precise function of the molecule and test drugs
and other therapies for the first time,' he said.

    There may also be other spin-offs from a greater understanding of the CFTR
protein. Dr Smith points out that the CFTR looks similar to a number of proteins
involved with transport of substances out of cells. One of these, active in
drug-resistant tumours, pumps out drugs from the cell before they have had
chance to take effect.

    But despite the great optimism raised by the latest results, Dr Welsh
cautions against raising hopes too quickly. 'The precise molecular defects in
some other genetic diseases, notably sickle cell anaemia, have been known for
some time but the information has not yet led new therapies or a means of
correcting the defect.'

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                              499 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 21, 1990

LENGTH: 405 words

HEADLINE: Science: Putting therapy on trial

BODY:


    THE NEW work on cystic fibrosis pushes the disease up the list of possible
candidates for gene therapy. Long mooted by scientists as a theoretical
possibility, gene therapy faces its first test with trials now set to take place
in the US later this year.

    After extraordinarily lengthy consideration, a committee at the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) in Maryland last month gave Dr W. French Anderson and
Dr Steven Rosenberg approval to carry out two separate gene therapy trials; one
on a rare inherited disorder of the immune system and the other on cancer. The
final hurdle, approval by the Food and Drug Administration, is expected shortly.


    Gene therapy has raised eugenic fears but its advocates compare it with
organ transplantation. As surgeons put foreign tissue into patients to treat
certain diseases, gene therapists aim to transplant specific genes into
patient's cells to fight disease.

    The researchers stress that the genes would work only in the body of the
patient; they could not be passed on to any future offspring nor change the
pattern of inheritance.

    Both trials would involve gene therapy of blood cells, as these can be
easily removed from the body to add the new genes and then returned to the
patient. The NIH scientists have engineered a type of virus, called a
retrovirus, to get genes into the blood cells.

    Anderson will treat a small number of patients with a disease called ADA
deficiency that leaves them defenceless against infection. He plans to insert
the ADA gene into white blood cells from the patient in the hope of correcting
the defect.

    Rosenberg's study is not concerned with genetic defects; he will test
whether gene therapy can act as a radically new way of treating melanoma, the
most serious form of skin cancer. He will insert the gene for a natural body
substance with the ability to kill cancer cells into white blood cells,
chemically-primed in the laboratory to migrate towards tumours. Rosenberg hopes
the added gene will help the white cells produce the cancer-killing substance,
called tumour necrosis factor, at the cancer site.

    Preliminary studies with non-therapeutic genes were carried out successfully
on patients at the NIH last year. Many scientists believe the use of
retroviruses as vectors may not prove to be the most successful strategy in gene
therapy but all eyes will be looking for signs of promise at this first step.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                              500 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 21, 1990

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis treatment hope

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS, Science Correspondent

BODY:


    LABORATORY studies announced today raise the first hopes of treatment for
cystic fibrosis, one of the most common inherited diseases, which affects 6,000
people in the UK.

    Two groups of scientists in the United States have corrected the genetic
defect in cystic fibrosis cells by adding the normal gene.


    British-born Alan Smith at the US biotechnology company Genzyme near Boston,
has led one team that will publish its results in Nature magazine next week. The
other group, led by Dr Francis Collins of the University of Michigan, publishes
its results today in the journal Cell.

    Gene therapy, the hope of putting genes into patients' cells to correct
defects or boost natural defences in diseases such as cancer, has not yet been
proven but it promises revolutionary new treatments. The gene causing cystic
fibrosis was discovered last September and both teams made copies of the normal
and defective forms of the gene. Using genetically engineered viruses to get the
gene into cystic fibrosis cells in the laboratory, they found that the normal
gene corrected the faulty salt secretion found in these cells.

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common genetic disease among Caucasians, with
two million UK carriers of the defective gene. Patients produce abnormally thick
mucus in their lungs which blocks the airways and promotes bacterial infection.
Chronic infection gradually destroys the lung and patients often die before 30.

    'Safe and effective delivery of the gene to a large proportion of lung cells
is the big question now,' said Dr Collins. The laboratory viruses would not be
suitable to treat patients.

    The first gene therapy trials began at the US National Institutes of Health
last week.

    Promise in the gene, page 32

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                              502 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 21, 1990

LENGTH: 143 words

HEADLINE: Young children with poor sight 'score higher in IQ tests'

BODY:


    POOR eyesight in young children is linked to intelligence, the British
Association was told.

    Dr Bernadette Modell, of University College, London, said: 'Shortsight below
the age of 10 is positively related to (higher) IQ.'


    The difference between shortsighted children and others could be five or 10
points on the IQ scale.

    Dr Modell, an obstetrician and gynaecologist, gave the example at a news
conference on embryo research and gene therapy to illustrate that gene therapy
to correct one defect might handicap someone in another area.

    'If you correct shortsight, might you reduce IQ?' she asked.

    Dr Martin Johnson, a Cambridge University embryologist, urged the Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Authority to consider genetic engineering on
embryos.

    He said that occasions could arise where its use might be justified.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000


                              508 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 4, 1990

LENGTH: 2221 words

HEADLINE: Enviroment: A great stretch of the genes - We're on the edge of the
genetic engineering revolution which could transform the farming landscape with
new plants, new creatures and new hazards. But how safe is it to let these
products into the environment and how is Britain approaching the ethical and
safety questions?

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS

BODY:


    FROM pot-bellied pigs to purple-sprouting broccoli, human beings have long
tinkered with the genetics of animals and plants with varying degrees of fancy
and utility. But the constraints of conventional breeding are now challenged by
genetic engineering which, less than 20 years after the first steps were
developed, is offering a short cut to a whole new range of organisms.

    Genes can now be swapped between micro-organisms, animals and plants.
Scientists in California recently announced the production of genetically
engineered tobacco plants containing animal antibodies; in the Netherlands, a
team has produced potato plants that make human albumin one of the vital blood
proteins. The prospect of such genetic mixed-bags is attracting commercial
interest as rapidly as public unease.


    Genetically engineered organisms mostly micro-organisms are establishing
their place in the pharmaceutical industry in many countries but companies now
believe they could take a substantial share of the world's agricultural
business.

    But to achieve this the organisms must make the great leap from the
laboratories and factories out into the environment. The prospect is highly
controversial and potentially hazardous and governments around the world are
hastily getting to grips with the question of regulation.

    In Britain, proposals for experimental release of genetically engineered
organisms were submitted voluntarily to an expert committee for approval until
last year, when this became a legal requirement. Comprehensive legislation is
proposed in the Environment Bill currently before Parliament but last week the
Government announced the formation of a new expert committee which will assess
the safety of all proposed releases of genetically engineered organisms. Also
last week, two new directives on genetically modified organisms (the preferred
terminology) were approved by the EC Council of Ministers in Brussels which will
toughen current UK regulations.

    What is not clear is whether the new UK committee alone will be enough to
control the the public's fears. The committee's remit is only to assess the
safety of released organisms but the technology prompts many broader ethical and
environmental concerns. And even on safety, many questions loom uncomfortably
large. Last summer, the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution reported on
the release of genetically engineered organisms to the environment. Chaired by
Lord Lewis of Newnham, the commission's report was widely welcomed as a balanced
and informed appraisal. The report concluded that strictly controlled releases
should be allowed but highlighted the current ignorance about many aspects of
genetics and ecology that hinder the assessment of risks.

    Everyone is agreed that the prediction of environmental impacts is
difficult. The science underpinning predictions about the ability of organisms
to invade the environment is not well developed. There are many examples of
small sub groups of closely related species in which one of the group has become
established in a new environment while the others, despite apparently equal
opportunities have not.

    To highlight the headaches, the commission points out that in Britain, for
example, introduced Mandarin ducks have done well and are spreading whilst
introduced Carolina ducks are not. Similarly, oat plants have not spread outside
the fields where they are grown whereas a close relative is a troublesome weed
of arable land. There is real difficulty in determining why one species becomes
a pest while one or more of its close relatives fails to do so.

    ASSESSMENT of risk is also hampered because only a small number of releases,
mostly field trials, have taken place. 'Although the environment is generally
resilient', states the report, 'resistent to invasion by alien organisms and
robust to biological perturbations, it is probable that some organisms, once
released to the environment, will become established there. Most are likely to
pose no hazard but others may cause varying degrees of disturbance which, in the
extreme, could have serious environmental consequences'.

    The report describes a study of the fate of introduced species: 'Of 1,058
documented invasions or introductions of alien species of plants, animals or
micro-organisms into the British Isles, about one in 10 became established. Of
these approximately one in 10 have became pests, varying in severity from
relatively minor to highly damaging.' But the report believes these figures may
overemphasise the risks. 'None of the heterogeneous collection of invading
organisms identified in this study had been screened for safety prior to arrival
and yet 90 per cent of those species that became established have not become
pests.'

    A programme was set up last year by the Department of Trade, the Agriculture
and Food Research Council and a consortium of industrial companies, called
Prosamo (the Planned Release of Genetically Modified Organisms), to develop ways
of monitoring the spread of micro-organisms and plants in the environment.

    Although the number of potentially troublesome organisms may be small the
assessment of risk cannot be confined to the organisms themselves. The extent to
which genes, especially novel genes, may spread to other organisms is an
important uncertainty. And adverse effects may only show up in subsequent
generations. 'It will be prudent to begin with the assumption that an introduced
gene could spread widely and then challenge that assumption,' says the report.

    The Royal Commission's candid assessment of risk has led to calls for a
moratorium on release. Greenpeace supports a moratorium believing that although
risks may be low, the consequences could be highly damaging. In the light of
these concerns, what are the grounds for going ahead?

    John Beringer, professor of microbiology at Bristol University chaired the
original voluntary release committee and has been appointed chairman of the new
committee. He doesn't duck these issues. As before the committee contains
scientific experts, representatives of industry and the trade unions but for the
first time includes a 'public interest' member.

    His first defence is that of the 15 releases of genetically modified
organisms approved so far in Britain mostly small-scale experiments 'we've not
yet made any stupid mistakes'. He points out that, unusually over matters of
safety, stringent precautionary measures have been installed before any trouble
has occurred. In the early days of genetic engineering 15 years ago, it was
scientists who first called for a moratorium until safety was assessed. But
experience in the laboratory has given scientists increasing confidence that the
organisms can be safe, which has been accompanied by a relaxation of
regulations.

    PROFESSOR Beringer believes that public confidence can be fostered by strict
enforcement of the regulations, even if scientists perceive them to be
excessive. 'At present there is a good liaison between academics, industry and
the Advisory Committee on Genetic Manipulation and good peer approval. But the
EC directives involve a much more extensive regulatory programme in areas of low
risk and consensus could break down. But unless you prosecute you are not seen
to be caring.'

    Genetic engineering itself is no longer perceived as a hazardous technology
in itself. Research on the development of the immune system has revealed that we
are all accomplished genetic engineers. Fragments of DNA the stuff genes are
made of are cut out and stuck together in the white blood cells to make new
genes for antibodies and other molecules during the course of an individual's
lifetime.

    But Professor Beringer believes confidence gained in the laboratory is best
built up in the environment by a cautious step by step approach. The Royal
Commission concluded that the ability to predict the outcome of a release is
likely to be greater if the organism to be released is a modified version of an
organism common in the locality of the release; the behaviour of that organism
in the environment is well known; the genetic modification is limited in scope;
the properties of the new genetic material and its interaction with the original
organism are well understood; and the quantities to be released are not
excessive.

    Professor Beringer believes that the committee would never have allowed the
introduction of many current pests, like the prickly pear in Australia. 'There
has been a great deal of hype surrounding the technology. We are really just
tinkering around the edges of genetics at present and the first releases are
likely to be single changes to well understood organisms,' he argues.

    It's perhaps not surprising that the first sanctioned experimental release
in West Germany where opposition to the release of genetically engineered
organisms has been fierce is a plot of salmon-coloured petunias. The unusual
colour derives from white petunias engineered to express a maize pigment gene.
Scientists in Cologne hope to establish a variegated version.

    Many release proposals will be concerned with domesticated animals and crops
whose behaviour is much better understood than many wild species. In such cases
it should be possible, by thorough evaluation, to make a reasonable prediction
of the likely environmental behaviour of the organism.

    A genetically engineered wheat, for example, planted in similar conditions
to normal wheat is likely to behave in a similar manner to its non-engineered
relative.

    But what of the longer term? Genetic engineering is still in its infancy. We
know of only a small number of genes of the many thousands that make up most
organisms. There is no way scientists could engineer the wingless, legless,
large-breasted chicken held up as one of the ultimate horrors by critics of the
technology. But rapid developments in understanding the genetics of body
patterns in a range of organisms mean the idea cannot be completely dismissed as
science fiction.

    The Royal Commission warns: 'The full consequences of genetic engineering
cannot be foreseen. It is possible now to do things which were inconceivable 20
years ago. Ingenious people in the future may be able to use the tools at their
disposal, for example, the ability to construct novel genes by chemical
synthesis, to develop organisms whose impact may be quite unlike anything
previously known.'

    IT IS concern about the longer-term directions and prospects that fuel calls
for the establishment of a biotechnology commission to consider the wider
ethical and environmental impacts of genetically engineered organisms. The UK
Genetics Forum, a network of public interest groups, is not opposed in principle
to release but believes a public biotechnology commission should be established
alongside the release committee to tackle the wider issues.

    Within the EC there is growing pressure to establish a body with wider remit
in biotechnology. Ken Collins, a member of the European Parliament, believes
something along the lines of the Royal Commission would be desirable. 'We need
to be able to steer a path between the excesses of scientists who believe if it
can be done it should be done and those who would impose restrictions severe
enough to drive industry out of Europe.' He feels industry as well as the public
would welcome such a move.

    Professor Beringer also believes there is a role for some sort of ethical
body. And the Government set up a committee last autumn under Sir Cecil Clothier
to report on the ethical issues surrounding gene therapy the prospect of using
gene 'transplants' to treat a number of diseases another possibility brought
about by genetic engineering technology.

    Beringer hopes the new release committee will have a higher public profile
and will publish the details of planned releases. But the prospects fall short
of openness, some releases will not be revealed to the public to preserve
commercial confidentiality or the national interest.

    And there is some ground to be recovered from the bungled announcement by
the Ministry of Agriculture of the release of a genetically engineered baker's
yeast in March. The announcement of the first commercial release in Britain came
with no details about the new yeast or the company producing it. Only
subsequently did these details emerge.

    Governments and companies should be the most eager to provide the fullest
public information on releases. One release which caused serious damage to human
health or the environment or widespread revulsion could destroy public
confidence in both the science and the scientists and put the whole business at
risk.

    At a biotechnology meeting last week John Rimington, director general of the
Health & Safety Executive, said that it was essential to keep the public
informed. 'There's real concern that human beings are messing around with too
much power and industry must take these worries to heart. The lesson of the
nuclear industry, which raised similar concerns, led, along with a number of
other factors to a quite exaggerated public perception of risk.

    'However we must not ignore the potential for accidents, the problems of
public perception, nor the need to protect the environment where organisms once
released cannot be recalled.'

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2000


                              511 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1990 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 19, 1990

LENGTH: 423 words

HEADLINE: Aids test 'crunch' five years away

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS

BODY:


    AIDS research has made remarkable progress, with 25 companies and more than
100 university laboratories working on new drugs to fight the disease, a
researcher told the association.

    Dr Bill Haseltine of the Dana-Faber Research Center in Boston said: 'Aids
has successfully mobilised a large group of scientists in a very short period of
time. Remarkable progress in understanding the virus has been turned into a
development programme for drugs and other therapies.'


    Four or five compounds have entered clinical trials in the past year, the
fruit of research between 1981 and 1984, he said. Since then many more targets
within the virus had been identified and more drugs would soon be under
consideration.

    'AZT, the only drug currently licensed by the Food and Drug Administration
for the treatment of Aids, and improved treatment of opportunistic infections
mean that there are a number of people alive today who previously would have
died,' he said.

    There could soon be more candidate drugs to test than could easily be
handled: 'There's a real crunch coming in the next five years.'

    Researchers are also buoyed by the success of a vaccine against SIV, a close
relative of HIV that infects monkeys.

    Dr James Mullins of the University of Stanford said that two or three years
ago there was real despondency that a vaccine might be impossible. But work on
the monkey virus meant that the approach was not a waste of time.

    'There is a real possibility of developing a vaccine with an intelligent
rationale over the next ten years,' he said.

    Dr Haseltine said there was a parallel with the treatment of childhood
leukaemia.

    'First progress was made in the treatment of these diseases in the 1950s.
Throughout the 1960s developments were slow but by the mid-1970s lifelong
survival was becoming commonplace.'

    Many new approaches to Aids were under consideration. In the long term,
scientists were looking at gene therapy, now under preliminary tests with cancer
patients at the National Institutes of Health in Maryland.

    Dr Haseltine said: 'Harmless viral vectors could carry parts of the HIV and
stimulate an immune response, and 'eviscerated' HIV could be used in a number of
ways to block the spread of infection.'

    Vaccines offer the best hope, particularly in poorer countries, Dr Haseltine
said, but a combination approach would ultimately lead to the survival of
patients and a reduction in transmission of disease.

    'It's a long slow process but we've made the first few steps.'

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2000


                              513 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 29, 1989

LENGTH: 37 words

HEADLINE: UK News in Brief: Ethics body formed

BODY:


    A committee to study the ethics of gene therapy was announced by the
Government yesterday. No such treatment will be available for two or three
years, but researchers have been pressing for national guidelines.


LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2000


                              515 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                November 4, 1989

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: Genetic test to give early clue to heart disease

BYLINE: By JOHN ILLMAN in Jamaica

BODY:


    A TEST to identify people at risk from coronary heart disease will become
available as genetic engineering moves out of the laboratory and into the
doctor's surgery, a scientist predicted yesterday.

    Professor Bob Williamson, a consultant in molecular biology at St Mary's
Hospital Medical School, London, told British Medical Association members
meeting in Jamaica that scientists had defined 10 to 15 genes involved in
coronary heart disease - the single biggest killer in Britain.


    Speaking at the association's clinical congress, Professor Williamson said
that people found to be at risk could be forewarned.

    With up to 15 genes implicated in coronary disease, there was no prospect of
gene therapy to correct inherited abnormalities, said Professor Williamson. But
such therapy would emerge for single gene diseases such as cystic fibrosis.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2000


                              516 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1989 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 7, 1989

LENGTH: 1272 words

HEADLINE: Futures: Revolution in the family - The global map of the human genome
that centres on Paris

BYLINE: By NIGEL WILLIAMS

BODY:


    As France prepars to mark the passing of 200 years since the beginning of
the Revolution, a strange gathering of families in Paris is at the centre of a
new, much more far-reaching revolution - mapping the human genome.

    It's a project that has been embraced in the US with almost moon-shot
enthusiasm and programmes are also planned or under way in France, Italy, West
Germany, Japan and the UK. Kenneth Baker earmarked Pounds 12 million over the
next three years from the UK science budget and the EC is in the middle of plans
for a coordinated project amongst member states that could be under way by the
end of the year. And it is the Centre d'Etude de Polymorphisme Humain in Paris
that has cells containg the entire genetic information of 40 large families -
soon to be 60 - from France, the US and Venezuela which will form the reference
material for the whole international effort.

    It's a huge task, with the ultimate aim of determining the precise chemical
sequence of the genetic information stored in our chromosomes - a print out of
our entire body plan and checklist agianst future disease. Enthusiasm and
optimism for the project comes from two directions - the new power of molecular
biology and computing which now makes it technically feasible and a growing
understanding of the importance of the role of genetics in disease.

    Opposition comes from those who question whether the results will ultimately
be used for the benefit of inidviduals or whether it will ne a tool for coercion
and of benefit just to biotechnology, pharmaceutical and insurance comapnies.
There are already aptent battles over substances produced commercially by
genetically engineered human genes - will companies end up owning parts of the
human genome?

    And there are more inchoate worries about how such information may have
presently unthinkable effects on a broad range of issues. Protests have been
strongest in West Germany with bitter memories of eugenics and a genetic
vocabularly deeply tainted by Nazi abuse. Even the gene map - Genkarte - causes
alarm as Karte is the name for the plastic bank cards and there are fears of a
'gene card' that can be swiped through a terminal and checked as simply as a
credit card.

    One thing, however, the scientists abnd their critics agree upon is the
staggering speed of developments. A genetic involvement in some diseases has
been suspected for a long time. In 1911 a form of colour blindness was thought
to be carried on the X-chromosome from a study of the pattern of inheritance
which showed that only males were affected. Several other diseases were
subsequently thought to result from a faulty gene on the X-chromosome by looking
at sex differences. But since the discovery of DNA and the development of
molecular biology over the last 20 years the precise genetic defects responsible
for a host of diseases, particularly those involving th blood protein
haemoglobin, have been be determined.

    From patterns of inheritance it has been estimated that there are about
4,200 diseases affecting about 2.5 per cent of live-born offspring in Western
Europe which look like the result of a single faulty gene but the actual genes
causing many of these diseases are still not known. It's the hope that one of
the first fruits of the mapping project will be to find these genes and develop
effective screening.

    Knowing the defect opens doors to possible treatments too. One of the great
hopes is gene therapy - transplant of normal genes into an individual to counter
a defect. Dr French Anderson at the National Institutes of Health in the US has
received approval after stringent scrutiny for the transplant later this month
of bacterial marker genes into the immune cells of some cancer patients to help
look at their function but this is not yet a foreseeable means of therapy.

    The pursuit of defects has been helped by a remarkable new way of homing in
on the genes - reverse genetics. The DNA of different individuals can be
compared by cuting it up with restriction enzymes. These cut the DNA at precise
sites and the resulting different-sized fragments form a specific pattern. A
different sequence at a cutting site in a different person leads to a different
pattern of fragments.

    Such patterns of cut DNA are called restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLPs) and they are an analytical triumph of molecular biology.
If a RFLP is found associated with the appearance of a particular genetic
disease then it can act as an easily detectable marker for that disease.

    Markers already exist for a number of disorders such as cystic firbosis,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Huntingdon's diseas. And it is now possible to
use the RFLPs to 'walk' along the DNA fragment to reach the actual gene and
determine the precise defect.

    The initial goal of the human genome project is to produce a fairly crude
map fo where the different genes lie within the chromosomes. This could take up
to five years as it is estimated we have 50,000 to 100,000 genes. The final goal
is the complete sequence of chimical building blocks of DNA - about 3,000
million of them - out of which the genes are constructed. Most estimates are
that this is about 15-20 years away. Getting there is going to take a lot of
drudgery and many of the projects are looking at ways of developing an
'industrial' approach necessary to handle all the data.

    As the map takes shape it looks set to throw more light on commoner diseases
such as diabetes, heart disease and mental disorders, susceptibility to which
are known to involve a number of genes. At this stage the issues become more
controversial as they invovle probabilities, risks and the assessment of
environmental effects. A study at King's College Hospital, London has shown
onlya 50 per cent concordance between the development of diabetes in identical
twins. So to know that you carry genes giving you, say, a ten-fold greater
chance of developing diabetes is to what benefit? The hope is the possibility of
avoiding the risk factors or procuring priority treatment but what will be the
response of your insurance company, or a state wishing to lessen the burden of
diabetes? And what happens, as the map unfolds, if the genetic base of
much-prized talents is discovered? What pressures would that bring?

    Unsurprisingly, given the eventual effects on wider issues, most scientists
involved in the project are keen that such questions ar eaired as widely as
possible. The intellectual prizes for them are clear; to develop the techniques
necessary to handle huge volumes of data, to develop the map, to understand the
genetic interactions in inheritance. But many of the research plans include
money for ethical discussions.

    Nancy Wexler, who chairs the ethics committee of the US project, says that
the immediate aim is to ensure that there is protective legislation; that there
can be no discrimination on the grounds of genetic make-up. She is also
concerned about the quality of counselling.

    Benedict Harlin, European parliamentary representative of a group linked
with the German Greens, has tabled many amendments to the EC plans to emphasise
the need for proper ethical considerations.

    One of Britain's leading experts on genetic diseases, David Weatherall, has
likened the genetics revolution to that which occurred in physics earlier this
century with the same possibilities for good and evil but 'the potential for
benefit of mankind from the application of the new genetics is so great that it
is absolutely essential that we take the associated ethical problems in our
stride.'

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2000
