
                               1 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                           November 16, 2010 Tuesday

LENGTH: 1375 words

HEADLINE: WHY DO I FEEL SO LOW IN THE MORNING?

BODY:

   ASK THE DOCTOR - DR MARTIN SCURR

   *BY ARRANGEMENT ONLY*

   I WAS diagnosed with anxiety and panic attacks a few years ago, and was
prescribed propranolol for the symptoms, and citalopram to boost my serotonin
levels. I also had cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT). I found all of this
helpful.

   I'm off medication and have many more positive than negative days. However,
some mornings I wake up feeling on edge for no reason. By lunchtime I'll always
feel better, but I wondered whether my serotonin levels have something to do
with it?

   Is there anything I can eat or do to keep the levels on an even keel?

   Name and address withheld.

   you sound like a motivated individual and I applaud the fact you've taken
such an interest in your symptoms Ñ I'm sure you'll be able to recover fully.

   You have what is known as a strong 'diurnal' variation in your mood: this
means that you're worse at a particular time of day Ñ in your case, in the
morning Ñ and then you brighten up later.

   Please do not think you are alone in this: the pattern is typical of
depression. The anxiety and panic disorder are symptoms of the depression, too,
not a diagnosis in themselves.

   The good news is that the medication you were prescribed Ñ propranolol, a
beta-blocker that helps by blocking the body's responses to excess adrenaline,
and citalopram, an antidepressant Ñ and the CBT sessions have helped
considerably.

   However, having come off the medication you still have down times. These are
too easily attributed to low levels of serotonin, a brain chemical often
labelled as the 'feelgood' hormone.

   It is true that depression is often worse in the mornings and our serotonin
levels are, indeed, also low at this time. But there's more to it than that.

   It's like thinking all a car needs to make it go is petrol. But an empty tank
is just one of a multitude of reasons why the engine might not start.

   Similarly, low serotonin is not the only explanation for low mood. This is
why helping you is not as simple as finding a way of boosting serotonin
production, such as by altering your diet.

   My point is that there are other aspects to consider when looking at what
causes depression.

   For example, we know that the gene p11 is essential for nerve cells to be
able to respond to serotonin, and a lack of that gene has been shown to lead to
depression. As a result, researchers are thinking about gene therapy for
depression.

   Along similar lines, the brains of depressives have been found to contain
higher levels of a protein called MKP-1. This protein stops the growth and
development of certain nerve cells, which may make some people more vulnerable
to depression.

   Even citalopram Ñ a member of the group of medicines called selective
serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) Ñ doesn't simply 'boost' serotonin
levels.

   It is thought to work by allowing the build-up of higher levels of serotonin
at nerve junctions in certain parts of the brain.

   So I urge you not to become lost in contemplation about what exactly is going
on in terms of brain chemistry.

   Your symptoms, despite earlier improvement, have not been fully resolved. So
I suggest you go back to your doctor and ask about resuming treatment.

   I have a sense that you are under-treated.

   I AM 90 and, until five years ago, was hale and hearty, despite being a
moderate smoker.

   However, I then developed a problem with blood circulation in my legs, which
required a vein/artery substitution.

   Almost immediately, I developed neuropathy, a sensitivity in the soles of
both feet. Now I feel as though I'm treading on broken glass. I've been
prescribed all the usual medication without any effect. Will the neuropathy cost
me my mobility? And will exercise, a vitamin cocktail or other medication help?

   Tynan Campbell-Burns, Torquay, Devon.

   WHAT a shock it must have been suddenly to be faced, after a long life of
good health, with major surgery to restore the blood supply to one of your legs.
I assume the treatment you had involved a vein being taken from elsewhere in the
body and used as a graft to 'bypass' a narrowed section of the femoral artery,
the main vessel supplying blood to the leg.

   This would be as a result of peripheral arterial disease, where the leg
arteries have become clogged with fatty cholesterol deposits, a process known as
atherosclerosis. It's like having heart disease in your legs.

   Risk factors include high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol levels
and Ñ perhaps most relevant to you Ñ smoking.

   Often peripheral arterial disease causes no symptoms at all. But in more
severe cases, it can lead to intermittent painful cramping sensations in the
calf muscles when walking Ñ known as claudication Ñ which is rapidly relieved by
rest.

   Claudication is evidence of a shortage of vital nutrients in the muscles,
particularly oxygen (because not enough blood is getting through the blocked
arteries).

   Diagnosis involves feeling for a pulse in the leg. The weaker the pulse, the
less efficiently blood is being pumped around.

   The extent of the blockages can then be further investigated using scans,
leading to the surgery you had or balloon angioplasty, when the fatty deposits
in the artery are pushed out of the way using a small balloon.

   Unfortunately, while your blood flow has improved, you've developed
peripheral neuropathy. This is caused by damage to the peripheral nervous system
Ñ the nerves that run from the brain and spinal cord to the extremities.

   Symptoms can include numbness, tingling, burning, or over-sensitivity to
touch.

   The most common cause of peripheral neuropathy is diabetes. However, you
don't mention this in your letter, so I suspect the peripheral arterial disease
that has limited the blood supply to the nerves of your lower limbs has caused
the damage.

   It is disappointing that the three medications (gabapentin, pregabalin and
carbamazepine) known to help neuropathy haven't helped you.

   However, I'm hopeful that the immediate improvement in your blood supply
after the operation means your nerves won't get any worse, and they may even
improve. I can also reassure you that you will not lose your mobility, though it
may remain painful.

   Physical exercise can only help; it will improve the formation of new blood
vessels in the legs. But I'm afraid there are no medications or supplements that
will make any difference.

   However, keep optimistic, never smoke again and do all you can to walk
regularly. Things will improve.

   WE TEND to forget just how recently medical practices we take for granted
were considered radical.

   Sixty years ago this month, the British Medical Journal published one of the
first reports about muscle-relaxing drugs being used in anaesthesia.

   My father, Cyril Scurr, an anaesthetist, wrote about patients undergoing
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) for depression using succinylcholine. This is
derived from curare, a poison used by South American Indians for their blowpipe
arrows.

   The breakthrough was the use of the poison in patients, paralysing them to
prevent injuries such as fractures as they experienced induced seizures.
Anaesthetists used it to paralyse breathing muscles, too, prompting developments
in surgery.

   In 1951, George VI was anaesthetised in his drawing room at Buckingham Palace
for the removal of a cancerous lung (my father was in the team).

   The transition from dangerous drug to accepted medicine is proving less
straightforward for another plant.

   The 66 drugs identified in cannabis sativa have had a much rougher ride. The
medical interest in these has grown since scientists discovered there are
receptors in the central nervous system and other organs to which the drug locks
on. If a drug molecule is the key, then a receptor is the lock into which it
fits.

   Some molecules have anti-nausea effects and reduce pain and spasm Ñ which is
promising for the treatment of MS.

   In the U.S., a prescription version Ñ dronabinol (Marinol) Ñ is available,
enabling clinical trials. But it may well be that adverse effects will limit the
use of such drugs. The medical concerns are toxicity, the risk of mental health
changes and dependence. Far greater are the political and societal concerns. But
times, as Bob Dylan said, are a-changin' Ñ and 60 years hence I wouldn't be
surprised if we were all taking painkillers or anti-nausea pills derived from
cannabis.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2010


                               2 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            MAIL ON SUNDAY (London)

                            October 31, 2010 Sunday

LENGTH: 1014 words

BODY:

   TMOS2_H_28_A_31_ibdOCT31

   .TXT

   I'VE SEEN THIS ILLNESS TURN PATIENTS INTO

   BY EMIN CARAPETI Consultant Colorectal Surgeon St Thomas' Hospital, London

   - TO BE ADVISED -

   Imagine the pain of a mouth ulcer Ð a burning, needle-like sensation that is
impossible to ignore. And now imagine hundreds of these sores lining your gut,
triggering agonising spasms every time a piece of food is eaten or the digestive
system moves.

   This is what it feels like to have inflammatory bowel disease Ð an umbrella
term for gut conditions including ulcerative colitis and Crohn's Ð that affect
more than 250,000 Britons, with numbers rising each year.

   Couple this with embarrassing digestive discomfort and a raised risk of
cancer, internal bleeding, infection and, in many cases, death and you can see
why we so desperately need to find a solution to this problem.

   While ulcerative colitis tends to affect the rectum and colon, Crohn's can
develop anywhere along the digestive tract, causing inflammation, deep ulcers
and scarring and, eventually, permanent damage.

   Other symptoms include fatigue, weight loss and malnutrition Ð due to poor
food absorption. And because of the digestive problems, patients stop wanting to
eat. I have seen relatively healthy-looking patients reduced to walking
skeletons within months.

   For decades, doctors have pinned their hopes on discovering a cure, or at
least a drug that can treat IBD without causing major side effects. But as it
is, the immune-suppressing or anti-inflammatory medicines we use are so powerful
they cause acne, facial swelling, insomnia and mood swings. Long term, they thin
the bones and even lead to cataracts.

   We know IBD is the result of the immune system turning inwards and attacking
healthy tissue Ð but we have not been able to discover why this happens. You are
more likely to develop one of the conditions if you have a relative who suffers
from one. Hopefully advances in gene therapy will one day lead us to a cure but
this is some way off. Today we must focus on how best to help patients to live
pain- and risk-free lives.

   I would argue that today the linchpin of treatment must be good old-fashioned
surgery. Traditionally doctors treating an IBD patient call in a surgeon when
everything else has failed.

   And patients also have a fear of being operated on. Yes, it is a big
operation but I want to get the message out: don't be scared. Today we are so
adept that in 50 per cent of cases, an operation provides a virtual cure. And
thanks to advances in keyhole techniques, many cases are left without a
significant scar.

   Within the next decade I hope that all patients will be treated in specialist
centres, where there is a team of doctors Ð a gastroenterologist, surgeon,
pathologist and radiologist Ð who understand the specifics of the disease. It is
no good having a GP, physician or surgeon dealing with your treatment
separately. You need all three working together so that they can create a
bespoke management plan.

   Fortunately, physicians are becoming more aware of the need for early,
aggressive treatment, going straight to the new disease-modifying drugs rather
than dilly-dallying with less effective medicines. The moment they notice
complications, they call in a surgeon to remove the damaged section of the gut.

   Nearly 85 per cent of sufferers will need surgery in their lifetime. It is
just a question of when to operate to remove the damaged sections of the gut Ð
not if.

   Up to ten per cent develop complications after the operation Ð the bowel
won't join up, they get peritonitis and end up in hospital with blood poisoning.
The crucial thing is to operate sooner rather than later. Then there is a good
success rate.

   Many patients are deterred from having an operation because they fear being
left with a colostomy bag.

   But a permanent bag is necessary in only five to ten per cent of cases, and
this is determined by how low down in the gut disease has progressed, not
necessarily by the success of the operation.

   We always try to make decisions with the patient about the timing of an
operation. But they should be made aware of the risks of delaying surgery Ð
including cancer.

   I recently operated on a young mother who had been avoiding surgery for
Crohn's disease for three years, despite repeated calls from her
gastroenterologist. The 40-year-old teacher had delayed the operation because of
work and family commitments Ð she didn't have time to recuperate for eight
weeks.

   That decision has jeopardised her life. Once we went in, we discovered she
had bowel cancer.

   Although I managed to remove the tumour, she now has to have chemotherapy and
faces the risk of the cancer returning.

   Sadly she is not alone Ð every week I see patients who face dire consequences
because they have delayed surgery. If only they had come to see me sooner.

   lThe National Association for Colitis and Crohn's Disease, www.nacc.org.uk

   Interviews by CLAUDIA JOSEPH

   INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: THE FACTS

   l The two main types of IBD are ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.
Together they affect about one in 250 in the UK.

   l Most patients are diagnosed between the ages of ten and 40.

   l Cases of Crohn's disease have been rising in the UK especially among
children and young people. A recent study in Scotland found that there had been
a 50 per cent rise in ten years among the under-16s.

   l The causes of IBD are not yet known. But people who have a relative with
IBD are more susceptible. Environmental factors may trigger genetic
predispositions.

   l Some Crohn's sufferers find that eliminating certain foods helps, but no
specific dietary cause has yet been found. The EU is currently funding a major
study into diet.

   l One theory is that an organism found in cow's milk that can survive
pasteurisation may trigger Crohn's. The organism, Mycobacterium paratuberculosis
(MAP), is present in about half of Crohn's sufferers and affects about 35 per
cent of UK herds and causes a wasting disease in cattle.

   l Stress is thought to exacerbate IBD. Smoking may trigger Crohn's disease
flare-ups, while alcohol is thought to cause relapses in ulcerative colitis
sufferers.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2010


                               3 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            MAIL ON SUNDAY (London)

                            October 10, 2010 Sunday

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: HOW DIFFERENT TREATMENTS CAN WORK

BODY:

   l Biological therapies use substances that occur naturally in the body to
destroy cancer cells. They include monoclonal antibodies, cancer-growth
inhibitors, vaccines and gene therapy. They are administered either

   tablets or

   injection into the muscle or veins.

   l Hormone therapies act

   altering the production or activity of hormones in the body. They are most
commonly used to treat breast and prostate cancer as these cancers are
hormone-related. The type of hormone therapy given depends on the type of cancer
being treated. They are often administered

   tablets or

   injection.

   l Chemotherapy uses anti-cancer (cytoxic) drugs to destroy cancer cells.
There are more than 50 different drugs. Some are given on their own, many are
given together. They are administered

   injections, or in tablets, or via tubes or (for some skin cancers) creams.
Some patients suffer temporary side effects such as sickness and hair loss.

   l Radiotherapy uses X-rays and similar rays (such as electrons) to destroy
cancer cells in the treated area. Although normal cells can also be damaged

   the radiotherapy, they can usually repair themselves. It can be given either
externally, using X-rays, or internally,

   introducing solid or liquid radioactive material into the body. It can cure
some cancers and can also reduce the chance of a cancer coming back after
surgery.

   lwww.thelondonclinic.co.uk

   RAY OF HOPE: Therapies are tailored according to cancer type

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2010


                               4 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                           September 13, 2010 Monday

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: FOUND, THE GENE THAT CAUSES SHORT-SIGHT

BYLINE: BY FIONA MACRAE SCIENCE REPORTER

BODY:

   NOW EXPERTS SAY CONDITION COULD BE HALTED

   EYE DROPS

   A GENE that causes shortsightedness has been pinpointed

   British scientists, paving the way for eye drops that could make glasses
history.

   Within just ten years, a drug that prevents short- sightedness or stops it in
its tracks could be in widespread use.

   Millions would be spared the inconvenience and expense of contact lenses,
spectacles and laser surgery.

   Given in childhood, the eye drops could also spare school pupils anxieties
about having to wear glasses.

   Short- sightedness, or trouble in focussing on distant objects, affects

   more than one in three Britons and is becoming more common as we spend more
time indoors and in front of computer screens.

   Caused

   overgrowth of the eyeball, it usually starts developing in childhood. In some
cases vision can rapidly deteriorate. There is no way of halting its progress
and, in severe cases, it leads to blindness.

   The latest research,

   an international team led

   experts at King s College London and published in the prestigious journal
Nature Genetics, offers hope to millions.

   To find the gene, the first to be linked to short-sightedness, or myopia, the
researchers compared the DNA of more than 4,000 British twins. Twins are often
used in such studies because it is easier distinguish the different effects of
nature and nurture.

   They then confirmed their results studying the genetics of another 13,000
British, Dutch and Australian individuals.

   Some 45 per cent of Britons have the rogue gene and those who have two copies
of it are almost twice as likely to be short-sighted as those who are free of
it. KCL researcher Dr Pirro Hysi, the study s lead author, said: We have known
for many years that the most important risk factor for being short-sighted is
having parents who are shortsighted and for the first time we are identifying
genes that may be involved in passing on this susceptibility.

   The gene, known as RASGRF1, is thought to play a key role in the development
of the eye and the passing of visual signals to the brain for processing. When
it is faulty, the eyeball may over-grow, making distant objects seem fuzzy or
blurred.

   Dr Chris Hammond, also of KCL, said: Myopia, or shortsightedness, is the most
common eye problem, affecting over a third of adults in the UK. People who are
extremely short-sighted carry significant risks of future vision loss. The
retina can peel away from the back of the eye like wallpaper off a wall. While
we believe that environ-mental risk factors such as a lot of close work and lack
of outdoor activity are implicated, we have not previously understood how people
become short-sighted. We hope that

   understanding the mechanisms we can stop children from becoming shortsighted
and stop short-sighted children from becoming more short-sighted.

   A second study,

   Dutch researchers, identified a second short- sightedness gene. Ultimately,
there could be dozens behind the condition.

   Drugs that counter their effect and stop the eyeball from over-growing could
be available in just a decade, said Dr Hammond. Other options include gene
therapy injecting healthy genes into the eye.

   But Dr Hammond said: Gene therapy is a major intervention. I think we are
going to be looking at developing some kind of eye drop or tablet that
interferes with the biological pathway that leads to short-sightedness. Although
the eye drops would not help adults who are already short-sighted, they could be
of huge benefit to their children.

   However, today s youngsters can take some simple steps to try to discourage
short-sighted-ness. Terri Young, of Duke University in North Carolina in the
U.S., said: People need to go out-side and look at the horizon. Today s near
work forces our eyes to be constantly in tension to focus on reading papers and
watching monitors.

   Professor Pete Coffey, director of the London Project to Cure Blindness,
cautioned that any drug would have to be shown to be extremely safe before it
was given to children.

   f.macrae@dailymail.co.uk

   LEGACY OF POOR VISION

   ÷ Genes are largely to blame for short-sightedness. If one of your parents is
short-sighted, there is a one in three chance you will be. ÷ If both your
parents are short-sighted, there is a one in two chance you will be too. ÷
Environmental factors such as close work and lack of sunlight also play a role,
explaining why the condition is becoming more common in urban and computerised
societies. ÷ The main symptom of myopia is distant objects appearing blurred,
while near objects are seen clearly. Other symptoms can include headaches and
tired eyes. ÷ In those who are shortsighted, light rays are focused in front of
the retina s receptor cells (the inside of the back of the eye), rather than
right on it. This is because the eye is over-enlarged and too long from front to
back, or the cornea (the front of the eye) is too curved.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2010


                               5 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                             July 20, 2010 Tuesday

LENGTH: 1765 words

HEADLINE: FOR MONTHS HIS WIFE BEGGED HIM TO SEE THE DOCTOR ABOUT A MOLE ON HIS
LEG. BUT, LIKE COUNTLESS MEN, KEVIN REFUSED TO LISTEN ...UNTIL IT WAS TOO LATE

BYLINE: BY MARIANNE POWER

BODY:

   One of the most heartbreaking moments for Carole Batchelor was seeing her
husband Kevin struggling to get out of the bath. The IT manager, once a
strapping and fit 6ft 4in, was now so weakened

   illness he couldn't manage the simple manoeuvre.

   'I wanted to help him but he kept saying "I'll do it, I'll do it",' says
Carole, now 44. 'Finally, after several attempts, he found the strength to stand
up, and clung to me as he shuffled to our room.

   'It broke my heart to see my big strong man like that.'

   Five days later Kevin died. Just 41, he was riddled with cancer. The tragedy
was that his death could have so easily been avoided.

   Kevin was in great health and full of energy when he first noticed a new mole
that had appeared on his right calf.

   He'd had always hated doctors Ñ he went only once in 20 years of marriage Ñ
so refused to seek advice. But as the months passed and the mole got bigger,
darker, then started to bleed, even Kevin began to worry, yet despite his wife's
efforts to persuade him, he still wouldn't see his GP.

   'I'd plead almost every day for him to make a doctor's appointment,' recalls
Carole, a holistic health practitioner from Kempston, Bedfordshire.

   'Kevin didn't like being prodded about, and I think he was also scared of
what he might find out. He put his head in the sand.'

   'In desperation I rang the GP myself, and asked if he could write and tell
Kevin he was due a check-up, but he said Kevin would have to come in himself.'

   Six months later, Kevin was still putting plasters on his leg as the mole
wasn't healing.

   now it was the size of a 10p piece with ragged edges, and he finally agreed
to see his GP.

   The news, eventually, was bad: Kevin had a malignant melanoma, the most
serious form of skin cancer. Caught early it is entirely curable, but left too
late, it is deadly.

   Sixteen months after being diagnosed, Kevin died as the cancer spread to his
lungs and liver.

   'He died of the most treatable form of cancer Ñ I couldn't get past that for
a long time,' says Carole, three and half years later. 'He was angry at himself
for how stupid he had been, and for a long time I was livid, too. It was fear
that killed him Ñ fear of going to the doctor.'

   It's a story being repeated across the country, with the number of men dying
from malignant melanoma doubling over the past three decades according to Cancer
Research UK.

   The problem is particularly acute in older men, with deaths in those over 65
trebling. More women are actually diagnosed with skin cancer Ñ but more men die
from it because they go to their GP too late.

   'Too often men are presenting at a later stage,' says Caroline Cerny of
Cancer Research UK. 'This could be because men are more likely to get melanomas
on their back, so can't see them, while women get them on their legs and chest.

   'But it's also because of that age-old problem that men are more reluctant to
go to the GP, especially if something isn't causing any pain. I've spoken to men
who say they just put a plaster over their mole when they go out in the sun Ñ
they either don't know the risks or they don't want to face them.'

   Dr Jonathan Bowling, a skin cancer specialist from the Radcliffe Hospitals
Trust, adds: 'We are facing an epidemic of skin cancer. Rates of melanoma are
rising faster than any other cancer Ñ and more men are dying than women. Yet
men, wrongly, have the attitude that if a mole isn't bleeding and doesn't hurt,
it's not harmful.

   'Nor do you have to be a sun-worshipper to be at risk,' he warns. 'This form
of skin cancer is caused

   intermittent exposure to UV rays from the sun: it could be from something as
simple as getting sunburn as a child or from taking your shirt off in the
garden.

   'Skin cancer is now the fifth most common cancer in the UK. Caught early it
is curable with surgery. But caught late, because of its genetic make up, it
doesn't respond as well to chemotherapy as other forms of cancer.'

   Kevin's moles had always worried Carole. Although not a sun-worshipper, he
was blond and very fair skinned, and very 'moley'.

   'I remember sitting in the hairdressers, just after we'd got married, reading
an article about a woman who had skin cancer,' says Carole. 'We were only 21 but
it really scared me.

   Kevin had so many moles that I made him go to the doctor to get them checked
out Ñ but everything was fine. He was so young, he felt invincible.

   'Although we were always very careful with sunscreen when we went abroad, at
home, Kevin was a typical bloke, wearing shorts and mowing the lawn without
putting on any cream.'

   It wasn't until almost two decades later that the worries re-surfaced. 'We
had a couple of friends over and Kevin yelled for me to come upstairs,' says
Carole. 'He'd bumped his mole and there was blood all over the bedroom carpet Ñ
we were frantically trying to clean it up.'

   When he did finally see the GP, he was told it was probably an infected cyst,
despite the fact that the mole was dark, raised and bleeding Ñ all clear signs
of a melanoma. Kevin was told to go back in a couple of weeks to have the cyst
removed.

   'After that, Kevin was like a new man,' says Carole. 'He had been as worried
as me Ñ but we trusted what the doctor said and we'd been given the all-clear.'
To celebrate, the pair went off on a last-minute holiday to Cyprus. 'Someone
knocked his leg with their luggage at the airport and there was blood everywhere
again,' she says. 'But because of what we'd been told, we really weren't
worried.'

   On his return, Kevin saw a dermatologist to have his cyst removed. 'He didn't
want me to go in with him because he thought he'd be straight in and out, so I
waited in the car,' recalls Carole.

   'When Kevin came out, he looked grey. He told me: "The dermatologist thinks
it might be bad and I need surgery now." We were both stunned.'

   Two days later, on July 7, 2005, Kevin had a biopsy. After a torturous week
of waiting, the diagnosis was confirmed: Kevin had a malignant melanoma.

   There are three types of skin cancer. Basal cell carcinoma, which accounts
for about 75 per cent, is the slowest growing and usually doesn't spread.
Squamous cell carcinoma, which usually affects the face, is also slow to spread.
But malignant melanoma, which usually presents as a new or changing mole, is
particularly aggressive and can spread rapidly through the bloodstream, usually
to the liver, lungs or brain.

   'The doctors didn't give any prognosis at that stage, they just said they
needed to remove the area surrounding the mole,' says Carole. 'That night, we
just held each other and Kevin said: "It will be fine Ñ they just need to cut it
out." '

   Two weeks later, Kevin had surgery to remove a 4in-wide section of skin, an
inch and a half deep. This was covered with a skin graft from his thigh.

   An MRI scan to check the lymph nodes found no evidence that it had spread.
However, in a phone call the dermatologist warned Carole there was a high chance
she would be a widow within five years because there was a chance the cancer was
in Kevin's bloodstream.

   'I just put my head on my desk and wailed,' recalls Carole. 'I don't know how
I did it, but I never told Kevin what she said; I didn't know what good it would
do. It was the only secret I ever kept from him.'

   Kevin had quarterly check-ups on his moles and to look for lumps which could
show that the cancer had spread to the lymph glands.

   After six months they felt confident enough to go on holiday. 'We went for
three weeks around Asia,' says Carole. 'Kevin wore a hat and full-length
trousers and we made sure he was always in the shade. I'd convinced myself he
was going to be OK.'

   A few months later, in May 2006, Kevin started to complain of a pain in his
right side and was sent for an MRI scan. 'We knew it was bad news when the
doctor walked in with the nurse,' says Carole.

   'They said the cancer had spread to the liver and the lungs. They could try
chemotherapy, but melanoma is a very complex cancer that does not respond as
well to it as other cancers; the prognosis was very, very poor.'

   'As we struggled to take it all in, they suggested Kevin make a will. I don't
remember anything else except the room was spinning and Kevin had to help me to
the car. It was surreal. We were being given a death sentence but Kevin wasn't
even feeling sick.

   'We would sit in the hot tub in the garden, because the heat helped him with
his pain, and talk about the future. He said that he was happy that he'd done
everything he wanted to do in this life, but that when he got through this he
really wanted to spend his life doing something worthwhile.

   'He was also angry with himself for being so stupid about going to the
doctor.'

   In a last-ditch attempt, Kevin applied to take part in a trial for gene
therapy at St George's hospital in Tooting. This involved replacing a faulty
gene linked with skin cancer with a normal one.

   Kevin first needed chemotherapy to reduce the cancer in the liver and the
lungs. He had his first session on October 8, 2006.

   It was the beginning of the end.

   'He was already weak

   this stage and rapidly deteriorating, and the chemo finished him off,' says
Carole. 'He must have caught an infection because he got a high fever, and a
couple of days later we had to call an ambulance.

   'One of the consultants then took me aside and said Kevin only had a couple
of weeks. It was such a shock, because I thought we had months.

   'I decided not to tell Kevin Ñ what good would it do? But he knew how sick he
was, and more than anything he wanted to be home.

   'We set up a bed in the living room and a district nurse came in to help.
Those last days were spent saying how much we loved each other Ñ there were a
lot of kisses.

   'As the days passed, Kevin was on morphine and was desperately weak and
unwell. His arms and legs had wasted away but he was all swollen in the middle
because of fluid retention.

   'He told me: "I don't want to be here any more, I'm tired of living." That's
the hardest thing I've ever heard.'

   Just a week after leaving hospital Kevin died, holding Carole's hand.

   'It all happened so quickly that plenty of friends didn't even know he was
sick. It was horrific.'

   Even now, Carole is still devastated

   her loss.

   'The only thing more heartbreaking than losing someone you love is knowing
the whole tragedy could have been easily avoided,' she says, with a touch of
sadness.

   'A month after Kevin died, I had to have a suspicious mole removed. I was
crying throughout and the nurse told me that it was really nothing to worry
about Ñ that it wasn't cancerous and I'd got it early.

   '"That's why I'm crying," I told her.'

   * Cancer Research UK, sunsmart.org.uk or freephone 0808 800 4040 9am-5pm
Monday to Friday.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2010


                               6 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                            October 16, 2009 Friday

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: FOOD FOR THOUGHT IN GROCERY SECTOR

BYLINE: MARKET REPORT BY GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:

   BRITAIN'S third biggest grocer Sainsbury provided dealers with plenty of food
for thought as its shares rocketed 20pc around lunch-time on talk of a £7.75bn
or 420p-a share-cash bid from major shareholder, the Qatar Investment Authority.

   Many were amazed that a gain of such magnitude would fail to extract any kind
of official statement from the company via the London Stock Exchange's
regulatory news service. The silence was indeed deafening.

   As the market waited in vain for confirmation or even a denial that the
Qataris had tabled an offer or increased its stake in Sainsbury to 29.9pc, the
shares spectacularly touched a peak of 373p before closing 31.4p up at 342.5p on
meaty turnover of 70m.

   The Qataris were left holding a 26pc stake following a failed £10bn, or
600p-a-share offer in November 2007. That was derailed by the onset of the
credit crisis.

   Profit-taking dragged the Footsie 33.15 points lower to 5,222.95 as
third-quarter profits from US banking giant Goldman Sachs failed to live up to
super bullish expectations.

   Following JP Morgan's impressive earnings performance earlier this week,
money men in New York reckoned Goldman's third-quarter earnings could easily
touch $6 a share. They came in at $5.25 a share. Wall Street, which on Wednesday
breached the magic 10,000 level for the first time in a year, lost 16 points in
early trading.

   Money-broking giant Icap rose 22.6p to

   467.2p on talk of a pending upbeat circular.

   Taking the view that the stock has been left somewhat behind of late and is
undervalued compared with its US peers, fund managers chased investor 3i 12p
higher to 308.7p. Since May's £732m rights issue repaired its balance sheet,
there have been suggestions that private equity giant KKR could take a fancy to
it. Evolution's price target is 375p.

   Platinum miner Lonmin lost 43p to 1,701p despite speculation that 24.7pc
shareholder Xstrata could return with a new bid after deciding to walk away from
Anglo American,

   94.5p lower at 2,216.5p.

   A strong trading update helped investment manager Ashmore climb 20.6p to
295p. Funds under management increased by 25pc over the last three months.

   A Killik sell recommendation in the wake of the third-quarter update saw
GKN's shares reverse 7.6p to 119.9p. The broker fears that given the potential
for a significant impact in the Automotive Division (61pc of revenue) from the
removal of scrappage schemes, the rating is too high.

   Gene therapy specialist Oxford Biomedica soared to 21.75p before closing
6.25p better at 16.75p after revealing that patients have responded well to a
second dose of its ProSavin Parkinson's disease drug. Three patients have seen
an average improvement of 34pc after six months. One patient's improvement was
53pc, which compares with 28pc at three months and 30pc with one dose after six
months. Panmure Gordon upgraded the stock to buy from hold.

   ImmuPharma jumped 9.5p to 99p after broker Noble waxed lyrical about Lupuzor,
its treatment for chronic inflammatory disease, or Lupus. It says Lupuzor was
the drug to emerge in 2009, reporting the first statistically significant data
seen on Lupus in January, which triggered a £320m tie-up with Cephalon in
February, the best UK deal of the year.

   Phase 11b data suggests Lupuzor has an advantage over GSK's Benlysta. Noble
sees value of 220p a share on a risk-adjusted basis, unwinding to £10 over three
years if Lupuzor is successful.

   Recruitment group Michael Page was sold down to 366p before rallying to close
1.3p dearer at 368.8p. Altium Securities advised clients to take profits after
Charles-Henri Dumon, managing director of Continental Europe and the Americas,
sold 60,000 shares at 371p, the second time in five months he has disposed of
shares.

   Confirmation of a placing at 1.8p to raise £1.2m left Global Brands 0.38p
easier at

   4.12p. The company is the owner of the exclusive master franchise of the
world's leading pizza delivery brand, Domino's Pizza in Switzerland, Luxembourg
and Liechtenstein.

   Technology minnow OMG jumped 4p to

   24.5p after signing a license deal with US giant Microsoft.

   Green energy group Novera Energy rose

   2.25p to 69.5p to stand well above Infinis Energy's hostile 62.5p a share
cash offer. Novera said it has the support of 32.2pc of its shareholders
unwilling to accept the bid.

   --

   PENNY share investors should look at Songbird Estates, 0.03p dearer at 1.47p.
Just ask Cazenove. Following a recent £895m deeply discounted share sale to
erase its third-party debts, it is the most highly geared play in the property
sector on a recovery in the Central London office market. A small move in
yields/capital values could drive net asset values up quickly. Caz sees 20pc
upside in the next six to 12 months.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2009


                               7 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            MAIL ON SUNDAY (London)

                           September 27, 2009 Sunday

LENGTH: 978 words

HEADLINE: TWINS... BUT WHY WILL ONE AGE 10 YEARS BEFORE THE OTHER?

BYLINE: BY NIKKI MURFITT

BODY:

   IDENTICAL TWINS ARE NATURE'S CLONES AND SCIENTISTS NOW BELIEVE THEY COULD
HOLD THE KEY TO FINDING CURES FOR MANY DEADLY DISEASES

   They look alike, think alike, sometimes even dress alike. Identical twins may
make up just half a per cent of the world's population but their uniqueness is
proving to be more than just skin-deep. Scientists believe studying twins is the
key to curing our biggest killers ñ heart disease, cancer and diabetes. 'Within
the next decade, I'm hopeful we will have more effective drugs ñ even antidotes
ñ for our most common diseases, thanks to the world's twin population,' says
Professor Tim Spector, director of the Department of Twin Research and Genetic
Epidemiology at St Thomas' Hospital in London.

   Identical twins develop when a single egg divides in two a few days after
conception. Medical experts still do not know why this happens but the resulting
embryos share 100 per cent of the same DNA. With exactly the same genetic
make-up, characteristics that are determined by genes will also be similar.

   Identical twins are nature's own clones ñ but, ironically, it is their
differences that are helping scientists understand the debate between nature and
nurture and why some of us succumb to an illness while others do not. The
findings are revealed in a new BBC documentary, The Secret Life Of Twins.

   Chris and Xand van Tulleken, 31, are both doctors, achieved similar A-level
results and even say that their hair started to go grey at the same time, but
when their pain threshold was tested by immersing their hands in a case of ice,
the results highlighted a new area of research that suggests our environment can
alter the genes we are born with. This process is known as 'epigenetics'.

   'When I put my hand in the water, I found it really tough right from the
start, felt sick and nearly fainted,' says Xand, 'whereas Chris wasn't bothered
at all. We know that our genes are the same but because he has spent a lot of
time working in the Arctic, he can happily jump in and out of freezing cold
lakes.

   'The environment has changed the way his genes are expressed and his body's
response is different from mine.'

   When sisters Sue and Sheila Wright, from Kent, were young, they were
impossible to tell apart.

   But after Sue, a former speech and language therapist, got married, her
husband developed Huntington's disease, a degenerative brain disease that leads
to progressive dementia and death. The inevitable stress that followed not only
took its toll on her looks but also on her genetic make-up.

   'Because of his illness, my husband started being violent. It was very
difficult to deal with. I became involved in a support group for Huntington's
sufferers and their families but it was tough work. I frequently had to talk
people out of committing suicide because they felt they couldn't cope any more.

   'As a result, I began smoking heavily, didn't eat as healthily as I should
have done and put on weight,' says Sue, whose husband died three years ago.

   In contrast, Sheila says she has had a relatively easy life and admits: 'The
only time I did try smoking, I went green. I just did not like it. I have also
worked, whereas Sue had to be a carer and so I have had a more active life on
the whole.'

   The twins underwent a blood test to measure their ageing process. Scientists
say that this process is governed by telomeres, tiny structures found at the
ends of the chromosomes.

   When a cell divides, its telomeres become shorter, until they are so short
they can no longer divide. When this point is reached, tissue is no longer
reinvigorated and it is this that is behind the ageing process. Sue discovered
that hers were shorter than Sheila's. She was ageing faster than Sheila by ten
years, owing to her body's reaction to her personal circumstances.

   Six-year-old Olivia Murphy was just two years old when she was diagnosed with
leukaemia. Undergoing a rigorous round of chemotherapy at Great Ormond Street
Hospital, the youngster began to lose her hair and her weight began to drop.
However, her twin sister Isabella showed no sign of developing the illness,
despite the fact that they share exactly the same DNA.

   Doctors tested the girls' blood and it revealed that they both carried a
leukaemia gene. However, as a toddler, Olivia had suffered from a bout of
tonsillitis and this was the trigger that caused the gene to mutate or change.
Isabella had not caught the same infection and therefore her cancer gene
remained 'dormant'.

   Now, researchers believe that from Olivia's case, and others like it, they
will be able to trace the evolution of diseases. Prof Spector says: 'By studying
twins and the similarities and differences between them, we can work out which
particular genes make them sensitive to things such as pain.

   'We can then work out how to develop drugs that will specifically target the
mechanism of the pain, follow its pathway in the body and block it. As
scientists, we are moving away from the idea of gene therapy ñ the insertion of
genes into an individual's cells and tissues to treat a disease ñ and instead we
are concentrating on looking at the triggers in our genetic make-up.

   'Within ten years we hope to be able to develop drugs that will harness this
process and combat some of our most common illnesses such as heart disease,
arthritis, cancer and diabetes. It is a very exciting time.'

   Working with 5,500 pairs of identical and non-identical twins aged 16 to 100,
Prof Spector's register is the largest in the world but he needs more twins to
help further this potential medical breakthrough.

   'It's only in the past few years that we've realised how useful twins are in
medical research.

   'There are 600,000 pairs of them in the UK and I hope that this programme
will show just how important they are to our future wellbeing.'

   ï The Secret Life Of Twins is on BBC1 on Wednesday and Thursday at 9pm.
www.twinsuk.ac.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2009


                               8 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: COLOUR BLINDNESS CURE

BODY:

   FIONA MACRAE

   SCIENTISTS have cured colour blindness in monkeys in a world first.

   As well as allowing colourblind humans to tell red from green, the innovative
technique could restore sight to the blind.

   Sufferers of age-related macular degeneration ñ the most common cause of
blindness in the elderly ñ are among the millions who could eventually benefit.

   Researcher Jay Neitz said: 'If we could find a way to do this with complete
safety in human eyes, as we did with monkeys, there would be a lot of people who
would want it.

   'We hope the technology will be useful in correcting a lot of different
vision disorders.'

   Professor Neitz used gene therapy ñ injections of genes ñ to allow two male
squirrel monkeys called Sam and Dalton to see in full colour for the first time.

   Like some humans with red-green colour blindness, the monkeys lacked a
pigment that the cones ñ the colour-detector cells at the back of the eye ñ need
to see red and green. As a result, they saw both red and green as shades of
grey. Other colours, such as orange, blue and brown appeared washed-out.

   To fix their vision, the U.S. scientists injected their eyes with millions of
copies of a gene needed to make the missing pigment, the journal Nature reports.

   Importantly, the monkeys were injected with a human gene, suggesting the same
technique would work on people. Four months later, their vision suddenly
improved. Professor Neitz, of the University of Washington in Seattle, said: 'It
was as if they woke up and saw these new colours. They unquestionably responded
to colours that had been invisible to them.'

   A version of the colour blindness test that is used in schools around the
world showed just how much their vision has improved.

   Dr Katherine Mancuso, the study's lead author, said: 'Their performance on
red and green was similar, but not quite as good, as a female monkey who had
normal colour vision since birth.' But the need to prove that adding genes to
the body does not cause harmful side-effects means it will be some time before
the method is routinely used to correct colour blindness.

   Despite this, the researchers are optimistic and point out that gene therapy
is already being tested on Britons and Americans with a rare, hereditary form of
blindness called Leber's congenital amaurosis.

   The technique could also be adapted to treat other conditions that involve
problems with genes in the colour and detail-detecting cone cells at the back of
the eye. These include age-related macular degeneration, in which deterioration
of central vision makes it increasingly difficult to carry out everyday tasks
such as reading and driving. Blindness linked to diabetes might also be treated.

   Cathy Yelf, of the Macular Disease Society, said the research was 'very
interesting' but cautioned: 'A practical gene therapy for macular degeneration
is still some way off.'

   f.macrae@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2009


                               9 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                            June 24, 2009 Wednesday

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: BID TALK BOLSTERS MINER SYLVANIA

BYLINE: MARKET REPORT BY GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:

   IGNORING early rumours of a possible £22 a share cash counter offer from
China's Chinalco, shares of mining giant Anglo American fell 46p to 1652p on
profit-taking. Broker Investec advised clients to sell, saying it sees the
potential for a £40bn merger with Xstrata (4.8p better at 639.9p) as no more
than 50/50 and South Africa's mining minister Susan Shabangu said the government
was opposed to any merger.

   Disappointed punters therefore had to turn their attentions to much smaller
fry in the mining sector. Fast growing platinum group Sylvania Resources climbed
71/2p to 761/2p on revived gossip that privately-owned South African chrome
miner Samancor is on the verge of tabling a cash offer worth £1 a share. Earlier
this year it acquired a 9pc stake in the company from Credit Suisse.

   Samancor needs to get a move on, because Sylvania is currently trying to
acquire Great Australian Resources and recently piled on the pressure by
increasing its offer for the Australian mining company.

   Aquarius Platinum, 83/4p higher at 2343/4p, has often been mentioned in the
same breath as Sylvania. Sylvania's former chairman Ed Nealon, a well known
figure in the sector, used to be a director at Aquarius.

   Continuing speculation that Xstrata is a seller of its 25.9pc stake in the
company dragged platinum producer Lonmin down 14p further to 1134p. The Anglo
American/Xstrata collision has put both groups into play and dealers believe
there is now a good chance that Brazil's Vale could flex its muscles once more.

   The lethargic Footsie traded 30 points either side of Monday's finish and
closed 4.03 points lower at 4,230.02. An uninspired Wall Street traded 51 points
lower in early dealings as dealers awaited the outcome of the Federal Reserve's
two-day interest rate meeting. They hope to hear today that the world's biggest
economy is showing signs of a recovery.

   Sellers left Legal & General nursing a 4.77p fall at 55.83p. Broker SocGen
was the culprit, advising clients to bail out because the insurer has the
highest exposure to equities among the UK Life insurance stocks. In addition,
L&G has lower provisions against bond defaults. The broker has slashed its 2009
earnings per share forecast by a stonking 81pc and its 2010 by 21pc.

   Nervous selling in front of tomorrow's preclose trading statement left
international bank Standard Chartered 40p lower at 1135p. Collins Stewart is
bullish and sees the news as likely positive with wholesale banking continuing
to outperform, consumer banking being beating expectations and a reaffirmation
of the bank's position as a longterm 'winner'.

   On further consideration of the decision to de-list its shares from the
London Stock Exchange, financial information giant Thomson Reuters touched 1750p
and closed 59p better at 1690p. One fund manager said the stock is irrationally
valued in London and that was putting a drag on the value of the stock in New
York and Toronto, so it makes sense to say 'cheerio' to London. Only 5pc of all
group shareholders are in the UK.

   Satellite TV group BSkyB rose 131/2p to 4441/2p after Disney's ESPN acquired
Setanta's premier league rights for the next four years, agreeing to show the
games on the Sky platform (for a fee), which analysts reckon will be about £10
per month to subscribers.

   Analysts at Morgan Stanley raised a glass to JD Wetherspoon, 22p frothier at
3911/2p. They upgraded the pubs group to overweight and lifted their target
price 10pc to 480p, because they see it as a long-term winner in the pub
industry.

   Wetherspoon's focus on value for money, service standards, well maintained
premises and innovation has driven strong organic sales growth.

   Private & Commercial Finance, the finance house, firmed 11/4p to 111/4p after
reporting robust annual results. Turnover rose to £62.9m from £51.7m and
operating profit edged up to £8.8m from £8.5m.

   Better-than-expected full-year results helped domiciliary care and white
collar outsourced services provider Supporta shrug off news that takeover talks
have been terminated and close 2p up at 141/2p. Brewin Dolphin reiterated its
buy recommendation and revised its 12-month target price to 29p.

   Focus Solutions added 21/2p at 381/2p after launching focus:enterprise, a
distribution platform for global retail banks facing increased regulatory,
compliance and risk management scrutiny.

   AMERICAN buyers were reported to be all over ReNeuron, 1.1p up at 65/8p, like
a rash.

   They helped to swell turnover in the stock to almost 8m shares amid intense
speculation that the stem cell specialist company has been given the green light
by the British Gene Therapy Advisory Committee to begin human trials of its
ReN001 stem cell therapy for stroke victims.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2009


                              10 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                              May 22, 2009 Friday

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS CREATE A VIRUS THAT ATTACKS CANCER CELLS

BYLINE: BY DANIEL MARTIN HEALTH REPORTER

BODY:

   EXPERTS have developed a virus which they hope could be used to target cancer
cells.

   The specially-adapted bug was shown to attack liver tumours in mice but
leaves healthy tissue intact.

   The scientists, however, warn it could take at least two years before the
technique can be tested on humans.

   Oxford University scientists modified a common bug called an adenovirus, that
typically causes chest infections, to enable it to deliver genetic therapy to
tumours without poisoning the liver.

   The changes enabled the virus to keep its natural infectious characteristics
to replicate in the lab animals' cancer cells and kill them. But for the first
time the virus was also recognised and destroyed by healthy mouse liver cells,
so it was no longer toxic.

   Cancer Research UK scientist Professor Leonard Seymour said: 'The approach we
developed is easy to use and flexible. It may help in the development of future
therapeutic viruses that are specific to certain disease sites.'

   He said several clinical trials for this kind of technology have been going
on but the problem was the therapy was usually compromised by producing other
adverse reactions in patients.

   He added: 'We managed to turn off our virus in areas that it could cause
damage. Our findings go beyond cancer because you could create different viruses
to attack different diseases such as one for hepatitis that does not damage the
liver.'

   Adenoviruses have been used as cancer therapies in clinical trials in the UK
but have not yet been licensed here. To date the viruses have always been
converted to a weakened form so they do not cause organ damage. This is achieved
by deleting parts of the virus' genetic information.

   But in the new study, published in the journal PLoS Pathogens, the
researchers managed to engineer their virus so it cannot multiply in the liver
and cause damage, allowing it to be used at full strength and to maximum effect.

   Modified naturally-occurring viruses are already used in vaccines for measles
and mumps.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2009


                              11 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                           February 10, 2009 Tuesday

LENGTH: 119 words

HEADLINE: GENE JAB TO END PAIN OF ARTHRITIS

BYLINE: DAILY MAIL REPORTER

BODY:

   GENE therapy could eradicate the pain of rheumatoid arthritis.

   Two patients who had an experimental treatment in America experienced a
significant improvement in symptoms -- one had an 85 per cent drop in joint pain
overnight, while the other had a 70 per cent drop over several weeks.

   The disease, which causes painful inflammation in the lining membrane of the
joints, is triggered when the body is attacked by its own immune system.

   The treatment, developed by scientists at Harvard Medical School, involves
extracting cells from the patients' knuckles.

   These cells are injected with a gene which blocks a molecule linked to the
disease. The cells are cultured for several weeks, then injected back into the
patients.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2009


                              12 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 9, 2008 Tuesday
                                  IRE Edition

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 1981 words

HEADLINE: Leah is the only Irish sufferer of a disease that means she may never
walk, talk or sit unaided. But, there is hope;
A clinical trial could help Leah but the State regards it an unproven treatment
and refuses to pay...

BYLINE: MARIANNE POWER

BODY:

   MONICA Cambridge couldn't take anymore - so she ran. She lifted her baby from
the hospital bed, put her in her buggy and marched out the doors of Cork Mercy
University hospital into torrential summer rain. For what seemed like eternity
she stood in the carpark, her head spinning and her ears ringing.

   Inside, her partner Christopher was slumped in the consultant's room,
sobbing. He asked the doctor if she was sure. Yes she was sure.

   Their seven-month-old daughter, Leah, had one of the world's rarest brain
disorders. She would never walk, talk or sit up on her own. She would most
likely die before her fourth birthday. There was nothing anyone could do.

   'I just lost it,' says Monica, 22, from Hollyville in Cork.

   'The doctor was telling me to go home and wait for my baby to die. There was
a ringing in my head and I couldn't hear anything anyone was saying. I couldn't
think straight. So I ran.'

   It's six months since Monica and her partner, 23-year-old carpenter,
Christopher, were told that their first child was the only child in Ireland to
have Canavan's Disease - a condition so rare that only 1,000 children in the
world are affected. The chances of her getting the incurable neurological
disease were one in a billion, and there was no cure.

   Now, at 13 months old, when Leah should be taking her first tentative steps
and delighting her family with sounds, she isn't even able to sit up. She can't
hold her head or even hold a toy.

   All day, every day, she is held by her mother - a task that is becoming
increasingly difficult as Leah grows. Her vision is deteriorating, and doctors
have warned that one day soon she may need to be fed through a tube, as she'll
stop being able to swallow.

   For months there was no hope - until now. In August, the doctor rang to tell
Monica and Christopher that a trial of a new drug in Paris could prolong baby
Leah's life, could stop her from going blind - and might even allow her to crawl
or say her first word.

   There was only one problem: the State wouldn't fund it because as a clinical
trial it's regarded as an unproven treatment.

   Monica and Christopher could never have predicted what would happen to their
child. Everything went smoothly throughout the pregnancy, Monica's three-month
scan was clear, and after a 52-hour labour, Leah was born, a healthy 6lb, in
October last year.

   'She came out crying, and five minutes later the nurse gave her to me. She
looked perfect. I couldn't take my eyes off her. I was besotted.'

   It wasn't until Leah was five months that problems emerged.

   'Mum and Dad were on at me that she should be sitting up by now, and holding
her head. I wasn't worried, I just thought she was lazy, but I went to the GP.
He said she was fine, that all babies developed at different times.'

   But by six months, Monica and Christopher were worried.

   'Her head was leaning to the side. I didn't like it at all,' says Monica.
'Her hands were also weak. I tried to train her to hold a bottle and she
wouldn't do it. I knew something wasn't right.'

   This time the GP referred Leah to Mercy Hospital, where pediatrician Dr
Deirdre Rafferty examined her and said she was concerned. She asked Monica to
stay with her daughter for a week of tests.

   'Two weeks later we were called back in for the results,' says Monica.

   'Dr Rafferty said that the MRI scan had showed there was fluid on Leah's
brain. She said she didn't know exactly what was wrong but that we should be
prepared for the fact that Leah may well have a disability.'

   'It was a shock, but I couldn't fall apart. I told myself, "Come on, it'll be
okay, we'll get through it".'

   The doctors ran more tests and sent Leah's urine and blood samples to England
for analysis. In May of this year, Christoper and Monica were given the
devastating news.

   'It was lashing with rain that day,' says Monica. 'I was sitting opposite the
doctor, my boyfriend Christopher was sitting on a bed. His mother was with us
too, leaning on a windowsill. 'Dr Olivia O'Mahony, a paediatric neurologist,
told us Leah had a very rare condition called Canavan's Disease. I had no idea
what it was. She said it was very serious. Leah mightn't walk or talk and she
wouldn't have long life expectancy.

   'I asked her how long? She might be one, she said, but some children live
until they are 10. In America she had treated two Canavan patients who died
before they turned four.'

   'She said Leah would probably go blind, stop being able to feed and become
locked in her own body. Then she'd get a turn - after that her whole body would
shut down and she'd be dead within the year.

   Canavan's disease is a fatal genetic condition that causes the white matter
in the brain to deteriorate.

   This white matter, called myelin, forms a protective coating around every
nerve in the brain and spinal cord, and ensures nerve impulses are properly
transmitted from one part of the body to another.

   WITHOUT it, Canavan's children aren't able perform the simplest functions.
Even if they live to their full life expectancy - three to ten years - their
brain swells, they become blind, paralysed, prone to seizures and increasingly
lost to the world around them.

   'We were told it was a one in hundred million chance this would happen to us.
Only 1,000 children worldwide have it.

   'We were both carriers of a defective gene that meant our baby had a per cent
chance of having Canavan's. You could never expect something like this.

   'Don't worry, the doctor said, Leah won't be in any pain, she'll fade away
easily. I just had to comfort her and love her and give her the happiest times I
could& I couldn't hear anymore bad things so I put Leah her buggy and left.

   'For first month I refused to eat - I just lay there and played with her. I
didn't tell any friends what had happened, just my family.

   'I kept thinking how unfair it was. You see people out there taking drugs and
drinking through their pregnancy and they have perfect babies. I did everything
right.

   'For months we'd talked about what school she'd go to, what she'd grow up to
be - now all that was gone. Our future had been taken from us.

   'My boyfriend spent nights sitting up in the bed, looking over at Leah and
crying. I'd pretend to be asleep but I'd lie there thinking about what would
happen if she died. I'd imagine I'd never leave the graveyard, and die of a
broken heart.

   'Eventually I snapped out of it. realised I couldn't curl up in a ball; I had
to do things. I couldn't just wait for my baby to die.'

   Monica started to do what her doctor told her not to - she looked online to
research her daughter's condition.

   'I was told I shouldn't go on the internet because I wouldn't like what I saw
- but I don't know how anything could have been worse than what I'd already been
told.'

   'I found a website called Jacob's Cure about an American boy who had the same
condition.

   'It was tough looking at the pictures of this big boy, unable to do anything
for himself, having to be lifted in and out of bed, and spending his days in a
wheelchair - but thanks to gene therapy, he had defied all doctors' expectations
by living until his 12th birthday.'

   'I found doctors in America specialising in the condition and started to
email them.

   'I got responses, saying that yes, this was an area where some progress was
being made with new drugs, gene therapy and most recently, stem cell therapy.
They told me not to give up. It was the hope I needed.

   'I went back to the doctor,' recalls Monica.

   'I told her there were doctors in America who were willing to help me. I was
really frustrated. It was a stressful time. I felt like I had no hope. But when
I found that research I realised that there was hope. I was frustrated that I
was the one to find the information and not the other way around.

   'So I gave the doctor my 40 pages of internet research.

   'A few days later she rang me willing to help. She said she was looking into
everything.'

   For the next few months Monica continued to keep her baby's condition a
secret.

   'I didn't want people to look at us differently. I became paranoid that
people would see Leah lying in the pram and wonder why she wasn't sitting up
yet.

   'Buying shoes one day, the shop assistant asked me if she was walking yet. He
had no idea what he'd said but I was devastated.

   'I longed to buy her toys but she wouldn't even have been able to hold them.
Instead I bought her new outfits, little pink jeans, velvet dresses, dozens of
hats& 'Every day I'd hold Leah from the minute she woke up to time she went to
sleep. She couldn't sit up, hold her neck, hold any toys.

   As she got bigger it became harder - but some days I forgot Leah was sick.
I'd hold her and she'd look at me, and give me a big smile and everything seemed
fine.'

   Monica and Christopher tried renting an apartment together, but they couldn't
cope without the support of their families.

   While Christopher was out at work Monica had to hold Leah for 12 hours a day
until she fell asleep. She became exhausted, realised she couldn't do it on her
own and went home.

   Then, in August, Monica got a phone call from Dr O'Mahony who told her there
was a trial for a new drug in Paris that could help Leah.

   Ten children with Canavan's disease were being admitted to try new medication
that would reduce the swelling in the brain, and might even slow down the
condition itself.

   SHE said the doctors were very excited about the possibilities, that Leah
might even say a few words, and start crawling. It could stop her going blind.
She said she was 100 per cent sure this could help her. It was better than
winning the lottery.'

   They would have to wait until Leah turned one, on October 24, but for the
first time there was real hope. The family were on cloud nine - until another
call came. Dr O'Mahony said the State would not fund the trial because it was
not a proven treatment. She said she was very sorry, but if they wanted to go
ahead they'd have to find [#x20ac]50,000 to pay for it themselves.

   'We were devastated,' says Monica. 'I wrote letters to TDs begging, I got
nowhere. I rang them up, asking them to re-consider, or even help a small bit. I
got nowhere. I couldn't believe our baby was just being left to die.'

   Then Monica, who had never spoken to anyone outside the family about Leah's
condition, rang her local radio station and begged listeners to help her baby
girl.

   'I rang Cork 96FM, on Thursday November 20. My heart was pounding I was so
nervous.

   'I got through to the Neil Prendeville show and told everyone about Leah - my
beautiful, happy little girl who was being left to die. Please, please, I said,
if anyone could help please get in touch.

   'To be honest, I don't know what I was expecting - I just had to do
something.

   'But when I got a call that afternoon from the show saying there had been an
anonymous donation of [#x20ac]10,000, I could have fainted.' The following
Monday the same donor rang to increase their pledge to [#x20ac]20,000. Two days
later another single donation of [#x20ac]10,000 was made& 'We're all speechless
at what's happened. In less than a week we had over [#x20ac]30,000. I could
never in my wildest dreams have expected people would be so generous. I can't
thank them enough.

   'For months I've cried at night, sometimes so much that I can't breathe, but
now I have hope.

   The Paris hospital confirmed that Leah could go on the trial after Christmas
if we can raise the final [#x20ac]20,000. I don't care what we have to do, we
will raise it.

   'Right now it looks like Leah's eyes are going, and the fluid in her skull is
building - her head is so heavy. If we can get her these new drugs on time that
could stop.

   'I can see she's getting frustrated because she wants to do things but she
can't.

   'At her age, Leah should be walking, but she's still in my arms all day. The
thought of her taking just one little step, or that one day she'd say her name
would a miracle.'

   For more information on the Leah Fund call Cork 96FM, 021 455 1596 - or make
a donation in any bank into Credit Union account 500 401 37; sort code 99 10 07

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2008


                              13 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                                  2ND Edition

SECTION: Pg. 7

LENGTH: 120 words

HEADLINE: Aids patient 'cured' by transplant

BODY:

   AN Aids patient appears to have been cured after receiving a bone marrow
transplant, his doctors said yesterday.

   The 42-year-old, who had been infected for more than a decade, is showing no
signs of the virus 20 months later.

   The man, an American in Berlin who also had leukaemia, was given the
transplant for his blood cancer. But his doctor, Gero Huetter, knew that one in
1,000 Westerners have a genetic mutation that can make them resistant to HIV.

   So he found someone with the gene among donors who had the patient's marrow
type.

   The case could lead to a greater interest in gene therapy to fight Aids.

   But Dr Huetter is not certain his patient is cured. He said: 'The virus is
wily. There could always be a resurgence.'

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2008


                              14 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: Pg. 7

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: Aids patient is 'cured' by marrow transplant

BYLINE: Mail Foreign Service

BODY:

   AN Aids patient appears to have been cured of the disease after receiving a
bone marrow transplant, his doctors said yesterday.

   The 42-year-old, who had been infected for more than a decade, is showing no
signs of the virus 20 months after the treatment.

   The man, a Berlin-based American also suffering from leukaemia, was primarily
given the bone marrow transplant to treat his blood cancer.

   But his leukaemia specialist Dr Gero Huetter recalled that one in 1,000
Westerners carry a genetic mutation that seems to make them resistant to HIV
infection.

   So he set out to find someone carrying the gene among donors that matched the
patient's marrow type.

   Out of a pool of 80, the 61st person tested carried the proper mutation and
the bone marrow was transplanted.

   Berlin's Charite hospital say tests on his bone marrow, blood and organs are
clean.

   'We waited every day for a bad reading,' Dr Huetter said.

   'It has not come.' Experts say the procedure, which required the patient to
come off his Aids drugs, is too costly and dangerous to employ as a first-line
cure.

   But it should inspire a greater interest in gene therapy to fight the disease
that has infected 33million people worldwide.

   However, London professor of epidemiology David Roth, said: 'That's a long
way down the line because there may be other negative things that go with the
mutation that we don't know about.' And Dr Huetter warned it is not certain his
patient is cured. He said: 'The virus is wily. There could always be a
resurgence.'

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2008


                              15 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            October 24, 2008 Friday
                                  IRE Edition

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 186 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells may help mend damaged hearts

BYLINE: Gayle Schoales

BODY:

   IRISH doctors may soon be able to repair damage caused by heart attacks -
with a new treatment using stem cells.

   According to Professor John Martin, who leading a major new trial, stem cells
could be taken from a patient's own bone marrow and used to repair their damaged
heart.

   Professor Martin, who is due to deliver a lecture on the subject in Dublin on
October 30, said: 'There has been a lot of talk about embryonic cells and their
use has raised a lot of political and ethical questions around the world. But
this project means we don't have to use embryonic cells at all.

   'Instead, we can use a patient's own cells and make them better with gene
therapy. This trial could revolutionise treatment for people who have heart
attacks.' His groundbreaking trial is the first of its kind in the UK, and aims
to restore a heart attack patient's health to what it was before the event.

   According to Professor Martin, who spe-cialises in Cardiovascular Medicine at
University College London, thousands of lives could be saved if the trial is
successful.

   Almost 5,000 people in Ireland die following a heart attack each year.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2008


                              16 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           September 23, 2008 Tuesday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: Pg. 25

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: The gene jab that offers a chance of reversing blindness

BYLINE: Sophie Borland

BODY:

   AN injection of genes straight into the eye's retina could reverse blindness
in hundreds of thousands of patients Scientists carried out the trial treatment
on three patients in their 20s who had an inherited condition which caused
blindness in their teens.

   Within a month all three had their sight significantly improved. The three
were suffering from Leber's congenital amaurosis , which until now has been
untreatable. LCA occurs when faulty genes, called RPE65, stop cells in the
retina at the back of the eye working.

   Scientists say that injections of healthy genes could be a major boost for
sufferers from other genetic eye problems.

   In particular it could lead to advances in the treatment of age-related
macular degeneration, which affects around 400,000 Britons.

   The successful trial comes months after a British teenager Steven Howarth had
his sight partially restored by the same procedure when surgeons at Moorfields
Eye Hospital in London injected healthy copies of a gene into one of his
retinas.

   Scientists at Scheie Eye Institute, at the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia, then tested the treatment on three more patients.

   Two experienced improvements to their sight in just a few days. After a month
all three could see significantly better.

   Scientists detected major improvements to the light-sensitive cone and rod
cells in the retina.

   Cone function, which is responsible for colour and daytime vision, increased
up to 50-fold.

   Rods, which provide night vision, became as much as 63,000 times more
effective. But the researchers, led by Dr Artur Cideciyan, found their patients
took much longer than usual seeing in the dark and took several hours before
their eyes adjusted. Writing in the Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences,
they said: 'These results demonstrate dramatic, albeit imperfect, recovery of
rod and cone photoreceptor-based vision after RPE65 gene therapy.' Scientists
believe the technique could be ready for use within two years to treat some
other inherited diseases of the retina, which affect 20,000 people in Britain.

   Within five years it could be ready for testing on those who suffer
age-related macular degeneration.

   s.borland@dailymail.co.uk

   CASE STUDY

   DOCTORS had told Steven Howarth, pictured, that he would probably lose his
vision completely because of Leber's congenital amaurosis.

   But in April he had millions of healthy copies of the crucial gene injected
into one of his eyes.

   Mr Howarth, a student from Bolton, said: 'At first I could not really see
anything in the eye, but it gradually got better until it was back to normal.
Before the operation, I rushed home from college when it started to get dark
because I was worried about getting around. Now I stay later if I need to, for
band rehearsals and things like that.' Steven was one of three patients to be
treated. The other two did not report any marked improvement.

   But it took a few months for Steven to realise his sight was getting better
when, for the first time, he was able to make out cracks in the pavement and
road markings..

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2008


                              17 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 28, 2008 Thursday
                                  2ND Edition

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: Genes hold hope of deafness cure

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:

   AN EXPERIMENTAL gene treatment that could one day lead to a cure for deafness
has been developed by scientists.

   The therapy works by regenerating vital cells in the ear that are damaged or
missing in millions of the deaf.

   When mice embryos were injected with the treatment, it triggered the
production of hair cells that carry sounds from the inner ear to the brain.

   Dr John Brigande, who carried out the research at the Oregon Health and
Science University in Portland, described the results as a 'crucial first step'
in the search for a cure for human deafness.

   But he warned against raising the hopes of the deaf prematurely.

   'We're really far away from a cure for deafness,' said Dr Brigande, a
molecular biologist who began to go deaf at the age of ten and now has only
partial hearing in one ear.

   'I would love to be a member of the research team or community that does
define an efficacious therapy, but I think it needs to be approached with
enormous caution,' he told New Scientist magazine.

   Moderate to profound hearing loss is often caused by damage to the 'hair'
cells in the cochlea - an organ deep within the ear that converts vibrations
into electrical signals The hairs translate sound waves into nerve messages and
are vital to hearing. The cells can be damaged by infections, antibiotics, gene
mutations and loud sounds. Finding a way to regrow cochlea hairs has long been a
goal of scientists.

   Dr Brigande's team injected embryos of healthy mice with a gene called Atoh1.
Previous studies have shown that the gene is crucial in transforming cells in an
embryo into hair cells.

   Mice injected with the gene therapy in the womb grew hair cells in exactly
the right part of their ears.

   Tests showed that these cells were healthy and worked normally to convert
vibrations into electrical signals that are passed to the brain.

   The findings are published today in the journal Nature.

   Dr Stefan Heller, a biologist at Stanford University in the U.S., said: 'That
is sort of the major achievement or milestone that we all had to reach.' The
researchers are excited by their findings, but emphasise that it is unlikely the
treatment could be tested on human beings. They say it would be unethical to
inject a human foetus with a foreign gene.

   The mice were tested soon after birth although the new cells may not survive
into adulthood.

   The scientists next plan to try out the therapy on mice bred to be deaf to
see if it works as well.

   While unlikely to lead directly to a cure for deafness, they believe an
ability to influence developing mouse cochleae could allow scientists to treat
deafness with drugs.

   Around nine million people in Britain are deaf or hard of hearing, of which
700,000 are profoundly or severely deaf.

   Deafness can be caused by damage to any part of the hearing system and is
most commonly a result of advancing years. Three-quarters of deaf Britons are
over the age of 60..

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2008


                              18 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 28, 2008 Thursday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Could deafness be cured by gene therapy?

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:

   AN EXPERIMENTAL gene treatment that could one day lead to a cure for deafness
has been developed by scientists.

   The therapy works by regenerating vital cells in the ear that are damaged or
missing in millions of the deaf.

   When mice embryos were injected with the treatment, it triggered the
production of hair cells that carry sounds from the inner ear to the brain.

   Dr John Brigande, who carried out the research at the Oregon Health and
Science University in Portland, described the results as a 'crucial first step'
in the search for a cure for human deafness.

   But he warned against raising the hopes of the deaf prematurely. 'We're
really far away from a cure for deafness,' said Dr Brigande, a molecular
biologist who began to go deaf at the age of ten and now has only partial
hearing in one ear.

   'I'd like to hear and I would love to be a member of the research team or
community that does define an efficacious therapy, but I think it needs to be
approached with enormous caution,' he told New Scientist magazine.

   Moderate to profound hearing loss is often caused by damage to the 'hair'
cells in the cochlea - an organ deep within the ear that converts vibrations
into electrical signals The hairs translate sound waves into nerve messages and
are vital to hearing. The cells can be damaged by infections, antibiotics, gene
mutations and exposure to loud sounds. Finding a way to regrow cochlea hairs has
long been a goal of scientists.

   Dr Brigande's team injected embryos of healthy mice with a gene called Atoh1.

   Previous studies have shown that the gene is crucial in transforming cells in
an embryo into hair cells.

   Mice injected with the gene therapy in their mothers' wombs grew hair cells
in exactly the right part of their ears.

   Tests showed that these cells were healthy and worked normally to convert
vibrations into electrical signals that are passed to the brain.

   The findings are published today in the journal Nature. Dr Brigande said:
'Our work establishes that cells induced by gene transfer of Atoh1 are
functional sensory hair cells.' Dr Stefan Heller, a biologist at Stanford
University in America, said: 'That is sort of the major achievement or milestone
that we all had to reach.' The researchers are excited by their findings, but
emphasise that it is unlikely the treatment could be tested on human beings.
They say it would be unethical to inject a human foetus with a foreign gene.

   The mice were tested soon after birth although the new cells may not survive
into adulthood.

   The scientists next plan to try out the therapy on mice bred to be deaf to
see if it works as well.

   While unlikely to lead directly to a cure for deafness, they believe an
ability to influence developing mouse cochleae could allow scientists to treat
deafness with drugs.

   Around nine million people are deaf or hard-of-hearing in Britain, of which
700,000 are profoundly or severely deaf.

   Deafness can be caused by damage to any part of the hearing system and is
most commonly a result of advancing years.

   Three quarters of deaf Britons are over the age of 60.

   Causes range from wax blocking the ear to damage to the sensory cells of the
cochlea.

   d.derbyshire@dailymail.co.uk

GRAPHIC: 700,000 Britons are severely deaf

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2008


                              19 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             August 17, 2008 Sunday
                                  MS2 Edition

SECTION: Pg. 22

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Ballet is not just a passion for me. It's a dance for life;
This aspiring prima ballerina f ights her Cystic Fibrosis with hours of practice

BYLINE: Victoria Lambert

BODY:

   Her schedule would be demanding by any standards.

   For seven hours a day, five days a week, 18-year-old Natalie Bradley takes
classes or practice sessions in ballet, tap and modern dance - with extra
lessons most evenings - as part of her studies at the City College Norwich.

   This summer, she's rehearsed with the English Youth Ballet in London, the
national dance company that offers just 100 young people from outside the
capital the chance to perform on stage.

   For Natalie, who dreams of becoming a professional dancer, staying in peak
physical condition is essential. She suffers from Cystic Fibrosis (CF) - and the
constant exercise helps counter some of the worst effects of the illness.

   Cystic Fibrosis is the most common life-threatening inherited disease in the
UK, with more than 8,000 sufferers.

   More than two million people carry the CF gene and if two carriers have a
child, there is a one-in-four chance of that baby being affected.

   The symptoms are excessive heavy mucous, which affects digestion.

   Although average life expectancy is just 31, advances in treatment mean that
young sufferers can expect to live a lot longer and research into a gene therapy
is well under way.

   If Natalie is concerned about the future, she conceals it well. 'Ever since I
can remember I've known I have CF.

   Doctors, hospitals pills and injections have always been part of my life. But
when I'm dancing I don't think about it - it's like an escape.' Her next step is
an intensive dance class in Norwich in September to hone her technique.

   'There are times when I feel really tired. Even then I urge myself to get up.

   I never want to stop dancing.' She admits her ambition drives her on. 'If I
sat around when I was feeling ill, I wouldn't have achieved what I have, getting
into the English Youth Ballet, and performing so much. Having drive has helped
me.' When Natalie, who lives in a village outside Norwich, was diagnosed with
CF, her parents, Wendy and Kevin, both 47, were devastated. 'Our son Carl, now
22, had been born with Kallman syndrome and so we were really looking for
symptoms of that.' Kallman sufferers have decreased functioning of the sex
hormoneproducing glands, which may delay puberty. 'Carl needed constant physio
to build up his strength,' says Wendy.

   'So when they told us Natalie would need it every day too, it wasn't much of
an adjustment.' Although she appears the picture of health, Natalie suffers
recurrent chest infections, the most serious of which - three years ago -
coincided with her GCSEs. Her recovery took two months.

   Her daily medication includes steroid and ventalin inhalers, another inhaler
that exercises her lungs and about 30 tablets.

   Yet Natalie is upbeat: 'I've had to stay in hospital a few times but luckily
I've been looked after by my mum at home when I've been really poorly.'
Natalie's recent performance of Coppelia with the English Youth Ballet was a
particular thrill. 'It gave me a chance to experience a professional company,'
she explains. Now her thoughts are on applying to one of the big ballet schools
- the Northern Ballet or The Place in London. Whether Natalie ever achieves her
dream of performing in Swan Lake at Sadler's Wells there is no doubt her family
is incredibly proud of her.

   'Having CF hasn't stopped me doing anything,' adds Natalie. 'You've just got
to be determined to make the most of your life.' www.cftrust.org.uk..

GRAPHIC: ESCAPE: Natalie says ballet helps her forget all the suffering of her
disease

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2008


                              20 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 16, 2008 Saturday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: Pg. 98

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: Just the drug for the biotechs;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:

   IT is all happening among 'seat of your pants' biotechs.

   As San Francisco-based Genentech, the biggest biotech company in the world by
market capitalisation, attempts to stave off a £21bn-plus bid from its 44pc
shareholder Roche, the Swiss drugs maker, much lower league and undervalued
UK-based companies are attracting takeover interest.

   Punters were all over Oxford Biomedica like a rash on early rumours of a bid
approach.

   They chased shares of the gene therapy specialist up to 11p swelling morning
turnover to 7m-plus in a stock which usually trades an average of 600,000 shares
a day.

   Lunchtime confirmation of an offer worth £187m or 35p a share from US farm
disease specialist GeneThera and the board's immediate rejection, increased the
excitement as dealers realised the company is now 'in play'.

   The close was 1.6p better at 10 1 4 p and trading volume breached 10m.

   GeneThera, which provides vaccines for testing services for animal diseases
including BSE or mad cows disease, said it believes its technology would help
address the issues related to the failure of the TroVax clinical trials.

   Oxford's shares plunged 59pc to 7 1/2 p last month after its flagship
programme, cancer vaccine TroVax, failed in a trial for kidney cancer.

   TroVax is partnered with France's Sanofi Aventis. Although Sanofi has already
agreed to buy British vaccine firm Acambis ( unchanged at 187 1/2 p) for around
£275m, rumours now suggest it could decide to swallow its joint venture partner
too.

   Awaiting further news of its takeover approaches, Protherics rose 3p more to
58p for a three-day leap of 26p.

   Drugs giant AstraZeneca, which is rumoured to be interested, eased 5p to
2614p..

   The biotech minnows are receiving increased attention from the big boys as
they search for new products to bolster shrinking new drug pipelines.

   The Footsie lost some early sparkle and replaced a 41.4 point gain with a
closing fall of 42.6 points at 5454.8.

   Wall Street's initial gain of 94 points on news that US factory output rose
0.4pc in July, the best gain in 10 months, failed to arrest the late slide in
London.

   The fresh fall in the oil price to $112 a barrel and hefty declines in metal
prices as the dollar continued to appreciate against sterling, brought
heavyweight miners back down to earth after Thursday's gains on Merrill Lynch's
comments that the sector was oversold.

   As the gold price dropped $20 to $793.95 an ounce, Anglo American fell 188p
to 2725p and Xstrata 172p to 2878p. BHP Billiton lost 53p to 1529p ahead of
Monday's figures, while its takeover target Rio Tinto declined 195p to 4605p.

   The hefty 23pc fall in the oil price from its $ 147- plus a barrel July peak
helped drag Tullow down 31p to 677p and BP 11 1 2 p to 515 1 2 p. Royal Dutch
Shell 'A' dipped 41p to 1797p.

   The prospect of cheaper fuel costs helped bus and train company First Group
accelerate 23 1/2 p to 581 1/2 p and cruise giant Carnival steam 68p ahead to
1985p.

   British Airways climbed 7 1 4 p to 261p with buyers also excited by the
airline's plans to forge closer ties on transatlantic routes with U. S. rival
American Airlines. EasyJet added 11 1/2 p to 3661/4p.

   A sharp recovery in weekly sales at department store John Lewis gave
retailers a fillip.

   Marks & Spencer gained 10 1 4 p to 276p and was also boosted by news that
director Sir David

   Michels had splashed out almost £100,000 on buying 37,745 shares at 265p a
share.

   Renewed buying ahead of its expected return to the Footsie on September 10
after a seven year absence lifted Dr Mike Lynch's software group Autonomy 85p to
a year's peak of 1143p.

   Housebuilder Persimmon erected an 8p gain at 351 3./4 p ahead of next
Thursday's results.

   Theme park operator Lo-Q gave shareholders an exciting ride, closing 7p
better at 31p following good interim figures. Pretax profits for the half-year
to end-June soared to £182,281 from £14,327 on revenues of £4.07m, up from
£2.71m.

   Nighthawk Energy jumped 3 1/4 p to 70p on persistent buying fuelled by hopes
of news soon of upbeat drilling reports from its onshore sites in the US.

   Oilex rose 4 1/2 p to 39p after increasing its working interest in West
Kampar PSC (production sharing contract) onshore, Sumatra, Indonesia, to 60pc
from 45pc..

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2008


                              21 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 31, 2008 Thursday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: Pg. 76

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: Biotech boosted by cancer drug;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:

   FOLLOWERS of Britain's beleaguered biotech sector got a shot in the arm when
Ark Therapeutics soared 32 3/4 p to 80 1/4 p on a hefty turnover of 6.3m shares.

   Buyers dosed up with stock after hearing of positive results from the
company's fourth Data Safety Monitoring Board review of the ongoing Phase III
trial of its Cerepro brain cancer drug. It reported a 42-day improvement in
patients' lifespan when Cerepro is added to standard of care treatment.

   Ark's buoyant chief executive Nigel Parker said the firm is the first in the
cutting-edge field of gene therapy to get a product into Phase III trials in
cancer, and that in itself represents a significant breakthrough for medicine.

   There is still a substantial amount of further information to come and the
company will update the analysis in early 2009.

   Samir Devani, analyst at Nomura Code, reckons the announcement significantly
enhances the chances of Cerepro successfully reaching the market and gaining
regulatory approval by the second half of 2009.

   Fair value for the stock would then rise to £2, which compares with his
current target price of around 135p.

   Meanwhile, Axis Shield rose 9 1/4 p to 295 3/4 p after announcing it has
entered into an agreement with Diazyme Laboratories that brings to an end
litigation between the two companies regarding AS's homocysteine patents.

   The Footsie closed a healthy 101.5 points higher at 5,420.7, boosted by a
forever- popular mining sector and positive trading statements from constituents
Aviva, 40 3/4 p better at 507 1/2 p, Admiral ( 89p dearer at 914p) and tin can
maker Rexam ( 33p up at 380 1/2 p).

   Wall Street added its considerable weight behind London's rise, following its
impressive 266 point gain on Tuesday with an early rise yesterday of 168.
Dealers on the Street of Dreams were delighted to see a private sector jobs
report showing unexpected growth in July. President Bush also signed off
legislation which should shore up the U.S. housing market and give much needed
support to Freddie Mack and Fannie Mae.

   Lazards showed that not all investment banks are drowning in a sea of debt
and toxic waste. It reported a better-thanexpected 5pc rise in second-quarter
profits.

   Advisory revenues surged 37pc after the bank advised on takeover bids and
deals worth more than ?50bn, including InBev's ?26bn bid for Anheuser Busch and
Gaz de France's ?22.3bn merger with Suez. Higherthan- expected credit market
losses at the half- way stage dragged Lloyds TSB 15p lower at 306p. Nervous
selling ahead of today's interims left HBOS 1 1/2 p easier at 271 1/4 p.
Analysts forecast pre-tax profits will fall by up to 60pc to ?1.2bn.

   Miner Xstrata jumped 212p to 3647p following in-line first-half production
figures.

   BHP Billiton (37p up at 1677p) boss Don Argus reckons Rio Tinto's share price
(217p up at 5354p) is being propped up by its bid.

   Promoted to the Footsie last month, Ferrexpo gained 31p to 295 1/4 p on talk
of a pending circular.

   Demand in a thin market fuelled by talk of an imminent contract helped
payment services group PayPoint rise 56p to 647p. Vague takeover gossip
accompanied a 5 1/2 p rise to 77 1/2 p in directories group Yell . Acquisition
speculation lifted social housing group Connaught 20 1/4 p to 389p.

   Merchant bank Close Bros, which houses top market-maker Winterflood
Securities, firmed 6p to 601p on a trading update.

   Landsbanki said the banking business has held up well with 11pc growth in the
book to ?2.2bn by the end of June. It's target price is 780p. Reflecting
impressive resilience during the current credit crunch malaise, quoted
stockbroker Charles Stanley jumped 27 3/4 p to 213p. In the three months to end
June, it produced profits of £ 25.4m, just a shade lower than the £25.9m
attained for the same period last year. Rival Brewin Dolphin has fared pretty
well too, reporting only a 13pc decline in third- quarter income. The shares
firmed 1 1/4 p to 107 1/4 p.

   More than 8m Blinkx changed hands as the shares touched 34 3/4 p but closed
only 1/4 p better at 29 3/4 p. Buyers switched on to news of the launch of its
latest Blinkx Remote service, the ultimate tool for finding and watching TV
episodes on the Web.

   Bus and coach manufacturer Optare accelerated 4 1/2 p to 29 1/4 p after
securing its biggest order to date. It is to supply Go-Ahead Group with 94
buses, comprising 54 double-deckers and 40 single-deckers, with first deliveries
scheduled during the fourth quarter of 2008..

   HARD hit by the slump in the UK housing market, Titon Holdings ( unchanged at
28 1/2 p) is bouncing back. Word is the installer of air conditioning, windows
and other fittings in new houses, is about to sign a deal with McCarthy & Stone
worth around £1.5m a year over two or three years. Titon has £2m cash in the
banks and plans to open a new facility in South Korea to help with production..

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2008


                              22 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              July 25, 2008 Friday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: The IVF minefield;
Desperate couples are resorting to poorly tested techniques, say experts

BYLINE: Fiona MacRae

BODY:

   COUPLES struggling to have a baby are being put at risk by poorly tested
fertility treatments, IVF experts have warned.

   Doctors, scientists and nurses fear that desperation is leading many to pay
for techniques that may not work and could even be dangerous.

   A survey published today found that nearly half of IVF experts polled thought
new procedures were being brought in too hastily.

   Almost all wanted more clinical trials to test the value of the techniques,
according to the poll to mark the 30th birthday of the first test-tube baby,
Louise Brown.

   Evidence supporting some of the latest techniques is 'threadbare', the
experts said, and patients and their doctors are too often blinded by the
'glitz' of launches.

   Siladitya Bhattacharya, professor of reproductive medicine at Aberdeen
University, said: 'There is often a great demand from patients who get
frustrated with multiple failures of IVF.

   'They read about new treatments on websites and when patients are desperate,
they will try anything.

   'Some of the drugs used have side-effects.

   It is not something for the faint-hearted to get into.' One controversial
treatment is preimplantation genetic selection, which aims to weed out embryos
with genetic abnormalities which are likely to be miscarried.

   Studies found it does nothing to cut the number of miscarriages and may even
reduce the chances of pregnancy in older women.

   It is used fewer than 2,000 times a year in the UK and adds around £2,000 to
the cost of IVF.

   There are also concerns about immune therapy, which boosts the embryo's
chances by suppressing the mother's immune system.

   Dr Geeta Nargund, head of reproductive medicine at St George's Hospital in
London, said there was an 'urgent need' for proper research into immune
therapy's use in IVF.

   'There are a lot of concerns about its risks and safety to mother and child,'
she said.

   The treatment, which is yet to reach the mass market, costs at least £1,000
per session of IVF.

   One in six couples experiences problems in having a baby.

   Eight in ten of the 186 experts polled in the survey said that the
infertility rate would continue to rise. Peter

   Braude, a fertility expert from King's College, London, warned that rising
rates of obesity and sexually transmitted diseases would take their toll on
reproductive health.

   STDs are at a record level, with almost 400,000 Britons diagnosed with
diseases such as chlamydia last year. Half the infections were in under-25s,
despite this group making up just an eighth of the population.

   The British Fertility Society and the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists are forming a group to look at new treatments.

   The society's secretary, Dr Allan Pacey, warned that high rates of
infertility could have economic consequences.

   He said: 'If birth rates drop yet further, no country will be able to pay for
the pensions of the older generation.'

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2008


                              23 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              July 8, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 475 words

HEADLINE: Tiny magnets that could help win the war on cancer

BYLINE: MARTYN HALLE

BODY:

   TINY magnets could soon be used to help kill cancer cells in humans.
Nano-magnets, as they are known, are so small that thousands can fit on a pin
head.

   So far, the only experiments have been on animals, but researchers believe
they are only a year or two away from starting human trials.

   The magnets are injected in a drug containing human white blood cells. This
drug combination hunts cancerous cells and destroys them.

   Doctors use an external magnet to help draw the drug more effectively into
the tumour.

   The new technique has been developed by a team of scientists working at three
British universities   Nottingham, Sheffield and Keele.

   Cancer specialists hope magnets will be a breakthrough to an effective gene
therapy treatment. So far this has eluded them as they have been unable to get
enough of the gene therapy into the tumour.

   Gene therapy is described as targeted treatment for cancer because it
destroys only the tumour. Traditional chemotherapy   still the mainstay of
cancer treatment   uses a poisonous chemical to kill the cancer through an
infusion into the bloodstream. But healthy cells as well as cancer cells are
destroyed causing side effects.

   'Using human cells as delivery vehicles for anti-cancer gene therapy has long
been an attractive approach for treating tumours, but these cells usually reach
tumours in insufficient numbers to attack them effectively,' says Professor
Claire Lewis of Sheffield University, who is one of the lead researchers.

   'We are not clear why this is but the use of magnets appears to overcome this
problem and make the treatment more effective.' RESEARCHERS placed a small
magnet, rather like one that can be bought off the shelf but electrified to
increase the forcefield, over the tumour in the trial. They found that the
magnetic field attracted many more of the drug-enhanced white blood cells into
the tumour than normal gene therapy.

   The research has been funded by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences
Research Council and the findings have been published in the journal, Gene
Therapy.

   The researchers believe the use of tiny metal particles in the body doesn't
pose a health risk as relatively few are used.

   In animal experiments they do not appear to cause ill health.

   'The use of nano-magnets could herald a new era in gene therapy,' says
Professor Lewis. 'This new technique could also be used to help deliver
therapeutic genes in other diseases such as arthritic joints or damaged heart
tissue.' Another of the researchers, Professor John Dobson, of Keele University,
says a major stumbling block to gene therapy appears to have been overcome.

   'We have shown we can get more of the treatment into the tumour using
magnets,' he says.

   'Cancer medicine is moving away from a sledgehammer approach to careful
targeting of tumours with drugs, so that the attack on the disease is
concentrated.'

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2008


                              24 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 5, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: IRE; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 454 words

HEADLINE: Help our Joseph;
Family seek donations to find cure for son s disease

BYLINE: Yvonne Tarleton

BODY:

   AN Irish toddler is one of only 50 people in the world diagnosed with a rare
muscle disorder that prevents him from taking a drink.

   Little Joseph Swift suffers from an incurable neurological disorder known as
Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome, the genes for which were only identified in 2006.

   It is a rare type of leukodystrophy and it means that Joseph has very limited
control over the muscles in his body.

   He must be fed through a tube because he is not able to drink fluids in case
he chokes.

   It means that his parents, Colette Dennigan and Matt Swift, must provide
round the clock care   while they live in hope that medical researchers will
make a breakthrough in treatment for the illness, through stem cell research or
gene therapy.

   The married couple, who are currently living near Grenoble in France,
explained that the severity of Joseph s condition means that they must take him
for daily visits to care centres and hospitals.

   Colette, who is originally from Fermoy, Co. Cork, said:  The eldest person
with this syndrome who is still surviving is 17.

    Every day counts as far as we are concerned. I d hate for any parent to go
through the year we have gone through.

   The 34-year-old has also set up a website for donations where she also writes
a blog about her daily life looking after Joseph and coping with his plight. She
explained:  Both Matt and I are carriers of the gene that has caused Joseph to
have his form of leukodystrophy.

   There is a one-in-four chance of it happening again if we tried for another
child. As the gene is known, it looks like there are possibilities for various
tests, which is a positive.

    Neither of the options are straightforward though, so we have a lot to think
about.

   She added:  He puts so much effort into reaching for a toy that when he
finally gets it, he doesn t know what to do with his hand; the toy will either
fall, or he won t realise or forgets that there is something in his hand.

    I look at other children in awe when they pick something up with ease.
Joseph started going to the local creche about three months ago and he goes
there for 2.5 hours once a week.

    This is a great boost for him, and me, as he gets to do some  normal  things
and spend some time with other children, which he loves.

   The couple are desperate to raise the funds for the research before time runs
out for young Joseph. His father Matt is taking part in the Ironman Triathlon in
Switzerland on July 13 in the hope of raising cash. He will undertake a 3.8km
swim, a 180km cycle and a 42km run.

   Colette s family are also doing their part, with a cake sale being held in
the resource centre in Fermoy next Saturday.

   Donations can be made through the family s website: www.tri4joe.com/donate.

   reporter@dailymail.ie

GRAPHIC: Hope for the future: Colette Dennigan and Matt Swift with Joseph, who
suffers from a rare illness

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2008


                              25 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              July 4, 2008 Friday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 92

LENGTH: 81 words

HEADLINE: Shire swallows drug firm with £260m bid

BODY:

   BRITAIN'S third biggest drugmaker has agreed to buy a German biotechnology
firm for around £260m.

   Shire ( up 8 12 p at 808 12 p) will gain access to a full pipeline of human
genetic therapies to combat rare inherited diseases when it takes control of
target Jerini.

   The FTSE 100 pharma firm currently makes a good slug of its earnings from its
attention deficit franchise, but has proved adept at carving out specialist
niches in the drugs market that the industry's giants tend to ignore..

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2008


                              26 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 2, 2008 Wednesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: Oxford Biomedica faces court claim

BODY:

   OXFORD Biomedica (down 3p to 20p), the gene therapy company, said Bavarian
Nordic's claim that the Modified Vaccinia Ankara system used in its TroVax
therapeutic cancer vaccine infringed patents, was 'without merit'.

   Bavarian Nordic has filed a claim against Oxford Biomedica in a US court. But
the British biotech firm said it would oppose the action vigorously, and 'will
seek all appropriate relief against Bavarian Nordic'.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2008


                              27 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             June 24, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 68

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: Whitbread can smell the coffee;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:

   THERE'S an awful lot of coffee shops in eastern Europe and Whitbread wants to
gobble them up.

   Tasty takeover rumours concerning coffee bar operator Coffeeheaven
International have been simmering for months.

   Up from a February low of 21 3/ 4 p, the shares touched a high of 43p before
boiling over to close 1 3/4 p easier at 41 1/4 p.

   Impatient punters who trousered profits could soon be kicking themselves
because hot gossip suggests leisure giant Whitbread (5p better at 1204p) is on
the verge of bidding £71m or 55p a share in cash.

   Whitbread owns Costa Coffee which operates more than 60 outlets across the
UK. It also operates in the Middle East, Pakistan and India through franchise
partners, and in China through a joint venture agreement.

   It wants to expand in Europe and Coffeeheaven would be a perfect bolt- on. It
has 87 trading sites across Eastern Europe including Poland, Czech Republic,
Latvia, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. Last month it raised £ 3.5m in a placing
at 30 1/2 p to help fund expansion plans.

   The exalted price of coffee has not put the consumer off forking out £2 a
time for a cappuccino. But the smoking ban, the cost of a pint and the
deteriorating consumer outlook is definitely keeping more and more people away
from the local rub-a-dub.

   Punch Taverns, the UK's largest pub operator, continues to struggle and
closed a further 25 1/4 p down at a year's low of 338p. Punch, which has net
debt of £3bn-plus, in March withdrew its proposal to merge with All Bar One
Group Mitchells & Butlers, 3p easier at 210p.

   The Footsie regained composure after Friday's sell-off, rallying 46.4 points
to 5,667.2.

   Heavyweight oils led the recovery as the price the black gold advanced to $
137 a barrel a pledge by Saudi Arabia to boost oil by 200,000 barrels day.

   Wall Street, which dropped below 12,000 on amid renewed fears of yet more
asset downs in the banking sector, opened 43 higher but soon hit a brick wall
and 28 lower. Early enthusiasm followed of a £2.4bn bid for Corn Products by
fertiliser and oilseed processor Bunge.

   The deal, which unites two of the oldest US businesses, left Tate & Lyle 18
1/4 p at 392 1/2 p.

   Celebrating its return to the Footsie after a year absence, electrical
equipment group

   Invensys surged 17p to 298 1 . 4 p. It flirted with the knackers' yard in
2003 under the weight of £ 3.3bn debts but has been nursed back to health by
boss Ulf Henriksson. It is now debt free. Unhappy housebuilder Persimmon, which
was booted out, closed 15 3/4 p easier at a year's low of 355p. The high was
1273p.

   Improved Vyvanse prescription trend data and a Goldman Sachs upgrade to buy
from neutral lifted pharmaceuticals group Shire 45 1/2 p to 842 1/2 p. The US
broker expects share gains to accelerate in the second-half of 2008 following
the launch of the attention deficit hyperactivity drug in adults. It also
expects the group to hold a Human Genetic Therapies business day during the
secondhalf of the year which could lead to a better appreciation of pill's
commercial potential and the firm's late-stage pipeline.

   Worries about falling commercial rents was behind a swingeing HSBC downgrade
of the property sector. Land Securities collapsed 64p to 1275p after the broker
moved to underweight and slashed its target price to 1195p from £15.

   After hedge fund Harbinger Capital Partner revealed, under new FSA rules that
it has 3pc short position in the stock, HBOS fell below the 275p rights issue
and touched 268 3 . 4 p before closing at 270 1/4 p, down 12p.

   Following Saturday's Daily Mail exclusive that struggling plumbing giant
Wolseley is planning to sell one of its troubled US division for £ 700m- plus to
bolster its balance sheet, the shares fell 15p further to a year's low of 430
1/2 p.

   Expro International nosedived 45p to 1632p after US industrial giant
Halliburton withdrew its offer, leaving the way clear for a leveraged buy-out
team led by Candover Partners to complete their £1.81bn, 1615p a share offer.
Halliburton had been prepared to pay 1625p a share.

   Mediterranean Oil & Gas jumped 11 1/2 p to 166 1/2 p on a 400pc reserve
upgrade on the Ombrina Mare Oil Field development offshore Italy. Ombrina is the
only development in offshore Italy to be controlled by an independent oil
company and not a major..

   GOLDMAN Sachs describes JKX Oil and Gas ( 10p better at 456 3/4 p), down 18pc
from recent highs, as the forgotten producer and has added the stock to its
European Conviction Buy List. It has lifted its six month target price to 569p
from 471p and says it offers significant opportunity, through a combination of
compelling valuation and potential for upside risk to 2009 Ukrainian gas
prices..

   Read the market latest updated five times a day at:
www.thisismoney.co.uk/markets »

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2008


                              28 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                              June 15, 2008 Sunday

SECTION: MS2; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: TheA-Z of Eczema

BODY:

   ANTIBIOTICS Prolonged treatment with antibiotics for infections can cause
resistant bacteria. It is better to prevent infections by keeping the skin
clean.

   BANDAGING Bandaging after applying creams or wrapping bandages soaked in
cream (wet wraps) and putting dry bandages on top help topical steroids or
moisturisers soak into the skin.

   CHINESE HERBS Alternative to chemical treatments - although little scientific
evidence to prove effectiveness - or safety.

   DANDRUFF Dandruff is a common, mild and uninflamed form of seborrhoeic
eczema. Medicated shampoos such as Allergenics Emollient Hair Shampoo may help.

   EVENING PRIMROSE OIL This can be obtained without prescription and offers a
mild alternative to chemical treatments.

   FOOD ALLERGIES Up to a third of infantile eczema is food allergy-related - in
particular cow's milk, soya, eggs, fish or wheat.

   GENE THERAPY Scientists have discovered a gene that causes dry skin leading
to eczema.

   It is hoped that effective therapy to tackle the root causes of the
condition, rather than simply treating the symptoms, will be developed.

   H20 Water can help and hinder sufferers.

   Swimming is an excellent exercise sufferers who may find other sports
uncomfortable. But chlorinated water can have a drying effect on the skin.

   IMMUNOSUPPRESSANTS Systemic Immunosuppressants are good at tackling severe
eczema.

   JELLY Pure petroleum jelly helps prevent skin cracking but blocks sweat
glands - increasing itching and eczema.

   KEEP COOL Feeling hot is a common problem for those with eczema, so wear cool
clothing in thin layers and use sheets and blankets rather than a duvet.

   LESIONS Thickening of the skin in these areas is common. Severe lesions can
be confused with fungal infections.

   MOISTURISERS These help restore the normal skin barrier. Choose one that
doesn't contain perfume, lanolin or preservatives, which can irritate.

   A B C D E F G H I J K L M

   NHS If eczema is severe, GPs may be able to offer a referral to a specialist
consultant dermatologist.

   OATMEAL Oatmeal is a natural anti-itch agent that restores the skin's PH
balance.

   It can be applied topically or mixed with bath water to make a milky
dispersion.

   PHYTOSTEROLS Phytosterol is soya bean extract that shares some of the
therapeutic effects of cortisone.

   QUORN If your body chemistry is too acid you need more alkaline foods.
Replacing soya with Quorn (mycoprotein) can help redress the balance.

   RUBBING Eczema can be incredibly itchy and uncomfortable, but it is important
not to rub affected areas, which can make the rash worse and lead to thickened,
brownish areas on the skin.

   SODIUM LAUREL SULPHATE Some reactions result from contact with an irritant,
such as this common household detergent that amplifies the allergenicity of
other substances.

   TAR Tars and extracts of crude coal tar are used to reduce topical steroids
needed in chronic eczema.

   ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT UV light boxes can benefit chronic sufferers. If using a
course of ultraviolet light to treat eczema, use plenty of moisturiser
afterwards.

   VACUUMING House dust, dust mites, moulds, pollen and animal dander from pets
aggravate eczema.

   WOOL Wool clothing should be avoided, as lanolin in wool is very irritating
to even slightly sensitive skin.

   X-RAY Administering low energy X-rays to tackle localised eczema has been
trialled with some success.

   YOUNG Eczema is far more common in children, affecting one in five compared
to one in 12 adults.

   ZONING OUT Sleep disturbance is one of the most common problems affecting
children with eczema, with sufferers sleeping 46 minutes less a night on
average.

     Life with Eczema has advice for sufferers. www.lifewitheczema.com.

   N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2008


                              29 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              May 13, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: IRE; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 1162 words

HEADLINE: Seeing is believing for the eye-injection boy giving hope to millions;

GOOD HEALTH

BYLINE: ISLA WHITCROFT

BODY:

   AT A central London warehouse 18-year-old Steven Howarth is wandering around
a specially constructed street scene in front of a group of eminent eye doctors
and scientists.

   It is dimly lit and Steven, who suffers from a genetic eye condition, has
never been able to see in the dark. The last time he carried out this test he
bumped into most objects in his path.

   But now, almost a year on, everyone hopes things will be different. For
Steven, a student, is one of the first people in the world to have genetic
therapy   the replacement of a faulty gene with an artificially created one that
works   to try to improve his impaired sight.

   Steven suffers from a form of Retinitis Pigmentosa called Leber s congenital
amaurosis.

   This is an eye condition caused by a fault on the RPE 65 gene, which is
responsible for the functioning of the retina, the lightdetecting layer at the
back of the eye.

   Since birth, Steven has had almost no night vision and his day vision was
deteriorating to the point where he would probably be blind by his 20s.

   Although the condition is genetic, there is no impaired vision in his family.
Both his mother and father are the one in 20,000 of adults who carry one half of
the gene. Together, they had a one in four chance of having a child with the
disease.

   Steven has only peripheral vision and his central blind spot meant he couldn
t see straight ahead or up and down.

   As a youngster, he was continually tripping over. At primary school, he
struggled to see the blackboard and at secondary school he was bullied because
of his sight impairment.

   SOME teachers were sympathetic, but others just stuck me at the front of the
class and, when that didn t work, they called me lazy,  he says.

   But last July, Steven made medical history. He had an operation at Moorfields
Eye Hospital in London, in which ophthalmic surgeon Mr James Bainbridge injected
a healthy copy of the faulty gene into the central area of Steven s retina.

   Under anaesthetic, a cannula containing the correct version of the gene was
inserted into Steven s eyeball just above the iris and passed through the back
of the eye into the retina.

   Once in place, the gene, which is carried in a harmless virus, was injected
in between the retina and the layer behind it, called the retinal pigment
epithelium.

    A virus is a very efficient vehicle for getting to cells,  explains Robin
Ali, professor of human molecular genetics at University College London, who ran
the trial.

    Once injected, it quickly finds its way to the retinal cells. The new gene
is then absorbed and, hopefully, overrides the natural genetic fault. Cells in
the eye do not replicate, so once the RPE 65 gene is in place it should, in
theory, stay put.

    I could sense the doctor s excitement,  says Steven.  I knew if my night
vision improved there were huge implications for treating people with impaired
sight.

   Corrupted genes are responsible for many severe eye conditions including
Retinitis Pigmentosa and some forms of macular degeneration, which causes
partial or total loss of sight in millions of people worldwide.

   Not surprisingly then, eight months later as they watched Steven navigate the
warehouse, the ophthalmic surgeons, geneticists and scientists were keen to
witness the results.

   The outcome was better than they had hoped for. Steven s negotiating skills
in the dark were transformed and, as he finished the test, the results were
conclusive. His night vision had improved 100-fold. The gene therapy had worked
and it has transformed his life.

    Loss of vision means loss of independence,  says Steven, who is studying
music at college.

    Before the operation, I had to rush home before it got dark, or I depend on
other people.

    It wasn t too bad in familiar surroundings. I d count the steps along the
route from the local train station to our house, but I have fallen over or got
lost so many times.

   Now I can see cracks in the pavement and make out road signs. I feel free.

   Until he was eight, eye doctors at had insisted that Steven was short-sighted
and gave him thick glasses, which didn t work.

   He was finally diagnosed with Retinitis Pigmentosa when he was eight (the
diagnosis of Leber s congenital amaurosis came a few years later) when his
mother, Adelaida, read an article on the condition, recognised the symptoms and
took it to her doctor. For Adelaida, the diagnosis, although shattering, was a
relief because it meant she could finally get help for her son.

   Steven s father, Tommy, took him to be examined by a world-class specialist
at Moorfields Eye Hospital.  He confirmed the diagnosis, that there was no cure,
says Tommy.  That was a real blow.

   As Steven s sight deteriorated he could watch TV only if he sat close up, and
he could read only large print books.

   He was unable to play sport, which marked him out as different.  School was
tough,  he admits.  I wanted to be like everyone else, but I had a tutor who sat
next to me and read things out. I was bullied. I left at 16 with very poor exam
results.

   Through the Retinitis Pigmentosa Society, Steven became aware of the progress
in genetic therapy research into his condition, and 15 months ago, he was asked
if he wanted to join the gene therapy trial.  I was both excited and terrified,
he remembers.  But we decided to find out more.

   In June 2007, Steven had two weeks of tests and interviews to see if he was
suitable for the trial and made aware of the many possible dangers.

    There was a risk of haemorrhage, retinal tear or detachment,  says surgeon
Mr Bainbridge.  There was also a post-operative risk of inflammation and
infection, that s why we operated on Steven s right eye   if it went wrong he
still had his best eye.

   THEN there were the theoretical dangers of the genetic therapy.

    There was the tiny possibility that the gene might not stay in the retinal
cells but travel around the body and alter the DNA,  says Professor Ali.

   Finally, there was the possibility that the body s immune system would reject
the new gene. To counteract this, Steven was given immuno suppressant drugs.

   Steven was cleared for the operation.  I was nervous but determined to go
ahead,  he says.  When I woke up my eye felt very sore and I had to take
painkillers.

    At first my vision was incredibly blurred. The doctors had said it might
take several months before my eye recovered, so I tried not to worry.

    By October, four months later, my vision had improved, but it was hard to
tell how much.

   It wasn t until the follow-up test this March that he could tell how much
better he was.

    I watched the before and after video of me navigating the dark street scene,
says Steven.  It felt brilliant.  As Steven was one of the first people in the
world to have the procedure, he was given a low dose of the therapy and only one
third of his retina was treated, so there is scope for improvement.

    I would like at some point to be considered for another dose, perhaps in my
right eye,  he says.  Ultimately, my dream is to have my vision restored to
normal.

GRAPHIC: Pioneer: Gene therapy restored Steven s sight

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2008


                              30 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              May 6, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 1187 words

HEADLINE: Seeing is believing for the eye-injection boy giving hope to millions

BYLINE: ISLA WHITCROFT

BODY:

   AT A central London warehouse 18-year-old Steven Howarth is wandering around
a specially constructed street scene in front of a group of eminent eye doctors
and scientists.

   It is dimly lit and Steven, who suffers from a genetic eye condition, has
never been able to see in the dark. The last time he carried out this test he
bumped into most objects in his path.

   But now, almost a year on, everyone hopes things will be different. For
Steven, a student from Bolton in Lancashire, is one of the first people in the
world to have genetic therapy   the replacement of a faulty gene with an
artificially created one that works   to try to improve his impaired sight.

   Steven suffers from a form of Retinitis Pigmentosa called Leber's congenital
amaurosis.

   This is an eye condition caused by a fault on the RPE 65 gene, which is
responsible for the functioning of the retina, the lightdetecting layer at the
back of the eye.

   Since birth, Steven has had almost no night vision and his day vision was
deteriorating to the point where he would probably be blind by his 20s.

   Although the condition is genetic, there is no impaired vision in his family.
Both his mother and father are one in 20,000 of the population who carry one
half of the gene. Together, they had a one in four chance of having a child with
the disease.

   Steven has only peripheral vision and his central blind spot meant he
couldn't see straight ahead or up and down.

   As a youngster, he was continually tripping over. At primary school, he
struggled to see the blackboard and at secondary school he was bullied because
of his sight impairment.

   SOME teachers were sympathetic, but others just stuck me at the front of the
class and, when that didn't work, they called me lazy,' he says.

   But last July, Steven made medical history. He had an operation at Moorfields
Eye Hospital in London, in which ophthalmic surgeon Mr James Bainbridge injected
a healthy copy of the faulty gene into the central area of Steven's retina.

   Under anaesthetic, a cannula containing the correct version of the gene was
inserted into Steven's eyeball just above the iris and passed through the back
of the eye into the retina.

   Once in place, the gene, which is carried in a harmless virus, was injected
in between the retina and the layer behind it, called the retinal pigment
epithelium.

   'A virus is a very efficient vehicle for getting to cells,' explains Robin
Ali, professor of human molecular genetics at University College London, who ran
the trial with Moorfields.

   'Once injected, it quickly finds its way to the retinal cells. The new gene
is then absorbed and, hopefully, overrides the natural genetic fault. Cells in
the eye do not replicate, so once the RPE 65 gene is in place it should, in
theory, stay put.' 'I could sense the doctor's excitement,' says Steven. 'I knew
if my night vision improved there were huge implications for treating people
with impaired sight.'

   Corrupted genes are responsible for many severe eye conditions including
Retinitis Pigmentosa (which affects around 24,000 people in the UK) and some
forms of macular degeneration, which causes partial or total loss of sight in
millions of people worldwide.

   Not surprisingly then, eight months later as they watched Steven navigate the
warehouse, the ophthalmic surgeons, geneticists and scientists were keen to
witness the results.

   The outcome was better than they had hoped for. Steven's negotiating skills
in the dark were transformed and, as he finished the test, the results were
conclusive. His night vision had improved 100-fold. The gene therapy had worked
and it has transformed his life.

   'Loss of vision means loss of independence,' says Steven, who is studying
music at college.

   'Before the operation, I had to rush home before it got dark, or I depend on
other people.

   'It wasn't too bad in familiar surroundings. I'd count the steps along the
route from the local train station to our house, but I have fallen over or got
lost so many times. Now I can see cracks in the pavement and make out road
signs. I feel free.' Until he was eight, eye doctors at Bolton General Hospital
had insisted that Steven was shortsighted and gave him thick glasses, which
didn't work.

   He was finally diagnosed with Retinitis Pigmentosa when he was eight (the
diagnosis of Leber's congenital amaurosis came a few years later) when his
mother, Adelaida, read an article on the condition, recognised the symptoms and
took it to her doctor. For Adelaida, the diagnosis, although shattering, was a
relief because it meant she could finally get help for her son.

   Steven's father, Tommy, took him to be examined by a worldclass specialist at
Moorfields Eye Hospital. 'He confirmed the diagnosis, that there was no cure,'
says Tommy. 'That was a real blow.' As Steven's sight deteriorated he could
watch TV only if he sat close up, and he could read only large print books.

   He was unable to play sport, which marked him out as different. 'School was
tough,' he admits. 'I wanted to be like everyone else, but I had a tutor who sat
next to me and read things out. I was bullied. I left at 16 with very poor GCSE
results.' Through the Retinitis Pigmentosa Society, Steven became aware of the
progress in genetic therapy research into his condition, and 15 months ago,
Moorfields can iron so steak of asked if he wanted to join the gene therapy
trial.

   'I was both excited and terrified,' he remembers. 'But we decided to find out
more.' In June 2007, Steven had two weeks of tests and interviews to see if he
was suitable for the trial and made aware of the many possible dangers.

   'There was a risk of haemorrhage, retinal tear or detachment,' says surgeon
Mr Bainbridge. 'There was also a post-operative risk of inflammation and
infection, that's why we operated on Steven's right eye   if it went wrong he
still had his best eye.' THEN there were the theoretical dangers of the genetic
therapy.

   'There was the tiny possibility that the gene might not stay in the retinal
cells but travel around the body and alter the DNA,' says Professor Ali.

   Finally, there was the possibility that the body's immune system would reject
the new gene. To counteract this, Steven was given immuno suppressant drugs.

   Steven was cleared for the operation. 'I was nervous but determined to go
ahead,' he says.

   'When I woke up my eye felt very sore and I had to take painkillers.

   'At first my vision was incredibly blurred. The doctors had said it might
take several months before my eye recovered, so I tried not to worry.

   'By October, four months later, my vision had improved, but it was hard to
tell how much.' It wasn't until the follow-up test this March that he could tell
how much better he was. 'I watched the before and after video of me navigating
the dark street scene,' says Steven. 'It felt brilliant.'

   As Steven was one of the first people in the world to have the procedure, he
was given a low dose of the therapy and only one third of his retina was
treated, so there is scope for improvement.

   'I would like at some point to be considered for another dose, perhaps in my
right eye,' he says.

   'Ultimately, my dream is to have my vision restored to normal.'

GRAPHIC: Pioneer: Gene therapy restored Steven's sight

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2008


                              31 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              May 3, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: IRE; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1782 words

HEADLINE: We ve given up everything for Grace;
Would you sacrifice everything ...your job, home and car with only a slim hope
of saving your child s life? When told that their daughter had a rare form of
cancer one couple didn t hesitate

BYLINE: Annette Witheridge

BODY:

   GRACE O Gorman s big brown eyes sparkle cheekily.  I want to go home,  she
says, tugging at her daddy Kevin s ear. But home at the moment for the brave
two-year-old has to be New York s world-renowned Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Institute, where she has been undergoing agonising life-saving treatment since
January.

   While other children cry at the slightest pain, Grace smiles through almost
everything, never complaining about her constant discomfort. No matter how much
agony she s suffered, the chatty tot always thanks her doctors at the end of
every procedure. When Cork-born Kevin and his doctor wife Millicent Stone, who
hails from Wexford, discovered Grace was suffering from the rare, aggressive
childhood cancer neuroblastoma they turned to Sloan Kettering for help.

   The hospital offers ground-breaking treatment not available anywhere else in
the world. The downside was the cost   the couple had to provide a $350,000
(e230,000) deposit and expect the total medical bill will be around $1million.

   Millicent, a consultant rheumatologist, says they didn t hesitate:  We
dropped everything, remortgaged our flat, sold our cars and moved to New York in
the space of two weeks. You don t even think about money or possessions when it
comes to your child s health. You just do it.

   The couple, along with their six-year-old daughter Alice, have spent the last
four months nursing Grace through surgery, chemotherapy, radiation and the
unique Anti-GD2 antibody treatment.

   And while the health authorities held long-winded discussions and fretted
about the costs, the couple s family and friends in Ireland, Britain and Canada
came through for Grace.

   They launched an incredible fund-raising campaign. Kevin s eyes well up with
tears as he says:  Total strangers have just done amazing things.

   Youngsters at the Cullen School in Cork raffled their own Easter eggs,
raising e454 for the Grace O Gorman Trust, while a friend s nine-year-old niece
made e150 selling cakes. Pensioners from St Bridget s Centre in Wexford cleared
out their piggy banks to collect e565, while a band of brothers are running the
Cork Marathon in June on Grace s behalf.

   WHEN Brendan O Brien of the Dixies showband died last month his family asked
for donations to Grace s fund rather than flowers, and a dance has been
organised to support her at Dublin s Conrad Hotel next Saturday.

   Friends in Toronto, where the couple lived from 1995 to 1999, before they
moved to Bath, in Somerset, south-west England, are selling gold angel charms
and organising bake sales and a silent auction.

   In New York, Kevin s second cousin Mary Naughton approached the County Cork
Society, which is now planning a June fundraiser.

   A cookery book, launched only last week, is already selling like hot cakes.

   Cork lawyer Barry O Meara is running the trust fund for free and Millicent s
68-year-old father Val Stone Senior has set up a website   www.graceogorman.com
so that supporters can keep track of Grace s progress in America as well as the
fund-raising efforts.

   The family moved into a rented one-bedroom apartment in Manhattan at the
beginning of January, enrolling Alice in the nearby Rudolph Steiner School. Her
new classmates helped Alice illustrate the cookery book cover and their parents
have offered everything from expensive auction items to sleepovers.

    Alice is that age where she wants to help,  says civil engineer Kevin.  She
s made a patchwork quilt she wants to auction. But she also worries about
things. She asked if she d given Grace the cancer or if she could catch it from
her.

    We have tried to keep everything as normal as possible for Alice but it is
hard on her. All of our lives have been put on hold for a year and we re all
sleeping in one bedroom.

   Millicent s hospital job has been kept open for her, she has kept up her
research work at Bath University and spends one day a week volunteering at New
York s Cornell Hospital.

   However, Kevin s property development business back in Bath is struggling,
not that he s complaining. Just watching Grace get stronger by the day makes the
sacrifices worthwhile.

   When the couple first noticed swelling on Grace s jaw last October they
thought she had mumps. Their G.P. agreed but ordered more tests.

   The results were devastating. The tumour in her jaw was secondary. The cancer
had spread to her brain, lungs, leg bones and lymph glands. She was given just a
20 per cent chance surviving five years.

   Millicent was away at a medical conference in Houston, Texas, when Kevin
broke the awful news to her. She says:  I remember daydreaming about what a
wonderful life I had with two beautiful daughters, a lovely husband and a
terrific job.

    I thought I d pop outside and phone home to see how Grace was. One minute
later my world fell apart. I d felt uneasy about leaving Grace when we thought
it was just mumps but I had no clue how ill she was. So when Kevin said she had
tumours, even as a doctor I didn t understand .

   She caught the next flight home and went straight to Bristol Children s
Hospital, where Grace lay surrounded by tubes and machinery. The tumour in her
jaw was infected and she slipped in and out consciousness for several days as
doctors battled to save her life.

   Kevin says:  Scans showed there were tumours everywhere. She s a tiny little
thing and the one in her abdomen was the size of my fist.

   Millicent immediately started researching the disease and, while Grace was
going through 80 days of chemotherapy to shrink the tumours, she discovered that
Sloan Kettering offered unique antibody treatment. Her old Cork University
friend Dr Suzanne Keane urged the family to up sticks and move immediately to
New York.

   Millicent says:  She s a paedetri-cian and she gave me the best possible
advice to just go. Grace was getting awful infections during chemo and at
Christmas she almost died. We knew we just couldn t hang around.

   The downside was the treatment would cost upwards of $800,000, and was not
covered by any British insurance. Millicent s brother Val Stone and his wife
Catherine, who is Grace s godmother, lent them the $350,000 deposit needed for
doctors to start the treatment in January. That ran out in March.

   Millicent says:  Medical costs here are astronomical. If Grace needs an
ambulance it s $6,000 and every single staffer who studies a report puts in a
bill.

    The treatment is running at $100,000 a month and that doesn t include the
bill for drugs. Grace needs scores of pills every day. We probably spend $4,000
a month on drugs. One course of special vitamin A pills costs $4,000.

    We can t get insurance at all for Grace but we have taken out a policy that
covers us and Alice in case we get ill. That s $1,300 a month.

   The couple tried appealing to the National Health Service in Britain for help
but got nowhere. Kevin explains:  It was an incredibly stressful time. Here were
a bunch of administrators talking about costs and arguing that the treatment was
experimental   even though it has been available at Sloan Kettering for 10 years
while we were talking about saving our very sick baby.

    In the end we just got on a plane on January 8.

   The treatment schedule was different in the U.S. and the doctors insisted on
operating first to cut out the tumours before Grace embarked on another round of
chemo and then radiation.

   Millicent adds:  Her surgery was delayed until January 21 because she wasn t
well. The operation took 12 hours and the wait for us was excruciating. But the
doctors were brilliant. One came out every hour to let us know how it was going.

    At 5pm, the surgeon told us,  I got it all.  That was huge because they
weren t sure whether they d get every single bit of the cancer.

   After recovering from the operation, Grace started on a second round of
chemotherapy and then twice-daily radiation sessions, which were so gruelling
Grace needed a general anaesthetic to knock her out.

   Millicent s pride in her daughter shows as she says:  She is an amazing
little thing. She never complains about anything and always thanks the doctors
after treatment.

    The side-effects are awful too. She has ulcers from her mouth down to her
back passage. She s had the C-diffvirus and all sorts of infections.

    Yet she never lets it get to her.

    Even before we knew she was ill she never indicated anything was wrong. She
was the perfect baby.

   And now the devoted mother reflects on what may have been the first signs,
saying:  The only thing odd was that her legs and hands used to sweat a lot and
she would often wake up in the middle of the night crying. But we just put that
down to bad dreams and I thought I was being neurotic about the sweating.
However, once the tumours were removed the sweating stopped.

   Neuroblastoma is very rare. It affects only seven or eight children a year in
Ireland, 100 in Britain and around 700 American children.

   HOWEVER, the team at Sloan Kettering developed the antibody treatment and
they believe the survival rate for patients is 75 per cent. The catch is that
the treatment has to be given within six weeks of surgery, which is why the
couple had to make that split decision.

   Even so, nothing prepared them for the absolute agony Grace suffers every
time she receives a dose of Anti-GD2. She is given morphine to ease the pain and
a hypnotist helps her tune out but as the drug goes through her veins, Grace s
entire body seizes up.

   Kevin says this can be hard to take.  As a parent it is just so painful to
watch. You want to take away the pain, have the treatment for them.

   The first antibody treatment, which is administered through a drip, took
place on St Patrick s Day. Kevin says:  I thought that was a good sign. If St
Patrick can rid Ireland of snakes, so I hope he can also rid Grace of cancer.

    Also my grandmother had a saying that there d never be peace in Ireland
until the palm and shamrock met. Easter was so early this year that Palm Sunday
and St Patrick s Day were a day apart   something that won t happen again for
something like 150 years. That seemed like a good omen.

   Grace will continue the gene therapy treatment at regular intervals
throughout the year. After that, the family will need to decide whether to stay
on in America.

   Millicent explains their dilemma:  Our lives are kind of in limbo at the
moment. We just don t know what will happen in the future because we are
concentrating all our efforts on getting Grace well.

    But I do hope to raise the profile of neuroblastoma. And if there s money
left in the fund after Grace s treatment, then it will go to help other
sufferers. Seeing how people have responded to Grace has been so uplifting. It
has restored my faith in humanity.

   To make a contribution to the Grace O Gorman Trust go to www.graceogorman.com

GRAPHIC: Battle: Kevin, Millicent and Grace in New York Amazing Grace: She
suffers a great deal but comes out smiling

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2008


                              32 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: 2ND; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: An injection of hope;
Boy condemned to blindness has his sight restored by gene therapy

BYLINE: Daniel Bates

BODY:

   HUNDREDS of thousands of people with failing eyesight have been given hope
after a teenager had his sight restored by a pioneering gene therapy operation.

   Stephen Howarth, 18, had a degenerative condition, caused by a faulty gene,
that had damaged the light-detecting retina at the back of his eyes.

   He could barely see at night and was told he would probably lose his vision
completely.

   Surgeons at Moorfields Eye hospital in London injected millions of healthy
copies of the gene into one of his eyes to start the retina working properly. He
can now see significantly better.

   The operation was part of a joint U.S. and British study into Leber's
congenital amaurosis (LCA), an inherited disorder which can lead to blindness in
teenagers.

   It occurs when faulty genes, called RPE65, stop the layer of cells at the
back of the eye working. Of the six people who took part in the trial, four had
some vision restored.

   Each had only one eye treated in case the process went wrong. The success,
especially with Mr Howarth, will be a major boost for people with genetic eye
problems.

   It could lead to advances in the treatment of age-related macular
degeneration, which affects around 400,000 people in the UK, although it is not
clear if it can help older patients as their eyes may have deteriorated too
much.

   Mr Howarth, a student from Bolton, said: 'At first I could not really see
anything in the eye, but it gradually got better until it was back to normal.'
The teenager, who plays guitar in a band, said: 'Before the operation, I rushed
home from college when it started to get dark because I was worried about
getting around. Now

   I stay later if I need to, for band rehearsals and things like that'.

   He said he can also see the guitar frets better, as well as move around a
darkened stage.

   The UK trial was carried out by the University College London Institute of
Ophthalmology and Moorfields Eye Hospital.

   Professor Robin Ali, of the Institute for Ophthalmology, said: 'To get this
indication after only three patients is hugely exciting.

   'It paves the way for the development of gene therapy approaches for a broad
range of eye disorders.'

GRAPHIC: Stephen Howarth: Night sight

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2008


                              33 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             April 22, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: The blind made to see;
British pair have vision restored by 'bionic eyes'

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:

   TWO blind men who thought they would never see their families again have had
vision restored by Britain's first 'bionic' eye operations.

   Electronic receivers were implanted which take signals from a camera mounted
in a pair of glasses.

   The technology allows enough vision to find doorways, follow individuals,
locate objects across the room and help with eating. It gives new hope to
sufferers of diseases affecting the retina for which there is no cure.

   Surgeons at Moorfields Eye Hospital in central London implanted the
artificial retinal devices as part of a Europeanwide clinical trial.

   The identity of the two patients, thought to be in their 50s, is being kept
secret.

   The trial aims to assist those with retinitis pigmentosa, a group of genetic
eye diseases affecting the retina which cause progressive loss of vision over
decades.

   The camera and transmitter in the glasses send a wireless signal to the
ultra-thin electronic receiver and electrode panel which are attached to the
retina.

   The electrodes stimulate the remaining retinal nerves, allowing a signal to
be passed along the optic nerve to the brain.

   In the brain, patterns of light and dark spots are perceived which give a
basic level of vision to the patient, who is able to be more mobile and
independent as a result.

   A wireless microprocessor and battery pack worn on the belt powers the entire
device.

   American Linda Moorfoot was totally blind for more than a decade before
becoming one of the first patients to test the new technology. She told Sky
News: 'When I go to the grandkids' hockey game or soccer game I can see which
direction the game is moving in.

   'I can shoot baskets with my grandson and I can watch my granddaughter
dancing across the stage. I can see & things! It's wonderful.' The British
operations were carried out last week by consultant retinal surgeon Lyndon da
Cruz and his team at Moorfields, under the supervision of American colleagues
who developed the device with the company Second Sight in the U.S.

   Mr da Cruz said: 'Moorfields is proud to have been one of only three sites in
Europe chosen to be part of evolving this exciting new technology. The devices
were implanted successfully in both patients and they are recovering well from
the operations.' The U.S. developers are now trying to shrink the camera so it
will be small enough to be implanted into an eyeball. They predict these
pea-sized video cameras could be ready to be used in surgery in three to five
years.

   David Head, chief executive of the British Retinitis Pigmentosa Society,
said: 'These are significant advances and in conjunction with the advances being
made in stem-cell therapy and gene therapy, make for really exciting times as we
work to translate science into treatment.' Professor John Marshall, chairman of
the society's medical advisory board, said: 'It is very good news that devices
have been developed and some individuals have had these inserted. However, the
public should not run away with the idea that this is going to be routine
surgery in the immediate future because there is an enormous amount to learn.'
j.hope@dailymail.co.uk

   'I can watch the game'

   HOW THE DEVICE WORKS

   (1)The Camera on the GLasses captures an image and sends the information to
the video processor worn on belt (2)The processor converts image to an
electronic signal and sends it to transmitter on the glasses (3) The electronic
signal is then sent to a reciever in the-eye (4) This data is sent through a
tiny cable to the electrode array attached to retina. Electrical pulses then
sent through the optic nerve to the brain

GRAPHIC: Linda Moorfoot: 'I can watch my granddaughter dancing'

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2008


                              34 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            March 26, 2008 Wednesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 73

LENGTH: 73 words

HEADLINE: Biomedica boom;
CITY & FINANCE

BODY:

   SHARES in the gene therapy specialist Oxford Biomedica spiked 8pc as it
revealed 'encouraging results' from its TroVax treatment for prostate cancer.

   In some cases the new drug can stabilise the disease for as long as 10
months.

   The product, which is being developed in collaboration with the French giant
Sanofi-Aventis, is in the second phase of clinical studies.

   The shares closed 1 3 / 4 p higher at 22 3 / 4 p, valuing the group at
£113m..

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2008


                              35 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             March 21, 2008 Friday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 140 words

HEADLINE: Insulin could hold key to long life

BODY:

   INSULIN may help us live longer and healthier lives, say scientists. The drug
used to treat diabetes slows the ageing process, according to their findings.

   Researchers believe the insulin inhibits a gene which plays a part in ageing.

   In future it may be possible to manipulate the SKN-1 gene through gene
therapy. That could lead to increased resistance to chronic disease and may also
influence longevity.

   'The major implication is that we have found something new that affects
lifespan and ageing,' said researcher Dr Keith Blackwell at the Joslin Diabetes
Centre in Boston, Massachusetts.

   The breakthrough was tested on the digestive system of C. elegans, a
microscopic worm often used by scientists as a model organism.

   Dr Blackwell said the experiments will have to be repeated in mammals,
adding: 'The implications go far beyond diabetes.'

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2008


                              36 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             March 4, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: IRE; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 2292 words

HEADLINE: My life expectancy is 31. I'm 29. So that's two years of parties,
extreme sports and romance...;
(1) In her own words, cystic fibrosis sufferer Kate Smith tells why she's defied
the doomsayers and her illness (2) I trained as an aerobics teacher..and got the
giggles with Gordon I trained as an aerobics teacher ...and got the giggles with
Gordon

BYLINE: Kate Smith

BODY:

   YOUD hardly know I was ill if you were to look at me. I go out with my
friends, have a drink, travel, work, all the things everyone else does. But at
the back of my mind there is always a number the average life expectancy for
someone with my disease. That number is 31. I am 29. I have cystic fibrosis. Its
an incurable, genetic disease, where sufferers have thick mucus clogging their
lungs.

   Because of scarring from infection, a sufferer will either slowly suffocate
leaving their lungs unable to supply enough oxygen to the body or their immune
system loses the battle against infections. Should both parents have the gene,
there is a one-in-four chance their child will have it. I do, but thankfully my
younger brother Nick, and elder brother Alex, dont.

   When I was diagnosed at five, the average life expectancy was 17, but each
case is different. Improved medication and physiotherapy have changed my life.
Blowing out the candles on my 18th birthday cake felt very good indeed.

   Given my health problems Ive been admitted to hospital at least a dozen times
with infections, sometimes for several months I could have hidden away and given
up.

   Instead, I have lived life to the full parties, travel and romance. I love
new sports and Ive been whitewater-rafting, tandem sky-diving and bungee-jumping
in Australia. I know Ive got a lot to pack in.

   When Im asked what is the worst part of my illness, Id have to say the
exhaustion. The rigorous exercise and physiotherapy regime required to help
loosen the mucus on the lungs would tire anyone. It includes swimming, yoga, gym
and physiotherapy where the rib cage is beaten with cupped hands.

   The reduced lung capacity makes it harder still to cope with everyday life,
let alone a full-time job. The effect of absorbing a cocktail of drugs up to 50
pills a day plus inhalers, also saps the energy.

   The onset of infection will often bring appalling pains in my chest and
either side of my spine. Cystic fibrosis affects life in subtler ways, too. I
never leave my hair wet, because the cold and damp would make my lungs produce
more mucus.

   I also avoid mould, especially in fruit, which contains the staphylococcus
aureus bacteria that can grow in cystic fibrosis mucus.

   Despite this, my mum Moya and dad Phil a chemistry teacher and a pilot never
wrapped me in cotton wool. There were no restrictions on me. My mother always
threw me into exercise swimming, dancing, tram-polining and gymnastics and I
have continued into adulthood.

   Some other parents didnt get it. I remember one mum telling me I was not to
blow up balloons at a party: far too strenuous for a frail little thing like me,
she said. Fine, I thought, Ill sit in the corner, chill out and eat the food.

   Of course, my parents didnt burden me with all the details about the illness
immediately but I knew I was different. When I was 12, I used to tell each of my
family before I went to bed that I loved them just in case I died in my sleep.
This was before I understood that sufferers rarely die without warning.

   My personality has been shaped bythe disease, too. Ive never taken the small
things in life seriously and I am not easily offended or jealous. At school I
was puzzled by my friends obsessions with trivia. Youre unhappy with your hair?
Really? Oddly, Ive become more girly in adulthood.

   As I moved from school to further education and work, I found grooming and
make-up a useful way to cope with the illness. If I can still be bothered to do
my hair and make-up, then Im not that ill. I might feel awful, but I dont have
to look awful as well.

   There were a few times when I wastoo ill to go to school but I still got two
A grades in my final exams and degree in psychology at Kingston University, in
South-West London. Students treated me no differently anyone else, even if my
house-mates could tell when I was in by my coughing.

   In my early 20s, I worked for the publisher Haymarket, but a severe infection
brought on by my illness forced me to quit.

   Abandoning my career was the hardest decision Ive made, but there was little
choice. I coughed constantly in the office and was so exhausted one day that I
slept under my desk during my lunch break, asking my boss to wake me when he got
back.

   This might sound odd, but at 23, I retrained as an aerobics teacher. The
effort of keeping fit and to a professional standard actually improved my
health. I was able to double my lung capacity a crucial measure of my fitness
from 1.5 litres to three litres.

   I liked the physical challenge, but decided to do a postgraduate diploma in
psychology, at the same time working two days a week in the prison service.
Because I wasnt earning enough to pay rent, I moved home with my parents in
Surrey.

   In a funny way, I know I have exceeded my parents wildest hopes. When I was
diagnosed, I was not expected to make it into my 20s.

   Every day since has been worthwhile and all the better for their support.

   They havent batted an eyelid at the extravagant things Ive done. They even
trusted me to go to Ibiza with girlfriends at 16. I just danced the week away.
My parents trust has made me strong.

   My illness has always made me value relationships and be wary of fickle
people. My early relationships were with boys from my crowd of friends, so I
never had to explain that I had cystic fibrosis. In my mid-20s, however, I was
asked out on dates by men who didnt know me so well.

   That meant I had to choose the right moment to mention my illness and if it
was an issue, I would walk away.

   One man reacted in a bizarre way. He said he felt hed been cursed, falling
for someone who was ill. So cystic fibrosis has one advantage it sifts out the
nice guys from the idiots.

   Can I see myself getting married one day? I would love to. I will try
everything once but its different with relationships. I could marry only if it
felt absolutely right an extension of my happiness.

   Im not ruling out children, either, although it would be a medical decision.

   Carrying a child could reduce my lung capacity, maybe permanently. By having
a baby, would I reduce my life expectancy and my ability to care for the child?
Would it be fair on the child and its father?

   CYSTIC fibrosis is with me day and night but the right treatment may hold it
at bay. Techniques have developed rapidly in the past two decades. Medication is
more tailored to the individual; physiotherapy is more sophisticated and
intensive.

   In the morning I take two medications through a nebuliser, which produces a
fine spray that I inhale. I then try to cough up any mucus that has built up
overnight.

   I take pills three times a day, many of them antibiotics, starting at
breakfast. I use three inhalers, two to prevent tightness in the lungs and one
to prevent sinusitis.

   Additionally, I take Ibuprofen and paracetamol for any pain either side of my
spine.

   When I get home from work or university, I am exhausted and generally flake
out. Then its more neb-ulisers before doing some physiotherapy, having dinner,
doing some university work and going to bed.

   One of the most sophisticated drugs I use is Pulmozyme. When inhaled, it
breaks down the mucus before percussive physiotherapy a once or twice daily
beating of the ribcage lasting between 30 minutes and an hour to clear the lungs
to dislodge the phlegm.

   It can be administered by the patient, a therapist, a trained friend or a
parent. As I say, it is tiring.

   In more serious bouts of illness, I take intravenous antibiotics through a
permanent tube in my arm. Antibiotics are constantly swapped so the bugs in your
body cant build up immunities.

   I swim and do yoga for an hour as many days a week as my energy levels allow
to loosen the mucus on my lungs. I also use a Power-Plate a vibrating platform
to strengthen joints.

   The right food is essential, too, to keep up my energy. Protein is important
to fight infections.

   Guilt and anger are always there.

   Guilt because you worry you are a burden and anger when youre not getting the
treatment you need.

   THE infection that forced me to abandon my publishing job happened during a
summer heat-wave. My lung capacity went down to 30 per cent, considered high
risk.

   I admitted myself to hospital and had to wait six hours for a bed. I was
utterly exhausted, my energy drained from me.

   Then it hit me this is what people experience when they are very old. When I
go I will feel like this.

   And do you know what? I did-nt give a damn I would have been content to slip
away gently. But it was not my time. When I awoke with a drip in my arm, I could
feel my strength returning. It was clear that I wasnt going to die.

   My fighting spirit was back. I began to get bored in hospital and when youre
well enough to be annoyed, youre clearly getting better. Stroppy people survive.

   That day changed my life. Everyone wonders what it will be like when they
die. I gained a sense of peace and lost my fear of death.

   You learn to manage peoples reactions. Its like being in the limelight. This
is why Ive been able to speak at charity events to raise money for cystic
fibrosis research.

   The last one, the Liv charity dinner, was attended by Gordon and Sarah Brown,
whose son Fraser has cystic fibrosis.

   So there I was explaining my illness in front of a Prime Minister and
suddenly I got the giggles. I couldnt stop myself.I said how surreal it was to
give such intimate details to a star-studded audience.

   Ive also been raising money with my own website, named after my childhood
nickname Kitten. I had stickers and stamps made up with the web-site address. My
friends and I would stick them on people in bars to persuade them to donate.

   One day I received an email via the website from a guy who said hed woken up
with a sticker on his ear, a stamp on his hand and an evil hangover.

   Could I explain what had happened? Eventually we met up. Weve been going out
since last summer.

   Ive never had to explain my condition to Dan, a rugby coach. He knew from the
start because we met through my fundraising. I am interested in you not your
illness, he says.

   With smarter treatment, sufferers are living longer. Some have made it into
their 50s, depending on the severity of their condition.

   But many die in childhood, and in Ireland, where the incidence of CF is the
highest in the world, the life expectancy is thought to be ten years less than
it is in the UK, because of a lack of decent services.

   Unlike the UK, and indeed most countries in the Western world, Ireland
currently has no dedicated CF units, in which young patients can come in for
isolated treatment. Instead young patients are put on wards with patients with
infectious diseases, which can make them even sicker. They lie next to dying,
elderly patients and their sleep is disturbed by their painful suffering. And
they are treated by nurses who have no speciality in their condition.

   Sufferers like Orla Tinsley, from Dublin, have had to campaign on radio and
in the press, just to have the right to decent hospital care. To be able to
leave hospital, better rather than sicker when they arrived. . . To fight the
possibility that they wont live to see their 25th birthday.

   In England, my experiences of the NHS have generally been good, but sometimes
horrific. Fortunately, I now attend a good cystic fibrosis clinic at Frimley
Park Hospital in Surrey for monthly sessions.

   Im having a big fundraising party on my 31st birthday, the day I overtake my
life expectancy. I have no idea how long I will live. Cystic fibrosis has taught
me so much including humility. I know that when I die, it will be peaceful.

   In the meantime, Im as busy as ever, making the most of my time.

   ¦ Proceeds from Kates website (www.Ivebeenkittened.com) go to cystic fibrosis
research

   Ireland and cystic fibrosis

   CYSTIC fibrosis affects the lungs and immune and digestive systems, and is
one of the most common incurable hereditary life-threatening diseases in
Ireland, with over 1,100 sufferers. Despite having one of the highest incidences
of the disease in the world, lack of Government action means Irish sufferers of
the disease die 10 years younger than Northern Irish and UK counterparts.

   WHAT CAUSES IT?

   A mutation in a gene which produces a protein known as the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), responsible for the salt and water
salt and water balance in mucus. Mucus is fluid secreted by the mucous
membranes, including sweat glands, respiratory passages, pancreas, stomach and
intestines.

   WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS?

   CF causes the body to produce copious thick mucus. In early stages, if
treatment is not started, a persistent rattling cough and frequent chest
infections are common. Allergic reactions can worsen breathing problems. The
disease also causes the pancreas, responsible for providing digestive juices
which help break down food, to produce thickened mucus. These thick secretions
cause irreversible damage to the pancreas, a difficulty in absorbing nutrients
in the stomach and ultimately malnutrition. In older patients damage to the
pancreas will lead to diabetes. Many may experience heartburn and bowel
problems. In some, thickened secretions can also lead to liver failure. The
combination of these increasingly worsening symptoms is what leads to an early
death for many CF sufferers, explains cystic fibrosis researcher Dr Littlewood.

   HOW IS IT TREATED?

   Because CF affects many organs, treatment is handled by specialist doctors
and nurses. Medication inhaled and intravenous drugs helps clear mucus and fight
infection. Drugs in capsules contain digestive enzymes to aid food absorption.
Physiotherapy helps clear the lungs of mucus. The real hope is treatment of the
basic genetic defect that causes CF, says Dr Littlewood. Clinical trials for
gene therapy in which a normal copy of the CFTR gene is placed into affected
cells are beginning this year in the UK.

GRAPHIC: 1. SUPPORT: Kate with brothers Alex, left, and Nick, who are not
sufferersLOOKING 2. 2. FORWARD: Kate is planning a huge party for her 31st
birthday. Middle left, with boyfriend Dan whom she met while fundraising. Top,
whitewater-rafting, and left, preparing to bungee-jump.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2008


                              37 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            February 24, 2008 Sunday

SECTION: MS2; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 349 words

HEADLINE: No longer a death sentence

BODY:

   Cystic fibrosis affects the lungs and immune and digestive systems, and is
one of the most common incurable hereditary life-threatening diseases in the UK,
with 8,000 sufferers.

   Advances in treatment mean life expectancy has increased from under ten years
in the Sixties, to 40 to 50 years for babies born this year, says Dr Jim
Littlewood, chairman of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust.

   WHAT CAUSES IT?

   A mutation in a gene which produces a protein known as the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), responsible for the salt and water
salt and water balance in mucus. Mucus is fluid secreted by the mucous
membranes, including sweat glands, respiratory passages, pancreas, stomach and
intestines.

   WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS?

   CF causes the body to produce copious thick mucus. In early stages, if
treatment is not started, a persistent 'rattling' cough and frequent chest
infections are common. Allergic reactions can worsen breathing problems.

   The disease also causes the pancreas, responsible for providing digestive
juices which help break down food, to produce thickened mucus.

   These thick secretions cause irreversible damage to the pancreas, a
difficulty in absorbing nutrients in the stomach and ultimately malnutrition. In
older patients damage to the pancreas will lead to diabetes.

   Many may experience heartburn and bowel problems. In some, thickened
secretions can also lead to liver failure.

   'The combination of these increasingly worsening symptoms is what leads to an
early death for many CF sufferers,' explains Dr Littlewood.

   HOW IS IT TREATED?

   Because CF affects many organs, treatment is handled in centres staffed by
specialist doctors and nurses.

   Medication - inhaled and intravenous drugs - helps clear mucus and fight
infection.

   Drugs in capsules contain digestive enzymes to aid food absorption.
Physiotherapy helps clear the lungs of mucus.

   'The real hope is treatment of the basic genetic defect that causes CF,' says
Dr Littlewood.

   'Clinical trials for gene therapy - in which a normal copy of the CFTR gene
is placed into affected cells - are beginning this year in the UK.'

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2008


                              38 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            February 15, 2008 Friday

SECTION: SC1; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 973 words

HEADLINE: I made my little girl a promise. I told her I'd save her life;
He cannot hug his daughter... but genetic research has offered a father new hope

BYLINE: Maureen Culley

BODY:

   ROBIN HOOD strides into the room, a mass of energy and determination. He is
accustomed to jokes about his name but deeper comparisons are there to be made.

   For while the medieval legend dedicated his life to helping the poor, the man
before me has given every ounce of his existence to a more personal cause.

   Mr Hood's daughter Alex, 19, was born with epidermolysis bullosa (EB), a rare
genetic condition commonly known as 'butterfly syndrome', as her skin is as
delicate as a butterfly's wings.

   Even the gentlest of touches causes blisters and six hours of each day are
devoted to replacing the bandages that swathe her, to keep infection at bay and
give her painful body some protection.

   She takes morphine every four hours and is given nourishment via a tube to
her stomach, as swallowing food can tear the skin in her throat.

   After all the years of putting up a valiant fight, however, the Dumfriesborn
teenager has a new battle to wage. The constant re-scarring of her skin has
encouraged cancerous tumours.

   Before Christmas, 80 per cent of her left thigh was removed as doctors tried
to rid her of a tumour - only to find a second, more serious growth underneath.

   Alex, who lives with her mother Virginia in Leamington Spa, Warwickshire,
also found out last Tuesday - her birthday - that another lump on her back is
cancerous and has to be removed on February 18.

   Three hundred miles north, in Hamilton, Lanarkshire, her father is at his
desk as regional director for DebRA (Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research
Association). .

   THE spotlight has always been on his daughter's illness but he is, in many
ways, the story behind the story. Alex's diagnosis as a baby at Cresswell
Hospital in Dumfries altered his life course completely, seeing him abandon his
career and lose his marriage.

   After Alex's birth, he held her in his arms for the first and last time. A
few hours later, his daughter's tiny foot was red and blistered.

   The 51-year-old says: 'She had been rubbing it against her cradle. The
condition was so rare, it took doctors a fortnight to tell us what was wrong.
Our world fell apart.

   'We got in touch with DebRA for more information and found that Alex had a
particularly crippling form of EB - but it wasn't immediately fatal and it was
just like a death sentence being lifted. I knew it was up to me then to fight
for her future.

   'As a baby, Alex quickly learned that, if she crawled, she would take the
skin off her hands and knees, so instinct kept her still.

   'On one occasion, when she was older, she fell.Virginia's instinct was to
reach out and save her - and she took the skin off Alex's entire hand.

   'She has no skin on her shoulders or buttocks. She has just had an operation
on her right hand to give her use of her thumb as the condition causes her
fingers to fuse together, so she was able to open her Christmas presents.' With
his marriage already under pressure from the stresses of caring for Alex - as
well as son Robin, who was eight when she was born - tragedy struck again when
Mr Hood had a head-on collision with a lorry, suffering a blood clot on the
brain.

   'The injuries affected my personality,' he says. 'I was moody for a while and
would roar at the kids - not very pleasant to live with. Then one day Virginia
threatened to leave and that snapped me out of it.

   'I began channelling all my energy into raising funds to find a cure for
Alex, to prolong her life, give her happiness.' His business - organising
fishing and shooting holidays near his home on the shores of Loch Ken,
Kirkcudbrightshire - was put aside in favour of his efforts to help his
daughter.

   'When I started with the charity, I threw myself into it,' he says. 'The only
time I went home to Virginia, Alex and Robin was to get a change of clothes.

   'In my first six months I raised more than £40,000 as a volunteer only and
then became an employee.

   'Time is running out for Alex and others like her and I have no option but to
do everything I can to help.' An observer could say he has lost much in the
process.

   His wife left him in 1995, taking Alex with her, tired of simply not having
her husband by her side. How did he keep going? 'It was a difficult time but I
don't want my daughter to die and that is enough inspiration,' he says.

   He remarried in 2000, to Sam, 38, and they have three children, Arthur, six,
Henry, two, and Ruby, one.

   'Sam knew what I was like when she met me,' he says.

   'I'm away a lot and she has to deal with the children - but I have to do
this.' The decision to have more children did not come easily to Mr Hood, who
sought advice from Dundee University experts. 'They told me both parents need to
carry the genetic defect that causes EB and it was very unlikely to happen
again.

   But when Arthur was born, I was sure I could see a bit of skin hanging off
his forehead.

   'I rubbed his skin and it was OK. The relief was fantastic.' Mr Hood is more
motivated than ever due to gene therapy developments.

   ITALIAN scientists took a sample of skin from an EB patient's palm,
correcting the defect and growing the cells into sheets of skin. When these were
grafted on to the patient's legs, they healed normally and remained free of the
condition.

   Dundee University scientists hope to conduct similar trials but more funding
is needed.

   'I promised Alex a cure,' says Mr Hood.

   'We have always wanted to walk along a sandy beach together and let her feel
the sand between her toes and not feel pain.

   'I keep going because the scientists tell me it is possible.

   If there was no hope, I would have to accept it, but they tell me they can do
the research if they get the funding.

   'Every day is a battle for Alex.

   She copes with such dignity and is determined EB will not stop her doing what
she wants to do.

   'She is an amazing girl and an inspiration to me. I need to keep pushing for
funding for the research that could save her life.'

GRAPHIC: Every day a battle: Robin with his daughter Alex when she was younger

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2008


                              39 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                          December 19, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 423 words

HEADLINE: Pioneer therapy gives 'boy in bubble' leukaemia

BODY:

   A BOY treated with pioneering gene therapy has developed leukaemia as a
result, say doctors.

   The three-year-old was successfully treated at Great Ormond Street Children's
Hospital two years ago for the condition X-SCID.

   Commonly known as the 'boy in the bubble syndrome', the condition is fatal as
victims have no immune system and have to be kept in sterile surroundings.

   But the gene therapy which gave the child a near-normal life led to leukaemia
- a recognised side effect - which was diagnosed last month.

   The boy was one of ten children with X-SCID treated so far at the hospital
and the first to develop the chronic bone marrow disease.

   A trial in France of similar therapy was halted in 2002 after four of the 11
children developed leukaemia.

   Professor Bobby Gaspar, consultant immunologist on the gene therapy
programme, said that all the children treated had benefited and had been able to
lead 'relatively normal lives'.

   He said: 'All families were counselled as to the risks, and so far, this
development has been the only negative one.' It is thought the gene therapy
which restored the boy's immune system also switched on a gene causing
leukaemia.

   Safer genetic treatment that does not pose a leukaemia risk is being prepared
for clinical trials next year.

   One in 100,000 births in the UK is affected by severe combined
immunodeficiency disorder (SCID), with the particular form of the disease
X-linked SCID affecting only boys.

   Sufferers are not expected to live beyond two years without treatment and are
put inside a plastic tent in conditions of absolute isolation.

   It can be treated with a bone marrow transplant to provide the missing immune
cells which has a high success rate when there is a matched brother or sister
donor, and fairly successful when the donor is a parent.

   But only one-third of SCID children get a good donor match.

   Gene therapy aims to help the child build a new immune system from within
rather than borrowing one from a donor.

   Bone marrow is taken from the patient under a general anaesthetic and treated
with a virus which carries the correct version of a synthetic gene.

   The genetically modified bone marrow is then infused into the child where it
generates immune cells which pass into the blood.

   But there had been warnings there was a risk of cancer, including long-term
studies showing the effect in mice.

   The childhood survival rate for leukaemia is around 80 per cent and it is
thought the boy's original illness will not affect his chances of beating the
disease.

   He is still in remission from X-SCID.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2007


                              40 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 15, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 85

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: WHICH CHILDRENS CHARITY DO YOU THINK DESERVES £100,000?

BODY:

   THE Daily Mail and the Royal Bank of Scotland are giving away £1million to a
host of childrens charities. Of the hundreds of good causes nominated by Mail
readers, 91 will each receive a guaranteed £10,000.

   Ten have been shortlisted, but only one will receive our top award of
£100,000 and you will decide which it is going to be.

   Voting lines are open for you to phone or e-mail. The overall winner and the
other 90 charities will be featured on Boxing Day.

   Calls cost 30p per minute from a BT line (other networks may vary). Voting
lines and e-mail addresses close at 11.59pm on Sunday, December 16, 2008. Only
one e-mail entry per person. Normal rules apply. Here is the shortlist of ten
childrens charities which one do you think deserves £100,000?

   BLISS

   WHICH CHILDRENS CHARITY DO YOU THINK DESERVES £100,000?

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0054 or e-mail bliss@dmail.entries.co.uk

   EVERY year 80,000 babies need extra care at birth. The premature baby charity
is dedicated to ensuring these infants survive. It supports families, doctors
and nurses, and drives innovative techniques in the care of vulnerable babies.

   GET KIDS GOING!

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0049 or e-mail kids@dmail.entries.co.uk

   PROVIDING disabled children with lightweight sports wheelchairs means they
can take up a sport or simply play outside with friends.

   STARLIGHT

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0047 or e-mail starlight@dmail.entries.co.uk

   GRANTING wishes to seriously and terminally ill children, it provides fun and
laughter for youngsters in every hospital and hospice in Britain.

   TEENAGE CANCER TRUST

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0053 or e-mail teenage@dmail.entries.co.uk

   EVERY day in Britain, six teenagers are diagnosed with cancer. The Teenage
Cancer Trust (TCT) funds specialist units in NHS hospitals, providing an
environment to improve survival rates and ensure a future for patients and their
families.

   TOMMYS

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0051 or e-mail tommys@dmail.entries.co.uk ONE in four
women loses a baby

   CYSTIC FIBROSIS

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0048 or e-mail cystic@dmail.entries.co.uk

   UP TO 8,000 people in Britain have cystic fibrosis the countrys most common
life-threatening inherited disease. The trust is funding a ground-breaking gene
therapy research project which hopes to stop the lung damage that claims the
lives of 90 per cent of sufferers.

   JUVENILE DIABETES

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0052 or e-mail diabetes@dmail.entries.co.uk

   THE Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) is working to find the cure
for Type 1 diabetes and its complications. Around 20,000 children and 330,000
adults in Britain are affected, with increasing numbers of children being
diagnosed every year. Complications from the condition can include blindness,
kidney failure and premature death.

   EAR FOUNDATION

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0050 or e-mail ear@dmail.entries.co.uk

   CHILDHOOD deafness can have a devastating impact on the whole family.
However, the exciting technology of cochlear implantation, brought to Britain in
1989 by the Ear Foundation, has helped 4,000 deaf children to hear.

   CHILDRENS TRUST

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0045 or e-mail childrens@dmail.entries.co.uk THE
trust provides care, education and therapy to some of the most seriously
disabled children in the country. It provides short breaks for children and
their families, an onsite special school and Britains largest rehabilitation
centre for children suffering with brain injuries.

   NSPCC

   To vote, call: 0905 197 0046 or e-mail NSPCC@dmail.entries.co.uk

   THOUSANDS of childrens lives are blighted by abuse and violence. The NSPCC
wants to end cruelty so all children can grow up in a happy and loving
environment.

GRAPHIC: Dreams: Sam Jones was granted his wish to be a soldier

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2007


                              41 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 14, 2007 Friday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 98

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: WHICH CHILDREN'S CHARITY DO YOU THINK DESERVES £100,000?

BODY:

   THE Daily Mail and the Royal Bank of Scotland are giving away £1million to a
host of children's charities. Of the hundreds of good causes nominated by Mail
readers, 91 will each receive a guaranteed £10,000.

   Ten have been shortlisted, but only one will receive our top award of
£100,000 and you will decide which it is going to be.

   Voting lines are open for you to phone or e-mail. The overall winner and the
other 90 charities will be featured on Boxing Day.

   Calls cost 30p per minute from a BT line (other networks may vary).

   Voting lines and e-mail addresses close at 11.59pm on Sunday, December 16,
2008.

   Only one e-mail entry per person.

   Normal rules apply.

   Here is the shortlist of ten children's charities which one do you think
deserves £100,000?

   BLISS To vote, call: 0905 197 0054 or e-mail bliss@dmail.entries.co.uk EVERY
year 80,000 babies need extra care at birth. The premature baby charity is
dedicated to ensuring these infants survive. It supports families, doctors and
nurses, and drives innovative techniques in the care of vulnerable babies.

   GET KIDS GOING! To vote, call: 0905 197 0049 or e-mail
kids@dmail.entries.co.uk PROVIDING disabled children with lightweight sports
wheelchairs means they can take up a sport or simply play outside with friends..

   STARLIGHT To vote, call: 0905 197 0047 or e-mail
starlight@dmail.entries.co.uk GRANTING wishes to seriously and terminally ill
children, it provides fun and laughter for youngsters in every hospital and
hospice in Britain.

   TEENAGE CANCER TRUST To vote, call: 0905 197 0053 or e-mail
teenage@dmail.entries.co.uk EVERY day in Britain, six teenagers are diagnosed
with cancer. The Teenage Cancer Trust (TCT) funds specialist units in NHS
hospitals, providing an environment to improve survival rates and ensure a
future for patients and their families.

   TOMMY'S To vote, call: 0905 197 0051 or e-mail tommys@dmail.entries.co.uk ONE
in four women loses a baby during pregnancy or birth. Tommy's focuses on
research and providing information on miscarriage, stillbirth and premature
birth. It also has a pregnancy information phoneline..

   CYSTIC FIBROSIS To vote, call: 0905 197 0048 or e-mail
cystic@dmail.entries.co.uk UP TO 8,000 people in Britain have cystic fibrosis
the country's most common life-threatening inherited disease. The trust is
funding a ground-breaking gene therapy research project which hopes to stop the
lung damage that claims the lives of 90 per cent of sufferers.

   JUVENILE DIABETES To vote, call: 0905 197 0052 or e-mail
diabetes@dmail.entries.co.uk THE Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) is
working to find the cure for Type 1 diabetes and its complications. Around
20,000 children and 330,000 adults in Britain are affected, with increasing
numbers of children being diagnosed every year. Complications from the condition
can include blindness, kidney failure and premature death.

   EAR FOUNDATION To vote, call: 0905 197 0050 or e-mail ear@dmail.entries.co.uk

   CHILDHOOD deafness can have a devastating impact on the whole family.
However, the exciting technology of cochlear implantation, brought to Britain in
1989 by the Ear Foundation, has helped 4,000 deaf children to hear.

   CHILDREN'S TRUST To vote, call: 0905 197 0045 or e-mail
childrens@dmail.entries.co.uk THE trust provides care, education and therapy to
some of the most seriously disabled children in the country. It provides short
breaks for children and their families, an onsite special school and Britain's
largest rehabilitation centre for children suffering with brain injuries.

   NSPCC To vote, call: 0905 197 0046 or e-mail NSPCC@dmail.entries.co.uk
THOUSANDS of children's lives are blighted by abuse and violence. The NSPCC
wants to end cruelty so all children can grow up in a happy and loving
environment.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2007


                              42 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 13, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 70

LENGTH: 1938 words

HEADLINE: Which charity do YOU think deserves £100,000?;
(1) The Mail and RBS are giving £1m to children's charities. Now you can vote
for a winner (2) FEMAIL MAGAZINE (3) RBS children's charity AWARDS

BYLINE: EIMEAR O'HAGAN

BODY:

   THE Daily Mail and the Royal Bank of Scotland are giving away £1million to a
host of children's charities. Of the hundreds of good causes nominated by Mail
readers in the past few weeks, 91 have been chosen, and will each receive a
guaranteed £10,000.

   But only one deserving charity will receive our top award of £100,000 and you
will decide which it is going to be.

   Ten of the nominated charities have been shortlisted for the RBS top prize,
and are featured on these pages.

   Voting lines are now open for you to telephone or e-mail, to nominate the
charity you would like to see receive the top £100,000 award. The overall winner
and the other 90 charities will be featured on Boxing Day. Calls cost 30p per
minute from a BT line (other networks may vary). Voting lines and e-mail
addresses close at 11.59pm on Sunday, December 16, 2008. Only one e-mail entry
per person.

   Normal rules apply.

   BLISS

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0054 or e-mail bliss@dmail.entries.co.uk
EVERY year 80,000 babies born in the UK need extra care at birth. BLISS, the
premature baby charity, is dedicated to ensuring that sick or premature babies
survive, and that each one has the best quality of life. BLISS focuses on
supporting families, doctors and nurses, and driving forward innovative
techniques in the care of vulnerable babies.

   The £10,000 will enable BLISS to further expand its Family Support services,
putting more parents in contact via a unique online message board service. If
BLISS were to win the £100,000 the money would also fund vital research projects
into improving the care of vulnerable babies.

   Samantha Walker's daughter Charlotte was born at 24 weeks weighing 1lb 9oz.
She says: 'We were terrified and didn't know what to expect. I was given BLISS
booklets by a nurse and they were invaluable. When I left hospital, I went
straight to the BLISS website. Reading other parent's stories made such a
difference and we knew there was light at the end of the tunnel.

   BLISS was our lifeline at such a difficult time.'

   GET KIDS GOING!

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0049 or e-mail kids@dmail.entries.co.uk

   GET Kids Going! turns dreams into reality by providing disabled children with
lightweight sports wheelchairs so they can participate in wheelchair sports, or
just enable them to play outside with their friends.

   The £10,000 will provide lightweight sports wheelchairs for four children.
With £100,000, Get Kids Going! could help 40 children, giving them the chance to
not only get involved in sport but also the potential to compete at the London
2012 Paralympics.

   Seven-year-old Louise Hunt from Swindon received a wheelchair from Get Kids
Going! She says: 'When I was given my tennis wheelchair it was amazing. For the
first time ever I felt I was free to achieve anything I wanted to.

   I wish all the other kids who need a chair could feel like me.'

   STARLIGHT

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0047 or e-mail starlight@dmail.entries.co.uk

   STARLIGHT Children's Foundation grants wishes to seriously and terminally ill
children, and provides fun and laughter for youngsters in every hospital and
hospice in the UK.

   There are 2,500 children diagnosed with a life-threatening illness every
year, and currently Starlight is able to grant 500 wishes.

   The £10,000 will grant ten of these children their wish in time for
Christmas, while £100,000 would bring Starlight a step closer to their goal of
giving every sick child in the UK the gift of a perfect day.

   Sam Jones, from Cambridgeshire, had his wish to be a soldier granted by
Starlight in 1999. His mum, Sue, says: 'In our darkest hour as Sam fought
leukaemia, Starlight brought a glimmer of hope into his life by making his dream
to be a soldier come true.

   'Three months later, when Sam passed away, the soldiers he met that day gave
him a military sendoff which he would have loved. It helped us cope with the
saddest day of our lives.'

   TEENAGE CANCER TRUST

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0053 or e-mail teenage@dmail.entries.co.uk

   EVERY day in the UK, six teenagers are diagnosed with cancer. The Teenage
Cancer Trust (TCT) funds specialist teenage units in NHS hospitals providing an
environment which they hope will improve survival rates and ensure a better
future for patients and their families.

   The £10,000 will enable the TCT to build a parents' room in one of the units,
offering mums and dads a chance to stay overnight, take a shower and be close to
their child.

   Having cancer as a teenager can be a lonely and isolating experience.

   Receiving £100,000 would enable the TCT to build, furnish and kit out a day
room at one of the units, with computers, entertainment facilities and musical
instruments to get teenagers out of bed and socialising with others.

   Lucy Smith, aged 20, from Suffolk, was diagnosed with Hodgkins Lymphoma at
the age of 16 in 2003. She says: 'Teenage Cancer Trust has been vital in my
experience of having cancer and dealing with everything. I've met so many people
who have been through a similar experience, and although the circumstances are
ones we would all rather not face, TCT manages to find the positive in a bad
situation.' TOMMY'S To vote for them call: 0905 197 0051 or e-mail
tommys@dmail.entries.co.uk ONE in four women in the UK lose a baby during
pregnancy or birth. Tommy's focuses on research and providing information
concerning miscarriage, stillbirth and premature birth. It also provides a
pregnancy information phoneline.

   The £10,000 will mean that for the next six months, Tommy's can recruit a
full-time midwife to join the existing team, ensuring more women can receive the
help and advice they need. With £100,000 Tommy's could open its third UK
research centre, helping to save thousands more babies' lives.

   Mich Turner, 35, from London, is a supporter of Tommy's. She says: 'When my
twins, Marlow and William, were born three months prematurely, they looked like
tiny sparrows, paper-thin with translucent skin. William wasn't strong enough to
pull through and passed away in my arms. By supporting Tommy's, we can find the
answers and help save lives like William's.'

   CYSTIC FIBROSIS

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0048 or e-mail cystic@dmail.entries.co.uk

   LIKE 8,000 people in Britain, seven-year-old Beth Samsa suffers from Cystic
Fibrosis the UK's most common life-threatening inherited disease. Every day Beth
has physiotherapy, inhales medicine and takes dozens of pills. Her lungs will
gradually get worse because of infection and inflammation. The Trust is
currently funding a ground-breaking gene therapy research project which hopes to
stop the lung damage that claims the lives of 90 per cent of people with the
condition.

   The project costs millions of pounds and every penny counts in the search for
treatment.

   Beth's mum Nikki, 37, from Dunstable, says: 'The Cystic Fibrosis Trust has
been a fantastic support ever since Beth was diagnosed. They give support, help
and advice on the phone and through their booklets and website. The research
they fund gives all families living with CF the hope of a brighter future for
their children.'

   JUVENILE DIABETES

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0052 or e-mail diabetes@dmail.entries.co.uk

   THE Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation (JDRF) exists to find the cure for
Type 1 diabetes and its complications. Around 20,000 children and 330,000 adults
in the UK are affected, with increasing numbers of children being diagnosed
every year. Complications from the condition can include blindness, kidney
failure and premature death.

   The JDFR is the leading charitable funder of research into a cure for Type 1
diabetes, and also into new treatments to reduce the devastating complications
while the search for a cure continues.

   The £10,000 from the Mail and RBS will be used to fund research into new ways
of automatically administering insulin, a system known as an artificial
pancreas, and would provide the medical supplies required for clinical trials.
The £100,000 could help the JDRF accelerate this project even further, bringing
diabetes sufferers one step closer to a cure.

   Daniel Wright, five, is the youngest patient to take part in the trials.

   His mother Nicky, from Cambridgeshire, says: 'I feel really lucky to be part
of this research. It was very exciting to see all the technology working as one
and keeping Daniel's blood glucose levels steady and consistently under
control.'

   EAR FOUNDATION

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0050 or e-mail ear@dmail.entries.co.uk

   CHILDHOOD deafness can have a devastating impact on the whole family, however
the exciting technology of cochlear implantation, brought to the UK in 1989 by
The Ear Foundation, has now helped 4,000 deaf children to hear.

   However the technology alone, which is provided by the NHS, doesn't make
these children talk, sing, or enjoy conversation.

   Receiving £10,000 will mean that for one year, The Ear Foundation can provide
the special services to make this happen.

   A further £100,000 would equip two rooms in The Ear Foundation's premises and
employ staff for two years to provide a specialist support service to families
to help them harness their child's potential.

   Rekha Chauhan, 36, from Leicester, is mother to four-year-old Dillon, who was
born deaf and received a cochlear implant in 2006.

   She says: 'When we first realised our child was deaf, it was very scary, but
since he has had his implant it's like a miracle. I've been able to ring The Ear
Foundation and go to courses there with Dillon and learn and meet other parents.
It gives us hope for the future.'

   CHILDREN'S TRUST

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0045 or e-mail childrens@dmail.entries.co.uk

   THE Children's Trust provides care, education and therapy to some of the most
seriously disabled children in the country. It provides short breaks for
children and their families, an onsite special school and the UK's largest
rehabilitation centre for children with brain injuries.

   The Trust aims to ensure that every child in its care is able to enjoy a
fulfilling childhood, regardless of the severity of their disability.

   The £10,000 will help the Trust continue to offer activities and experiences
to children which others may take for granted, including ice-skating, bowling
and taking part in Scouts and Guides, giving them the childhood they deserve.

   The £100,000 would fund a new national rehabilitation centre.

   Justin Tuohy, five, is receiving transitional care from The Children's Trust.
His mother Christa says: 'Before coming to The Children's Trust, Justin had
spent most of his life on a hospital ward. He couldn't talk and had hardly ever
even been outside. Being at the Trust has made all the difference.

   He does so many activities there, talks all the time and can get up to
mischief just like any other fiveyear-old.'

   NSPCC

   To vote for them call: 0905 197 0046 or e-mail NSPCC@dmail.entries.co.uk

   THOUSANDS of children's lives are blighted by abuse and violence. The NSPCC
wants to end cruelty so all children grow up in a loving environment.

   Lee is 14 and, thanks to the NSPCC, the daily fear of waiting to be hit by
the very person who should have been protecting him has gone.

   It costs £132 for a child like Lee to have a therapeutic assessment with an
NSPCC domestic violence team.

   The £10,000 will pay for 76 children to have an assessment.

   'I used to just go around hitting people because I was so angry,' says Lee.
'But now I've learned to walk away from things. When I'm older, I'd like to have
a family, but I won't hit my children because I know how horrible it is.' A
further £100,000 could be used to train 60 Childline counsellors.

   Last year, Childline counselled over 165,000 children, including youngsters
needing support about domestic violence.

GRAPHIC: Special dream: Sam Jones was granted his wish to be a soldier

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2007


                              43 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 1, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Professor killed by 11,000 volts af ter broken line was ignored

BYLINE: Chris Brooke

BODY:

   BLUNDERS by a power company were blamed yesterday for the death of one of the
country's leading medical pioneers.

   Professor Roland Levinsky, 63, who performed the UK's first successful bone
marrow transplant on a child, was electrocuted by an 11,000-volt line which had
been left hanging down beside a footpath.

   The line, owned by Western Power, had come down in strong winds because a
support post was rotten, a Plymouth inquest was told. It had not been checked
for nine years.

   Two worried locals called the power company to report the loose line on the
morning of New Year's Day.

   But the warnings were wrongly categorised by call centre workers as
'miscellaneous' rather than given the top priority 'danger' rating. As a result,
technicians thought the cables must be harmless phone lines.

   An engineer who had been sent to 2,600 criminals An engineer who had been
sent to the scene in Wembury, Devon, was diverted to a 'more urgent' job when he
was only five miles away.

   Around an hour later, father-ofthree Professor Levinsky, who was 6ft 5in, was
killed instantly when his head touched the cable as he walked his dog with his
wife Beth and two friends.

   In a statement read to the inquest, Mrs Levinsky said: 'I saw a flash of
light hit the top of Roland's head and he let out a yell.

   'He fell immediately to the floor. It was not until we all saw the sparks
hitting his head that we noticed the cable which had fallen and was being
supported by the hedge.' Professor Levinsky, who lived nearby in a £1.5million
manor home, was Vice-Chancellor of Plymouth University and a world leader in the
treatment of children with immunodeficiency diseases.

   As well as the bone marrow breakthrough, he was a pioneer in gene therapy for
children with fatal inherited diseases.

   The inquest heard that the warning calls had been made at 10.12am and
11.20am. Professor Levinsky died at 12.45pm.

   His widow said last night: 'His death was entirely preventable because the
power supply could and should have been switched off much earlier that morning,
immediately following separate telephone reports made to Western Power by local
residents.

   'If either report had been actioned criminals are 'Switched off within
minutes' properly the electricity could have been switched off remotely within
minutes.

   'As it happened nothing at all was done to avert the obvious danger.' She
said the tragedy had been made harder for the family to bear because no one from
the power firm had contacted them or passed on the results of an internal
investigation.

   Barbara Collopy, who lived in a bungalow near the scene of the accident, was
asked to raise the alarm when the professor was electrocuted.

   She said: 'I told the electricity company I had called three hours earlier
about the cable and that someone had now walked into it and been electrocuted.'
Philip Davies, service been electrocuted.' freed Philip Davies, service manager
at Western Power, admitted the warning calls were wrongly classified and action
should have been taken.

   But he added: 'It is rare for a pole to come down and even more rare for it
to come down isolated in this way and remain isolated.

   'If it had hit the ground or if the cables had touched each other, our
protection systems would have come into effect and tripped and cut the power.

   'I have no recollection in 43 years of a pole coming down and a cable
remaining live.' Coroner

   Ian Arrow gave a factual summary of Professor Levinsky's death in recording a
narrative verdict.

   The Health and Safety Executive is considering whether to prosecute the power
firm.

   c.brooke@dailymail.co.uk

GRAPHIC: Walk to tragedy: Professor Roland Levinsky and, left, the new pole at
the spot where he died

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2007


                              44 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           November 20, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: 3RD; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 202 words

HEADLINE: Gene 'cure' for Parkinson's

BYLINE: Duncan Robertson

BODY:

   THOUSANDS of Parkinson's sufferers could benefit from a major breakthrough in
the use of gene therapy announced yesterday.

   Scientists report that damaged areas of their brains could be repaired by the
injection of therapeutic genes.

   The treatment worked by dampening down nerve cells which become overactive in
Parkinson's patients and interfere with movement control.

   Doctors noticed more than 30 per cent improvement in the mobility of subjects
a few months after the intervention. One patient recovered 65 per cent of his
mobility.

   Scans confirmed that some brain circuits which had been damaged by the
disease were now work- ing healthily again. Professor David Eidelberg, of the
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in Manhasset, New York, who led the
study, said: 'It is the first solid evidence of benefit from gene therapy.'
Doctors say the advance could help with other disorders such as Alzheimer's and
epilepsy.

   Parkinson's affects about 120,000 people in Britain. As the disease
progresses, higher doses of drugs are required, leading to side-effects that
include involuntary movements.

   The American research appears in the journal, Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, which is published today.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2007


                              45 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 27, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 105

LENGTH: 204 words

HEADLINE: 30 PATENTS SECOND GUIDE TO ...

BODY:

   What are they? AS every budding inventor toiling in his garage knows, patents
are the best way to protect ingenuity.

   To get one you need to convince the patent office that your 'intellectual
property' is worthy of government protection from rip-off rivals. To enforce a
patent you'll have to take to the courts.

   Are there a lot? Yes. A mere three patents were granted in the US back in
1790, but now hundreds of thousands come into force every year. Medical research
spawns a particularly large number of patents - several are needed for a single
drug.

   Just because you're protected in Britain, it doesn't mean that copy cats in
other countries will respect your rights. If your idea is particularly valuable
you may need to fire off applications in numerous jurisdictions. Once a patent
expires after a set period, generic drugmakers will pile in and start offloading
cheaper versions.

   What's new? UK gene therapy firm Oxford BioMedica and a US partner received a
legal boost after a court confirmed the validity of patents in an infringement
suit against Open Biosystems. The lawsuit relates to treatments that may
ultimately help combat diseases like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. Oxford Bio-
Medica shares rose 12p to 3334p..

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2007


                              46 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            October 9, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: A Nobel Prize for Professor Supermouse

BYLINE: Fiona MacRae

BODY:

   A BRITISH scientist has won the Nobel Prize for a genetic technique that
revolutionised research into diseases from heart failure to cancer.

   Sir Martin Evans, professor of mammalian genetics at Cardiff University,
described the award as 'a boyhood dream come true'.

   The father of three, who is widely credited with the discovery of stem cells,
helped create mice genetically engineered to have human diseases.

   The 'knock-out' mice, as they are known, have become a cornerstone of
biomedicine, from basic research into devastating illnesses to the development
of new treatments.

   Sir Martin, 66, shares the £755,000 Nobel Prize for medicine with Professor
Oliver Smithies, from the University of North Carolina, and Professor Mario
Capecchi, from the University of Utah.

   Together they made a series of ground-breaking discoveries involving the
manipulation and disabling or 'knocking out' of mouse genes.

   Sir Martin's work centred on the genetic manipulation of stem cells - master
cells with the ability to turn into other cell types - while the others worked
on altering specific mouse genes.

   Combining the two strands of research led to a technique known as gene
targeting and the birth of the first 'knock-out' mice in the late 1980s.

   Using the technique, mice have been bred with medical conditions ranging from
cancer to heart disease and cystic fibrosis and used to test the effects of gene
therapy.

   A statement from the Nobel Assembly at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden,
which awards the most coveted prizes in science, said: 'Gene targeting in mice
has pervaded all fields of biomedicine. Its impact on the understanding of gene
function and its benefits to mankind will continue to increase over many years
to come.' Sir Martin, who was knighted in 2003, said: I'm very pleased that
British science is being honoured in this way. It is a boyhood dream come true.'
Lord Rees, president of the Royal Society, Britain's leading academic
institution, said: 'This is a fitting recognition of Sir Martin's groundbreaking
research on embryonic stem cells.

   'He is a world leader in mammalian genetics and his research has undoubtedly
increased our understanding of human diseases.' The award is the first of six
Nobel Prizes to be announced this year.

   The others are for chemistry, physics, literature, peace and economics.

   f.macrae@dailymail.co.uk

GRAPHIC: Gene genie: Sir Martin Evans is credited with discovering stem cells

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2007


                              47 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            October 2, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 1720 words

HEADLINE: THE BOY WHO WILL NEVER GROW OLD;
GOODHEALTH At 19, with a rare and incurable wasting disease, Stuart knows he
faces imminent death. But read his story and you'll be both humbled and inspired
by his courage and sheer love of life

BYLINE: ISLA WHITCROFT

BODY:

   AT NINETEEN, the age when most young men are getting ready to go out into the
world to build a career, a relationship and possibly start a family, Stuart
Wickison is facing up to his imminent death.

   'I know that I will die some time soon, and that before I die I will be very
ill possibly paralysed and in pain,' says Stuart.

   'Of course, I go through moments of great bleakness and darkness when I think
about what lies ahead, but I try not to dwell on it for too long otherwise I
would go mad.' Stuart suffers from Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), a rare,
degenerative muscular wasting disease that affects only boys. It is particularly
cruel because it is usually diagnosed in previously apparently healthy toddlers.

   Stuart knows he once was a normal child, because he has family videos to
prove it.

   In those heartbreakingly poignant filmed moments before his diagnosis, at the
age of three-and-a-half, Stuart is a beautiful, happy toddler, beaming up at the
camera, laughing as his parents throw him a ball or enthusiastically pushing his
baby sister around the garden in her toy car.

   There is no clue that within just a few years he would be in a wheelchair,
and by the time he was 14 he would be dependent on it for mobility, unable to
raise his arms above his head and needing 24-hour care to cater for his most
basic needs.

   Stuart can't remember how it feels to walk.

   'I think my brain sort of remembers because every so often it will tell me to
get up and out of my chair,' he says wryly. 'Sadly, although my brain is keen,
my body is simply not up to it.' His heartbreaking yet inspiring story is told
on TV next Monday in the documentary series Extraordinary People. The episode
The Boy Who Will Never Grow Old focuses on Stuart, his fears for the future, his
academic triumphs and his almost superhuman determination not to give in to this
devastating disease.

   Indeed, the achievements of this bright, good-looking young man are quite
incredible.

   He went to mainstream primary and secondary schools, and despite being badly
bullied at the latter, he managed to leave with four As, four Bs and two Cs at
GCSE level. He also composes music and paints.

   At sixth form college the world-renowned Treloar College in Alton, Hampshire,
which enables young people with severe disabilities to carry on with full-time
education he obtained an A in Art and a B in sociology at A-Level.

   He is now studying a foundation degree course in art and design at University
College for the Creative Arts at Farnham, Hampshire, living independently with a
carer funded by the Hampshire Health Authority. (Stuart has two carers who
alternate days and nights, sitting in a side room while he sleeps.) Even though
his hands are now too weak to use a keyboard, he still composes music using a
computer. And although he has enough hand movement to sketch, he has become
adept at using his mouth to control his paintbrush.

   'I always wanted to prove to myself and other people that I had talent and
ability,' explains Stuart. 'I want people to understand that I am not just some
guy in a wheelchair.' Most of his young life has been spent fighting prejudice.
'At primary school I had lots of friends and remember being very happy,' he
says. 'But when my legs had become too weak to support me and I had to go into a
wheelchair, friendships started to drop away.' DETERMINED that he should live as
normal a life as possible, Stuart insisted on going to a mainstream secondary
school. But the price was high. Stuart remembers girls screaming when they saw
him coming, pretending to be afraid his wheelchair would run them over; the boys
were more direct, kicking his wheelchair or blocking his way.

   His father says the family knew that Stuart kept from them some of what was
happening.

   'He became very sad,' says David Wickison, 53. 'We were up and down to the
school a lot and in the end they provided Stuart with a safe room where no
able-bodied student could go. That made things easier.' 'It was quite a tough
time,' admits Stuart. 'I had no friends apart from my carers, and people didn't
seem to be able to see past my wheelchair to the person I was.

   'I had suicidal thoughts; at other times I would fantasise about being
normal, about getting up and walking, having friends, being like everyone else.
But, of course, the only real way forward was to keep trying, keep achieving. I
am so proud to have got to university.

   'Treloar College was great because I was with people who had disabilities and
we understood each other. I had a girlfriend and a great social life. But here
at university, for the first time I feel I am being accepted in mainstream life
for who I am, not because I am in a wheelchair.' DMD is as sudden as it is
cruel.

   For the first three years of Stuart's life, his parents had no idea that
anything might be wrong with their son. 'We were just an ordinary young family
with what we thought was a healthy little boy,' says David, a survey manager for
the Ordnance Survey.

   'Life was good,' says David. 'I am a keen sportsman and I dreamed of having a
kickabout in the park with my son or taking him to play golf.' But when Stuart
was three his parents began to notice that he was not quite as fast as his
peers, his balance was poor and he was developing a slightly awkward walking
gait.

   Not unduly worried at first, they took him to the local children's hospital
in Tonbridge, Kent, where blood tests were done on Stuart.

   David recalled: 'A few days later my wife Mandy rang me at work and said the
consultant had called and we were to go straight to the hospital. That was when
we started to panic.' THE consultant gave them the devastating news that their
son had DMD, would be in a wheelchair by the time he was eight and probably dead
by 20.

   There was no treatment that could save him or even delay the onset of the
disease. Instead, it was simply about managing the symptoms as Stuart
deteriorated, with physiotherapy to strengthen the muscles, the introduction of
mobility aids when needed and, later on, care with bodily functions and help
with breathing.

   'We were scared and distressed beyond anything we had ever experienced,' says
David. 'We looked at this beautiful son of ours and we just couldn't comprehend
what the doctors were telling us. I think we grieved for about three years.

   'Every night I would get up and check Stuart's breathing check he was still
alive. You love your children so much, you just want them to have a happy
future. To know that you will have to watch them die slowly and probably
painfully is almost too much to bear.' While it was hard for his parents to come
to terms with his illness, Stuart has never known anything different.

   'I don't remember being told directly that I had DMD and that I was going to
die at an early age,' he says. 'I just absorbed it gradually through osmosis I
was always present at the numerous meetings with social workers and consultants
who would discuss my condition openly.

   'But I finally read the stark truth on the internet when I was about 14.
Although it was frightening, it didn't feel particularly real to me. When you
are 14, 20 seems a long way off. Of course now I am nearly 20, the issue of my
death seems much more real and it is not a pleasant prospect.

   'Instead, I think about how I want to live in the time I have left.

   I want to make my mark, to have achieved something. I have my art, my music
and have just started at university. These are all things that I take great
pride in and that make my quality of life so much better than if I just gave up,
sat in a corner and waited to die.' Just as Stuart has found his niche, his
health has gone through a period of deterioration. A chest infection
hospitalised him earlier this year, and he is now losing his ability to swallow
properly, which means that his body is not getting enough nutrients (he had a
feeding tube fitted in his stomach in August).

   Every night it takes him with the help of his carer around 20 minutes to be
prepared for bed.

   While he sleeps, he is attached to a ventilator machine which feeds him
oxygen through a mask in case his oxygen levels drop too low. He also has to be
moved several times a night because it is painful for him to lie in one position
for too long.

   'It is frustrating to have everything done for you,' admits Stuart.

   'It's particularly bad when I am ill.

   I have gone to bed at night and wished that I didn't wake up in the morning,
but I quickly come to my senses and just get on with life.' Not surprisingly,
his parents worry about their son living on his own. 'When he was at Treloar we
felt that he was safe,' says David. 'It's been very hard to see him move into an
environment that doesn't have 24-hour specialist care.

   'We have spent so much of our life worrying about him, caring for him and
making him our priority to the point where we worried that our daughter Katie
didn't get enough of our attention. But we have to learn to let go.

   'We are incredibly proud of what he has achieved, and like any parents we
just want him to be happy. We have learned, like Stuart, not to look too far
ahead and to enjoy what we have now.'

   Â¦WATCH Stuart in Extraordinary People: The Boy Who Can Never Grow Old on
Five next Monday at 9pm.

   ROGUE GENE THAT STRIKES ONLY BOYS

   AROUND 100 boys are born with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) in the UK
each year. The disease is caused by a mutation of the dystrophin gene, which
plays an essential role in maintaining the muscles. As a result, too much
calcium gets into the muscle cells, effectively destroying them.

   The condition is usually diagnosed between the ages of three and five when
the child starts to show symptoms of physical weakness. The legs and arms are
affected first, followed by other functions such as swallowing. The condition
finally causes acute damage to muscular organs such as the lungs and heart. The
average life expectancy is around 23 years, and sufferers generally succumb
either to a chest infection or heart problems.

   This disorder is passed down through the maternal line but affects only boys.
There is no cure.

   Scientists are currently looking at gene therapy in a bid to help sufferers.
One of the world's leading experts in this area, Professor Dominic Wells from
Imperial College, London, has been able to use gene therapy in mice to heal
muscles damaged by DMD.

   VISIT www.musculardystrophy.org

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2007


                              48 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            September 9, 2007 Sunday

SECTION: UNKNOWN; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: Milan in row as Ronaldo's return stalls;
Fresh fears for Celtic clash

BYLINE: FRASER MACKIE

BODY:

   CELTIC'S Champions League opponents AC Milan are at the centre of a row over
the fitness of star striker Ronaldo ahead of the European kick-off next week.

   The Brazilian hero is back home in Rio de Janeiro for a third opinion on the
problem in his left leg which has ruled him out of competitive action so far.

   He met with national team doctor Jose Luis Runco, who has advised treatment
and that he stays in Brazil for at least another week.

   Milan, who host Benfica in their Champions League opener, are at Parkhead on
October 3 and their vice-president Adriano Galliani has expressed fears over
when Ronaldo may be able to return to the starting line-up.

   Ronaldo was ineligible to face Celtic in the last-16 showdown earlier in the
year in which the Scottish champions held firm against Milan until extra time in
the second leg.

   And current No 1 pick Alberto Gilardino has been the subject of fans'
criticism over his ineffectual start to the season in attack for the European
Cup holders.

   Ronaldo's woes began at the end of July following a preseason friendly
against Lecce.

   But, after failing to make progress under the supervision of Milan medical
staff, the 30-year-old visited the man who saved his career with the operation
on his knee while an Inter player, Belgian specialist Marc Martens.

   Then, last Thursday, he flew to Brazil with personal physiotherapist Bruno
Mazziotti, who reported: 'In his case, Runco and I think that the cure in Milan
was not very correct.

   'For this, he returns to Brazil to take care of a muscular lesion he received
last season in his left joint.' Ronaldo has been given a tentative go-ahead to
return to training in a fortnight. He has already missed the first two Serie A
matches of the season and the Super Cup success over Sevilla.

   'We will apply a technique called Growth Factor to accelerate his
recuperation,' said Runco. 'It is a genetic therapy. It would be ideal for him
to stay in Rio for at least a week.'

GRAPHIC: BLAME IT ON RIO: Ronaldo has delayed his return to Italy and will
undergo further tests in Brazil

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2007


                              49 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 30, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 80

LENGTH: 742 words

HEADLINE: FTSE shrugs off the credit blues;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Brian O'Connor

BODY:

   STOCK markets are cautiously celebrating the return of the old economy -
overlooked sectors such as leisure groups, food manufacturers, and utilities.

   They used to be unfashionable, but now they are the best hope of pulling
markets out of their debt-induced gloom.

   Whitbread, the Premier Inns and Costa coffee group, delayed its plan to gear
up for a mega-cash return, but still scored the biggest gain in the top 100,
rising 54p to 1612p as investors decided that solid sales growth plus a share
buyback was not bad in these uncertain times.

   Water companies have been hammered recently on their high debts, but hopes
that they are oversold brought a bounce for Severn Trent (up 37p to 1342p) and
Yorkshire Water-owner Kelda (up 26p at 852p).

   Also emerging from the doldrums was Cadbury Schweppes, up 14p to 57612p
though still a long way short of May's 720p when it was buoyed by its demerger
plan.

   For most of the financial sector though, it was business as usual with the
big banks in retreat as more submerged sub-prime horrors came to the surface.

   Basis Yield Alpha Fund, a Cayman Islands hedge fund run by Australians which
managed nearly £500m a few months ago, filed for US bankruptcy protection after
losing a bundle.

   London structured investment vehicle Cheyne Finance is selling assets to
repay debt. Everyone is waiting for the next victim to turn up at the casualty
ward.

   Battered Barclays picked up 11p to 600p on suggestions that its sub-prime
exposure was a modest £75m, rather than ten times that as some feared.

   If it really wants to scotch these worries, it could spell out its exposure
openly..

   The Footsie fell 45 points when the market opened, but gradually recovered to
close 30 points better on the day at 6132.2.

   European markets managed modest gains and Wall Street began strongly,
recouping some of Tuesday's steep fall. Sterling rose to $2.0171 while the euro
traded at 67.8p.

   Miners continue to prosper from booming Asia and remind us that the world is
less dependent on the US economy than it used to be.

   BHP Billiton gained 26p to 1390p, helped by strong trading and bullish
predictions from rival Antofagasta, up 812 p to 692p.

   One of the big questions as the credit crunch bites is whether the buyout
business is still alive.

   The private equity firm that made a bid approach to Nestor Healthcare and
drove the shares up to a peak of 194p last month has had second thoughts and
stolen away.

   Nestor sank 634p to 13412p.

   But managers at drugs researcher Premier Research may give it a go, having
made 'a very preliminary approach' .

   Premier, chaired by former Celltech chief executive Peter Fellner, rose 1312p
to 113p, valuing it at £67m.

   The shares were 280p in January so you can see why action might be stirring.

   Recruiter Robert Walters Group rose 1834p to 31914p with bid potential adding
spice to its interim report, due next Monday.

   Standard Life added 6p to 29012p as Morgan Stanley raised its target price to
382p.

   Standard rejigged its private equity operation to give the management team
40pc of the profits.

   Worries about slowing house prices have hit builders hard. But a 9p fall at
Persimmon to 1155p had more to do with the passing of the dividend qualifying
date. Glaxo, Reckitt, Standard Chartered and HBOS were among others going
ex-dividend.

   With North Sea crude oil back up to $70.90, oil services firms are thriving.
Petrofac rose 912p to 42314p after swapping its stake in the North Sea's
Crawford field for a larger share of the West Don field.

   John Wood Group which has had a great run, added 7p to 35912p, helped by UBS,
which raised its target price to 420p.

   Gene therapy hopeful Ark Therapeutics fell 2p to 112p after first-half losses
rose to £11.2m. Though cancer drug Cerepro did not win fast-track approval, Ark
says its three main programmes passed key milestones.

   But on a day which belonged to the old economy, the last word goes to Volvo
chief executive Leif Johansson. The heavy trucks market, he reassured us, will
not be hit by the subprime crisis. Just in case you were wondering.

   Still, any good news is welcome these days.

   AFTER the gyrations of his White Nile vehicle in Sudan, former England
cricketer Phil Edmonds hopes to fare better in the Congolese jungle. Camec
(Central African Mining & Exploration) chaired by Edmonds, formally launched its
£720m all-share bid for Katanga Mining yesterday. It is backed by 54pc of
Katanga's investors, though at 4734p, down 414p, Camec shares have halved since
April.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2007


                              50 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 25, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 108

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: Ingeneous genes could be a shot in the arm

BODY:

   RAISING money in current markets is a challenge. But the Ingeneous Fund,
which aims to invest in the next wave of gene-related drugs, is one to watch.

   Mulier Capital, which is seeking between Â£100m and Â£250m for the fund,
believes gene technologies have 'massive commercial potential and are just
coming of age'.

   Though regulators' decisions will be crucial, it is confident that the 'dam
is about to break' .

   The fund plans to take stakes in up to 15 drug companies, which would give it
a potential product pipeline comparable to the pharma giants and a big slice of
the gene therapy market.

   The risks are obvious but Mulier's founder Pieter Mulier has assembled a
heavyweight team, including former SmithKlineBeecham research director George
Poste and Prof James Rothman of GE Healthcare.

   Mulier has backed some of Investment Extra's best tips, such as Silence
Therapeutics (tipped here at 18p under its old name, SR Pharma and now up more
than sixfold at 115p).

   Most investors will have to wait for Ingeneous, which will initially be an
offshore fund with a minimum $100,000 subscription.

   But it is likely to seek a London AIM quote within a year.

   Â¦ PENDRAGON, the motor dealer first tipped here at 60p (allowing for its
share split), and still rated good value at 107.7p last October, has dropped to
791/4p. The car market is difficult and the debt it took on to win the auction
for rival Reg Vardy does not help.

   But debt fell Â£80m to Â£289m in the first half and the interim dividend was
raised, putting the shares on a prospective yield of over 5pc.

   Chief executive Trevor Finn bought 500,000 shares at 81p, chairman Sir Nigel
Rudd 500,000 at 80p. The last tip was poorly timed, but Pendragon will recover.

   For the Investment Extra archive go to www.thisismoney.co.uk/tips

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2007


                              51 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 21, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 1469 words

HEADLINE: MS killed my father. The doctors said it couldn't be passed on but now
I'm fighting it, too;
(1) GOOD HEALTH (2) FOR years, Taggart actress ALISON PEEBLES, 52, kept her
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis hidden from all but her close family and
friends. Here, she talks frankly to LIZ BESTIC about the disease and how she
copes.

BYLINE: LIZ BESTIC

BODY:

   WHEN I first heard the diagnosis, it felt like a death sentence. I had a
pretty good idea of what MS was all about because I watched my father go
downhill with the same disease.

   He had been diagnosed when I was two, but in the early stages it did not have
a huge impact on his life. He had always been fit and sporty I remember him
taking us camping and hill walking.

   However, as the disease progressed, he became fatigued and eventually so
incapacitated he could walk only with the aid of a Zimmer frame. He died in 1971
when I was 17.

   So when, 30 years later, I sat in a neurologist's consulting room and was
told I had the same disease, I burst into tears.

   I'd suspected something was wrong. A couple of years before I'd had moments
of numbness and tingling in my hands.

   Gradually, over the next year, the numbness had begun to creep up my body it
was a strange and uncomfortable feeling, like a steel corset around my middle.
Some people refer to it as the MS 'hug'. I had also started to notice I was
clumsier.

   But my first unofficial diagnosis came in October 1999 when I was doing a
play in Scotland and stumbled. The theatre doctor did some simple tests,
checking the strength of my grip and observing how I was walking and standing,
as well as taking a short medical history.

   She said that though I would need to have more tests, she believed I could be
in the first stages of MS.

   It was a shock as I had been led to believe by the doctors who treated Dad
that there was no genetic link with MS.

   Other doctors I saw told me they didn't think I had the disease. One said it
could be my age (I was 44), another suggested it might be the onset of the
menopause. One told me I was neurotic and another said I was under stress.

   The most laughable diagnosis was under stress.

   The most laughable diagnosis was being told I drank too much.

   However, I only drink socially and before seeing that specialist, I had been
on a six-month detox when I was not drinking at all.

   Eventually, I went to see a neurologist and underwent a series of tests,
including CAT and MRI scans, to check for lesions in the brain. Multiple
sclerosis means 'many scars' and these occur in the brain or on the spinal cord.

   THE RESULTS, in conjunction with my loss of movement, suggested it was MS,
but this was not considered conclusive until 2001, when I had a sample of fluid
taken from my spine (a lumbar puncture) and analysed. It showed the immune
abnormalities characteristic of the disease.

   The first thing I did after I was diagnosed was to ring my big sister,
Sheila, who lives in Ireland. I couldn't bring myself to tell my other sister,
Elizabeth, or my mother, Marie, for three years.

   It was awful keeping it from them, but I wanted to protect my family because
of what had happened to Dad. Once I finally told friends and family, they all
wanted to do something to help. I was bombarded with the latest weird and
wonderful 'cures' for MS.

   Most of these, and many of the drugs available, are for the
relapsing/remitting form of MS, but I have progressive MS, which affects only 5
per cent of those with the disease. All that can be done for my type is to treat
symptoms such as bladder problems and fatigue.

   Other symptoms can include dragging feet, visual problems and pain, which can
get progressively worse. I have difficulty with mobilday ity and balance so that
is likely to get worse as I get older.

   At first I was afraid to tell anyone because I thought I might never work
again as an actor.

   I was right to worry, because no mainstream TV or film offers have been
forthcoming since I did a documentary for BBC Scotland last year about my
condition.

   Despite my track record and experience, I fear I will be considered for a
part only if it's sitting, lying down or requires a stick. If you see people
with mobility problems in a role, it's for plot reasons, and that needs to
change.

   My world is slowly shrinking. In the early days, even though I had tingling
fingers and was clumsy, I could still go hill walking. Now, I can barely walk 50
yards without feeling wiped out.

   I also suffer from urge incontinence, a common symptom of MS.

   It feels as if you constantly want to go to the loo, but once you have been
you still think you need to go.

   It's not painful, but it causes frequent bladder infections. One last year
after a run of infections that were being treated with antibiotics, I woke up to
find I was blind in one eye.

   I was rushed to hospital and told I had optic neuritis, an inflammatory
condition involving the optic nerve. It can be triggered by any type of
infection and is common in those with MS as their immune system is not working
properly.

   Luckily, my sight came back after being treated with steroids, but it could
happen again.

   I try to stay positive and not dwell on the negative effects of my MS.

   Recently I have started to be careful about my diet, cutting out wheat, dairy
and fat to help with the symptoms of fatigue.

   I also see a Glasgow GP who has devised a daily regime of supplements,
including omega 3 oils, vitamin D, calcium, magnesium, selenium, zinc and ginkgo
biloba.

   Though MS is a result of a combination of factors, including genetics, I
believe lack of vitamin D which the body needs sun to produce is a major
component..

   The incidence of MS is higher in the northern hemisphere, where there are
fewer days of sunlight.

   For the past year I have been on a controversial drug known as LDN low-dose
naltrexone which is not available on the NHS, but doctors will prescribe it
privately.

   The drug is an opiate antagonist and is used in high doses to treat people
who are addicted to heroin.

   Dr Bernard Bihari, a neurophysician in New York, discovered that in low doses
it seemed to help the symptoms of MS.

   It works by briefly obstructing the effects of brain endorphins, which act
like natural painkillers.

   This has the effect of stimulating production of these endorphins which, in
turn, stimulate the immune system.

   I have noticed an improvement in my fatigue levels and the terrible spasms in
my legs seem to have stopped. The drug is controversial because of a lack of
conclusive tests and trials of its use with MS.

   On the internet, I discovered hyperbaric oxygen therapy, where you breathe
oxygen under pressure. The theory is that more oxygen is forced into the tissues
and brain. The treatment is known to help with scarring on the nervous system,
fatigue levels and bladder problems. I have the therapy once a week at the MS
Therapy Centre in Glasgow and have found it's a real help.

   I have also had two sessions of hypnotherapy, which had me striding across a
room. The theory is that you have to return to your subconscious mind to relearn
how to walk.

   It's not that I can't walk, but I get extremely tired and find it hard to
deal with long distances. However, I am not naive enough to think it will be a
cure and know it works for some people, but not others.

   ONE THING which is very important is exercise, even though I find it
difficult to get motivated because getting up in the morning is difficult.

   Regular exercise can improve my mood but, of course, I can't jump, run or
walk any distance so aerobic activity is impossible. I am not a strong swimmer,
so I find that too exhausting.

   The MS Trust has just brought out a DVD that encourages even those in a
wheelchair to get active.

   I am determined to follow the regime because any exercise can improve
symptoms.

   I want to keep on top of this illness for as long as I can. My big hope is
that I can work as much as possible because acting has always been an important
part of my life.

   Though my father died of this disease, I'm hopeful that, 30 years on, things
have moved on enough for me to be able to retain a better quality of life for
longer..

   WHAT IS MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS?

   MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS (MS) is a debilitating condition affecting the central
nervous system.

   It is most frequently diagnosed in people in their late 20s or 30s. It
affects 85,000 people in Britain, and twice as many women as men.

   Despite ongoing research, no one knows what causes it. Some experts believe
environmental factors may trigger a genetic predisposition, while others think
it is an auto-immune disease where the body attacks its own cells. This causes
damage to myelin, which protects the nerve fibres of the brain and spinal cord.

   There are two main types of MS. The most common type is known as
relapsing/remitting a series of attacks followed by complete or partial
remission.

   The rarer form is secondary progressive MS, which begins as
relapsing/remitting, but goes on to a chronic progressive form of the disease
with no periods of remission.

   MS can have a wide variety of symptoms, from fatigue, visual disturbances,
dragging feet and weakness in the limbs, to balance issues, bladder and bowel
problems, pain and difficulty concentrating for long periods.

   MS Trust: 01462 476700..

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2007


                              52 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 16, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: 'Elixir of life' that could one day be given by injection

BYLINE: Fiona MacRae

BODY:

   THEprospect of holding back the years with a simple injection could be closer
than we think.

   Scientists have taken a step towards developing a treatment that could erase
the health problems associated with ageing.

   While their breakthrough relates to rogue genes behind two rare genetic
diseases, the approach they used could one day be harnessed to slow down the
ageing process - creating an 'elixir of life'.

   The research focuses on mitochondria, sausage-shaped 'powerhouses' in every
cell of the body except red blood cells.

   They turn the food we eat into energy that can be used by the heart, muscles,
brain and other parts of the body.

   Research has suggested their deterioration is an important cause of ageing,
according to a report in New Scientist magazine.

   About one in 5,000 children and adults are at risk of developing a
mitochondrial disease, which include disorders of the nervous system and
blindness.

   One unique feature of mitochondria is that they have their own DNA, known as
mitochondrial DNA, which is inherited from the mother only.

   Defects in this mitochondrial DNA are blamed for a range of rare genetic
diseases, including some forms of diabetes, blindness and heart problems. They
have also been linked to ageing - suggesting that fixing the flaws could slow
down the onset of old age.

   However, all attempts to fix flaws by inserting healthy DNA into mitochondria
- a technique known as gene therapy - have failed, with the fresh genes
stubbornly staying outside the powerhouses.

   Now, by labelling the functional genes with an 'address code' - which £466m
is spent each year on skincare by British women keen to stave off old age
effectively tells them where to go - French scientists have succeeded in
smuggling them inside the mitochondria.

   Once there, the pair of genes repaired the damage behind a rare form of
blindness and a muscle wasting disease, says the New Scientist report.

   In time, the same approach could be used to create injections of genes that
will erase flaws thought to be linked to the ageing process.

   However, while this might slow down ageing, it would not halt it completely,
as mitochondria are just one of many factors involved in the ageing process.

   Professor Patrick Chinnery, a leading British expert on mitochondrial
disorders, said: 'It is not a panacea but, if successful, it might potentially
correct part of this age-associated damage to mitochondria which might be
important in slowing down ageing.

   'What they are doing sounds potentially a very clever idea.

   'There is no treatment for these diseases, so any advance is clearly of great
interest.' The researchers, from Marie Curie University in Paris, now plan to
move their experiments from cells to rats, with human treatments the ultimate
aim.

   There are, however, many hurdles to be crossed. For instance, researchers
need to be confident that genes act as billed and do not disrupt other vital
processes.

   They also need to work out how to get them to the right parts of the body
without causing harmful side effects to other tissues.

   Gene therapy offers hope of new treatments for a raft of illnesses, from
cancer to Parkinson's disease.

   In a recent trial reported in the Lancet, injections of genes into the brain
significantly helped relieve the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

   Tremors and rigidity were reduced by up to 65 per cent, with no ill effects.

   f.macrae@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2007


                              53 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 28, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: 2ND; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 278 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy trial is halted after arthritis patient dies

BYLINE: Barry Wigmore

BODY:

   HOPES of finding a breakthrough treatment for arthritis suffered a setback
last night after the death of a patient involved in trials.

   The unnamed sufferer was receiving gene therapy, in which healthy genes are
injected directly into affected joints to replace faulty ones c a u s i n g the
condition.

   Doctors and researchers believe such treatment holds great promise for the
future.

   The trial, in the U.S., was suspended and American health chiefs are
reviewing 28 similar trials. In Britain, where there are three ongoing gene
therapy trials, researchers were waiting for more details of the death before
taking any action.

   The trial was being conducted by Targeted Genetics of Seattle. Doctors were
using a mild virus, known as an AAV - adeno-associated virus - to deliver the
anti-arthritis gene.

   The patient became ill soon after being given a second injection and died
within two days. Authorities fear the virus may be to blame. Since the trial
began in 2005, 127 patients have received an initial dose of the active
treatment or a placebo.

   Some received a second dose, but suffered no ill effects.

   It is the third setback for gene therapy. Eight years ago, a student who
suffered from a rare disorder that stopped his body processing nitrogen died in
a trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Researchers used a form of AAV virus to deliver his treatment.

   In France, two babies suffering from an immune disorder whose lives were
saved by the therapy later developed leukaemia.

   British gene therapy trials are confined almost exclusively to treating
terminal illnesses, rather than non-life-threatening conditions such as
arthritis because the procedure is so expensive..

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2007


                              54 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 28, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: IRE; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Death halts gene therapy trial

BYLINE: BARRY WIGMORE

BODY:

   HOPES of finding a breakthrough treatment for arthritis suffered a setback
last night after the death of a patient involved in trials.

   The unnamed sufferer was receiving gene therapy, in which healthy genes are
injected directly into affected joints to replace faulty ones causing the
condition.

   Doctors and researchers believe such treatment holds great promise for the
future.

   The trial, in the U.S., was suspended and American health chiefs are
reviewing 28 similar trials. In Europe, where there are several ongoing gene
therapy trials and several more planned, researchers were waiting for more
details of the death before taking any action.

   The trial was being conducted by Targeted Genetics Corp, of Seattle. Doctors
were using a mild virus, known as an AAV Â- adeno-associated virus Â- to deliver
the anti-arthritis gene. The patient became ill soon after being given a second
injection, and died within two days.

   Authorities fear the virus may be to blame.

   Since the trial began in October 2005, 127 patients have received an initial
dose of the active treatment or a placebo.

   Some received a second dose, like the patient who died, but have suffered no
ill effects.

   It is the third major setback for gene therapy. Eight years ago, a student
who suffered from a rare disorder that stopped his body processing nitrogen died
on the fourth day of a trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Researchers used
a form of AAV virus to deliver his treatment.

   In France, authorities severely restricted gene treatment after two babies
suffering from an immune disorder whose lives were saved by the therapy later
developed leukaemia.

   Meanwhile in Britain, gene therapy trials are confined almost exclusively to
treating terminal illnesses such as cancer, rather than non-life-threatening
conditions such as arthritis because the procedure is so expensive.

   Doctors here said they have no plans to halt their work until more details
are known about the American death.

   Len Seymour, president of the Society for Gene Therapy, said: 'Until a
thorough clincial investigation has been conducted, we don't know if the cause
of death was related to the treatment.'

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2007


                              55 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday

SECTION: 2ND; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 543 words

HEADLINE: Symptoms of Parkinson's 'are relieved by gene jabs'

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:

   INJECTING a gene directly into the brain can 'substantially' relieve the
symptoms of Parkinson's disease, claim U.S. researchers.

   The therapy, which reduced symptoms such as tremors and rigidity by up to 65
per cent without side-effects in trials, uses a harmless virus to carry the GAD
gene into the brain.

   The findings could lead to the development of effective new drugs for
Parkinson's, and possibly other brain diseases, such as Huntington's,
Alzheimer's and epilepsy.

   The year-long study of 12 patients by New York's Cornell University saw
different doses of the gene injected into the sub-thalamic nucleus, an area of
the brain which is highly overactive in Parkinson's sufferers. Once in the
brain's neurons, the gene boosts the production of GABA, an activitydampening
chemical.

   At the end of the gene therapy trial, reported in The Lancet medical journal,
all the patients demonstrated a clinical improvement of at least 25 per cent.

   Nine patients showed an average improvement of 37 per cent, five of whom
demonstrated recovery of between 40 and 65 per cent.

   There are about 120,000 sufferers of Parkinson's in the UK. It is currently
incurable, and controlling symptoms with drugs becomes more difficult as the
disease progresses.

   Famous sufferers include the actor Michael J Fox and former relieved by
boxing champion Muhammad Ali.

   Professor Matthew During, who led the trial, said: 'This gene therapy trial
is particularly unique and the clinical data unusually promising because the
treatment was confined to just one side of the brain.' Researchers plan to carry
out a larger trial of the gene therapy's effect on Parkinson's sufferers later
this year. Dr Kieran Breen, director of research for the Parkinson's Disease
Society, said: 'The cause of Parkinson's is not known but it is likely to be a
combination of genetic susceptibility and environmental factors. Because of
this, there are many potential ways to treat or cure Parkinson's, and gene
therapy is one potential route holding a lot of promise.

   'This study is very interesting because there has been no evidence of
side-effects and some evidence that this type of therapy produces positive
benefits. As such, it is an important platform for further studies to build on.

   'The results of the study are encouraging in terms of safety and efficacy,
and we look forward to seeing the results of the larger trial planned for later
this year.' A separate U.S. study, reported in the journal Science, claimed to
have provided another breakthrough in the treatment of Parkinson's. This second
study jabs' found that blocking the action of a certain brain protein was able
to help prevent the toxic damage Parkinson's disease causes to the nervous
system.

   Study leader Dr Aleksey Kazantsev, director of the Massachusetts General
Hospital Institute in Boston, said: 'We have discovered a compelling new
therapeutic approach for Parkinson's disease, which we expect will allow our
scientists - as well as those at pharmaceutical and biotech companies - to
pursue innovative new drugs that will treat and perhaps even cure this
disorder.' British experts said both developments in the fight against
Parkinson's were encouraging but more research was needed.

   j.hope@dailymail.co.uk 'No evidence of side-effects'

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2007


                              56 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              June 22, 2007 Friday

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 41

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: Gene injection 'can relieve Parkinson's'

BODY:

   INJECTING a gene directly into the brain can 'substantially' relieve the
symptoms of Parkinson's disease, claim U.S. researchers.

   The therapy, which reduced symptoms such as tremors and rigidity by up to 65
per cent without side-effects in trials, uses a harmless virus to carry the GAD
gene into the brain.

   Once in the brain's neurons, the gene boosts production of activitydampening
molecules.

   The year-long study of 12 patients by New York's Cornell University saw
different doses of the gene injected into the sub-thalamic nucleus, an area of
the brain which is highly overactive in Parkinson's sufferers.

   At the end of the gene therapy trial, reported in The Lancet medical journal,
all the patients demonstrated a clinical improvement of at least 25 per cent.

   Nine patients showed an average improvement of 37 per cent, five of whom
demonstrated recovery of between 40 and 65 per cent.

   There are about 120,000 sufferers of Parkinson's in the UK. It is currently
incurable, and controlling symptoms with drugs becomes more difficult as the
disease progresses.

   Dr Kieran Breen, director of research for the Parkinson's Disease Society,
said: 'The results of the study are encouraging in terms of safety and efficacy,
and we look forward to seeing the results of the larger trial planned for later
this year.'

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2007


                              57 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              May 22, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: ED SC1; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 583 words

HEADLINE: Dancer Kelli's courage leaves judges reeling;
Award nomination recognises bravery of young cystic fibrosis sufferer

BODY:

   WITH more than 300 medals and a clutch of trophies to her name, 13-year- old
dancing queen Kelli Gallagher has already achieved more than most girls her age.

   But while such success would be remarkable for any teenager, hers is nothing
short of incredible.

   Kelli suffers from cystic fibrosis (CF), a condition that means she faces a
daily battle just to keep breathing.

   Since she was diagnosed at only five weeks old, she has needed physiotherapy
twice a day to clear her lungs of fluid and has spent a great deal of time in
hospital being treated for severe chest infections.

   Yet Kelli, of Alexandria, Dunbartonshire, has always refused to let her
illness rule her life. Instead, she trains four times a week for her Highland
dancing competitions and has set her sights on one day opening her own dance
school.

   Now her courage has seen her nominated for a national award honouring
inspirational youngsters with CF.

   Kelli, who five years ago was a mascot at the Champions League final at
Hampden Park, said yesterday: 'Sometimes I forget I've got cystic fibrosis.

   It's just a part of my life now. I don't really think about it. My dream is
to run my own dancing school.' Her mother Maggie, father Peter and brother
Kenny, 19, could not be more proud. Mrs Gallagher, 39, said: ' She's a
superstar. Everything Kelli does is 110 per cent.

   'She didn't see herself as being any different until she went to secondary
school.

   'She is smaller than her peers because of her condition. But that doesn't
mean she's not popular her nickname is Tiny Dancer.' Mrs Gallagher said the
family was devastated when Kelli was first diagnosed. She added: 'We decided
there and then to give her the best chance in life.' Yesterday, it emerged that
Kelli is one of three Scottish nominees in the 2007 Breathing Life Awards which
celebrate the outstanding achievements of youngsters with CF the UK's most
common life-threatening inherited disease.

   A statement by the event's organisers revealed that Kelli had been nominated
for her positive attitude and for refusing to let her illness stop her doing the
things she loves.

   It read: 'Kelli started dancing at three and her energetic Highland dancing
is a great form of physiotherapy.

   'Even when she is unwell, she goes to class to watch and support the other
dancers. Her hard work, dedication and effort are recognised by everyone and she
is an inspiration.

   ' Kelli always wants to be known as a dancer, not as a girl with cystic
fibrosis.' The second year pupil at Vale of Leven Academy, who trains at Sandra
Lee Dancing School in Alexandria, will attend the star-studded awards ceremony
in London later this month with her mother and father. Stars of music, sport,
stage and screen will be honouring the 24 young nominees who have shown great
courage and determination despite battling on a daily basis with their
debilitating symptoms.

   Celebrities due to attend include Scots newsreader Kirsty Young, reality TV
stars Kate Lawler and Bianca Gascoigne, broadcast journalist Donal McIntyre and
television presenters Ben Shephard and Amanda Lamb.

   Kelli, who is nominated in the junior artistic category, said: 'It was a big
surpri0se when I found out about the awards.' Mrs Gallagher said: 'We have to
remember that CF is a lifeshortening condition. The best hope of finding a cure
is through gene therapy fundraising is so vital.' Caused by a defective gene, CF
clogs the lungs, digestive system and other organs with a thick, sticky mucus.

   Three young people die of the disease each week.

GRAPHIC: HIGHLAND FLING: KELLI GALLAGHER HOPES TO RUN HER OWN CLASS FOOTBALL
FAN: KELLI AT HAMPDEN PARK FIVE YEARS AGO

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2007


                              58 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 1648 words

HEADLINE: CAN YOU HELP US FIND THE DAILY MAIL INSPIRATIONAL WOMEN OF THE YEAR;
TEACHERS, MOTHERS, CARERS, NURSES...WE LAUNCH THE SEARCH FOR BRITAIN'S UNSUNG
HEROINES

BYLINE: HELEN WEATHERS

BODY:

   COURAGEOUS MUM-OF-NINE

   EVERY day the family of Jackie Culshaw remember the mother of nine as a
remarkable woman who lost two of her children to cystic fibrosis before the
disease claimed her life, too.

   'Mum never thought she was anything special, but she was. We feel blessed
that we had her for as long as we did,' says her eldest daughter, Lisa Kennedy,
35.

   The 58-year-old died on Valentine's Day this year, and her children continue
to raise money to help others with the disease.

   Jackie's husband Tony, 58, an engineer, and her seven surviving children
Lisa, Michaela, 30, Emma, 28, Jamie, 24, Anna, 21, Alex, 19, and Jonty, 17, say
Jackie was a truly inspirational woman.

   Despite caring for two children with cystic fibrosis, which put her own life
at risk from infection, Jackie from Liverpool did this with optimism.

   When daughter Sammy, 27, and son Stuart, 22, died from the disease within
weeks of each other in 2003, she rose above her own grief, telling her family
they were lucky to have had them for as long as they did.

   'We used to think everyone had a mum like us,' says Emma. 'But we realise now
she really was special and we feel so lucky to have had her.

   'She used to say that being a mum was the best job in the world. She loved
being pregnant and having babies and there was always enough love to go round.'
The second of five children growing up in a Roman Catholic family, Jackie had
dreamed of becoming a nun, until she met her future husband Tony at a dance when
she was a teenager.

   'At the time, The Sound Of Music had just come out on film, so Mum - just
like Maria - abandoned her dream of becoming a nun and ended up being a mother
to nine children,' says Lisa, who is married with two daughters, aged six and
three.

   'Dad was one of two children, so he was as keen as Mum to have a big family,
though I don't think he ever reckoned they'd end up having nine.

   'There was a real goodness about Mum, just something about her personality.

   When we were young, she fostered two teenagers and then a baby boy, who was
with us for twoanda-half years until he returned to his birth mother.

   'When she was asked why she fostered when she had her own children, she
couldn't understand the question. She thought if you have a home and love to
spare, how can you not.

   'And she loved those children as though they were her own.' Sammy was born
four years after Lisa. She was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis a
geneticallyinherited disease when she was three months old.

   Cystic fibrosis is the result of a single faulty gene and causes the internal
organs, particularly the lungs, to become clogged with mucus, resulting in
infections and inflammation, making it hard to breathe and digest food.

   A baby born of two carriers of the faulty gene - as Jackie and her husband
were found to be - has a one in four chance of having the disease.

   That statistic has been borne out in the Culshaw family, with two out of nine
children suffering from the disease.

   There is no cure and life expectancy is 31, thanks to improvements in
treatment, but 40 years ago children with the disease were not expected to live
beyond their fifth birthday.

   Today, there are more than 7,500 people in Britain living with cystic
fibrosis. Each week, five babies are born with the condition and it claims three
lives.

   About 4 per cent of the population carry the faulty gene and the Cystic
Fibrosis Trust funds research to find effective treatment through gene therapy.
'From the day Sammy was diagnosed, everything changed overnight for Mum,' says
Lisa.

   'It was a constant battle to keep Sammy alive, with physiotherapy two or
three times a day to loosen the mucus, drug therapy, digestive enzymes,
steroids, intravenous antibiotics and nebulisers to help her breathe.' When
Jackie's third child, Michaela - now married with three children, aged eight,
five and two - was born, she was immediately tested for the faulty gene, but
found to be in the clear. As was her fourth Emma, 28, now the mother of an
eight-month-old baby.

   But her fifth child Stuart - her first son - was found to have cystic
fibrosis, a discovery which Jackie faced with the same stoicism as she had with
Sammy.

   Despite having five children, two desperately ill, Jackie filled their home
with love.

   'It must have been exhausting for Mum, but she never complained once,' says
Emma.

   'She was so active, always taking us out to the park and doing the school
run, making sure she had time for all of us.' After Stuart, Jackie gave birth we
launch the search for Britain's unsung heroines to four more children.

   'Mum could be firm when she needed to, but she had a way of saying things
which made you listen and know that she really cared about you,' says Lisa.

   It was in 1995 that Jackie, once so tireless, started to feel drained and
breathless even on short walks.

   At first, the doctors didn't know what was wrong with her and she underwent a
battery of tests for cancer and even TB, which all came back negative.

   She was eventually diagnosed with atypical cystic fibrosis, a form of the
disease which can strike later in life and which has less severe symptoms.

   Nonetheless, this condition can be life-threatening because of the increased
risk of respiratory infection.

   'It just seemed so unfair because Mum had always been so active and suddenly
she was exhausted all the time,' says Lisa.

   'But she never complained and put her own suffering to one side to make sure
we were all happy.

   She always put herself last.

   'Shortly before her wedding, Sammy, who'd been quite well as a child,
suddenly deteriorated and Mum was terrified that she would not live to walk up
the aisle. But she rallied, even though the day was quite traumatic for her,'
says Lisa.

   'When Sammy died, Mum was devastated, but even in her deepest grief she
managed to find something to be thankful for.

   'She told us that we were blessed that Sammy had lived as long as she did.

   'It broke all our hearts when Stuart died just three weeks later. He had been
a sickly child who seemed to get better as he grew older.

   'Then he suddenly contracted an infection and died very quickly, so we
weren't as prepared for his death.

   'Once Sammy and Stuart passed away, it was almost as if Mum allowed herself
to get sick.

   'All the time they were ill, she would just not let herself be poorly, but
once that responsibility had gone, her body just shut down.' Jackie was admitted
to Broadgreen Hospital in Liverpool in January suffering from pneumonia. Her
family kept a vigil, so she was never alone.

   Her husband and each of her children were able to spend some time alone with
Jackie, though none of them admitted they were saying their goodbyes.

   'Of course, Mum hoped she would get better, but she knew the disease would
kill her,' says Lisa.

   'She was resigned to that and she knew that Sammy and Stuart would be waiting
for her.

   'We were all with her when she died on Valentine's Day. There was no
unfinished business, no regrets, just a feeling of great privilege that we'd
been so lucky to have her as our mum.

   'If we turn out to be even half as a good as she was, then we'll be happy.'

   THE YOUNG CARER

   EMMA BOVINGDON, 15, is a young carer for her brother Scott.

   She lives with her parents Lynne and Steve in Bensham near Newcastle.

   Scott, ten, has an undiagnosed neurological problem which means he is
immobile and can't do anything for himself.

   Emma says: I HAVE been a carer since I was seven. The doctors told us when
Scott was 18 months old that he was severely disabled and would never be able to
walk or talk.

   At first, it was difficult to understand because I was so young and I found
it really hard when people pointed and stared. But then I realised that he's my
brother no matter how ill he is, and it doesn't affect how much I love him.

   Caring for Scott is really a team effort in the house. Mum, who is a nurse,
works long hours to support us and Dad takes care of Scott in the daytime.

   In the evening, when I get home from school, Dad fixes the dinner and does
the chores while I look after Scott.

   His condition means he has epileptic fits almost constantly. Sometimes that
just means his eyes flutter and his limbs twitch, so all I need to do is listen
out for him while I do my homework. Other times, I have to stand over him,
making sure he can breathe.

   Every few weeks, Scott has to be rushed to hospital and I often have to go
with him. I am studying for my GCSEs and have a lot of coursework and can't
afford to miss out on studying time, so I take my books with me.

   All the doctors know that I'm Scott's carer and they don't mind me working by
his bedside.

   Even when Scott doesn't need the hospital, he still needs constant care. He
gets chest infections all the time, so I have to use a suction machine to clear
mucus from his throat.

   I also have to measure his feed, which is pumped into his stomach overnight,
and make sure he gets the right medication.

   Sometimes my dad does this, but we take it in turns and juggle our time.

   Caring for a disabled person is not an easy job whatever your age, but having
family and friends around to support you is the most important thing.

   West-End star Elaine Paige is inspired by paralympic athlete Dame Tanni Grey
Thompson. TANNI, who was born with spina bifida, has shown enormous courage
throughout her life. She has become a world-class athlete, winning no less than
11 gold Olympic medals as well as raising awareness of disability sport.'

   Pop star Jameliais inspired by her mother, Paulette-HER encouragementand
advice made me determined tosucceed. By the age of 21, she hadthree children and
we were Then she decided to turn our lives around and worked her way up
tobecomemanager of Birmingham'slargest afterschoolclub.'

   TV presenter-Anne Diamond was inspired by Shirley-Nolan, founder of the Nolan
bone marrow Trust-SHE was motivatedto do great things after her sonAnthony died
of a bone marrow disorder-She had a tragic but courageouslife before she, too,
died in 2002.'

GRAPHIC: MUCH-LOVED: JACKIE CULSHAW PICTURED WITH HER DAUGHTER EMMA MUCH-LOVED:
JACKIE CULSHAW PICTURED WITH HER DAUGHTER EMMA

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2007


                              59 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              May 15, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 1371 words

HEADLINE: Britain leads the world in finding treatments for cancer. So why are
we often the last to benefit?;
GoodHealth

BYLINE: FERGUS WALSH

BODY:

   EDWARD EDEN didn't know it at the time, but his decision to retire to France
eight years ago may have saved his life.

   When he was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2005, the drug Taxotere was
still unavailable to patients in the UK, despite robust evidence that it
extended life expectancy.

   The problem was cost: Pounds 8,000 for a course of treatment.

   Last year the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence approved
the drug's use, long after it had become an established treatment in France.

   But even approval from NICE does not guarantee patients in the UK will
receive expensive cancer drugs.

   I met Mr Eden while he was receiving his latest infusion of the drug in the
regional cancer centre in Nantes in the west of France.

   'From the moment I was diagnosed, the treatment has been rapid and efficient
- and no one has ever raised the subject of cost,' he says.

   Mr Eden, 62, has never regretted his move from Glasgow to a picturesque
village in the VendEe - a region renowned for its excellent climate. But moving
near one of France's most respected cancer centres was, of course, pure chance.

   The Centre RenE Gauducheau in Nantes is a functional modern building.

   Just as in the UK, all cancer care is free.

   The difference is that new drugs are fasttracked in France, whatever the
cost, once their health benefits are proven.

   The centre's director of research, Dr Francois Pein, says: 'There is a
paradox about healthcare in Britain. You are world-leaders in developing new
cancer medicines, yet patients in France get the new drugs denied to your
patients.' He simply cannot understand the reasoning which persuaded NICE in
January this year to reject another expensive new cancer drug, Avastin, which
extends life expectancy in advanced bowel cancer from 15 to 20 months. It costs
Pounds 2,000 per month and the NICE guidance said this was 'not compatible with
the best use of NHS resources'.

   DR PEIN disagrees: 'When patients have advanced cancer, how can you tell them
they cannot have a medicine which will give them a few more months of life,
simply because it is expensive? In France, we do not consider the cost of
treatments.

   We ask only whether they work.' A recent Swedish study found that the UK has
one of the worst records over access to new cancer drugs, something which
frustrates doctors and alarms patients. As eminent oncologist Professor Karol
Sikora put it: 'There are six cancer drugs which are available in Calais, but
not Canterbury.' Radiotherapy is another area of concern. In recent years,
dozens of new linear accelerator machines have been installed in NHS hospitals.
Each costs up to Pounds 1 million. There are now 279 of them. Yet France has 336
for a similar population, meaning patients are more likely to receive
radiotherapy without delay.

   The cancer centre in Nantes is especially proud of its newest radiotherapy
machine, which specialists say is able to target tumours more accurately.

   There are only three of the TomoTherapy (Hi-Art) machines in France - the
others are in Paris and Bordeaux. The UK has two, both in a private hospital in
London.

   And yet despite delays in treatment and denial of some drugs, cancer care in
the UK is improving. The NHS has many of the most renowned cancer specialists,
and hospitals such as the Royal Marsden in London deliver cancer treatment equal
to that found anywhere in the world.

   Survival rates in the UK for many cancers are improving dramatically, despite
lagging behind European neighbours.

   Professor Sikora, formerly the World Health Organisation cancer chief, is
optimistic about the future. 'Three decades ago, when I qualified, we didn't
tell patients they had cancer, and there was often little we could do for them.
Now cancer is on the verge of being transformed from a lethal disease to a
chronic condition, like diabetes.' That is quite some prediction.

   But after speaking to dozens of scientists for a series of special BBC News
reports, I can see why many believe cancer research is entering an exciting new
phase.

   Imagine being able to diagnose early-stage cancer from a urine test. That's
what Cancer Research UK scientists at Queen Mary, University of London, are
trying to achieve. They are looking at socalled biomarkers found in urine or
blood which may signal the presence of pancreatic cancer. Dr Tanja Crnogorac-
Jurcevic, from Croatia, is one of many foreign scientists attracted to Britain
because of its reputation for excellence in cancer research.

   'Cancer of the pancreas is usually diagnosed far too late,' she says. 'As a
result, survival rates are extremely poor. If we could spot the disease from a
blood or urine test, it would enable us to pick up the cancer early when surgery
was still possible, and that would lead to huge improvements in survival.' Viral
gene therapy - injecting a virus directly into the cancer - is another promising
field being pioneered at the Royal Marsden hospital.

   This approach works in one of two ways, either destroying the cancer cell
from inside, or highlighting the cancer cell so it is no longer hidden from the
body's immune system. Dr Kevin Harrington, from the Institute of Cancer
Research, has begun using inactivated herpes viruses to treat patients who have
head and neck cancer. 'The viruses are disabled so they can't attack healthy
tissue,' says Dr Harrington. 'But they can invade the rapidly growing cancer
cells.' A third team at London's University College Hospital, is leading a
global trial of a new approach to breast cancer care. Led by Professor Michael
Baum, surgeons are giving breast cancer patients a single dose of radiotherapy
in the operating theatre after cancerous tissue has been removed.

   If breast cancer recurs, it is most likely to do so at the site of the
original tumour - applying radiotherapy directly onto the site is thought to be
as effective as a six or seven-week course of radiotherapy (which can involve 20
to 30 hospital visits).

   'If one dose of radiotherapy during surgery can match many weeks of
radiotherapy after surgery, it would transform breast cancer care,' Prof Baum
says.

   The trial is being rolled out across hospitals worldwide, among them the
Royal Free in North London, and Ninewells Hospital, Dundee.

   Jennie Williams, from Kent, was one of the first to have intraoperative
radiotherapy, three years ago. 'I'd been told I'd have to wait 20 weeks for
conventional radiotherapy,' she says. 'Instead, having all the treatment
together in one go was remarkable.' And so we come back to the paradox of cancer
care in the UK.

   The daily experience of thousands of cancer patients is that they get
outstanding treatment from dedicated staff. Yet the problem of accessing new
cancer medicines is likely to continue.

   And it will probably be patients from overseas who first reap the benefits of
British research.

   BACK in Nantes, Edward Eden prepared to go home after chemotherapy. 'I've
been wearing a funky blue gel cap which cools the head and is supposed to help
prevent hair loss, and it seems to work - I've lost hardly any hair.' He is
optimistic about the future.

   'I live in a wonderful village', he says. 'I've even persuaded my daughter to
move to France - I couldn't ask for more.' FIGHTING Cancer presented by Fergus
Walsh will be broadcast every night this week on the BBC Six O'Clock News.

   ALTHOUGH they face a life threatening illness, it is often coping with the
change in their appearance that many cancer patients find most difficult, writes
Kate Maxwell.

   'The impact of hair loss is not talked about enough,' says DrPeter Harvey,
consultant clinical psychologist at Leeds Teaching Hospitals Trust. 'It can have
a huge impact on their identity.' There are treatments to prevent hair loss. In
most hospitals, patients are offered gel-filled caps chilled to -25c to wear
during chemotherapy - these constrict blood supply to the scalp, preventing
damage to hair follicles by the drugs.

   But they are extremely uncomfortable to wear.

   A newer version, the Paxman scalp cooler, operates at a higher temperature,
so it is more comfortable and thought to be more effective.

   On Saturday, 15,000 people will take part in the 26-mile Playtex Moonwalk
around London to raise money for Paxman coolers. For more information, go to
www.walkthewalk.org

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2007


                              60 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 745 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could restore failing sight

BYLINE: DANIEL MARTIN

BODY:

   BRITISH scientists have used gene therapy to restore a patient's sight in a
pioneering operation that will bring hope to tens of thousands of partially
blind people.

   Robert Johnson, 23, hopes to see fully again following the surgery at
Moorfields Eye Hospital in London.

   Mr Johnson, who was born with a degenerative disorder that means he can only
see outlines during the day and nothing at night, had copies of genes inserted
into one of his eyes.

   The hope is this will correct a genetic fault that stops his retina detecting
light properly. It will be several months before it is known if the operation
was a success. If it is, it offers hope to tens of thousands of people with
genetic eye problems.

   Scientists warn it is more likely the procedure will only work on children
and young adults because older people's eyesight may have deteriorated too much.

   But they say it could lead on to advances in the treatment of age-related
macular degeneration, which affects 400,000 people in the UK. Lead researcher
Professor Robin Ali, of University College London's institute of ophthalmology,
said the clinical trial was 'exciting'.

   He said: 'We have been developing gene therapy for eye disease for almost 15
years but until now we have been evaluating the technology only in the
laboratory.

   'Testing it for the first time in patients is very important and exciting,
and represents a huge step towards establishing gene therapy for the treatment
of many different eye conditions.' He added: 'There are many forms of retinal
degeneration, meaning the use of gene therapy treatments must be individually
developed and then tested in a separate clinical trial specifically for that
disease.

   'However, the results from this first human trial are likely to provide an
important basis for many more gene therapy protocols in the future, as well as
potentially leading to an effective treatment for a rare but debilitating
disease.' Mr Johnson's disorder is caused by a faulty gene called RPE65, which
stops the layer of cells at the back of the eyes, behind the retina, from
working.

   It results in severely impaired vision from a very young age and there are
currently no effective treatments available.

   Before the operation, Mr Johnson could see outlines during the day, but very
little at night. He said: 'It's very difficult to say how I'm feeling.

   I keep ranging from extreme nervousness to a bit of excitement.' Trials with
dogs had already shown that when the defect was restored, that they were able to
walk through a maze without difficulty indicating their vision had much
improved.

   During Mr Johnson's operation, donated healthy copies of the gene are loaded
into the shells of viruses and injected into the cells at the back of the
retina. The harmless virus shells invade the cells, spreading copies of the
healthy gene.

   James Bainbridge, who led the surgical team, said: 'It is very encouraging
that we can deliver genes to an extremely fragile site in the eye without
complications.' Assisting surgeon Robert Maclaren said Mr Johnson's operation
the first of 11 planned trials had gone 'extremely well'.

   He added: 'We couldn't have asked for a better result. In fact, if I sat and
drew what the perfect result would have been on a piece of paper, the retina
would have looked pretty much as it would look now.' Although the technique is
still experimental, it could eventually be used to treat a wide range of
disorders.

   Professor Leonard Seymour, president of the British Society for Gene Therapy,
said: 'The retina is a really good place for gene therapy because it can be
accessed by direct injection overcoming the problem of gene delivery. When gene
delivery is efficient, the whole power of gene therapy is unleashed.' Andrew
George, professor of molecular immunology at Imperial College, London, said:
'There is hope that once gene therapy is developed in the eye, scientists could
move on to more complex organs.' Barbara McLaughlin, campaigns manager at the
Royal National Institute for the Blind said: 'We welcome this first clinical
trial and research which may result in treatment for this currently untreatable
cause of blindness.

   'We would be interested to learn more about developments and how the research
might provide ways to combat other diseases that cause degeneration to the
retina.' Last night Health Minister Lord Hunt said: 'This new trial is a global
first. The UK leads Europe in gene therapy and we are second only to the U.S.'
d.martin@dailymail.co.uk

GRAPHIC: ABOVE: ROBERT JOHNSON, 23

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              61 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 29, 2007 Sunday

SECTION: FB 04; Pg. 113

LENGTH: 1106 words

HEADLINE: I fear Beijing will be the most tainted Olympics since Ben Johnson;
Sport's drug-buster, Dick Pound, reveals his growing concern over the 2008 Games

BYLINE: IAN STAFFORD

BODY:

   DICK POUND, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency, has warned that the
success of the Beijing Olympics next year will be judged by how well the Chinese
deal with their own country's growing problem of performanceenhancing drugs in
sport.

   Pound, a former Olympic swimmer who, as a member of the International Olympic
Committee,was instrumental in turning the Games into a multibillion dollar
enterprise after he took charge of TV and sponsorship deals, will be travelling
to China this autumn to spell out his concerns to the Beijing organising
committee and doping control unit.

   At stake could be the credibility of the Olympics. Pound fears that the
movement is in danger of experiencing its worst moments since Ben Johnson
brought shame on himself and his sport 19 years ago in Seoul.

   'China has a problem,' said Pound.'You can go on the web and get human growth
hormone, EPO, steroids, you name it, and they're coming from China.

   There's been systematic doping in their schools, they've hired a bunch of
former East German coaches who have brought their notebooks with them, and it's
clear that the whole success of the Games will be measured on how good the
anti-doping programme is.' Suspicion of Chinese sport is not new. Back in the
Nineties a coach called Ma Junren produced a host of world championship winning
athletes and famously insisted that their success was down to herbal medicine
and turtle blood. The scientists suspected otherwise and just before the 2000
Olympics in Sydney, six of his runners were among 27 Chinese competitors who
tested positive for banned substances.

   Since then, despite other positive cases, Chinese sport insists it has
cleaned up its act.

   Pound, however, remains to be convinced.

   'If they have a thousand athletes nobody's heard of and they end up winning
everything at the Olympics, then the Games will be a failure,' said the
65-year-old Canadian.

   'If their top 100 metres runner improves his time from 10.1sec to 9.8sec then
I'm afraid it will be too good to be true. I'm going to reinforce this message
in Beijing in September. Central government is aware of this, but they don't
reach further than the outskirts of Beijing and the provinces are a rule only to
themselves.' Pound also fears that gene therapy, the latest threat to drugs-free
sport,will start taking effect at the 2008 Games. He clings to the hope that a
watertight testing procedure, currently unavailable, will have been perfected by
then.

   The process, in which genes are inserted into muscle or bone cells and their
proteins fed directly into the tissue,was designed initially for muscle-wasting
diseases, but Pound, a powerful figure in global sport, predicted as far back as
2002 the threat it would pose to sport.

   'Genetic manipulation is prohibited,' he said. 'We have plenty of evidence
that says sport is turning to this, a currently undetectable process. I met some
of the world's leading genetic scientists five years ago and asked them to
provide a test. In 2005, they were confident a test would be ready soon.

   We don't have it yet, but I'm hoping we will before gene therapy gets out of
control.' AS BEFITS a man who has a can labelled 'Bullshit Repellent' sitting on
his office shelf,Pound pulls no punches. The way British sport handles those who
fall foul of the doping laws does not escape criticism and Pound highlights the
case of Christine Ohuruogu.

   The 400m runner missed three drug tests in 18 months and was suspended by her
sport for a year. But she is also banned for life by the British Olympic
Association, although an appeal may see that overturned. 'I thought she was
lucky to get only a year,' said Pound.'But I also want to see harmonised rules
around the world. Britain's policy of imposing permanent Olympic bans goes
beyond the WADA code, which the BOA are meant to have adopted.' Pound will leave
his post in November and he hopes what he refers to as his 'WADA swansong' will
be the ratification in November of an increase of the ban for drug cheats from
two to four years. 'Two is not enough,' he said. 'You can get the benefits from
steroids four years after taking them. We have an ongoing consultation process
on this but it would be a nice way for me to bow out with the code improved, and
it looks like this will be the case.' Another tactic he hopes will be used more
extensively in the war against drugs is the clumsily named ' nonanalytical
positive' - shopping your team-mates, in other words. Although former world 100m
champion Tim Montgomery had never failed a test, when fellow American sprinter
Kelli White revealed how Montgomery had admitted taking drugs to her, the
evidence was enough to earn Montgomery a ban.

   'We've hanged people on evidence like that,' said Pound. 'I see
non-analytical positives as the future. We need some truth and reconciliation
here. We need people to come forward and admit to having wrestled with their
conscience for the past 10 years or so, either about themselves, or someone
else.

   'I accept that most won't - there are either too many highly-polished halos
out there, or too many still in denial - but the Montgomery case showed us the
way.' Pound's wrath is not reserved for the mainstream Olympic sports.

   Cricket and rugby, in particular, have disappointed him by their
apparent-unwillingness to adhere to the WADA code on drug-testing and the
punishment of offenders.

   HE IS so disappointed by cricket's attitude towards the positive tests of two
Pakistani fast bowlers, Shoaib Akhtar and Mohammad Asif, that he has referred it
to the Court of Arbitration for Sport.

   Despite their positive tests for nandrolone, an anabolic steroid, the
Pakistan-Cricket Board overturned bans imposed on the two players because they
claimed they were unaware of the contents of supplements they were taking. 'The
ICC have not acted upon this so we've appealed to the CAS,' said Pound. 'Cricket
has undoubtedly got a problem. Don't think two Pakistani bowlers are the only
cricketers in the world cheating.' And as rugby prepares for the World Cup this
autumn, Pound lambasted the game, claiming: 'It lends itself to
performance-enhancing drug abuse and there's plenty of anecdotal evidence to
suggest it has a problem. Some of the players have thighs as big as the mast on
HMS Victory.' Clearly while his days at WADA are almost at an end, Dick Pound is
not a man looking to go quietly.

   'REMEMBER MA AND HIS TURTLE BLOOD?

   CHINESE track coach Ma Junren (right) caused huge controversy in the Nineties
by claiming turtle blood and herbs were behind the success of his athletes. Drug
tests proved otherwise and six of his runners were kicked out of China's Olympic
team

GRAPHIC: CHEAT: BEN JOHNSON WINS THE 100 METRES AT THE 1988 SEOUL OLYMPICS
BEFORE BEING DISQUALIFIED FOR DRUG-TAKING. INSET: DICK POUND

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2007


                              62 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             April 3, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: Could a bird virus help defeat cancer?;
Good Health

BYLINE: ROGER DOBSON

BODY:

   A VIRUS often fatal to birds is being used to treat human cancers.

   Researchers believe that Newcastle Disease virus, which causes no such
problems in humans, reproduces much faster in cancer cells than healthy cells
because they have fewer viral defences.

   They believe the virus, which is being injected into patients in a new
clinical trial, will kill cancer cells and may eventually destroy the whole
tumour.

   A number or viruses have been tried, including a modified human herpes, but
in the new trial in Israel, Professor Shimon Slavin, head of bone marrow
transplantation and cancer immunotherapy at Hadassah University Hospital,
Jerusalem, is using the Newcastle virus on patients who have not responded to
other therapies.

   Patients taking part in the trial include those with lung, gastric and skin
cancers that have spread.

   Other trials in America may soon be looking at using the virus in the
treatment of bladder cancer, ovarian cancer and head and neck cancer.

   Professor Leonard Seymour, professor of genetic therapies at Oxford
University, said: 'This is a whole new exciting field that is expanding very
quickly.' A number of other viruses are being looked at as potential cancer
therapies.

   At the Mayo Clinic in America, a treatment based on the measles virus is
being used to treat a number of cancers, including ovarian and brain.

   Researchers at the University of Western Ontario have also shown that the
myxoma virus, which causes myxomatosis in rabbits, can also infect and destroy
cancer cells.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2007


                              63 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             March 3, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 102

LENGTH: 218 words

HEADLINE: Bulls hope for more to come at SR Pharma

BODY:

   GENE therapy is extraordinary and so is the rise of SR Pharma. Tipped here in
November at 18p, it has been as high as 821/2p. After this week's turbulence, it
is 711/2p, almost a 'four bagger'. Is it time to take profits?

   Investors are waking up to the potential of SR's 'gene silencing' technology,
which stops unhelpful genes, controlling disease or allowing treatment to work.

   Merck's Pounds 575m purchase of US rival Sirna Therapeutics was the wakeup
call.

   SR's talks with licensing partners seem to be going well. Last September
Pfizer signed a deal to develop a treatment for eye degeneration. Last month SR
collected a Pounds 770,000 royalty helpful, but not enough to end losses.

   What inflames the bulls is the hope that one of the giants will not stop at
licensing, but buy the company.

   Having hoped for a takeout above Pounds 1 a share, they are now looking for
even more.

   SR is valued at Pounds 81m. If it were worth half as much as Sirna, the
shares would treble.

   This is only an if, but its Atugen gene technology buy, and other early stage
projects, could attract a predator.

   Yet it is still burning cash and faces all the risks of drug research and
development.

   It might be wise to sell enough to cover your costs and (if you bought big)
to use this year's capital gains tax allowance. Beyond that, hold on.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2007


                              64 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           February 24, 2007 Saturday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 930 words

HEADLINE: DAWN OF THE GM BABIES?;
As experiments on embryos get go-ahead...

BYLINE: JULIE WHELDON

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS will be able to carry out genetic experiments on human embryos for
the first time under controversial Government plans.

   Ministers have given the green light to research that some doctors warn
raises the disturbing prospect of 'genetically modified babies'.

   Proposed legislation says researchers would be allowed to alter the genetic
blueprint of an embryo up to two weeks old. Ethical campaigners fear this could
herald an era of eugenics in which couples would engineer their children to be
as perfect as possible.

   Critics predicted the public would be 'horrified' by any steps towards
creating GM babies.

   The Government has said it will not allow genetic modification of embryos for
reproductive purposes.

   However, it wants to let scientists alter the genetic structure of the cells
of live embryos for research projects. In practice this would mean scientists
could take an embryo while it is only a few days old and manipulate its genes to
learn more about inherited disorders such as motor neurone disease.

   After 14 days the embryo would have to be destroyed so it could never grow
into a GM baby.

   But Dr David King, director of the campaign group Human Genetics Alert, said
that to allow such research suggests that one day the Government hopes to
overturn this current ban.

   'If this were not the plan, why allow scientists to begin research?' he
asked. 'We must not start down the path to a future of GM "designer babies".

   'Once scientists can dangle before the public realistic rather than
theoretical possibilities of curing genetic diseases, it will be difficult to
counter well-meaning support for human genetic modification.' He said current
techniques are unsafe and would be likely to create mutations in the embryos.

   Genetic modification could ultimately be used to improve a potential child's
character or appearance, he added. 'Then we could end up in eugenics that would
make anything else we have seen in the past look like a picnic in the park.'
Josephine Quintavalle, of the lobby group Comment on Reproductive Ethics, said:
'This is very clearly a step in a direction that no one should be going down.

   'There was enough concern about genetically-modified food so what will people
think of the genetic modification of human beings?' Dr Michael Antoniou, an
expert in gene therapy from Guy's Hospital in London, said other techniques
already exist to help couples carrying defective genes.

   'If we really had the good of the patient at heart we would be investing our
limited resources in this area to advancing gene therapy in combination with
adult stem cell technology which is already showing great promise in clinical
trials,' he said.

   But others disputed the idea that research on 14- day- old embryos would lead
to GM babies.

   Professor Chris Higgins, director of the Medical Research Council's Clinical
Sciences Centre and an expert in genetics, said scientists want to understand
more about the early stages of human development and disease.

   Such embryos could be used to create banks of stem cells, which scientists
could then use to study ways in which diseases form and even try out new
treatments.

   'We need to learn how to do this perfectly and to be able to do that there
are fundamental questions that have to be answered about how cells work in the
embryo,' he said.

   He said that at the stage when the embryo is destroyed it is a bundle of 100
cells. It is not yet a baby because it has not been implanted in the womb and
that would be banned under current laws.

   'It is completely illegal to use these techniques to create a designer baby,'
he said. 'There are very clear safeguards in this country and I don't know of
anyone who would even think of doing that as it would be unsafe and immoral.'
Professor John Burn, medical director of the International Centre for Life,
Newcastle, said: 'I can't imagine anyone wanting to use genetic modification in
reproduction in the foreseeable future.' Dr Kieran Breen, director of research
and development for the Parkinson's Disease Society, urged the Government 'not
to cut off a research channel that offers the 120,000 people with Parkinson's in
the UK significant but as yet not fully explored hope for the future.' The
Department of Health said: 'The law will clearly continue to ban genetic
modification of embryos for reproductive purposes and we will extend that
prohibition to explicitly cover sperm and eggs.

   'Any research using human embryos requires authorisation from the Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Authority and must meet the rigorous criteria set
out in the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990.'

   HOW IT WOULD WORK

   AFTER fertilising an egg, scientists could begin to alter or introduce genes,
as the embryo divides.

   This might involve injecting a cell with a mutated version of a gene linked
to a condition such as Motor Neurone Disease.

   At 14 days the embryo would be destroyed. It could not become a baby as the
law states it cannot be implanted in the womb. But before this, scientists could
harvest stem cells master cells that turn into body tissues from the embryos.
These could be kept indefinitely in the lab.

   The banks of stem cells could be encouraged to form tissues relevant to the
disease, such as nerves or lung, allowing scientists to see how a disease
develops. They could also use it to test drugs.

   The same techniques could be used to see how certain genes influence an
embryo's early development. This would improve understanding of embryonic stem
cells, which would in turn, help scientists develop reliable ways of triggering
stem cells to become certain tissue types.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2007


                              65 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           February 20, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Woman who cared for everyone but herself;
Nursing her crippled children kills victim of cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: JAYA NARAIN

BODY:

   AS a mother of nine and a foster parent too, Jackie Culshaw was devoted to
caring for others even when it put her own life at risk.

   Two of her children were born with cystic fibrosis and, 12 years ago, she was
also diagnosed with a mild form of the condition.

   She knew that by nursing daughter Sammy and son Stuart, she could become
seriously ill and die if she caught an infection from one of them.

   But the woman crowned Mrs Britain by ITV's This Morning programme in 1993
never gave her own health a second thought.

   She tended constantly to Sammy, 27 and Stuart, 22, until they died within
three weeks of each other in 2003. By then, her own condition had begun to
deteriorate.

   Five weeks ago, 58-year-old Mrs Culshaw was admitted to Broadgreen Hospital
in Liverpool suffering from pneumonia and she died on Valentine's Day with her
husband, Tony, and other children at her bedside.

   Mr Culshaw, who raised three foster children with his wife as well as their
own nine, said she knew the risks of having such close contact with her
children.

   The 58-year- old engineer from Crosby, Merseyside, added: 'She wasn't afraid
of dying as she wanted to see Sammy and Stuart again. She had accepted her fate.

   'With CF, you do not know how bad the next illness will be and Jackie didn't
want to go through another infection.

   'We have already had five weeks of grieving as we knew she wasn't going to
come home. She just had no strength left to fight this infection.' The couple's
eldest daughter, Lisa Kennedy, 35, said Mrs Culshaw would not let her own ill
health affect her ability to care for her children.

   'Mum was a mother first and CF sufferer second and as such she always put the
health of Sammy and Stuart before her own.

   'All the time they were ill, she would just not let herself be ill.

   She used to say she had power of the mind.

   'But once Stuart and Sammy passed away, it was almost as if she allowed
herself to get sick. Once that responsibility had gone, her body just shut down.
She never complained or felt down about it. Even the day before she died we were
all together, laughing and joking.' Cystic fibrosis is caused by a single faulty
gene and causes the internal organs to become clogged with thick mucus resulting
in infections and inflammation and making it hard to breathe and digest food.

   For a baby to be born with cystic fibrosis, both parents must be carriers of
the faulty gene. A baby born to two carriers has a one in four chance of having
the disease.

   Mrs Culshaw was able to lead a normal life and was not diagnosed with CF
until she caught a bacterial infection from her children at the age of 46.

   A spokesman for the Cystic Fibrosis Trust said: 'It's certainly unusual for
someone to be diagnosed with cystic fibrosis that late in life but it is not
unheard of.' She said Mrs Culshaw could not have experienced severe symptoms or
she would have been diagnosed much earlier.

   Cystic fibrosis, for which there is no cure, is the UK's most common
life-threatening inherited disease, affecting more than 7,500 sufferers.

   About four per cent of the population carry the faulty gene which causes it.

   If two carriers have a child, he or she has a one in four chance of having
the disease.

   Each week, five babies are born with cystic fibrosis and it claims three
lives.

   Average life expectancy is around 31 years, although improvements in
treatments mean a baby born today could expect to live for longer.

   The Cystic Fibrosis Trust funds research to find an effective treatment
through gene therapy.

   When it was founded in 1964, life expectancy for sufferers was only five
years.

GRAPHIC: SELFLESS: MRS CULSHAW WITH DAUGHTER SAMMY, WHO DIED WITHIN WEEKS OF SON
STUART, LEFT

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2007


                              66 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            February 12, 2007 Monday

SECTION: ED SC1; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: 'Butterfly' girl's joy at cure hope

BYLINE: PATRICK BARNHAM

BODY:

   A GIRL born with a rare condition which makes her skin as fragile as a
butterfly's wing was all smiles yesterday after becoming one of the first in
line for a potential new cure.

   Nine-year-old Adana Forsyth, of Montrose, Angus, has to be bandaged every day
because she suffers from epidermolysis bullosa (EB).

   The genetic condition, which affects 350 people in the UK, causes skin to
blister at the slightest knock or on exposure to air or water.

   But now scientists in Italy have used gene therapy to 'fix' affected skin.

   Taking a small sample from an EB patient's palm, they corrected the defect
and then grew the cells into sheets of skin. When these were grafted onto the
patient's legs, they healed normally and, one year on, are still free of the
condition.

   John Dart of DEBRA, the charity which funds EB research, said: 'This is the
first proof that a gene therapy might provide a solution to this otherwise
incurable condition.' Adana's mother Dianne, 35, said: 'If they could just
rebuild the skin on her hands, knees and feet it would be the miracle we've
dreamed of.' Adana has already had blood tests in preparation for clinical
trials, which her family have been told could begin as early as October.

GRAPHIC: SMILES: ADANA COULD BENEFIT FROM GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2007


                              67 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            February 6, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: ED SC1; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 469 words

HEADLINE: I'll do anything to get more time with my precious baby;
Mum who put off cancer treatment to have son has only months to live

BYLINE: PAMELA OWEN

BODY:

   WHEN Anna Radosz was six months pregnant, doctors made the devastating
discovery that she had cancer.

   They told her she would need chemotherapy to battle the illness, but, fearful
it would harm her unborn baby, she refused.

   Baby Oscar was born in November and now Miss Radosz, 27, has been given only
months to live.

   Determined to spend as much time as possible with her baby, she is battling
to raise nearly Pounds 80,000 to fund genetic therapy in the U.S. that she
believes could save her life.

   Miss Radosz, who lives in Aberdeen, said: 'I'll move heaven and earth to get
more time with my precious baby.

   My cancer is so advanced, I know it's not looking good.

   'I could have a year, maybe six months or even less, but I ' l l do anything
to live to be a mother to my baby.

   'I've done some research and a gene clinic in Boston is probably my only
hope.' The agricultural science graduate from Poland moved to Aberdeen two years
ago to be with her partner, Daniel Smajdor, a lorry driver.

   Miss Radosz was diagnosed with cancer in 2004 after doctors removed a mole on
her arm and it turned out to be a malignant melanoma. The illness returned last
year when she was six months pregnant.

   Surgeons at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary removed spots on her neck, and arms and
the mother- to- be was warned she needed more chemotherapy, but concerned that
it might put her unborn child at risk, she refused the treatment until Oscar was
born.

   Miss Radosz added: 'The first two months were terrible. I kept wondering who
was going to take care of my baby if I didn't make it, but then I decided I had
to fight, for my sake and that of my family.

   ' There was no way I could go through with chemotherapy. My baby's health was
more important.' But last month, doctors discovered the sacrifice had come at a
massive price. Scans revealed Miss Radosz had tumours in her lungs and brain.

   Because there are so many tumours on her brain, surgery is out of the
question and, even with chemotherapy, she only has about a 10 per cent chance of
survival.

   Medics have given her as little as two months to live.

   A desperate Miss Radosz has been turned away by a clinic in London because
her condition is so far advanced, but the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston
in the U. S. is offering a glimmer of hope.

   Miss Radosz is clinging to the belief that groundbreaking genetic therapy
there could save her life and ensure her more time with her beloved baby, but
the treatment will cost about Pounds 78,000, which neither she nor her partner
can afford.

   So far, they have raised Pounds 1,000 and they are pulling out all the stops
to get more.

   She added: ' We are determined to get the money somehow.

   'The hospital has said it will take me as a patient, we just need the funds.

   I want to live to see my baby grow.

   Not being there for him is out of the question.'

GRAPHIC: ANNA RADOSZ AND OSCAR: 'I WANT TO LIVE TO SEE MY BABY GROW'

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2007


                              68 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            January 23, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 1499 words

HEADLINE: MY BROTHER MY SAVIOUR;
Good Health: At 11, Nathan Hartley had a life-saving bone marrow transplant. Now
he has agreed to be a donor himself to save his brother Luke, 7, from the deadly
disease that affected their whole family

BYLINE: BECKY SHEAVES

BODY:

   ON NOVEMBER 30, 2003, Allison and David Hartley were asked to go to Great
Ormond Street Hospital for Children in London, where two of their sons were
being treated for anaemia. Their consultant delivered a bombshell: although the
Hartleys' other two sons were apparently healthy, all four boys had a rare
genetic disorder, X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (XLP) which would kill
them all within ten years.

   The condition weakened their immune systems and would inevitably lead to
cancers, blood clots and severe anaemia. None of the boys - Josh, then 11,
Nathan, ten, Daniel, seven, and Luke, four - would live beyond his teens. The
only hope was a bone marrow transplant, if a suitable match could be found for
each child.

   'I could see why the nurses had taken the boys out of the room to watch
video,' remembers Allison, now 39.

   'David and I were numb with shock.

   'The consultant was direct and honest with us. But I could see it wasn't easy
for her to tell us that our children could die within the next ten years.

   She, too, had tears in her eyes.

   'We immediately said we would donate our own bone marrow, but she told us
that, at best, most parents are only a 50 or 60 per cent match for their child's
tissue type.

   'On the way home, we had to be cheerful because we had the children in the
car. But late that night, when they had all gone to bed, we cried and prayed.

   We clung to the hope that a donor could be found for each of them.' The
hospital looked through donor registers to find a match to save each boy's life.
But although the international medical community pools resources - there were
nine million people registered in 50 countries - none was a 100 per cent match
for any of them.

   In desperation, the couple appealed in the Mail for donors, and thousands of
readers came forward. Within six months, Joshua, now 15, had undergone a
successful transplant. Then matches were found for Nathan, 13, and Daniel, ten.
All three boys are in good health with a normal life expectancy.

   HOWEVER, the Hartleys' youngest child, seven-year-old Luke, has not had a
bone marrow transplant - without one, he is unlikely to live beyond the age of
12.

   Then, just last week, David and Allison received some good news.

   Specialists said the best match for Luke is his older brother Nathan. By
becoming a donor, Nathan could save his brother's life.

   'We are over the moon,' says David, 43, a software company director. 'It's
such a blessing that Nathan can donate to save Luke's life.' Luke's transplant
can go ahead in March.

   The Hartleys' story began 20 years ago when Allison and David met through
their local church. They married two years later - unaware that Allison carried
the XLP gene.

   'At first, we seemed to be a very normal family,' says Allison. 'Our boys
were all born healthy, and we loved being parents of a big, lively family.

   'But when our second son, Nathan, was about two-and-a-half, he developed
anaemia and was failing to thrive.

   He was small for his age and looked pale and unwell.

   'Eventually, an ultrasound scan revealed he had a childhood cancer called
B-cell lymphoma in his bowel.

   It's a common result of XLP, though we didn't know it at the time.

   'He was undergoing chemotherapy to shrink the cancer, which was the size of a
golf ball, when the tumour ruptured his bowel. He was rushed to theatre for
emergency surgery which was very complicated as the tumour was wrapped round a
major artery.

   'The doctors told us they didn't think Nathan would survive the operation.

   But after two-and-a-half hours in the waiting room, literally preparing
ourselves to say goodbye to our son, we saw the surgeon come in, smiling, saying
they had got the tumour out safely.

   'Nathan made an incredible recovery, and was up and running around within a
fortnight. After that, we thought that having a son survive cancer was our fair
share of health problems.' But worse was to come. Five years later, Josh, then
nine, became increasingly pale, listless and was unable to take part in sports
with his friends.

   'He was found to have severe anaemia,' says David. 'He struggled along with
iron injections and blood transfusions for two years. But then Nathan, too,
developed worsening anaemia and doctors referred both boys to Great Ormond
Street Hospital.' They underwent a host of tests - as did the rest of the family
to see if there were genetic problems. After six months, doctors discovered the
children had XLP.

   The consultant explained that Allison was the carrier, through a faulty X
chromosome. Women have two X chromosomes, so even if, like Allison, one of these
is faulty, the healthy partner chromosome ensures a normal immune system. But
men have only one X chromosome - which is why only males are affected by the
disease.

   A son of a woman who carries XLP has a 50 per cent chance of developing the
disease. In the Hartleys' case, it was statistical bad luck that all four boys
inherited Allison's faulty chromosome rather than her healthy one.

   XLP is so rare that there are just 100 affected families worldwide, and the
condition was identified only seven years ago.

   One of Allison's brothers, Peter, died from unexplained causes when he was
just four years old. It is now thought he, too, had XLP.

   'My parents have found it a sort of comfort to know the probable reason for
Peter's death,' says Allison.

   'We've looked through the family tree and can find no other incidences. We
can only hope that by the time the boys start their own families, there will be
a cure or screening,' she says.

   At any one time, there are about 3,000 people in the UK waiting for a bone
marrow transplant, but only about 500 take place every year.

   'Despite it being unlikely we would be a match, David and I were both
screened,' says Allison. 'It was getting especially urgent for Josh, who was
deteriorating daily before our eyes.'

   THE results of the DNA screening would take 12 weeks and, in the meantime,
the family's only hope was to appeal publicly.

   Within a few weeks, 15,000 people had volunteered to become donors.

   'It was overwhelming,' says David.

   'We couldn't get over how good people were.' Then Allison's results came
back. 'I was found to be a 90 per cent match for Josh's tissue type and, rather
than wait for a closer match, doctors felt it was vital to go ahead with the
transplant,' she explains.

   'It was very healing to be able to be Josh's donor,' she says. 'David and the
boys have never blamed me for carrying XLP. But as a mother, I felt it deeply.
This way, I could do my bit to save his life.' Josh's transplant took place in
May 2004. For Allison, the donation was simple and required minimal discomfort,
involving a few injections and drips.

   For Josh, however, it was much tougher. He had to have two weeks of intensive
chemotherapy to kill off his existing white blood cells.

   He felt sick, lost his hair and was exhausted. He had to live in a sterile
isolation room, visited only by his parents and the medical team to avoid
infection - even a cold could have killed him.

   Josh was then given the blood marrow transplant by an intravenous
transfusion. It was three months before he was well enough to come home. To this
day, Josh has an inner strength and resilience from everything he went though
then,' says David.

   'He never lets anything get him down for long, and he is wise beyond his
years.' While Joshua was undergoing his transplant, the Hartleys received more
good news. A donor had been found for Daniel, then eight, who went on to have a
successful transplant himself in November 2004.

   Soon afterwards, another donor was found to match Nathan, and he, too, had
his transplant in September 2005, aged 11.

   That left Luke. The idea of Nathan as donor had been proposed before as he
and his youngest brother are such a close tissue match. 'Nathan heard a
consultant mention it months ago, and he was desperate to be chosen,' Allison
says. 'So when we told him this week that it was all down to him, he was
thrilled.' Becoming a donor is, says Nathan, the least he can do. 'I know I was
lucky that a donor helped me,' he explains.

   'Now I am so well that I can give some of my bone marrow to my little
brother. I'm really proud I can do it.' By the summer, if all goes well, every
one of the Hartley boys will have been saved by bone marrow transplants.

   'We're very grateful. But we know other people aren't so fortunate,' says
David.

   'The Holy Grail of a condition like XLP and other genetic diseases is gene
therapy, in which you simply inject a patient with the missing gene. Allison and
I have set up a charity called the XLP Research Trust to fund medical research.
We've raised more than Pounds 100,000 so far, but there is so much more to do.

   'We know that, although we were very unlucky to have all four children with
XLP, we have been incredibly blessed to have found a cure for all of them.'

   * TO REGISTER as a bone marrow donor, contact the Anthony Nolan Trust through
its website at www.anthonynolan.org or call 020 7284 1234.

   * To donate to David and Allison's charity, visit www.xlpresearchtrust.org

GRAPHIC: TRANSPLANT: NATHAN HARTLEY AND BROTHER LUKE, WHO WILL RECEIVE HIS BONE
MARROW

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2007


                              69 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           January 11, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: ED 3RD; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: Common cold virus could destroy cancer tumours

BYLINE: LUCY BALLINGER

BODY:

   THE common cold could be used in a groundbreaking treatment to fight cancer,
scientists said last night.

   Human trials starting this year will attempt to kill cancers by using viruses
like the common cold to infect the tumour.

   Preliminary research on mice shows the treatment works well on tumours
resistant to cancer drugs.

   If the tests are successful, the virus therapy could become standard
alongside radiotherapy and chemotherapy, but without the debilitating
side-effects.

   The trials, partly funded by Cancer Research UK, are being led by Leonard
Seymour, a professor of gene therapy at Oxford University.

   He has been working with scientists in London and the U.S. who hope the virus
will kill cancer cells directly, but avoid harm to healthy tissue.

   Although researchers have known for some time that viruses can kill tumour
cells, they have previously concentrated on injecting the treatment directly
into cancers.

   But this will not work if the cancer is inaccessible or has spread throughout
the body.

   Professor Seymour's solution is to mask the virus from the body's immune
system during its journey to the tumour. The virus is given a polymer coat
before it is injected, so the immune system does not immediately start trying to
destroy it.

   When it reaches a tumour it exploits the fact that cancer suppressesthe
body's immune system in the immediate area. The virus can start replicating and
overwhelm and destroy the cancer cells.

   Professor Seymour said: 'In principle, you've got something which could be
many times more effective than regular chemotherapy.

   'What we've done is make chemical modifications to the virus to put a polymer
coat around it it's a stealth virus when you inject it.

   'If you can get a virus into a tumour, viruses find them a very good place to
be because there's no immune system to stop them replicating. You can regard it
as the cancer's Achilles' heel.

   'The viruses replicate, you get a million copies in each cell, the cell
bursts and they infect the adjacent cells and repeat the process.' Any viruses
which escape from the tumour are quickly recognised by the body's immune system
and mopped up.' The therapy would be especially useful for secondary cancers,
called metastases, which sometimes spread around the body after the first tumour
appears.

   The two viruses likely to be used in the first trials are adenovirus which
normally causes a cold-like illness, and vaccinia, which is used in the vaccine
against smallpox.

   Richard Sullivan, Cancer Research UK's director of clinical programmes, said:
'We are pleased to be supporting this new and important research.

   'While this approach is still at an early stage it has exciting potential,
particularly for the treatment of cancer which has spread, a notoriously
difficult stage to treat.'

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2007


                              70 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           January 3, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: Leading don killed by falling pylon

BYLINE: LUKE SALKELD

BODY:

   A RESPECTED academic has been named as the man killed by a falling
electricity pylon on New Year's Day.

   Professor Roland Levinsky, 63, vice-chancellor of the University of Plymouth,
was electrocuted as he and his wife walked their dog in a field near their
seaside home.

   Stormy weather brought down a 30ft wooden electricity pylon and a loose cable
sent 11,000 volts through his body, causing a massive heart attack.

   Friends yesterday paid tribute to the scientist's achievements.

   Neighbour Barry Stevens said: 'Roland was a big man with a big personality.

   He arrived in the UK five years ago and was a very respected and clever man.
I was with him on Christmas Day he was so happy.' The tragedy happened just
before one o'clock on New Year's Day as

   Professor Levinsky and his wife Beth walked along a footpath close to their
home in Wembury, Devon.

   Mrs Levinsky, a former primary school teacher, was yesterday being comforted
by the couple's grownup son and two daughters.

   Mr Stevens said: 'She is in a complete state. She can't believe what has
happened.' Professor Levinsky was born in South Africa, of East European
descent. In 2002, he was appointed vice-chancellor of Plymouth University, where
he was also professor of medicine. His research interests included gene therapy
and stem cell biology.

   The father of three, who was a keen sailor and artist, had also worked as a
doctor at Great Ormond Street Hospital. He was

   also praised by his colleagues at Plymouth University. Deputy vicechancellor
Mark Cleary said: 'Roland was a remarkable person who was very special. He was a
friend, a mentor, an inspirational leader who will be seriously missed.

   'He was generous with his time and generous with his intellect.

   'He was a very powerful researcher who was an international leader in his
field but he was also a tremendous leader of the university.' PC Terry Hodgson,
of Devon and Cornwall police, said yesterday that electricity company engineers
were examining the pylon to discover what caused it to fall.

   He added: 'It was a freak incident.

   The structure has to be examined and we need to ask the company about its
maintenance.'

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              71 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 30, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1775 words

HEADLINE: As a young boy, DESMOND MORRIS wrote down his haunting vision of a
future in which Man would live for ever but plants and animals would cease to
exist. Today, he says, he's almost been proved right;
SATURDAY ESSAY

BYLINE: DESMOND MORRIS

BODY:

   EVEN before I had embarked on my career as a people-watcher, I had spent most
of my childhood observing grownups blowing one another to pieces.

   With World War II raging around me, I retreated into the realm of fantasy
and, on one occasion, wrote a description of the future of mankind.

   It was not intended to portray what I personally wanted, but what I envisaged
might take place if, despite my inherent pessimism, our species managed to
survive in the long-term future. It was a strange scenario.

   I imagined a world in which protein had been synthesised, and artificial
steaks and chops and sausages were indistinguishable from the real thing.

   Similar progress had been made with vegetable foods. A natural fauna and
flora was no longer needed to provide mankind with sustenance.

   What I called the 'biomortists' - humans who deliberately had destroyed the
natural world - had successfully exterminated all non-human forms of life, from
elephants to earwigs, and from trees to algae.

   I imagined that medics had eliminated all diseases and perfected human cell
replacement so that there was no tissue deterioration with ageing.

   Humans could live as long as they wanted in perfect health. Because the
climate was ruined, I speculated that people had moved underground, living in
vast colonies deep under the land masses and even beneath the oceans.

   There were so many people alive that free space had run out, and a breeding
permit had to be obtained before a baby could be conceived. These permits were
issued only when someone had been killed in an accident or had committed
suicide, now the only two ways you could die.

   Breeding without a permit was prevented by a special chemical added to all
the water supplies. When you were granted a breeding permit, you were given a
temporary antidote. This kept the human population steady at a million million.

   All forms of fear and violence had also been eliminated by chemical control.

   Huge stimulation palaces, now in every community, provided an unimaginable
variety of both sensual and cerebral novelties to occupy the minds of the new
humans, so that they were never bored.

   With perfect artificial food, a perfect artificial climate, perfect health,
and plenty to occupy themselves, members of the human species had, in my
youthful mind, reached the next, higher phase of evolution.

   Human beings had insulated themselves from every threat to their survival and
would last as long as their home planet. It was clearly a scenario influenced by
wartime nights spent in the comforting security of air-raid shelters.

   I had forgotten all about this fantasy of mine until I came across an old box
of papers my mother had saved from my youth. And reading it recently set me
thinking about what kind of scenario I would now envisage for mankind.

   WITH a lifetime of study of the human species behind me, how would I see the
future of our species?

   How different would it be from my earlier vision?

   Alarmingly, at least one of my predictions appears to be a reality already.

   My 1944 invention of 'biomortism' - the destruction of the natural world -
turned out to be prophetic.

   Sixty years ago, no one gave a thought to chopping down the rain forests, the
pollution of the seas or the creeping reduction of wild habitats. There may have
been no deliberate attempt to destroy the wild places of the world, but this
threat has escalated exponentially as a by-product of the rapid growth of human
populations.

   In the 1960s, I was present at the first ever conservation conference, and I
recall thinking what a novel idea it was.

   However, I was highly sceptical about many of its proposals, and upset its
organiser, Peter Scott, by suggesting that his best hope lay in supplying
condoms to the human populations living in the regions where wild animals were
most at risk.

   And now? No one can deny the evidence all around the world that, as long as
the human population continues to grow at its present rate, there is no
long-term hope for much of the wild habitat of this planet.

   We may not have a malign 'biomortist' organisation out there employed to
destroy it, but the effect is the same. Even if the threat from global warming
abates, mankind will continue to lay waste to the planet we inhabit.

   When I wrote my early fantasy, there were just over 2,000 million human
beings alive on the planet.

   Today, that figure has tripled to more than 6,000 million.

   Every day, the global human population increases by about 200,000.

   Where are all these people going to live? Something will have to make way for
them - and it will be the remaining wild places on Earth. My fictional
'biomortists' will hardly be needed. Their job will be done for them - unless
some way can be found to slow down human population growth.

   It is just possible that we might eventually be persuaded to extend
contraception to the level where we accept something akin to my concept of
breeding permits, but this would be such a gross infringement of human rights
that it is highly improbable.

   BUT in failing to control over-breeding, it is much more likely that we will
become so crowded that Nature will take a hand, as it does in all such cases,
and will provide us with sweeping epidemics so deadly that we will suddenly find
ourselves back to quite modest levels again.

   The wilds will then be able to reclaim some of their lost territories but,
sadly, many of the most exciting forms of wildlife will have been exterminated
before this can happen.

   What of my other predictions?

   Is there any hope of synthesising food, or of controlling ageing, fear or
violence? Again, science fact has caught up with my science fiction.

   Whether you approve of them or not, cloned animals and GM foods are now a
reality that was unimaginable in my early career. So I can certainly envisage
that the perfection of artificial foods may one day remove the need for domestic
livestock and crops altogether.

   This would, at least, have the benefit of freeing up acres of farmland around
the world to accommodate the thousands of millions of new humans - as well as
the ones who refuse to die. For I can also imagine medical advances enabling us
to approach immortality.

   The ageing process has long been thought of as inevitable, but we now know it
is not. It is merely that each individual has a built-in obsolescence. As
individuals, we are temporary containers for our immortal genes.

   With each new generation, these genes get re-mixed and keep our species
flexible, ready for any major change in the environment. Without this system we
would, quite literally, be unable to evolve.

   But that does not mean our human intelligence is incapable of isolating
Nature's ageing mechanism and incapacitating it.

   We already know roughly how it works. Gene therapy to treat certain diseases
is an imminent reality. And I am sure that, in the longer term future, our
medical experts will have found a way to isolate the ageing gene altogether, and
to strengthen our immune systems to an amazing degree.

   The dream of eternal youth is therefore something that can be realised -
whatever the consequences for our already nightmarish population problem.

   With food and health taken care of, this may also place religion in a new
perspective.

   To protect ourselves from fears of our own mortality and to cope with our
earthly sufferings, we have, for thousands of years, sought the protection of
one kind of god-figure or another.

   Inevitably, these fears are strongest where there is extreme poverty. But if,
in some distant future, we have been able to eradicate global poverty and
disease, then religion, like ageing, may also become obsolete.

   Does all this make me depressed about the future of our species? Not at all.

   The pessimism of my wartime childhood has long since evaporated.

   Over the years, my studies of human behaviour have made me realise that we
have one saving grace, namely our playful curiosity.

   Our inventiveness, our urge to explore new ideas and to develop new forms of
technology, is so strong that it will repeatedly rewrite our future.

   Just when we find ourselves up against some seemingly impossible new problem,
we will solve it with yet another brilliant-innovation. I have been talking so
far about life in the distant future, but in a more immediate timeframe I expect
to see (or rather I expect my grandchildren to see) some startling new
developments, especially in the realm of transportation.

   Some futurologists pin their hopes on travel to the stars, where new colonies
could be established. But I believe that the real technological leaps will be
made in shorter-range transport on Earth.

   When I learned to drive 60 years ago, the roads were almost empty and driving
was a joyous pastime.

   Today, the roads are jammed and driving is a gridlocked chore.

   Another 60 years and it will have become a nightmare.

   HOWEVER, within a few centuries I genuinely suspect that we will have solved
the problem of making efficient antigravity machines that will take us up into
the air and away from the interminable traffic jams.

   The huge, cumbersome aircraft of today will have vanished, as will the
ground-based, four-wheeled vehicles on which we have relied for more than 100
years.

   In their place will be familysized 'airpods' that will take us up and away to
anywhere in the world we feel like visiting. Special sensors will prevent these
airpods from colliding - if a shoal of fish can manage it, so, surely, can we.

   This one invention alone will transform our lives, and there will be many
more.

   Advances in screen technology, for example, will mean that, within a few
centuries, every household will have a threedimensional, liquid-crystal
display-wall on which any event can be viewed in comfort, as if one were present
at it.

   We will be able to experience everything from great sporting occasions and
virtuoso performances to family reunions and important business meetings in this
way. Information exchange, education and entertainment will all be available at
a level previously undreamt of.

   And what of the human animal at the centre of all this? The deep-seated
social urges within us will, I am certain, survive. We will still fall in love,
build nests, rear families, enjoy social encounters and engage in creative
pursuits, just as we do today.

   How well we succeed in fulfilling these activities will depend on our human
ingenuity when applied to the growing problems that face our species.

   Despite everything, I am now an optimist because I have come to believe that
the human species is not only the greatest, but also the most resourceful and
most resilient animal that has ever lived.

   My great regret is that I shall not be around to witness the next
extraordinary chapters in our evolutionary story.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2006


                              72 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 30, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 97

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: Take a tip for 2007

BYLINE: BRIAN O'CONNOR

BODY:

   THE past year saw net gains for markets, ending on a high note on Wall
Street, though London was well short of the historic 6,930.2 Footsie 100 peak
reached in 1999.

   It was a year of peaks and pitfalls.

   In May global markets took a sharp turn downward, sparking fears that the
three-year recovery was over. By autumn they recovered but gains were patchy;
the AIM market barely rose at all.

   Neither, sadly did our own share tips. Five of the eight made gains, but
losses on the three laggards dragged down the overall portfolio.

   If you held all eight for the year, the loss would have been 3.5pc a poor
outcome compared with an 11pc gain on the Footsie 100.

   If you followed our 'stop loss' advice your outcome would have been much
better. Selling the laggards once they had dropped 20pc, your overall gain would
have been 9pc. Following a 'stop loss' policy makes a big difference.

   But it can't conceal that we had a poor year.

   For 2007 we must do better. Though our tips are the individual choices of our
new team, we have tried to build in some balance in the 2007 selections, and to
cut risk by including larger companies. Please decide now that if any tip falls
by 20pc, you will sell.

   My own tip for 2006, Cable & Wireless, had a rocky ride, but ended with a
reasonable gain of 32pc.

   For 2007 I am putting my faith in the remarkable technology of gene therapy
manipulation of some of the 30,000 genes in the body to boost your defences or
suppress viruses.

   This area has had setbacks, but the survivors have built a pipeline of
potential new drugs at a time when the industry's giants are searching
desperately for products.

   Ark Therapeutics is at the forefront. Its pipeline includes Vitor, for weight
loss in cancer, and Trinam for kidney patients. Its best prospect is Cerepro,
for brain cancer. This could become the first of a new generation of gene-based
medicines.

   Trials suggest a single treatment of Cerepro trebles life expectancy for late
stage sufferers.

   That only keeps them alive for 12 months, but this might be extended greatly
by repeated doses, or adding other treatments.

   European drugs regulator EMEA has cleared Ark to produce commercial batches.

   Full approval could come as early as the first half of 2007. Experts think
sales could reach Pounds 180m a year or more.

   At 933/4p Ark is valued at Pounds 155m.

   This month Fidelity bought a 4pc stake and took 5.9m warrants.

   These only pay off if the shares top 140p between 2007 and end-2008 a
remarkable vote of confidence.

   Interest in gene research is rising. US giant Merck has just paid Pounds 575m
for Sirna Therapeutics more than double its market value.

   Biotech is risky, but Ark has two years' cash and a highly promising
pipeline. Cerepro could transform its prospects and trigger a bid.

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2006


                              73 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            December 24, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: HI 04; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: How the loneliest girl in Britain is ready to enjoy a real family
Christmas

BYLINE: PAUL DRURY

BODY:

   WHEN Carly Smith was a baby, she was diagnosed with a serious illness that
robbed her of the chance to make friends and led her to be dubbed 'the loneliest
little girl in Britain'.

   The rare genetic condition which had claimed the life of her brother meant
she could not mix with other children, and parks had to be emptied before she
could play.

   But 14 years on, after entering the history books as the country's first gene
transplant patient, the Scots teenager has astounded doctors with her recovery.

   With Carly looking forward to Christmas like any other girl of her age, her
mother Jane has spoken in detail for the first time about the horror she endured
as first one child and then another succumbed to the one-in-a-million disorder.

   Carly was born two days before the funeral of her brother and did not leave
hospital until the age of three because of the deficiency which left her body
unable to fight infection.

   She was forbidden to go anywhere near other children as her immune system was
so frail that even a simple cold could have killed her.

   In a Christmas Eve 1995 report, The Mail on Sunday described her as 'the
loneliest little girl in Britain'.

   Her case was followed worldwide because of its groundbreaking medical
implications, with doctors hoping the treatment could be used to combat other
serious illnesses, such as cystic fibrosis.

   Last night, Mrs Smith, of Milton of Campsie, Dunbartonshire, told how she had
to leave hospital after having Carly to attend the funeral of her baby son
Greig.

   She said: 'Looking back now, I was in a daze most of the time. I just could
not believe it was happening.

   'Carly was born on the Saturday. I was allowed out of hospital on the Monday
to attend my baby, Greig's, funeral. You just get on with it. I think any mother
would.' Greig was only 14 months old when he died suddenly in 1992.

   Having baffled doctors in Scotland, he had been sent to London's Great Ormond
Street Hospital for specialist tests.

   But it was not until after he died that medical staff discovered he had
suffered from ADA deficiency, a genetic disorder which stripped him of the
ability to fight infection.

   There was only a one-in-four chance his baby sister Carly would also be
afflicted but, to Mrs Smith's distress, doctors confirmed that she was.

   However, Carly was to be far luckier than her brother. By 1993, Great Ormond
Street had reached the culmination of ten years of research into gene therapy.

   The doctors decided that, in the first operation of its kind, a missing gene
could be inserted into the stem cells of Carly's bone marrow.

   A government medical ethics committee approved the pioneering treatment, and
samples of her stem cells were sent to Holland, where medics added the gene
needed to make her body produce the white blood cells vital to fight infection.

   Sadly, within months of her treatmentit became evident the hopedfor-change in
her immune system had not occurred.

   In September 1996, her distraught mother was warned Carly would not survive
without further treatment.

   Mrs Smith explained: 'It was a terrible time for all of us. My dad died on
the Wednesday and Carly went into hospital on the Friday.

   'She was receiving twice-weekly injections but the drugs were being rejected.
I could not face the alternative of putting her through chemotherapy.

   'The doctors sat me down and told me that if she did not receive a bone
marrow transplant, she would not see Christmas.' Carly's transplant was made
possible by the generosity of a complete stranger, a father-of-three from South
Wales.

   Although it was this procedure which eventually saved her life, enabling her
body to regenerate its entire blood supply, Carly will always have her place in
the medical books as the first person to receive gene therapy.

   Mrs Smith added: 'It usually takes between three and five weeks after the
transplant to see if it is working.

   Eleven days after her surgery, it was shown to be a success.

   'She was home within three weeks and has not looked back since.' The teenager
last night paid tribute to her mother for helping her become one of the
country's most enduring medical miracles.

   She said: 'The way I live my life is the way I show my thanks to my mum.'

GRAPHIC: 1.ISOLATED: CARLY WENT OUT TO PLAY ONCE OTHER CHILDREN HAD GONE HOME
2.TRAGIC: HOW WE TOLD HER STORY 3.ASTOUNDING: CARLY SMITH NOW LIVES THE LIFE OF
A NORMAL TEENAGER

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 2006


                              74 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 16, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 84

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Torrent of takeovers transforms our tips

BODY:

   THE tide of bidders for UK companies has many long-term implications, but it
is rewarding for followers of our share tips.

   European Motor Holdings has risen to 485p on the strength of a 480p cash
offer from Inchcape.

   EMH was first tipped here in August 2001 at 97p, so it has risen nearly
fivefold.

   Gallaher, tipped the same month at 490p, has had a Pounds 7.5bn offer from
Japan Tobacco at 1140p, a 132pc gain. A counter offer cannot be ruled out.

   The battle for steelmaker Corus is doing wonders for last year's share tip at
403/4p.

   Though that rises to 2033/4p to allow for a one-for-five share consolidation,
the shares are now 531p, for a gain of 160pc.

   Investors have done well from the battle between India's Tata and Brazil's
CSN.

   Let us hope the victor does not get so carried away that it overpays, and
then tries to recover the excess from Corus staff and pensioners.

   You may be tempted to take your profits on SR Pharma, tipped on November 18p
and now 501/2p.

   After such a sharp rise, I would not blame anyone for selling.

   But the gain highlights the potential of gene therapy companies.

   Mulier Capital, one of the experts in the field, has raised more than Pounds
32m for the sector this month, a sign that big investors are moving in.

   The gene story may not be over yet.

   Broker BUYS

   Betex: Daniel Stewart says buy at 35p (now 361/2p). Has the relationships,
contracts and product diversity to play a key role in the expansion of the
Chinese Lottery industry.

   Next: Investec says buy at 1760p (now 1790p). More upside potential in 2007
than other retail majors, given the modest valuation.

   Ashtead: Investec says buy at 151p (now 153p). Still cheap.

   Carpetright: Panmure Gordon says buy at 1208p (now 1267p). The safest haven
over what is likely to be a problematic Christmas for the retail sector.

   Sportingbet: Shore Capital says buy at 38p (now 381/2p). At current levels,
the risk/reward profile appears favourable.

   Hunting: ABN AMRO says buy at 570p (now 579p). Results likely to beat
expectations. At a discount to the sector. Target price 645p.

   Broker SELLS

   Davis Service Group: Investec says sell at 518p (now 5033/4p).

   Better opportunities elsewhere in the support services sector.

   iSoft: Shore Capital says sell at 47p (now 55p). We still question the value
of the equity and the price a bidder might pay for control.

   Wilmington: Altium Securities says reduce at 243p (now 228p).

   Overvalued.

   Biofuels Corporation: Ambrian says sell at 401/2p (now 36p). Still hanging on
in there (just).

   Alliance Boots: Dresdner Kleinwort says sell at 837p (now 8371/2p).

   Valuation leaves little margin for error. Target price 740p.

   Davis Service Group: Investec says sell at 518p (now 5033/4p).

   Better opportunities elsewhere in the support services sector.

   iSoft: Shore Capital says sell at 47p (now 55p). We still question the value
of the equity and the price a bidder might pay for control.

   Wilmington: Altium Securities says reduce at 243p (now 228p).

   Overvalued.

   Biofuels Corporation: Ambrian says sell at 401/2p (now 36p). Still hanging on
in there (just).

   Alliance Boots: Dresdner Kleinwort says sell at 837p (now 8371/2p).

   Valuation leaves little margin for error. Target price 740p.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2006


                              75 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 15, 2006 Friday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 70

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: Something nasty is skulking in the gene pool . . .;
Books for Christmas: Critic's choice

BYLINE: JOHN HARDING

BODY:

   HANNIBAL RISING by Thomas Harris (Heineman, Pounds 17.99)

   NEXT by Michael Crichton (HarperCollins, Pounds 17.99)

   OK, HERE'S the problem: men are notoriously difficult to buy for and you're
stumped for what to get yours.

   Well, as luck would have it, along come two blockbuster books blokes will
enjoy, but - if you don't want to buy him both in case you'd like a conversation
before Twelfth Night - which to go for?

   One stars not just any old serial killer, but none other than Hannibal 'The
Cannibal' Lecter from Silence Of The Lambs.

   Highlights include a barbecued toddler (don't knock it, it's an idea that
could come into its own over the festive season), a drowning in formaldehyde
(one for Damien, maybe, Mrs Hirst), and a man having his head tugged off by a
rope attached to a horse.

   The other's a satirical blackcomedy thriller (if there is such a genre) about
gene therapy.

   For your typical man, choosing is a no-brainer: cannibal killer, with an
embargo on reading out juicy bits before the turkey's been fully digested,
right? Well, maybe not. Depends what you want from a book: silence during the
Queen or Christmas chortles.

   Not having read Thomas Harris's previous Hannibal outings, I'd laboured under
the misconception that serial killers generally originated from society's
dysfunctional, murkier depths.

   But in this prequel, which attempts to explain through his traumatic
childhood how Lecter found his true vocation, I discovered that he's the son of
a Lithuanian count, raised in a castle, a mathematical genius and gifted
painter.

   Obviously, a strong penchant for suspension of disbelief is handy here.

   THAT'S not to say Crichton's plot doesn't push the credibility envelope, too,
featuring a parrot that can really talk - and not just 'pretty boy' stuff, but
hitting the conversational ball back across the net - and can also do maths
homework.

   Then there is a talking chimp, albeit one with dodgy grammar.

   But back to Harris.

   It is 1940. Eight-yearold Hannibal is heading towards a future as a top
mathematician, philosopher or painter, or some other highflying career (in any
case, he definitely isn't going to end up wearing that mask thing), when the
Germans invade, the family castle and kill his parents.

   Hannibal and his little sister Mischa find themselves in the hands of a band
of brutal, starving, renegade Lithuanian Nazi collaborators who cook and
cannibalise Mischa and feed Hannibal the leftovers without him knowing.

   After the war, Hannibal is rescued by his wealthy uncle and taken to live in
Paris, where he falls under the spell of his aunt, the beautiful Japanese Lady
Murasaki, and becomes a top medical student and exquisite painter who does a bit
of serial killing on the side as he avenges himself one by one on his sister's
murderers in ingeniously gruesome ways.

   This could seem barmy, as indeed it is, except Harris writes elegant,
literary prose and is as interested in character and spirituality as in
violence, although don't worry, there's plenty of that, too.

   If we don't quite get inside Hannibal, we're on his side, because the
villains are even worse. We desperately want him to get away with it - a
difficult prequel trick to pull off, since we already know he has to survive to
be caught and later questioned by Jodie Foster's Clarice Starling in The Silence
Of The Lambs.

   Crichton writes like a controlled Carl Hiaasen or Tom Wolfe on speed (pretty
much the same, thing, really). His plot, involving a score of main characters,
and a dozen different strands, defies summary but is completely brilliant.

   ABIOTECH company, voracious in its outlook, secretly patents a man's genes,
then tries forcibly to extract them from his daughter or grandson; a scientist
inserts his genes into a chimpanzee to produce a transgenic (basically a
talking) animal, Dave, that he takes into his family and passes off as a human
child with a rare and hairy genetic disorder.

   There's also Gerrard, a parrot with attitude, who not only has the genes of a
human but thinks he is one and does movie star impressions. Cornered in the
desert by advancing coyotes, he drawls, 'D'you feel lucky, punk?

   Do you?' Crichton's treatise on how breakthroughs in genetic science have
been hijacked by commerce is anything but dull; for the last hundred pages, my
wife, a fairly tolerant woman, was telling me to stop laughing, although I
wasn't able to oblige.

   So there you have it, two best-selling authors not resting on their royalty
cheques, but on top form.

   Your choice may ultimately be between a quiet Christmas or a merry one.

   It's a shame, really, that the two can't be combined: send some of Hannibal
Lecter's genes to Bernard Matthews and produce the ultimate Christmas dinner - a
talking turkey that can bite back.

GRAPHIC: HANNIBAL HUNTER: JODIE FOSTER AS CLARICE STARLING

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2006


                              76 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 12, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: At last, an injection to cure impotence (The bad news is where they
put the needle);
Good Health

BYLINE: MARTYN HALLE

BODY:

   DOCTORS have developed a gene therapy treatment that could cure millions of
men who suffer from impotence.

   This comes after researchers were able to identify a gene that is responsible
for the condition that affects as many as 60 per cent of men over the age of 55
and around three million men in total in the UK.

   Tests of the therapy have already started in humans, and the first small
trial using the gene has proved that it is safe and works.

   Men suffering from impotence would need just two injections a year to be able
to enjoy a normal sex life.

   Although drugs like Viagra have revolutionised the treatment of men with
erectile dysfunction, many still claim there is a lack of spontaneity, as
lovemaking has to be planned in advance by taking a pill.

   Doctors who discovered the gene say that - for the first time - it will give
men with impotence problems total control over their love lives.

   AROUND 30 per cent of impotence cases have psychological reasons, but the
remaining 70 per cent are physical.

   Heart disease and diabetes are two of the biggest causes in the middle-aged
and elderly.

   The gene breakthrough has been made by a team at the Albert Einstein College
of Medicine in New York, who say the treatment could become available in less
than five years.

   Lead researcher Professor Arnold Melman says: 'Our initial research proves
that this is a safe method of treatment for male impotence that works very
effectively.

   'The initial trial was in 11 impotent men - two of whom were able to have
intercourse for six months after having their gene therapy jab.

   'It would have worked for all 11 patients, but initially we had to give a
combination of low doses and high doses because this was a phase one safety
trial, principally looking at the safety of the therapy.

   'The two men for whom it worked had the highest doses of the drug.

   'One of the attractions of the drug is that men have just two injections a
year and do not have to worry about taking pills - they can just forget they
have a problem. The existing impotence drugs can have side effects, such as
making men feel dizzy, but so far we have found none with gene therapy.'

   Professor Melman - a urologist - and fellow researcher Dr George Christ will
now give high doses of the jab, called Maxi K, to almost 200 men in a trial
starting in the New Year.

   The gene used in the treatment has been artificially created in the
laboratory and is an exact copy of a gene found in human 'smooth muscle' tissue,
the type of muscle found in the penis.

   Dr Melman points out that the gene is entirely safe and has been developed
without having to use a human virus - such as the common cold virus - to 'carry
it' to the part of the body where it is needed.

   'One of the concerns with gene therapy has been the use of viruses and how
they can affect the immune system,' he says. 'We have got round that by
developing a gene that does the job without needing assistance.'

   The gene works in a similar way to impotence drugs like Viagra - except it
lasts longer because it stays in the body for months, rather than just a few
hours.

   The gene jab enables extra potassium to be produced, which acts to relax the
smooth muscle in the penis, allowing an increased flow of blood into the blood
vessels.

   FOR IT to work properly, it has to be injected into the penis, but Dr Melman
says modern techniques mean this is relatively painless.

   He says: "For many men, the mind might be willing - they desire their partner
- but the chemical and mechanical reaction to make things happen is not strong
enough. What this gene does is to boost the existing cells so lovemaking becomes
possible.'

   Dr Richard Petty, medical director of the London Wellman Clinic, approves of
the gene breakthrough. 'This is fantastic news, because impotence pills like
Viagra work for only about 60 per cent of men, and there are many who can't take
these pills because of conditions such as heart disease.

   'Men don't like being reminded they have a problem, but that's what happens
every time they pop a pill. The fact they can have a jab that restores their
sexuality for six months will be a big boost for men.'

   Sexual Dysfunction Association: 0870 7743571, www.sda.uk.net.

GRAPHIC: HOPE: GENE TREATMENT COULD END THE FRUSTRATION OF IMPOTENCE

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2006


                              77 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           December 12, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 56

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: Help cure cystic fibrosis;
LETTERS

BODY:

   WE'RE told Gordon and Sarah Brown were unaware they were carriers of cystic
fibrosis (Mail). My wonderful grandson Connor was diagnosed, after being born
with a perforated bowel - a sign of CF.

   When our family were asked, we were adamant there were no carriers in either
family. We were amazed when we were tested. Myself, my son, my daughter and mum,
my daughter-in-law, her mum and sister were all carriers of an illness we knew
nothing about.

   My grandson is a brilliant, very intelligent, active little boy who takes all
medication and physio in his stride.

   As stated, one in 25 people carry CF.

   My family hope and pray that gene therapy can help in the future. The Cystic
Fibrosis Trust needs donations to fund research into this illness. We are
desperate for the gene now identified to be corrected.

   RUTH THOMAS, Swansea.

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2006


                              78 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            December 3, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: FB 04; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 1244 words

HEADLINE: My wonderful life

BYLINE: RACHEL AGUTTER; VICTORIA LAMBERT

BODY:

   Like the Browns' baby, Jenny Agutter's niece has cystic fibrosis.

   But her defiant words and joyful pictures prove that she can still live life
to the full

   At 28, Rachel Agutter has lived with cystic fibrosis all her life. Here, in
her own inspirational words, she describes how she has never let the disease
stop her enjoying life to the full. And on the following page, her aunt, Railway
Children star Jenny Agutter, tells of the latest treatments and reveals how she
is inspired by her niece's courage.

   Have you ever wondered what you really mean to your friends? Last summer, I
was lucky enough to find out in the most magical way possible. It was a hot
London night and I'd popped round to my friend Emma's house in Putney for a
drink. I've been blessed with wonderful friends, and we're always getting
together in the evenings just to chat about our days, so I wasn't expecting
anything special.

   But this evening far from being the usual chat about men, jobs and shoes
turned out to be one of the most memorable of my life. Because when I walked
into her home, I saw my family, my boyfriend Adam and a handful of my closest
friends standing round two large boxes covered in bright wrapping paper. And
when they saw me, they began a chorus of Happy Birthday, cheered and broke out
champagne.

   It wasn't actually my birthday that was two months before, and I had been
stuck in hospital but there was certainly a gift for me. Looking at the boxes, I
guessed immediately what it was.

   'It's a Vest,' I said, stunned, and then burst into tears of happiness and
disbelief.

   My parents confirmed the truth: it was The Vest, a piece of physiotherapy
equipment that costs a staggering Pounds 12,000. My friends had emailed everyone
I had ever known from school to university to work, from my family to friends of
my family, and asked for donations, however small, so that I could have this
amazing piece of kit. They had even printed out the emailed replies and bound
them into a book as a very special record of our friendship. It's hard to
imagine anything more generous, touching and thoughtful.

   I've never kept my cystic fibrosis a secret. I can remember even at the age
of four eating handfuls of pills with every meal. Everyone at school knew, and I
suppose I equated it with something like asthma. There was nothing I couldn't
do. I was on the school gymnastics team that must have helped my lungs. I
certainly didn't feel different to any of my friends.

   When I was 15, my parents managed to get me on a drug called DNase, which
costs Pounds 25 a day and is rationed by the NHS. My parents had to fight to get
it for me but somehow the doctor found the budget, and I've taken it ever since.

   DNase thins the mucus so you can cough it up more easily, and the lungs don't
get infected.

   After school I secured a place at Reading University to read zoology. But
first, my girlfriends and I decided to take a holiday in Ibiza. We partied like
mad. Afterwards, for the first time, I fell ill. It took me six weeks on
antibiotics in the Royal Brompton Hospital before I felt strong again. It was my
wakeup call; it was time to start looking after myself.

   Even so, I had a great time at uni and afterwards I went travelling for a
year round the world with friends, working for a time in Sydney. We bought a car
and went all over Australia. I took my pills and I had a portable nebuliser a
machine that produces a fine mist that can be inhaled which could be plugged
into a car cigarette-lighter. I must confess I wasn't that good at doing my
physio; I felt so good and so active, I let it slide.

   When I returned I found a job in the City working as a PA for a group of
brokers. But that was fairly horrendous long hours and a terrible culture. I
ended up being hospitalised again and decided to resign. Later my doctor and
family had to tell me I had been pushing myself too hard and needed to consider
working part-time from then on. My health had been steadily getting worse, and
I'd gone from never being in hospital to needing short stays twice a year.

   All cystic fibrosis sufferers end up having hospital stays so that they can
get intravenous antibiotics to combat the endless chest infections.

   Some need the drugs so often that they have a permanent port fixed into their
chests to make it easier. Luckily I've never been that bad although I would
consider it if needs be in the future. But when you do go in, the courses of
antibiotics last

   two weeks, so that's the minimum you have to stay for. It's knackering: you
get the antibiotics administered three times a day at 6am, 1pm and 11pm.

   The physiotherapy is intensive too.

   When I started work again it was in temporary jobs. I tried being a
receptionist but it was demotivating and depressing. I felt I could do more with
my life: I had the high expectations of my peer group and wanted to match up to
their successful, satisfying careers. It was so frustrating.

   Finally I decided to retrain as a picture researcher and that's what I am
doing now, working on a teen magazine. I've learnt so much and I really enjoy my
job. Had I known earlier how inhibiting my lack of stamina would be, I would
have studied a subject such as graphic design, where work is more flexible.

   That's not the only thing I've learnt. Looking back, I should have taken my
physio sessions more seriously too. Most teenagers with cystic fibrosis are told
to be religious about their exercises but many aren't. Yet, if you don't do
them, your lungs sustain damage; I could have protected mine more. On the other
hand, I wouldn't have had so much fun.

   Which is why when my friends got together to present me with The Vest, it
couldn't have been a more appropriate gift. They knew the repetitious exercises
got me down. When I strap on The Vest, it vibrates my chest, performing the
exercises for me. It's great if I'm feeling really tired and I can even call
someone for a chat while it's working away. The Vest is controversial in this
country as not everyone believes it works, but for me it has.

   Cystic fibrosis is not a nice disease but the imminent gene therapy and
inventions such as my Vest do help.

   Sometimes I feel depressed about whether this therapy will happen in time for
me. But I try to stay positive.

   And I try not to worry about the future; I prefer to live from day to day.

   As you approach 30, all your peer group are considering children and
marriage. I don't know if that is a possibility for me, but I won't rule it out.

   My boyfriend Adam and I have been together for three years and he is
incredibly supportive. I'm sure he has thought about what will happen, as I
have. Whenever I am in hospital, he comes in every day. And some days are harder
than others.

   I think it is important to read everything I can about my condition to be
prepared. I've read a lot about heart/lung transplants. I don't need one now but
I do need to be aware of the procedures. It would be wonderful if we could
change our donor system so that everyone has to opt out of being a donor rather
than the other way round.

   I hope Gordon and Sarah Brown let Fraser do whatever he wants, as my parents
have done with me.

   It would have been awful to have been wrapped up in cotton wool.

   I'm 28 now, and I know that current life expectancy for my condition is only
31. So I know the clock is ticking. But there is much hope for the future.

   And I believe it is far more important to lead a full and happy life than to
get to 80, without much to look back on.

   Interviews by Victoria Lambert

GRAPHIC: PICTURES OF HAPPINESS ... RACHEL AGUTTER WITH HER AUNT JENNY. RIGHT:
BACKPACKING AROUND THE BRAZILIAN RAINFOREST

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2006


                              79 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            December 3, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: FB 04; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: The Browns can learn from Rachel

BYLINE: JENNY AGUTTER; VICTORIA LAMBERT

BODY:

   The Browns can learn from Rachel

   What a privilege it is to be born healthy. And who is not blase about it when
we're young? Looking back, I know I was.

   By 18, I had already been in The Railway Children and was off to the National
Theatre in London. It was an exhausting and exhilarating time. I took my future
for granted.

   Compare my experience with my niece Rachel, who suffers from cystic fibrosis,
the incurable illness that Gordon and Sarah Brown's baby son Fraser has just
been diagnosed with. By 18, she was already getting used to taking 30 tablets a
day, twice-daily bouts of physiotherapy, and endless chest infections.

   When I was her age, my life was unfolding in front of me. My niece, however,
was facing up to the biggest responsibility of all her own life. It is a credit
to her and to her parents, my brother Jonathan and sister-in-law Caroline, that
she has done so with aplomb.

   From watching their family, I have learnt that every parent of a cystic
fibrosis child, including the Browns, should keep their child safe and teach
them self-discipline but when the time is right they must also set them free.

   Self-discipline is vital. Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease that affects a
number of organs, particularly the pancreas and lungs, by clogging them with
thick mucus. Symptoms include weight loss, coughs, chest infections and
diarrhoea. Sufferers may have a slight salty smell to them as cystic fibrosis
causes the body to produce too much salt. It is a progressive disease, and the
average life span is about 31.

   Children with the disease have to learn that daily physiotherapy is essential
as it helps clear the lungs of mucus. Too much mucus can cause chest infections
and permanently damage the lungs the biggest threat to sufferers. Rachel knows
she mustn't skip her exercises and that she must take care of infections
immediately.

   Diagnosing cystic fibrosis early is essential if the lungs are to be
protected. Fraser Brown will have been detected just after birth,as all babies
in Scotland are routinely tested, although I knowit is on the agenda for tests
to be taken nationally.

   Rachel was diagnosed at six months, after her parents realised she was having
problems with her chest. It was instinct they knew something wasn't right.

   I imagine the Browns will be hoping for a cure, as we all are. The scientific
community in the UK is, unusually, working together, with no competition between
teams.

   Mutual co-operation has led to a gene therapy which while not a cure, could
mean patients enjoying a much longer, healthier life span.

   The treatment, which will start human trials next year, will change the
lining of the lungs. It could be a huge breakthrough. Parents such as the Browns
have every reason to be optimistic as it could easily be available in the next
decade.

   Gordon Brown has always supported the cystic fibrosis cause, before the
disease affected him personally. We know neither he nor Sarah had any idea it
ran in the family, but it is the most common inherited disease in the UK
2.3million people carry the gene.

   I didn't know about it until Rachel was diagnosed, so when I was pregnant I
was tested and I am a carrier. But my husband Johan doesn't carry the gene so my
son Jonathan, who's 15 now, couldn't have the disease, although he can still be
a carrier. At some point we will have to get him tested for that.

   The Browns mustn't let the disease dominate theirs or Fraser's life.

   They must treat it seriously, but lightly. It was hard for Rachel's parents
when she went travelling, but she has her own life to live.

   Obviously, my Christmas wish for Rachel would be for a cure, but failing that
I'd like to see her healthy enough to enjoy all the season's parties.

   Life should be enjoyable for all cystic fibrosis families I hope it will be
for the Browns, too.

   By Jenny Agutter

   Interviews by Victoria Lambert

GRAPHIC: FLOWER POWER... RACHEL AGUTTER WITH FRIENDS IN THE GROUNDS OF A CHATEAU
IN THE SOUTH OF FRANCE

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2006


                              80 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1136 words

HEADLINE: Browns didn't know they carried cystic fibrosis gene;
AS FRIENDS REVEAL DIAGNOSIS OF BABY FRASER'S ILLNESS CAME OUT OF THE BLUE

BYLINE: GORDON RAYNER; JIM MCBETH; JENNY HOPE

BODY:

   GORDON Brown and his wife Sarah had no inkling that either of them was a
carrier of the cystic fibrosis gene before their son was diagnosed with the
disease, friends said yesterday.

   Neither of them has any known family history of cystic fibrosis, and despite
making inquiries into their wider ancestry they have found no clues as to how
long the faulty gene has been in either family.

   The Chancellor's youngest son Fraser was diagnosed with the incurable genetic
disease in July, within weeks of his birth. He faces a lifetime of drug
treatments and physiotherapy.

   A friend of the family said: 'As soon as Fraser was diagnosed both families
started making inquiries into their background to establish whether or not this
can be traced to any recent ancestor.

   'As far as they are aware no one in their close family or in their extended
family has ever suffered from cystic fibrosis. When baby Fraser was diagnosed,
it came completely without warning.' One person in every 25 carries the gene
which leads to cystic fibrosis, but it has no effect on their own health. It is
only when both parents are carriers that a child is at risk, with a one in four
chance of being born with the disease.

   Although the current life expectancy for children with cystic fibrosis is 31
years, researchers are cautiously optimistic of finding a cure using gene
therapy, giving hope to children of Fraser's generation.

   Mr Brown released a statement confirming

   his son's illness on Wednesday night, after it became clear that at least one
newspaper had latched on to the story.

   It is likely to force the Tories to rethink their strategy of personal
attacks on the Chancellor, which they had hoped would help to turn voters
against him before his expected anointment as Prime Minister next year.

   The battle plan was based on claims by Downing Street figures and Charles
Clarke that the Chancellor was ' psychologically flawed', and aimed to contrast
his dour image with Tory leader David Cameron's 'fireside' manner.

   On Monday Shadow Chancellor George Osborne, Mr Cameron's close friend,
ridiculed Mr Brown in the Commons over a sample of his handwriting allegedly
revealing he had 'poor judgment' and a lack of emotional control.

   But Tory sources last night said there may be a 'softening' of the personal
jibes in the light of Fraser's illness.

   Mr Brown, who is working on his pre-Budget speech, spent yesterday in Downing
Street and neither he nor his wife made any further comment on their son's
condition.

   They had said on Wednesday that Fraser was 'fit and healthy' and told friends
they did not want his condition to be portrayed as a 'tragedy'. Mr Brown, 55,
and his 43-year-old wife lost their first baby, Jennifer Jane, in 2002, when she
died of a brain haemorrhage aged ten days.

   Their elder son, John, aged three, has been tested for cystic fibrosis and
given a clean bill of health.

   Gene therapy for cystic fibrosis is to be tested in the biggest trial of its
kind starting next year.

   British researchers hope it will lead to a monthly treatment that will
effectively cure lung problems that eventually cause the deaths of most
sufferers.

   In gene therapy, DNA material is transported into the body to replace the
defective genetic component causing the disease.

   The trial will use more DNA than has ever been produced before in an attempt
to remedy the genetic defect which leads to persistent respiratory infections
and scarred lungs.

   By 2010 researchers will know whether the treatment works but the signs are
already promising, said Dr Jane Davies, consultant paediatrician and senior
lecturer in gene therapy at the Royal Brompton Hospital, London.

   In cystic fibrosis patients, the glands which produce mucus, saliva and
intestinal fluids do not work properly, resulting in secretions which clog vital
organs, making it difficult to breathe properly and digest food.

   The faulty gene affects cells which secrete chloride, which includes the
lungs and mucous membranes in the nose, making them 'dehydrated' from lack of
water on their surface.

   This leaves the lungs vulnerable to infection from bacteria which would
normally be kept at bay by a proper supply of water which gene therapy is
designed to replace.

   The trial, being funded by the UK CF Trust, will cost at least Pounds
5million to get a supply of gene products alone.

   Around 200 sufferers will be involved in 18 months of research work from next
spring which will lead to the full-scale clinical trial of 100 patients in 2009.

   g.rayner@dailymail.co.uk

   Embryo screening can spot the disease

   FOR the Browns the prospect of having more children with cystic fibrosis
could be greatly reduced thanks to a revolutionary technique.

   The method, developed at Guy's Hospital in London, enables doctors to screen
embryos to ensure they grow up free of the disease.

   Known as pre-implantation genetic haplotyping, or PGH, it can check for up to
6,000 inherited illnesses and could revolutionise IVF treatment if it becomes
routinely available on the Health Service.

   Jim and Catherine Greenstreet, of Chiswick, West London, decided to screen
their future children for signs of the disease after their daughter Lizzie,
five, was born with cystic fibrosis.

   For them the technique is a godsend. At the end of October, their twins
Freddie and Thomas became the first British babies to be delivered after using
the process.

   Mrs Greenstreet, a physiotherapist, and her 41-year-old husband, who works in
corporate finance, both carry the genes that make it highly likely that their
offspring would be born with the disease.

   They found out only after Lizzie and her twin William were delivered in 2001.

   Lizzie, who was born with cystic fibrosis, now requires 16 tablets and two
30-minute physiotherapy sessions every day.

   Faced with the prospect that a new sister or brother with cystic fibrosis
could have a damaging effect on Lizzie's fragile health, they felt they had no
alternative but to have the embryos screened.

   Mrs Greenstreet, 38, said: 'What a lot of people don't understand with cystic
fibrosis is that if you have two children with the condition, they can
cross-infect one another, putting them at greater risk.' A version of the Pounds
6,000 test has been carried out on six British patients three with NHS funding
by the Nottingham-based CARE fertility clinic.

   The procedure is one of a number of pioneering techniques being developed
around the world and is said to be quicker and more accurate than others.

   It involves removing a single cell from each embryo when they are three days'
old. The DNA is then extracted and multiplied in the lab to make it easier to
analyse.

   By comparing the DNA with that of the parents via a blood sample doctors can
then tell whether the unborn baby will develop the condition for which it is
being screened.

   Disease-free embryos are then implanted in the mother through IVF.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2006


                              81 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            December 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: ED 3RD; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: Scientists work on gene therapy 'cure'

BODY:

   GENE therapy for cystic fibrosis is to be tested in the biggest trial of its
kind starting next year.

   British researchers hope it will lead to a monthly treatment that will
effectively cure lung problems that eventually cause the deaths of most
sufferers.

   In gene therapy, DNA material is transported into the body to replace the
defective genetic component causing the disease.

   The trial will use more DNA than has ever been produced before in an attempt
to remedy the genetic defect which leads to persistent respiratory infections
and scarred lungs.

   By 2010 researchers will know whether the treatment works but the signs are
already promising, said Dr Jane Davies, consultant paediatrician and senior
lecturer in gene therapy at the Royal Brompton Hospital, London.

   She said: 'At present treatment is all about symptom control but the aim of
gene therapy is prevention by giving patients a healthy copy of the gene.' In
cystic fibrosis patients, the glands which produce mucus, saliva and intestinal
fluids do not work properly, resulting in secretions which clog vital organs,
making it difficult to breathe properly and digest food.

   The faulty gene affects cells which secrete chloride, which includes the
lungs and mucous membranes in the nose, making them 'dehydrated' from lack of
water on their surface.

   This leaves the lungs vulnerable to infection from bacteria which would
normally be kept at bay by a proper supply of water on the cell surface which
gene therapy is designed to replace.

   Dr Davies, a member of the strategy group of the UK CF Gene Therapy
Consortium, is one of 60 researchers at three centres in London, Edinburgh and
Oxford involved in the trial.

   Unlike other gene therapy trials, it will not use a virus to transport the
healthy gene into the patient's body because it eventually stops working.

   Instead the DNA material will be carried within fatty globules called
liposomes which can be used repeatedly.

   The liposomes are deposited within the body using an inhaler treatment once a
month and the genetic ' remedy' should last until the next top-up dose.

   Although the therapy will not alleviate digestion problems, current
treatments work for most patients.

   In the trial, which is being funded by the UK CF Trust, around 200 sufferers
will be involved in 18 months of research work from next spring which will lead
to the full-scale clinical trial of 100 patients in 2009.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2006


                              82 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           November 30, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 582 words

BYLINE: JENNY HOPE

BODY:

   CYSTIC fibrosis is the UK's most common life-threatening, genetic disease.

   But the outlook for sufferers born today is optimistic, Dr Jim Littlewood,
chairman of the UK CF Trust, said last night.

   'There is no reason to think that a baby born with CF today won't have a
near-normal life expectancy as a result of better treatments,' he said.

   Researchers are also working on gene therapy which could eventually mend or
replace the faulty gene and deal with the effects of the disease.

   'Gene therapy will have a major impact within five to ten years,' said Dr
Littlewood, whose charity is putting Pounds 4million into research and new
treatments this year.

   One Caucasian person in 25 is a carrier of the faulty CF gene.

   When both parents are carriers which has no effect on their own Father's boy:
Fraser in Mr Brown's arms. The couple discovered his illness in July but are
optimistic that medical advances and exercise will give him a long and healthy
life health there is a one in four chance of a child being born with the
condition.

   Most CF babies are born to couples such as the Browns, with no family
history. If there is no reason to suspect a baby might be affected it is
unlikely the condition will be picked up before birth.

   There is also no link between CF and the mother's age when she gives birth.

   In CF sufferers the glands which produce mucus, saliva and intestinal fluids
do not work properly, resulting in secretions which clog vital organs, making it
difficult to breathe properly and digest food.

   Some rarer mutations can cause very mild symptoms.

   Among the treatments used to help children with CF are physiotherapy,
medication and exercise.

   Parents are encouraged to learn how to do physiotherapy for their child even
as an infant to help clear the lungs.

   Relatives and friends often help out as the child usually needs at least two
treatment sessions a day, lasting around 15 minutes each.

   The sessions are invaluable as they reduce infection and can prevent lung
damage.

   As the children grow, most learn breathing exercises and teenagers become
completely independent.

   A range of drugs can help open the airways to relieve symptoms of shortness
of breath.

   Inflammationreducing steroids are either inhaled or taken intravenously.

   Antibiotics are used to clear persistent infection.

   Because CF affects the pancreas a vital part of the digestive system enzyme
pills need to be taken with meals.

   Advice from a dietician is important to help children with CF get the best
out of their meals, as digestion problems mean much of the nutrition does not
get absorbed into the body. Far from being treated as invalids, children with CF
are encouraged to take as much exercise as possible ideally activities such as
running, swimming, football and tennis which get them out of breath.

   The exercise improves physical bulk and strength, with the aim of getting a
more flexible upper body to helps drain secretions.

   Older CF sufferers who become seriously ill can benefit from a lung
transplant.

   The condition can cause fertility problems in men and some women have
difficulty in conceiving.

   However, fertility treatment has provided hope to families affected by the
disease. Parents who are aware they are carriers can choose a new IVF technique
to ensure they have a healthy child.

   A mouthwash test can be done to check for carrier status in unaffected
people. This is particularly important for siblings of a child with CF.

   With couples, the woman is usually tested and the man has a test only if she
is positive.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2006


                              83 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            November 13, 2006 Monday

SECTION: ED IRE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine that attacks and destroys cancer offers patients hope

BYLINE: JULIE WHELDON

BODY:

   A REVOLUTIONARY new cancer vaccine can shrink and destroy deadly tumours.

   In trials the jab has performed even better than expected, sparking hopes it
could prove an effective treatment for the disease that strike thousands of
Irish people each year.

   One patient given the vaccine saw his tumour disappear completely for more
than six months. Another two have seen their tumours shrink and in three, cancer
was halted in its tracks.

   The researchers said results were 'exciting' and 'very encouraging'.

   Oxford BioMedica, the British company behind the jab, is initially hoping it
will provide a new treatment for kidney and bowel cancer.

   These cause around 3,100 new cases and 1,225 deaths each year in Ireland.

   To date 150 patients have had the vaccine and 95 per cent of those that can
be evaluated have had an ' antitumour response'.

   If further trials prove successful, the vaccine could be licensed for use
against kidney cancer within just three years.

   Experts said last night the Adams: Mounting pressure McGuinness: Prime
position data suggests the 'gene therapy' vaccine could prove an effective
treatment for a whole range of cancers.

   The new jab is called TroVax and works in a totally different way to existing
treatments by harnessing the patient's immune system to fight the disease.

   The patient is given a series of injections containing a harmless virus and a
gene for a protein called 5T4.

   This protein is found on the surface of tumours but not on healthy cells.

   By injecting the gene into the body, it triggers an immune system reaction
which kills the cancer cells but leaves healthy tissue unharmed.

   Data from an early trial involving 34 people with kidney cancer was revealed
at a major American cancer convention earlier this year.

   At a conference in Prague last week updated data was announced from the Phase
II trial, in which people with renal cell carcinoma had the vaccine on its own
or in combination with other standard treatments.

   Renal cell carcinoma is a particularly aggressive form of kidney cancer,
which accounts for more than 80 per cent of the 350 new cases each year in
Ireland and claims 180 lives annually.

   Among the 18 patients given the vaccine along with a drug called
interleukin-2, one had his tumour totally disappear.

   Dr Bob Amato, who led the U.S. trials, said the test was primarily designed
to show the vaccine was safe and produced an immune system reaction.

   That it was also helping to shrink or halt the growth of tumours in some
patients was an unexpected bonus.

   'To find we are already seeing this kind of activity when it is not the
primary objective makes it exciting,' he said.

   'In some cases we have seen very significant responses.' Among the kidney
cancer patients, the vaccine only appears to work for the most common type,
clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

   Those with a form known as papillary renal cell carcinoma did not respond to
the treatment-during the trials. The studies are still at an early stage and the
latest results have not yet been published in a peer-reviewed journal.

   But based on their success, a much larger study involving 700 patients around
the world with this kind of kidney cancer is now being launched.

   All patients will have had surgery to remove the tumour and they will then
receive the jab, or a placebo, alongside three different standard drug
treatments.

   Professor Robert Hawkins, who is now starting the latest phase of trials at
the Christie Hospital in Manchester, said that the data from the phase II trials
was 'very encouraging'.

   'It would be rare that a patient would get rid of a tumour with standard
treatment,' he said.

   'The fact it has happened in a small trial is encouraging.' A spokesman for
the Irish Cancer Society said the results are positive.

   For information or advice about cancer call the society's helpline on 1800
200 700.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2006


                              84 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            November 13, 2006 Monday

SECTION: ED SC1; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: Vaccine for kidney and bowel cancers 'within three years'

BYLINE: JULIE WHELDON

BODY:

   A CANCER vaccine which uses the body's own immune system to shrink tumours
has been developed by British scientists.

   One patient has seen his tumour disappear completely for more than six
months.

   Another two have seen their tumours shrink, and in three the cancer has been
halted in its tracks.

   Oxford BioMedica, the company behind the jab, hopes it will provide a
treatment for kidney and bowel cancer, which claim 20,000 deaths a year in
Britain.

   Of the 150 patients who have been given the drug, 95 per cent of those that
can be evaluated have had an 'anti-tumour response'.

   If further trials prove successful, the vaccine could be licensed for use
within three years.

   Experts last night said the data suggests the 'gene therapy' vaccine could
prove an effective treatment for a whole range of cancers.

   The TroVax jab works in a different way to existing treatments by harnessing
the patient's own immune system.

   The cancer sufferer is given a series of injections in the arm containing a
harmless virus and a gene for a protein called 5T4. This protein is found on the
surface of tumours but not on healthy cells.

   By injecting the gene into the body, it triggers an immune system reaction
which kills the cancer cells but leaves healthy tissue unharmed.

   Data from an early trial involving 34 patients with kidney cancer were
revealed at a U.S. cancer conference earlier this year.

   Last week updated data was announced at a medical conference in Prague from
the phase II trial, in which those with renal cell carcinoma had the vaccine on
its own or in combination with other standard treatments.

   Among the kidney cancer patients, the vaccine only appears to work for the
most common type known as 'clear cell renal cell carcinoma'.

   Those with a form known as 'papillary renal cell carcinoma' did not respond
to the treatment during the trials.

   A much larger study involving 700 patients around the world, including dozens
from Britain, is now being launched. All patients will have had surgery to
remove their tumours and they will then receive the jab, or a placebo, alongside
with three different standard drug treatments.

   Professor Robert Hawkins, who is starting the latest phase of trials at the
Christie Hospital in Manchester, said the data from the phase II trials was
'very encouraging'.

   'It would be rare that a patient would get rid of a tumour with standard
treatment,' he said. 'The fact it has happened in a relatively small trial is
encouraging.

   'We hope this treatment will improve the outcome of patients and that is why
we need larger trials with hundreds to prove whether this combination is better
than existing treatments and causes no unexpected side effects.' Dr Daljit Kaur,
clinical trials research manager at Cancer Research UK, said TroVax developed
out of original research by Manchester scientists who were funded by the
charity.

   'The data so far suggests TroVax could be an effective treatment for several
types of cancer, including kidney cancer, which affects more than 6,600 people
each year in the UK,' he said.

   Oxford BioMedica's chief medical officer Dr Mike McDonald said: 'The clinical
experience with TroVax in over 150 patients has shown indications of its
therapeutic potential as well as its excellent safety profile.'

   j.wheldon@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2006


                              85 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           September 11, 2006 Monday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 65 words

HEADLINE: Social engineering;
LETTERS

BODY:

   JOHN LINSIE'S association of eugenics with murderous anti-Semitism (Letters)
is prejudicial.

   Eugenics applies the science of human heredity to social welfare, not to
exterminate 'weak' people, but to eliminate weaknesses from future generations
by counselling, contraception and gene therapy.

   It was practised in many countries before and after the Nazis.

   JASON ROBERTSON, Sheringham, Norfolk.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2006


                              86 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: ED 3RD; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: Patients' own blood cells used to help beat cancer;
Two men owe their lives to therapy that hunts and destroys tumours

BYLINE: ANDY DOLAN

BODY:

   DOCTORS have destroyed cancer for the first time using genetically engineered
cells from a patient's own blood.

   Researchers took normal cells from the immune system and altered them so they
would become 'tumour hunters'.

   They injected them back into two men who were dying of skin cancer and found
the tumours began to shrink.

   Two years on, both men are still free of the disease.

   Experts described the breakthrough as an important advance because it proves
socalled gene therapy can help to fight cancer.

   However, they also urged caution. While the therapy destroyed the cancer in
these two men, doctors have no idea how long the effect will last.

   They also found that not all patients responded to the treatment.

   Another 15 did not see their cancer disappear after being given the cells.

   Researchers plan to try to strengthen the therapy in the hope of greater
success.

   They will also test it against other forms of the disease including breast
and colon cancer.

   Mark Origer, 53, from Wisconsin, is one of the two men who owe their lives to
the treatment.

   He had advanced melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin cancer, which
kills 1,800 Britons each year.

   Before the treatment, he simply wanted to live long enough to attend his
daughter's wedthose-ding. By the time he walked her down the aisle last autumn
there was only one small cancerous spot in his liver.

   That has since been removed by surgeons.

   'I am cured for now,' he said.

   'I know how fortunate I am to have gone through this and responded to this.
Not everybody's that lucky.' Details of the research, carried out by a team from
the National Cancer Institute in the U.S., were reported yesterday in the
journal Science.

   Senior editor Stephen Simpson said: 'This work marks an important next step
in harnessing the power of our immune systems to fight cancer.' Gene therapy has
been tested before in children who have no immune systems.

   They are commonly said to have 'Boy in the Bubble' syndrome. Early trials
appeared promising but were halted when it emerged three children had developed
cancer.

   However, recent research has suggested gene therapy may help shield healthy
bone marrow stem cells from the effects of radiotherapy treatment for cancer.

   The latest study has shown for the first time that genetically engineered
cells can successfully hunt down and destroy tumours.

   White blood cells called Tlymphocytes naturally seek out germs and other
foreign tissue.

   However, they can struggle to spot cancer cells.

   Dr Steven Rosenberg found some patients produce cancerfighting versions. So
he took cells out of the blood, grew more in the laboratory and injected them
back into patients to help fight their tumours.

   But not many patients make enough of these cells naturally for them to be
harvested.

   Dr Rosenberg and his team have created them from scratch in the laboratory.

   'We can take a normal cell from you or me or any patient and convert that
cell into a cell that recognises the cancer,' he said.

   'It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, where as soon as you're done,
you're done.

   'We're giving living cells which continue to grow and function in the body.'

   In 15 of the patients, the genetically engineered T-cells took root and grew
at low levels for a few months although they did not defeat the cancer.

   But in Mr Origer and a second patient, T- cells grew at higher levels for
over a year, and their tumours gradually shrank.

   Dr Len Lichtenfeld of the American Cancer Society said the research was
'exciting' as it provided proof that this approach can work.

   But he warned it was only a first step. He said doctors had to be careful not
to raise hopes too much.

   j.wheldon@dailymail.co.uk

   THE scientist at the forefront of the new technology is Dr Steven Rosenberg,
chief of surgery at the National Cancer Institute.

   One of his jobs in 1985 was to announce to the American public that President
Ronald Reagan had cancer.

   Dr Rosenberg became interested in immunotherapy in 1969 while working at the
Veteran's hospital near Harvard.

   He was surprised by the medical history of a patient he was treating to
remove a gall bladder.

   More than a decade earlier the patient had been diagnosed with a terminal
stomach cancer. Instead of dying he underwent a spontaneous remission.

   Dr Rosenberg said: 'It got me thinking that this patient's body had in some
way reacted against the cancer.' That reaction was rare because cancer is caused
by genetic changes within the body's cells.

   While the body's immune system can react vigorously to foreign invaders, it
reacts weakly to cancer because the tumour cells are so similar to normal cells.

   Decades of work attempting to boost this immune response is now starting to
reap dividends.

GRAPHIC: DEFYING THE ODDS: MARK ORIGER AND HIS DAUGHTER KATIE ON HER WEDDING DAY

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              87 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 31, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1145 words

HEADLINE: Is this really the miracle cure for all our ills?

BYLINE: MICHAEL HANLON

BODY:

   STEM cell therapy, we have been told, promises a revolution in medicine. New
tissues and even whole organs could be grown in jars, genetically identical to
their recipient and so with no inbuilt danger of rejection.

   Stem cells could be used to regenerate diseased or damaged nervous tissue,
repairing the ravaged brains of Alzheimer's patients and rewiring the broken
spinal cords of those paralysed by accidents.

   It is no wonder that the late Superman actor Christopher Reeve, paralysed in
a riding accident, was perhaps the world's leading proponent of stem cell
research.

   But there are several big problems with stem cells, or at least the growing
hype around a potential medical advance that sounds initially like science
fiction.

   Firstly, despite reports to the contrary, growing new hearts or kidneys in a
vat of nutrients is a long, long way off.

   There are immense technical barriers to overcome, not least finding a way to
support growing tissue in a complex three-dimensional structure.

   Scientists are decades away from trying this even in laboratory mice.

   Clinical trials in human patients will not happen until most of us are dead
and probably a long time after.

   Secondly, stem cell therapy is now starting to be offered by the world's
quacks and snakeoil salesmen as a magic cure or treatment for everything from
multiple sclerosis to cosmetic surgery.

   In a letter to The Times this week, leading medics called for caution when
faced with 'extravagant claims' for stem cell therapy, citing clinics in the
Netherlands, currently under investigation by the Dutch authorities, which are
offering cosmetic procedures and MS treatments.

   The medics warn that unproven treatments run the risk of 'uncontrolled and
inappropriate tissue generation'.

   Even where stem cell treatments have been licensed, there is only limited
evidence for their efficacy.

   Also, the ethical issues surrounding stem cell treatments have seen
scientists at loggerheads with the religious and political establishments.

   Particularly in America, where most science is done, and where there is the
greatest concentration in the world of medical talent and money, stem cells are
a moral hot potato.

   Because, say opponents of the technology, creating 'lines' of stem cells
involves the deliberate creation and destruction of human embryos tantamount to
abortion.

   This is a very emotive issue in the U.S., where the religious Right is a
major political force, and there has been a longstanding ban on using federal
funds, a ban supported by President Bush, for stem cell research.

   As a result, there has been something of a reverse braindrain in recent
years, with scientists (and their grants) crossing the Atlantic to Britain,
where laws are more relaxed and there is less cultural opposition to such
research.

   The abortion issue arises because of the origins of the stem cells. There are
three possible sources: adult tissue, cells taken from the umbilical cord (these
pose no ethical dilemmas and there is no opposition to research in this area)
and embryos.

   Stem cells are undifferentiated, 'all purpose' cells that have the potential
to grow into any kind of tissue.

   The most ambitious idea involving stem cells is to use therapeutic cloning to
mass produce lines of cells, genetically identical to the donor and patient,
which could then be used to replace damaged or diseased tissue or organs.

   Genetic material extracted from an adult could be used to create a clone, or
series of clones, from which stem cells could be harvested at an early embryo
stage.

   This would involve the destruction of the embryo, leading to the accusation
by antiabortion campaigners that therapeutic cloning is using the taking of life
to make a cure.

   Last week, there was some excitement when an American company, Advanced Cell
Technology, said it had found a way to extract stem cells from human embryos
without killing them.

   These 'ethical' stem cells may be a clever way to get around the U.S.

   federal-funding ban, although this 'breakthrough' is unlikely to change the
terms of the debate.

   Not all the embryos could be used to develop stem cell lines, and there will
inevitably be many discarded embryos anyway from any attempt to create an
'ethical' stem cell line. Any removal of cells from a growing embryo may also
damage it.

   So stem cell treatments are fraught with both ethical and technological
problems.

   Stem cells promise a great deal, and may indeed prove to be the revolution in
medicine that so many doctors and scientists believe is just round the corner.

   However, the harsh truth is that this revolution is not even on the horizon.

   The situation is similar with another sci-fi-like technology which promises
so much yet which has, so far, amounted to little.

   Ten years ago many medics had great hopes that certain diseases could be
cured by inserting sections of DNA, altering the metabolism of the body's cells
and tissues.

   Gene therapy has had some (limited) success in clinical trials, but there
have also been some well-publicised setbacks, including cases where patients
have died.

   The saga of stem cells and gene therapy illustrates perfectly the great
paradox at the heart of modern Western medicine.

   Thanks to the advances we have seen in the last century, we are living
longer, healthier lives than at any time in human history.

   And yet we are not satisfied.

   As we have come to expect a healthy old age, we are more resentful than ever
when biology kicks in with its harsh certainties of mortality.

   Millions live in hope of a magic bullet to cure old age, of a miracle
breakthrough to end the misery of cancer and to keep the years at bay for
improbable lengths of time.

   But the sad reality is that while diseases can be cured, we are probably no
further ahead in the battle to defeat the inevitable decay and breakdown of old
age than we were at the time of the Victorians.

   The idea that the human body is just a machine whose parts can be replaced
when they wear out has taken hold in the public, and to an extent, the
scientific consciousness.

   Stem cell therapy, gene therapy, hormone treatments and all the other
advances we read about are all highly experimental. They come with huge caveats
and health warnings and should be taken with a pinch of salt.

   The brutal truth is that the greatest advances in human health - clean water
and sanitation, vaccination, decent diets, antibiotics and competent surgery -
have all been made.

   The prospect of stem cell therapy offers hope to millions suffering from
degenerative brain illnesses such as Alzheimer's and from spinal injuries, but
the harsh reality is that most of today's patients will probably not live to see
these therapies offered on the NHS.

   The fact that some unscrupulous medics seem to be offering 'stem cell'
treatments that are untried, untested and will at best not work and at worst
cause harm, is testament to the world's insatiable appetite for panaceas.

GRAPHIC: STEM CELLS: COULD REGENERATE DAMAGED TISSUE

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2006


                              88 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            August 24, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 80

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: Tesco trounces the opposition

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:

   SIR Terry Leahy's juggernaut Tesco continues to steamroller its supermarket
rivals. Despite having to raise food prices this year along with its rivals
after freak weather around the world affected harvests, it still has more than
31pc of the grocery market.

   Data this week also reveals that Tesco.com, its online order business, has
captured a huge 66pc of all online sales in the first seven months of this year.

   Mega sales of toilet rolls and bananas have helped it to leave its nearest
competitor Asda, with just 16pc, miles behind.

   Tesco recently hit an all-time high of 3771/2p after the Daily Mail revealed
it would soon be intensifying its assault on the non-food sector with the launch
of its Tesco Direct catalogue in September.

   Surprisingly, however, it has still lagged the share price performance of
rivals Morrison (unchanged at 2173/4p) and Sainsbury (13/4p better at 356p) this
year. Yesterday it eased 23/4p to 3671/4p.

   Philip Dorgan at broker Panmure Gordon says there is still plenty to go for
and believes interims on October 3 will confirm strong UK trading.

   He expects like-for-like sales in the secondquarter will be much better than
Q1's 4.5pc increase, boosted by the World Cup, excellent July weather and the
benefits of aggressive and sustained price investment.

   WhenWall Street lost an early 31 point gain to trade 58 lower after a
National Association of Realtors report said sales of existing homes had plunged
to a two-year low, the Footsie fell away to finish 42.6 points down at 5860.

   Early sentiment had been affected by min-

   ing giant BHP Billiton's (42p lower at 1014p) results.

   Stimulated earlier in the week by mega break-up rumours, Anglo American
succumbed to profit-taking and lost 90p to 2380p.

   Premier Oil's erratic performance featured in the FTSE 250. Sold down to 954p
at the outset on news of lower-than-expected production at the Chinguetti oil
well in Mauritania, in which it holds an 8pc interest, the shares rebounded to
close 561/2p better at 1042p.

   Vague bid rumours did the rounds as

   did gossip that a positive update on its Dua discovery well in Vietnam could
be on the agenda.

   However, 19pc shareholder Hardman Resources was left nursing a 5p deficit at
60p after its revelation that recoverable reserves at Chinguetti are now likely
to be up to half of the 123m barrels originally assumed.

   BG, which has a 10pc interest in the field, eased 1p to 694p. Oriel
Securities says Hardman is a buy because its share price has fallen by more than
40pc since Chinguetti's problems began.

   Responding to a UBS buy recommendation and 675p price target, PayPoint jumped
60p in a thin market to 560p. The broker points out that the leading payment
collection company, with a network of more than 15,000 outlets, has fallen 23pc
in the last three months and looks oversold.

   Support services group Connaught edged up 1/4p to 2011/2p after announcing
plans to move to a full listing from Aim in order to provide increased liquidity
for its shares.

   Stephen Hill, corporate finance director of Serco since 2002, has been
appointed finance director with David Wells becoming his deputy and company
secretary.

   Positive Phase II results for Trinam, its gene therapy for kidney dialysis
patients, helped Ark Therapeutics rise 31/4p to 93p.

   Analysts have suggested that if Trinam reached the market it could generate
peak sales of Pounds 246m.

   Biophysics company Avacta, the former cash shell Readybuy, firmed 0.13p to
33/4p on talk of a collaboration agreement with UCB Celltech.

   Grove Energy improved 1/4p to 333/4p following its award of two exploration
permits in Tunisia. Galahad Gold firmed 3/8p to 95/8p following a positive
drilling report from Northern Dynasty Minerals, in which it holds a 20.2pc
stake.

   TripleArc, the print procurement solutions provider, added 1/2p to 31/2p
following a positive annual meeting.

   Trading is in line with expectations and healthy underlying cashflow is
leading to further debt repayments. Altium's target price is 10p.

   FORMER dotcom entrepreneur Charles Cohen via broker Evolution brings
Probability to Aim today. Placed at 76p, shares of the company which operates
casino, bingo and lottery games for mobile phone users, as well as associated
payment services, should attain a small premium. It is the recognised leader in
the emerging market of mobile gambling and has not taken any bets from customers
in the US.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2006


                              89 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           August 23, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 59

LENGTH: 79 words

HEADLINE: Biomedica boost

BODY:

   OXFORD Biomedica jumped 31/2p to 29p on hopes for its cancer drug TroVax.

   The gene therapy specialist announced it would be presenting details of its
Phase II trials for kidney cancer at an America conference.

   It expects to start recruiting patients for its Phase III trials later this
year.

   Further trials are also planned for colorectal cancer and other types, such
as prostate and breast cancer.

   Investors needed a boost: the shares have fallen by a third over the past
year.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2006


                              90 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                              June 19, 2006 Monday

SECTION: ED 1ST 04; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: A GIANT STEP TO DESIGNER BABIES;
Breakthrough in embryo screening sparks ethical storm

BYLINE: JULIE WHELDON

BODY:

   NEW fears were raised last night that science is moving inexorably to a world
of designer babies.

   Campaigners reacted with alarm to two developments in genetic screening.

   UK experts revealed an improved method which could allow hundreds of couples
to avoid the risk of having children with a killer disease. It will be quicker
and more accurate than existing screening.

   More disturbingly, a London hospital applied to use IVF sex selection
techniques to help couples with a family history of autism by destroying all
their male embryos.

   There is no reliable genetic test for autism, but boys are more likely than
girls to have the condition. Implanting only females would dramatically reduce
the risk, but mean many perfectly healthy male embryos would be discarded.

   Ethical campaigners said the move was yet another example of how the
goalposts were being moved ever wider.

   Josephine Quintavalle, of Comment on Reproductive Ethics, said: 'It is not
about taking an embryo and curing it, but about diagnosing and then throwing
away.' Simone Aspis, of the British Council of Disabled People, warned:
'Screening out autism would breed a fear that anyone who is different in any way
will not be accepted. It would create a society where only perfection is
valued.' Scientists at University College Hospital in London have applied to the
watchdog Human Fertilisation and Embryology

   Authority for permission for the screening.

   Rates of autism have risen tenfold in the last decade and half a million
British families are now affected. Around ten per cent of cases are thought to
be hereditary.

   Professor Joy Delhanty of UCH said her team would create embryos using IVF
and test them at a few days old to see if they were boys or girls. Only girls
would be implanted into the mother.

   Professor Delhanty said: ' Normally we would not consider this unless there
were at least two boys affected in the immediate family.' She pointed out that
many couples in such a situation would be fertile and might not want to go
through gruelling IVF.

   An HFEA spokesman said the authority had a duty to consider any new
applications. But Miss Quintavalle said: 'The requirements are getting wider and
wider and the science can be more and more hypothetical.

   'This getting rid of male embryos is shoddy and shocking. We need to see more
evidence on the genetic causes of autism.' In a second highly- significant
development, UK scientists said they have found a totally new way to spot
problem genes and ensure that only disease-free embryos are implanted.

   The technique has already been used in several pregnancies. Three are for
couples with particular genetic defects which trigger cystic fibrosis but are
not covered by existing tests. Two are for couples who carry defects for the
musclewasting disorder Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. One is in a woman with a
rare genetic disorder which leads to pancreatic tumours.

   The new screening technique, called Pre-implantation Genetic Haplotyping
(PGH) was developed by Professor Peter Braude of Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital
in London. He will tell the annual conference of the European Society of Human
Reproduction and Embryology-in Prague today that it represents a major step
forward.

   'It is more accurate, highly reliable and available for a whole range of
disorders,' said Professor Braude. 'It opens the doors to all sorts of
conditions.' Doctors can currently use a technique called Pre-implantation
Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) to test embryos for some inherited cancers and disorders
such as Huntington's Disease. But scientists must know the precise defect they
are seeking and it can take up to a year to devise a test for each problem.

   Professor Braude's method, which costs Pounds 4,100 a time, can cover many
more genetic mutations and diseases.

   Ultimately it could even allow scientists to weed out thousands of genetic
diseases.

   The news was greeted with approval by Linda Ball, 37, whose son Daniel, five,
has Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy. Girls can carry the condition but only boys
suffer its devastating effects.

   Daniel already has problems with his legs and must wear splints at night.

   His parents must face the fact that he is unlikely to live beyond his teenage
years.

   Mrs Ball, from Daventry, Northamptonshire, knew the disease ran in her family
because her brother Vaun died of it when he was 18.

   But when she became pregnant, she said, she could not bring herself to have
an abortion, even though she knew she was having a son and there was a 25 per
cent chance he would be affected.

   Now she is delighted that the new test will give her baby daughter Helena 'a
real choice' when she too decides to become a mother.

   Mrs Ball said: 'Of course there is debate about when a life becomes a life.

   But when you know Duchenne and that my little boy is going to have a lot of
pain and suffering, it make things different.' For the test, scientists take
blood samples from a couple and their affected child, or another relative, to
work out where the problem gene lies.

   Using IVF, they create several embryos and remove a single cell from each
when they are a few days old, to get the DNA.

   This is grown overnight in the laboratory which provides a much larger
genetic sample.

   From this the scientists can spot if the embryo is carrying the problem
chromosome or a disease-free version. Only the healthy ones are then implanted.

   The team next hope to offer PGH for disorders such as Fragile X Syndrome,
Myotonic Dystrophy and Prader-Willi Syndrome.

   But Josephine Quintavalle repeated her warning against further extensions of
screening.

   She said: 'I am horrified to think of these people sitting in judgment on
these embryos and saying who should live and who should die.' She said huge
strides had been made to prolong life expectancy for victims of cystic fibrosis
and gene therapy was looking increasingly promising promising for tackling the
condition.

   j.wheldon@dailymail.co.uk

   SCREENED OUT EMBRYO screening can be used for more than 60 inherited
conditions in the UK. These include: Huntingdon's Disease Duchenne Muscular
Dystrophy Cystic fibrosis Haemophilia Fragile X causes severe learning
difficulties Retinoblastoma a form of eye cancer Bowel cancer Breast cancer
Ovarian cancer Sickle Cell blood disease END

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2006


                              91 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             May 24, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: ED 1ST; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 669 words

HEADLINE: Relief as Footsie dusts itself down;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:

   'ENOUGH is enough,' screamed buyers as they returned to the London stock
market with a vengeance, bringing an abrupt halt to the Footsie's dramatic
collapse which has seen it plummet almost 10pc from its mid-April high of 6132.

   Punch-drunk dealers heaved a big sigh of relief as they gleefully watched the
Footsie drag itself off the canvas to rally 173 points before closing 146
points, or 2.6pc, better at 5678.7.

   The FTSE 250 followed Monday's heaviest fall of 364 points with an incredible
405.7 points recovery to 9234.3, its biggest one-day gain.

   London needed Wall Street to behave itself and it did by opening 77 points
higher. Mike Lenhoff, chief equity strategist at Brewin Dolphin, has called the
recent fall a 'healthy correction' and now thinks that the Fed is set to keep US
interest rates on hold at 5pc in June.

   Given the pressure on the housing market and the wash back into consumer
spending, he says the prospect now is that US rates may even have peaked.

   It was no surprise to see mashed miners in the vanguard of the advance. They
have borne the brunt of the selling in recent weeks and some have lost almost
25pc of their value.

   Broker Citigroup helped stop the rot, advising clients that the fall has been
overdone and they should 'buy while stocks last'.

   They obviously did and, together with a sharp rebound in commodity prices, it
helped closing gains stretch to Pounds 2, or 10pc, in places.

   As the price of gold bullion for June delivery climbed Pounds 10 an ounce to
$668 and the copper price surged 8pc, investors scrambled for stock.

   Rio Tinto rebounded 200p to 2860p, Kazakhmys 1241/2p to 10821/2p, Xstrata
178p to 1942p, Antofagasta 183p to 2072p, Anglo American 175p to 2080p and BHP
Billiton 781/2p to 1042p.

   Slicker oil stocks drew encouragement from a firmer crude price with Cairn
Energy 204p higher at 2187p, BP 251/2p up at 635p and Royal Dutch Shell 57p to
the good at 1764p.

   Stimulated by the plan from British Land, up 75p at 1238p, to convert into a
tax-efficient Real Estate Investment Trust early next year, properties joined
the rally. Liberty International rose 69p to 1042p, Hammerson 74p to 1123p and
Land Securities 94p to 1780p.

   Awaiting bid terms from Credit Agricole of France, mortgage bank Alliance &
Leicester rose 37p to 1180p. Barclays gained 181/2p to 6091/2p ahead of
tomorrow's pre-close trading statement.

   Biotech watchers piled into Proteome Sciences, lifting the stock 141/2p to
48p on hearing it has signed a licensing agreement with bioMerieux to use its
biomarkers for the detection, diagnosis and monitoring of a stroke.

   Oxford Biomedica, the gene therapy group, rose 21/2p to 281/2p.

   A Phase II trial of TroVax in patients with prostate cancer that is
unresponsive to hormone therapy is open for recruitment.

   Engineering construction group Balfour Beatty jumped 231/4p to 3411/4p
following two road maintenance contract extensions worth Pounds 170m. It already
has a Pounds 900m order book.

   Reflecting a strong return to profitability at the halfway stage, Gaming
Corporation firmed 1/2p to 12p. During the period, the company won a contract
with Vodafone UK to launch a fully interactive mobile casino service on Vodafone
Live!.

   Chilled foods group Uniq, whose biggest client is Marks & Spencer, jumped
171/4p to 149p.

   Ross Warburton, chairman of the Warburton bakery business, recently joined as
non-executive deputy chairman.

   Acquisition news helped Hargreaves Services accelerate 291/2p to 390p. The
provider of transport and support services to the energy and waste sectors has
bought Gilbraith Tankers, a bulk liquid transport company, for Pounds 2m.

   AIM-listed Homebuy, which specialises in selling domestic appliances to
customers with poor credit histories, rose 31/2p to 1921/2p on news of a
heavyweight board appointment. Former corporate financier Tom Bartlam, who
cofounded leading mezzanine finance investment group Intermediate Capital, has
joined as non-executive deputy chairman. It is a coup for Homebuy and suggests a
deal or two could be on the menu.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2006


                              92 of 210 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              All Rights Reserved
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            February 24, 2006 Friday

SECTION: ED 1ST 04; Pg. 71

LENGTH: 198 words

HEADLINE: Back on the road to recovery;
ANALYSIS

BODY:

   VITAL STATISTICS: (full-year) Underlying net profit: Pounds 194m, down 5pc
Dividend: 3.5p, +10pc One-year share performance: +78pc

   THE past year has seen Shire transformed under chief executive Matt Emmens.

   No longer are the company's prospects bound up with Adderall XR, the
hyperactivity pill that will soon fall prey to copycat competition.

   It has bought in a replacement called NRP 104. And in Transkaryotic
Therapies, the company it bought for Pounds 900m six months ago, it has gained
access to treatments for kidney disease, the genetic disorder Hunter Syndrome
and a pipeline full of projects.

   Underlying profits were slightly ahead of market expectations, reflected in
the share price, which ended up 27p at 902p.

   With the results came some good news on Adderall. Okay, Emmens hasn't
resolved the court case with Barr Labs, which wants to create a generic
alternative. But he let slip that the patent should remain intact until the end
of the year.

   By that time Adderall users should be transferring to the more effective NRP.

   A small dose of realism with so many new products and development, sales and
research budgets will be higher than forecast.

   Verdict: Emmens' medicine is working.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2006


                              93 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 29, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 92

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: US rival may be on the brink of taking over SCi

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:


    MARKET REPORT GET the kids back to school. That was the shout from sparsely
populated dealings rooms as traders once again bemoaned the paucity of business
during half-term week. They have fed on scraps while bosses and many fund
managers have dipped into their bonus pots and taken the family to Dubai.

    Closing turnover yesterday limped to 2bn, well below the daily average of
3bn-plus.

    Computer games in most homes must have been hammered during the week, so it
was rather ironic that a company behind some of the most popular titles Lara
Croft and Tomb Raider happened to be on the tip of many City dealers' tongues.

    SCi Entertainment reversed an early 18p fall as rumours intensified that it
had agreed to be taken over by US rival Electronic Arts. Word is that the cash
deal will come early next week and value the shares at 625p each and the company
at Pounds 456m. SCi closed up 8p up at 538p. If takeover does materialise, then
Jane Cavanagh, the company's founder and chief executive, who owns 6.6pc, would
bank a cool Pounds 32m.

    SCi confirmed on Monday it had received bid approaches. A couple of days
later it was talking to just one suitor. California-based Electronic Arts is one
of the best run computer games companies in the world. Its titles include Harry
Potter and FIFA Soccer 06. Dealers believe it has been stalking SCi ever since
it snatched Eidos from the clutches of Elevation, a US-based private equity
house.

    Dealers were relieved when Wall Street shot 75 points higher within 30
minutes of the opening. Microsoft's figures pleased, as did news that the US
economy had shaken off headwinds from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita to grow at a
faster-than-expected 3.8pc annual rate in the third-quarter.

    The Footsie recouped a 25 point deficit to close 30.6 points better at
5213.4.

    Mike Lenhoff, chief strategist at Brewin Dolphin, reckons his yearend
Footsie target of 5,700 will be a struggle from here and has rolled it over to
March of next year. He remains positive about equities and thinks Wall Street
will rebound and lead global markets higher.

    British Airways climbed 3p to 290p ahead of next Friday's interims. But
buyers beware as the second-quarter results will include the damaging effects of
the catering dispute during the period, which is estimated to have cost the
airline around Pounds 40m.

    Aim-listed Blue Star Mobile, a provider of entertainment and promotional
content via mobile phones, buzzed 1/2p higher to 103/4p. It has won a contract
from BA to provide its customers with a guide to London that can be downloaded
directly to their mobile phones.

    Fashion group Next lost 8p to 1306p as rumours of a pending profits warning
continued to do the rounds. If clothing sales at Marks & Spencer (3/4p dearer at
4143/4p) are recovering, its biggest rival must surely be suffering.

    Hopes of bumper Christmas sales lifted toy-maker Character Group 4 1/2p to
441/2p. Character launched a Dr Who range of licensed toys in August and the
radio-controlled Daleks have been big sellers. So should the family of Little
Britain figurines.

    Transport company AutoLogic fell 14p to 1271/2p after admitting that its
French joint venture company, CAT, will report a loss for the year.

    IT services company Computer-Land, meanwhile, jumped 131/2p to 1281/2p after
experiencing improved trading in the second-quarter. More bullish news is
expected with the interim results on December 8.

    Books and magazines printer St Ives lost 6p to 316p after revealing its
facilities at Hollywood and Miami in South Florida had suffered significant
damage from Hurricane Wilma. The company said it was too early to assess the
financial impact.

    Following news that Cerepro, its brain cancer drug, has been submitted for
approval in Europe, Ark Therapeutics gained 31/2p to 991/2p.

    If approved, it will be the launch of the world's first gene-therapy drug
outside China.

    ENTHUSIASTIC Wilson King fund manager Craig Ray recently visited Asiafocused
merchant bank and wealth management group Crosby Capital in Hong Kong. He was
impressed by the management team which has already been involved in several
profitable situations this year. It made a Pounds 22m return on a stake in
Japan's IB Daiwa. The deal flow is set to continue and Ray believes the shares,
3p up at 81p, look as cheap as chips.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2005


                              94 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 27, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 915 words

HEADLINE: ANOREXIA IS A REAL DISEASE

BYLINE: THEA JOURDAN

BODY:


    THIS week, experts announced that the eating disorders anorexia and bulimia
may be biological diseases rather than mental conditions. Researchers at the
Karolinska Institute in Sweden say that they have linked eating disorders to
infections which hit the immune system. Here, a leading UK expert in eating
disorders, Professor Janet Treasure, Professor of Psychiatry at Guy's Hospital,
Kings College London, explains to THEA JOURDAN why she welcomes the findings.

    FOR a long time, I've thought that eating disorders were biological
diseases. Young women, who make up 90 per cent of sufferers, do not just decide
to starve themselves because they want to look slim.

    Instead, they become anorexic because of a complex interaction between
biological, psychological and social factors.

    Anorexia has been recognised as a condition for hundreds of years, but it is
becoming more common in the Western world. Between 1970 and 1980, the number of
people with anorexia increased threefold.

    The main symptom is noticeable weight loss caused by excessive dieting. Some
people also take laxatives or make themselves vomit. Excessive exercising is
another feature. People with anorexia typically weigh 15 per cent or more below
the expected weight for their age, sex and height.

    The Swedish research showed that sufferers of anorexia and bulimia have
unusually high levels of certain antibodies in their blood. These antibodies are
produced by their own immune system in response to infections.

    It seems that the antibodies then begin to attack chemicals in the brain
that conshifttrol appetite. If the researchers are right, then anorexia could be
reclassed as an auto-immune disease (a bit like rheumatoid arthritis).

    This research is interesting because there is already evidence that eating
disorders can follow an infection. My own research suggests that anorexia runs
in families and has a genetic element, too.

    In the 1980s, I was involved in research that compared levels of eating
disorders between identical and non-identical twins. The fashion then was to
think that anorexia was a psychological disorder.

    Our research, however, clearly showed that identical twins were much more
likely to both suffer from anorexia than non-identical twins. Over 70 per cent
of identical twins both suffered from the disease, as compared to just 10 to 15
per cent of non-identical twins.

    Identical twins have identical genes, so the evidence was compelling that
genes played a part.

    I think that research started to attitudes, and many more scientists started
to look at the biological causes. Over the past decade, researchers have been
trying to pinpoint the genes that can trigger anorexia.

    Last year, I published a study looking at the brains of people with
anorexia. Using sophisticated scans to show which parts of their brains reacted
to food, we found that in people with anorexia this was different to normal.

    THE orbital frontal cortex is the part of the brain that normally agonises
over decision-making. But in anorexics, this cortex is activated by food
stimuli. Perhaps, people with anorexia find it difficult to make a decision
about whether they are going to eat.

    In my view, biological factors trigger the disease but environmental factors
and social pressures make it worse. There is no doubt that there is an alarming
pressure on young girls to stay thin. Many preteens now say that they are
unhappy about their weight and are on a diet.

    Personality and family environment probably play a role, too.

    Anorexics often have poor selfesteem. They may also be disturbed due to an
unhappy childhood. For example, about three in 10 people with anorexia will have
suffered some form of sexual abuse.

    We think that developing anorexia may be a response to dealing with complex
emotions and a way of maintaining control.

    It is very important that we look for ways to treat this disease more
effectively. Anorexia does not just make someone painfully thin.

    Prolonged starvation can lead to infertility and osteoporosis.

    In some cases, people with the disease die from the effects. Singers Karen
Carpenter - the first 'celebrity' anorexic - and Lena Zavaroni both fought long
battles with anorexia and died young; Karen aged 32 and Lena aged 35.

    Former Spice Girl Geri Halliwell is another high-profile sufferer.

    Many people with anorexia refuse to admit they have a problem. They either
never get help, or delay getting help for many years.

    I am now very optimistic that we will now be able to find a better way to
help people who develop this condition. Gene therapy is an exciting possibility
for a complete cure, but it is still a long way off.

    Behavioural therapy may be the best way to tackle the problem now.

    We have found that people with eating disorders are often high-achievers and
perfectionists and you can see traits developing in childhood.

    The good news is that even people who have suffered from anorexia for years
can be treated. Around four in ten patients fully recover, and many more live
with the disease in a less acute form. The more we know about this disease, the
more likely it is that we will one day find a cure.

    EATING Disorders Association Helpline: 0870 770 3256 IF YOU come from a
family with two or more people who have anorexia nervosa, researchers from Kings
College London would like to speak to you. Contact Frankie Bishopp on 07932
506518 or f.bishopp@iop.kcl.ac.uk

GRAPHIC: ONETIME SUFFERER: GERI HALLIWELL

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2005


                              95 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 August 6, 2005

SECTION: ED_2ND_04; Pg. 81

LENGTH: 757 words

HEADLINE: US job figures give Footsie the shivers

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:


    STRONGER than expected US employment numbers for July prompted an early
42-point fall on Wall Street and that dragged London lower.

    Traders in New York fretted that the Fed may now raise interest rates at a
faster pace than economists had forecast. The unemployment rate remained at 5pc,
a 47-year low.

    The news prompted late profit-taking in the City and the Footsie lost an
initial 26 point gain to finish 0.8 points off at 5,314.7, but still 32.4 points
higher on a week which saw UK interest rates cut for the first time in two
years.

    Sentiment was underpinned by bumper interim figures from Barclays, 17p
better at 576p. Perennial takeover favourite Standard Chartered dipped 21p to
1125p ahead of its interims.

    Barclays Stockbrokers expect a strong performance in wholesale banking and a
bullish update on its most recently acquisition, Korea First.

    Continuing to reflect speculation that state-owned Chinese oil giant CNOOC
could pounce on the UK group after withdrawing its Pounds 10.4bn offer for
Unocal, BG Group gushed 6p to 4941/4p.

    Premier also gained 211/2p to 738p.

    Centrica firmed 31/4p to 2373/4p amid gossip it could be interested in a bid
for Scottish Power, 1p dearer at 5041/2p. The Glasgow-based utility effectively
hoisted the 'for sale' sign in May when it announced the Pounds 5.1bn sale of
its ailing PacifiCorp business in America to Warren Buffet's MidAmerican Energy.

    Amid growing speculation that French businessman Vincent Bollore was adding
to his recently acquired 6.03pc stake, Aegis advanced 11p more to 1251/4p on
hefty turnover of 65m shares. Bollore is 22pc shareholder and chairman of Havas,
the world's fifthbiggest advertising group. Dealers believe there must be a good
chance of an agreed merger between the two in the coming weeks.

    Rumours of a pending downbeat trading statement left magazine printer St
Ives 113/4p down at 3651/4p.

    Private equity bid takeover rumours saw wooden and laminate flooring company
Floors2Go touch 401/2p, forcing the company to say that it knows of no reason
for the sharp rise.

    Nevertheless, the close was still 3p higher at 36p with speculators still
prepared to have a punt on something happening in the short-term.

    Apax Partners was apparently prepared to pay 110p per share earlier, but
walked away after failing to reach agreement with the board. A dire profits
warning in June saw the price collapse and it has taken until now for private
equity players to start sniffing around again. Manchester-based investment bank
Zeus Capital speaks for around 25pc of the equity and is apparently happy to sit
tight on its investment. Meanwhile, lower interest rates should encourage Joe
Public to spend again on some trendy upmarket wooden flooring.

    Almost 21m Provalis shares were traded and the close was 3p higher at 81/4p.

    Buyers have piled into the international medical diagnostics and drugs group
on hearing that in2it(TM)A1c, its flagship diabetes diagnostic product, has been
certified by the National Glycohaemoglobin Standardisation Program, which is run
by the University of Missouri.

    Ark Therapeutics rose 33/4p to 1001/2p after announcing that its Finnish
based scientists had found a way to insert DNA into specific sites in a genome,
thereby avoiding the possible devastating side-effects of current gene therapy
techniques. Analysts will be hoping for an update and news of possible financial
implications with interim figures on August 31.

    Zi Medical gained 11/4p more to 81/2p.

    The latest Growth Company Investor news sheet says the market has not
noticed the arrival of biotech entrepreneur, Sir Christopher Evans, as chairman.
The medical device developer should make investors sit up and take notice over
the next year.

    Football agency group First Artist improved 1/4p to 51/2p on a bullish
trading update. It is experiencing its best summer transfer period in the last
four years, having concluded 50 transactions including Diomansy Kamara's move to
West Bromwich Albion from Portsmouth and Kevin Phillips's transfer to Aston
Villa from relegated Southampton.

    WORD is next month's interim figures from Deal Group Media, 3/4p dearer at
201/4p, will not disappoint. The cash-rich internet advertising group, which was
formed through the reverse takeover of IBNet in late 2003, has been boosted by
the increasing willingness of consumers to buy goods online and the rapidly
growing number of broadband connections in the UK. Dealers say good figures
would lift the stock to 25p.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2005


                              96 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 29, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 79

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: results round-up

BODY:


    F&C's good news Shire boom draws a lot of attention STRONG growth in its
attention deficit disorder drug Adderall helped Shire Pharmaceuticals (no change
at 655p) beat second-quarter forecasts, as it upped its guidance for revenue
growth this year.

    Shire, which has just completed the Pounds 915m purchase of Transkaryotic
Therapies, grew quarterly revenues by 32pc to Pounds 243m and bottom line
earnings from Pounds 19m to Pounds 66m. The interim dividend was held at
1.0475p. Revenue growth in 2005 will be in 'low double digits', at the top end
of its previous target.

    RISING stock markets helped asset manager Foreign & Colonial (down 1/2p to
2081/2p) record a 4.7pc increase in assets under management to Pounds 2.4bn in
the first half of the year.

    Profitable Alliance PHARMACY group Alliance Unichem revealed a 28pc rise in
interim profits to Pounds 137.3m. However analysts were concerned about a 0.6pc
fall in operating profits at Alliance's wholesale operations, and the shares
slumped 121/2p to 818p.

    Capita shares leap OUTSOURCING services firm Capita the administrator of
London's congestion charge unveiled an 18pc rise in interim profits to Pounds
74.5m.

    The group also announced a contract, worth Pounds 100m over 10 years with
the London borough of Harrow. The shares soared 16p to 3651/4p.

    Liberty assets up SHOPPING centre owner Liberty International (down 6p to
972p) reported interim profits of Pounds 130m as it said net assets per share
had risen to 1085p on the back of its purchase of Manchester's Arndale Centre
and Cribbs Causeway in Bristol. An interim 13p dividend is to be paid.

    Carphone move CARPHONE Warehouse's TalkTalk will begin selling home phone
line rental on top of calls after topping 1m customers. Retail sales were up
17pc to Pounds 259m and fixed line sales rose 33pc to Pounds 125m in the first
quarter.

    Autonomy rises SOFTWARE specialist Autonomy Corporation (up 43/4p to 255p)
saw profits almost double to US$8.17m in the first half of the year thanks to
sales of its latest big keyword search product.

    Vedanta departure INDIAN miner Vedanta yesterday parted company with its
finance director Peter Sydney-Smith, leaving it with no UK-based executive
director. The group posted nearly double its earnings in the first quarter, with
underlying earnings up to $155m (Pounds 90m).

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2005


                              97 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 28, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 58 words

HEADLINE: Shire finalises its $1.6bn US deal

BODY:


    SHIRE Pharmaceuticals (up 11p to 655p) completes its $1.6bn purchase of US
biotech Transkaryotic Therapies today. Investors initially opposed the deal, but
were swayed by positive trial data on a treatment for Hunter syndrome, a rare
hereditary disorder. Shire is expected to announce a 13pc rise in second-quarter
revenues to $363.8m today.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2005


                              98 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 12, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: Gene injection to tackle impotence

BYLINE: ROGER DOBSON

BODY:


    A REMARKABLE new treatment based on a single injection could revolutionise
the treatment of impotence, which afflicts one in ten men, and almost half of
the over-40s.

    The treatment, which has been given to men for the first time in a clinical
trial in America, involves injecting 'healthy'genes to restore normal male
function.

    The effects of just one injection can last for up to six months for erectile
dysfunction associated with both diabetes and ageing.

    This suggests gene therapy can treat the nine out of ten cases of erectile
dysfunction which have a physical or medical cause, such as ageing or an
underlying medical condition such as diabetes, heart disease or high blood
pressure.

    The new treatment is based on a gene which produces a protein called Maxi-K
that controls key penile muscles. The protein is usually active only during
sexual stimulation, but with ageing and certain medical conditions, not enough
is produced. Injecting a processed version of the gene causes more protein to be
released in the body when needed.

    Although drugs can help, they do not cure the problem and have other
drawbacks. They require planning, because the effects last only a few hours, and
have to be taken repeatedly.

    Researchers say the idea of gene therapy is to allow sex to be more
spontaneous for impotence sufferers.

    So far six men have been injected and are being monitored. Earlier results
from laboratory tests show the therapy is highly effective.

    Differences in animals were seen within one month and remained months later.

    'These studies have shown erectile function can be restored for up to six
months,' says Dr Melman of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York.

    Researchers have also found that the injection has a similar effect on
bladder muscles. Trials to see if it could treat incontinence are also planned.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2005


                              99 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 21, 2005

SECTION: Pg. 66

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: Soaring Shire puts the doubters in their place

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:


    IT was game, set and match to bulls of Shire Pharmaceuticals as it soared to
635p before closing a healthy 32p better at 6271/2p.

    Analysts who had doubted the board's recent decision to fork out a stonking
$839m on Transkaryotic Therapies, an American biotech firm that produces drugs
for genetic disorders, were left red-faced.

    TKT released positive Phase III trial data on a therapy for the treatment of
Hunter syndrome, a rare hereditary disorder characterised by dwarfism.

    Shire had said it was looking to spend up to $550m on a large acquisition as
part of a strategy to reduce its reliance on its hyperactive drug.

    But when it announced the proposed TKT deal in April, the shares nosedived
below 550p on fears that the price Shire was prepared to pay was way too high
and shareholders would vote against it at the egm in mid-July.

    Broker Canaccord believes the very strong data has removed any lingering
uncertainty on whether the proposed acquisition of TKT will go ahead.

    Shareholders should now give the deal the thumbs up. It advises clients to
dose up with stock and has a target price of 727p.

    Shire had flagged TKT's Hunter syndrome treatment as one of its most
promising products. It is now hopeful it will be filed with regulators in the
fourth- quarter of the current year.

    Indeed, Canaccord believes that Shire's newsflow and financial profile
places it in a position to shine.

    Meanwhile rumours of a $8bn-plus Anglo- German chemicals merger refuse to
lie down. BOC, the British chemicals and gases group, touched 1072p before
closing 4p up at 1062p as dealers continued to get wind of a possible 'friendly'
deal with Linde of Germany. Rumours have been rife that the two have already had
talks about a possible summer wedding.

    BOC and Linde have done business before, merging their process plant and
research and development operations in the US two years ago. BOC recently
reported a rise in secondquarter profits from $118m to $130m.

    Many other blue chips were spooked by a record oil price, with the black
gold flirting with a price of $ 60 per barrel in the face of growing supply
fears. Although an opening 60-point fall on Wall Street caused some late concern
in London, the Footsie finished only 5.6 points easier at 5072.0.

    Prevailing worries about fuel costs left British Airways 41/2p off at 273p
and easyJet 51/4p off at 2423/4p. Chemicals group ICI fell 71/2p to 2661/2p.

    But oil shares reflected predictions in some quarters of an even higher
crude price, with BG Group up 63/4p to 4553/4p, BP 4p to 5901/2p and Shell 31/4p
to 5193/4p.

    Venture Production gained 133/4p to 360p.

    Ramco Energy gushed to 341/2p and closed 7p higher at 31p after being
granted extended waivers on loans with both its bankers and a major creditor
until it has sold enough assets to repay the debt.

    Despite pub managers across the UK reporting a record number of pints were
pulled over the scorching weekend, pub shares were flat.

    Investors were distressed to hear that the government is considering
bringing in legislation to ban smoking in all public places from 2007.

    Enterprise Inns lost 11p to 814p, Greene King 6p to 1249p and Wolverhampton
& Dudley 7p to 1156p.

    Buyers were in the driving seat at luxury car dealer Pendragon, 131/4p
better at 2931/4p. They are hopeful that next week's trading update will put the
shares in the fast lane.

    Aim- quoted Ocean Power Technologies rose 41/2p to 70p following news of an
agreement the company has with Total and Iberdrola to develop power stations in
France.

    Placed on Aim at 11p by broker Corporate Synergy, shares of Chromogenex
touched 123/4p and closed at 113/4p. The company designs and manufactures
medical lasers to treat skin complaints.

    SectorGuard improved 0.13p to 33/4p following satisfactory interim results.

    After completing three acquisitions over the six-month period, the board is
in negotiations about a further two.

    - E-RETAIL staged a successful debut on Aim. Placed at 31/2p by broker
Seymour Pierce Ellis, shares of the internet retail consultancy founded by two
former directors of ASOS, raced ahead to 43/4p and closed at 41/4p following
turnover of 7.7m. An estimated 21m people shop online, and more than $3bn was
spent over the Christmas period last year. It offers huge potential for
e-Retail.


LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005


                              100 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 21, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: Soaring Shire puts the doubters in their place

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:


    IT was game, set and match to bulls of Shire Pharmaceuticals as it soared to
635p before closing a healthy 32p better at 6271/2p.

    Analysts who had doubted the board's recent decision to fork out a stonking
Pounds 839m on Transkaryotic Therapies, an American biotech firm that produces
drugs for genetic disorders, were left red-faced.

    TKT released positive Phase III trial data on a therapy for the treatment of
Hunter syndrome, a rare hereditary disorder characterised by dwarfism.

    Shire had said it was looking to spend up to Pounds 550m on a large
acquisition as part of a strategy to reduce its reliance on its hyperactive
drug.

    But when it announced the proposed TKT deal in April, the shares nosedived
below 550p on fears that the price Shire was prepared to pay was way too high
and shareholders would vote against it at the egm in mid-July.

    Broker Canaccord believes the very strong data has removed any lingering
uncertainty on whether the proposed acquisition of TKT will go ahead.

    Shareholders should now give the deal the thumbs up. It advises clients to
dose up with stock and has a target price of 727p.

    Shire had flagged TKT's Hunter syndrome treatment as one of its most
promising products. It is now hopeful it will be filed with regulators in the
fourth- quarter of the current year.

    Indeed, Canaccord believes that Shire's newsflow and financial profile
places it in a position to shine.

    Meanwhile rumours of a Pounds 8bn-plus Anglo- German chemicals merger refuse
to lie down. BOC, the British chemicals and gases group, touched 1072p before
closing 4p up at 1062p as dealers continued to get wind of a possible 'friendly'
deal with Linde of Germany. Rumours have been rife that the two have already had
talks about a possible summer wedding.

    BOC and Linde have done business before, merging their process plant and
research and development operations in the US two years ago. BOC recently
reported a rise in secondquarter profits from Pounds 118m to Pounds 130m.

    Many other blue chips were spooked by a record oil price, with the black
gold flirting with a price of $60 per barrel in the face of growing supply
fears. Although an opening 60-point fall on Wall Street caused some late concern
in London, the Footsie finished only 5.6 points easier at 5072.0.

    Prevailing worries about fuel costs left British Airways 41/2p off at 273p
and easyJet 51/4p off at 2423/4p. Chemicals group ICI fell 71/2p to 2661/2p.

    But oil shares reflected predictions in some quarters of an even higher
crude price, with BG Group up 63/4p to 4553/4p, BP 4p to 5901/2p and Shell 31/4p
to 5193/4p.

    Venture Production gained 133/4p to 360p.

    Ramco Energy gushed to 341/2p and closed 7p higher at 31p after being
granted extended waivers on loans with both its bankers and a major creditor
until it has sold enough assets to repay the debt.

    Despite pub managers across the UK reporting a record number of pints were
pulled over the scorching weekend, pub shares were flat.

    Investors were distressed to hear that the government is considering
bringing in legislation to ban smoking in all public places from 2007.

    Enterprise Inns lost 11p to 814p, Greene King 6p to 1249p and Wolverhampton
& Dudley 7p to 1156p.

    Buyers were in the driving seat at luxury car dealer Pendragon, 131/4p
better at 2931/4p. They are hopeful that next week's trading update will put the
shares in the fast lane.

    Aim- quoted Ocean Power Technologies rose 41/2p to 70p following news of an
agreement the company has with Total and Iberdrola to develop power stations in
France.

    Placed on Aim at 11p by broker Corporate Synergy, shares of Chromogenex
touched 123/4p and closed at 113/4p. The company designs and manufactures
medical lasers to treat skin complaints.

    SectorGuard improved 0.13p to 33/4p following satisfactory interim results.

    After completing three acquisitions over the six-month period, the board is
in negotiations about a further two.

    E-RETAIL staged a successful debut on Aim. Placed at 31/2p by broker Seymour
Pierce Ellis, shares of the internet retail consultancy founded by two former
directors of ASOS, raced ahead to 43/4p and closed at 41/4p following turnover
of 7.7m. An estimated 21m people shop online, and more than Pounds 3bn was spent
over the Christmas period last year. It offers huge potential for e-Retail.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2005


                              101 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 30, 2005

SECTION: ED_3RD; Pg. 90

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: Shire profits nosedive by shock 73pc

BODY:


    SHIRE Pharmaceuticals profits fell 73pc in the first quarter as it was hit
by the costs of new drug launches and wholesalers reducing their stocks.

    One-off costs such as the Pounds 26m licensing cheque it sent partner New
River Pharmaceuticals also hampered performance.

    Net profits for the three months to the end of March plummeted Pounds 28.3m
to

    Pounds 10.7m. On an underlying basis the decline was a less severe 35pc.
Shares shed just 1p to 5461/2 as Shire's problems were anticipated.

    Chief executive Matt Emmens reckons he is winning round sceptics who panned
his planned Pounds 839m takeover of Transkaryotic Therapies. Adderall XR, its
hyperactivity drug, posted a better than expected Pounds 76m in sales, up 4pc in
a year.

GRAPHIC: SHIRE PHARMACEUTICALS

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2005


                              102 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 27, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 67

LENGTH: 755 words

HEADLINE: Dairy Crest leaves a sour taste in punters' mouths

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:


    DAIRY Crest is not everyone's cup of tea. Hungry bears sold the food
manufacturer and owner of Cathedral City cheddar cheese amid trade industry
gossip that struggling supermarket group Wm Morrison, which last year merged
with Safeway, is about to drop it as its milk supplier.

    Dairy Crest currently supplies about a third of Morrison's milk. The close
was 221/2p off at 433p.

    Morrison would be the third major supermarket to ditch Dairy Crest in 12
months. Asda was the first, in May 2004, to switch from Dairy Crest and Wiseman.
It gave Arla the contract for some 450m litres of milk a year, worth an annual
Pounds 230m in sales.

    Only a few months later Tesco said 'cheerio' and Dairy Crest's shares
immediately collapsed 18pc to a low of 316p in one session. Tesco's business was
worth a stonking Pounds 60m a year in sales and Pounds 12m-Pounds 15m in annual
profits.

    The loss of Morrison's contract would possibly make Dairy Crest exit the
liquid milk business altogether and as soon as possible. Some analysts believe
it would fare a lot better if it concentrated on its less-risky spreads and
yoghurts products.

    However, one supportive fund manager last night said that sellers are
playing a dangerous game. Morrison has yet to make a decision and will not do so
until later next month, at the very earliest. Should it decide to be loyal and
remain with Dairy Crest, the upside from here could easily be 50p-plus.

    Robert Wiseman, in which dairyfarmer collective First Milk owns 15pc, gained
5p to 270p on hopes it will benefit should Morrison decide to change.

    After a firm 14-point start, the Footsie turned sour. It traded 33 lower by
mid-afternoon and closed 19.4 points down at 4845.5 after Wall Street dipped 49
following disappointing data.

    The Conference Board's consumer confidence index fell for the third
consecutive month to a sharperthanexpected 97.7 in April from 103.1 in March.

    The Dow had initially risen 21 points after new home sales last month
unexpectedly rose to a record.

    Drugs firm Shire Pharmaceuticals rallied 191/2p to 561p after Morgan Stanley
defended its decision to fork out Pounds 839m on US drugs firm Transkaryotic
Therapies. The US broker believes the deal makes great sense and could be highly
value-enhancing.

    TT will strengthen Shire's existing renal and hematology products.

    After Deutsche Bank raised its target price to 2450p from 2250p ahead of
tomorrow's first-quarter results, AstraZeneca jumped 40p to 2295p.

    GlaxoSmithKline, with its Q1's on the same day, firmed 8p to 1232p.

    Whitbread's (441/2p down at 8731/2p) poor figures gave the rest of the
drinks sector a nasty hangover.

    Enterprise Inns shed 231/2p to 750p and Scottish & Newcastle 111/4p to
4691/2p.

    Slowing sales at Carpetright raised fears that trading at Topps Tiles is
currently at the mezzanine level. After Evolution slashed its target price to
180p from 200p, the shares touched 164p and closed 63/4p lower at 169p.

    Headlam, which is the dominant floor-covering distributor in the UK, also
reflected Carpetright's woes with a fall of 141/2p to 4041/2p.

    Internet bank Egg closed as flat as a plain omelette at 96p, down 6p.

    Dealers have given up hope of Prudential (1p easier at 482p) ever finding a
buyer for its 79pc stake.

    Selling in belated response to cautious comments from ABN Amro left Daily
Mirror publisher Trinity Mirror 27p down at 653p. The broker believes profit
forecasts could be under threat due to The Mirror's declining circulation and
weakness in advertising.

    Alexandra, the UK's leading supplier of corporate uniforms and workwear,
rose 61/4p to 1181/2p. Full-year profits advanced 10pc to Pounds 4.7m, aided by
new accounts including McDonalds, National Grid, Shell and Swissport. It has
also acquired Docklands, a London clothing company, for Pounds 4m.

    Regal Petroleum slumped 281/2p to 3641/2p following a placing of 11.5m
shares at 390p. The Pounds 44.85m raised will be used to exploit drilling
success in Romania and continue appraisal work at Kallirachi and development
work at Prinos in Greece.

    PROFITS to March 2005 at niche printer Wyndeham Press are in line with the
top end of market expectations.

    Numis remains bullish and its target price of 166p compares with the close
of 1391/2p, up 41/2p. The recent Graphic Facilities acquisition has bedded in
well and progress has made through reorganisation. Numis advises a switch out of
St Ives, which trades at an unfair premium to Wyndeham.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2005


                              103 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                                 April 23, 2005

SECTION: 1ST; Pg. 100

LENGTH: 108 words

HEADLINE: Shareholder attacks Shire

BODY:


    SHIRE Pharmaceuticals came under fire from an influential shareholder who is
unimpressed at plans to pay Pounds 839m for US drugs firm Transkaryotic
Therapies.

    Britannic Asset Management's chief investment officer Peter Reid said the
deal 'undermines shareholder value' and 'destroys the company's growth prospects
in one single blow'.

    He slammed boss Matt Emmens for spending Shire's Pounds 500m cash surplus.

    The City, which marked the shares down 201/2p to 539p, would appear to share
some of Reid's reservations.

    A Shire spokesman says doubters may be silenced once Emmens has explained
the merits of the acquisition.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                              104 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 22, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 85

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: Pounds 840m swoop hits Shire

BYLINE: IAN LYALL

BODY:


    SHIRE Pharmaceuticals spooked the market with its plans to buy a US drugs
firm with only one product on the market.

    Its Pounds 840m swoop for Transkaryotic Therapies sent the shares plummeting
47p to 5591/2p amid fears that chief executive Matt Emmens had overpaid for the
little-known group.

    An already bad case of the jitters was not helped by plans to book Pounds
419m of acquisition-related asset write-offs and restructuring charges.

    Analysts calculate that he is paying a 44pc premium to TKT's average share
price of the past month. They also say the deal adds to the overall confusion
over the prospects for Shire.

    Its main product, hyperactivity drug Adderall, is expected to come under
copycat competition soon.

    Emmens, armed with Pounds 500m, has been attempting to expand Shire's
medicine cabinet.

    Investors were led to expect a dribble of smaller deals, rather than a big
one.

    TKT only has one product on pharmacists' shelves, Replagal, for a genetic
disorder called Fabry disease.

    But it is bringing another to market called Dynepo, which could be sold
alongside Shire's own kidney drug, Fosrenol.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2005


                              105 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 11, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Gene that can carry a death sentence

BYLINE: ROBIN YAPP

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have discovered a gene that significantly increases the risk of
heart attack, rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis.

    Up to one in four people are thought to have the mutant gene, which may also
be linked to other diseases involving inflammation, such as diabetes and asthma.

    The discovery by Swedish researchers could lead to new ways of treating
these conditions, because it suggests drugs that are effective against one may
work against others. It could eventually lead to gene therapy treatments to
correct the mutation.

    Writing in the journal Nature Genetics, Professor Fredrik Piehl of the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm says this is the first identified gene to link
autoimmune and cardiovascular diseases.

    The autoimmune response when the immune system mistakes the body's own
tissues as foreign invaders and attacks them, causing inflammation is at the
root of diseases such as arthritis, diabetes and multiple sclerosis.

    Inflammation is widely recognised as a contributory factor in
atherosclerosis, which leads to heart attacks.

    'This gene variant can therefore be one of the single largest genetic causes
of complex inflammatory diseases,' says Professor Piehl.

    'There is also a chance that other diseases are affected.

    The discovery can now lead to more reliable diagnostics and better
treatments for patients.' The discovery centres on a variant form of a gene
called MHC2TA, which was discovered first in rats. The mutant gene reduces the
production of a number of proteins upon which the immune system relies to fight
diseases.

    The scientists then investigated whether it was associated with human
diseases.

    They compared 387 heart attack victims, 548 patients with MS and 1,288
rheumatoid arthritis sufferers with similar numbers of healthy people.

    Heart attack victims were 39 per cent more likely to carry the variant gene,
arthritis sufferers were 29 per cent more likely to carry it and people with MS
were 14 per cent more likely to have it. Between 20 and 25 per cent of people
are believed to have the gene.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2005


                              106 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 29, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_SPR; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: Gene jab makes new arteries

BYLINE: ROGER DOBSON

BODY:


    GENE therapy is being used to grow new arteries and blood vessels in the
legs of patients with a circulation condition that affects up to three million
people in Britain.

    Instead of surgery to attach transplanted arteries, in a revolutionary new
technique, patients will be given injections of an engineered master gene
designed to make new blood vessels grow to bypass blockages and improve
circulation.

    Early trials of the treatment have already started, offering hope for
thousands of people who suffer with peripheral arterial disease or PAD.

    With PAD, blood vessels in the legs are narrowed or blocked by fatty
deposits, resulting in reduced blood and oxygen flow to the feet, legs and
muscles, increasing the risk of heart attack and stroke. Symptoms can include
leg pain - particularly when walking or exercising - which disappears after a
few minutes of rest, as well as a numbness, tingling or coldness in the lower
legs or feet, and infections and sores that do not heal quickly.

    Drug therapy is used to treat the condition, although in some cases, surgery
is needed, including an artery bypass graft.

    The new therapy, developed by Genzyme, is designed to get the same kind of
bypasses to grow inside the patient's leg rather than transplant them from
elsewhere.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2005


                              107 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 15, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: Bionic glasses give sight back to blind

BYLINE: MARTYN HALLE

BODY:


    ACAMERA the size of a 5p coin, mounted on a pair of spectacles, could offer
hope of restored sight to thousands of people.

    The tiny camera may help people who have lost virtually all their sight due
to diseases affecting the back of the eye - such as age-related macular
degeneration, the leading cause of blindness in the UK, and retinitis
pigmentosa.

    At present, there is no cure for the 600,000 people in the UK affected by
these conditions.

    Now scientists from the University of Louvain, near Brussels, have developed
a way of sending moving images from the camera to the brain so that vision can
be restored.

    The team of doctors and electronic engineers has already treated two
patients using the glasses-mounted camera. Both have been able to read and
identify objects thanks to the glasses.

    Now more patients will join the trial and there are plans to start
production of the device in the next three years.

    The bionic glasses work by sending video images - in the form of an
electronic signal - from the camera down a cable to an electrode planted behind
the ear.

    This then sends the signals to an electronic implant attached to the retina
at the back of the eyeball.

    Surgeons have to perform an operation on the eye to place the implant - the
size of postage stamp - on the back of the retina.

    The implant in the retina then fires off electrical impulses which, as with
normal sight, the brain than translates into pictures.

    PROFESSOR Claude Veraart, who is leading the study, explains: 'In illnesses
such as macular degeneration, the lightreceiving cells at the back of the eye
which make out shapes and colours have died, but the next layer of retinal
cells, which begin the process of sending signals back to the brain, are
intact.' The electrodes in the implant simply 'plug into' those cells, allowing
images to be transmitted to the brain.

    'The implant will not work for people who have lost lightsensitive cells at
the back of their retina,' says Professor Veraart.

    'There have to be some cells working so that these cells can send "sight"
signals back to the brain.' The images that are seen using the camera are blurry
- but have enabled users to identify objects and read text.

    Professor Veraart says that technology is improving so quickly that the
quality of visible images is improving all the time.

    'If we pack in more sensors into the retina implant, then we can give the
patient better sight,' he says.

    'The two patients we treated were absolutely delighted with the results
achieved, as they had lost almost all their vision.' Professor Veraart has been
give an EU grant of more than Pounds 1.5 million to develop the camera glasses.

    A number of teams around the world are working on similar technology, but
the Belgians have so far achieved the best images for patients.

    'The idea is to bring a blind person to the point where they can read, move
objects, and do basic things around the home,' says Professor Veraart.

    His project is expected to result in a device that could cost patients or
the NHS around Pounds 15,000. But scientists behind the project expect the price
to come down considerably as production steps up.

    The spectacles - and the surgery to place the implant on the retina - will
cost roughly the same as the bionic cochlear implant which is currently used to
restore hearing in children and adults.

    With a growing elderly population - who are the main people affected by
diseases such as macular degeneration - the camera spectacles could help an
estimated four to five million people in Europe.

    Dr Bob Thompson, of The Macular Disease Society, lost most of his sight due
to macular degeneration.

    He believes camera-mounted spectacles offer hope to those who have lost most
of their sight.

    'If you can hardly see and you get back enough vision to do jobs round the
home, then you would be delighted with such a gadget,' says the former GP.

    'In the past there has been so little hope for sufferers. These
technological advances, although not perfect, are showing the way forward.

    'Some form of gene therapy to repair the damaged cells would be the best
solution, but that sort of treatment is still many years away.'

    HOW IT WORKS

    A camera fitted to a pair of glasses sends images to an electrode behind the
ear

    The electrode sends signals to an implant attached to the retina at the back
of the eye

    The implant fires impulses to the brain which as in normal sight the brain
translates into pictures

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2005


                              108 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 11, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 45

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough for boy who faced death if he got a cold

BYLINE: JULIE WHELDON

BODY:


    SIMPLY catching a cold could have killed four-yearold Mustaf.

    Born without an immune system, it seemed his life would be one of relentless
medication and treatment.

    Mixing with other children could have exposed him to an infection his body
had no means of fighting.

    But following pioneering treatment at Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children in London, he is now able to live a normal life.

    Indeed, his doctors have said he is doing so well that he is going to
pre-school and mixing with other children for the first time.

    Mustaf, who cannot be further identified, has become the first person in
Britain with the disorder ada-SCID to have his immune system successfully
restored through gene therapy.

    Consultant Bobby Gaspar said: 'If you saw him now you would just think he is
like any other normal child. He is a very active, happy little kid.

    'He has now got a good quality of life and is going to school.' Around three
or four children a year in the UK are born with ada-SCID.

    A mutation in a single gene means their body does not produce a protein
called ADA which is vital for the production of the white blood cells that fight
infection.

    If it is left untreated, a child is unable to fight off serious infections
and usually dies in a year.

    Doctors can cure a child with a bone marrow transplant from someone who is a
very close match such as a brother or sister.

    However, if no donor can be found, children have to endure weekly hospital
injections to replace the missing protein.

    In Mustaf's case, the drugs worked reasonably well for around three years
then started to fail.

    'We realised we could not keep him on the drugs for ever,' said Mr Gaspar, a
consultant paediatric immunologist.

    'We decided that before he got really sick, we would go ahead with the gene
therapy.' However, this meant Mustaf coming off the drugs that were preventing
him getting ill.

    'It was a difficult decision for all concerned,' said Mr Gaspar. 'We had to
think long and hard.' After stopping the enzymes, doctors took bone marrow from
Mustaf and extracted stem cells from it. These are the 'blank slate' cells which
have the ability to replicate and develop into any of the scores of different
types of cell in the body.

    Mustaf's stem cells were altered so they carried a working version of his
defective gene. He was given chemotherapy to prepare his system and the adapted
stem cells were put back into his body.

    After five weeks in isolation, he went back home to his family in London.

    His immune system is already better than it was when he was on enzymes.

    He is still taking antibiotics but will come off them once his immunity
develops further.

    Mr Gaspar said: 'Effectively with this treatment, he could be cured, but we
need to follow him closely for some time.' Treating the disorder with enzymes
costs the NHS up to Pounds 200,000 a year. A bone marrow transplant costs half
this.

    Gene therapy therefore offers the prospect of cheaper and more effective
treatment.

    Mustaf was yesterday a guest of honour at the opening of the hospital's
Wolfson Centre for Gene Therapy. The success of his operation opens the door to
using gene therapy for other disorders, such as haemophilia or sickle cell
anaemia although some experts warn that it can cause side effects.

    j.wheldon@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2005


                              109 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 7, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 992 words

HEADLINE: HOW CAN THIS HOSPITAL RUN OUT OF CASH?

BYLINE: HARCHARAN CHANDHOKE; DAVID HUGHES

BODY:


    A FUNDING crisis at Great Ormond Street Hospital blew a gaping hole in
Labour's defence of the NHS last night.

    The world-renowned children's hospital has closed up to a fifth of its beds,
cancelled dozens of operations and is turning away sick children.

    Coming at a time when the Government is boasting about the biggest spending
increase in NHS history, the news is a devastating setback to Tony Blair's
efforts to recapture the high ground on health.

    Great Ormond Street has become a globally noted centre of excellence for the
treatment of children with often rare and complex conditions.

    Yet it is facing a Pounds 1.7million shortfall this year and has been forced
into a series of drastic measures to balance its books: Closing between 50 and
63 of its beds up to a fifth of the 314-bed total.

    Shutting at least six intensive care beds out of 42, and three cots in its
neonatal intensive care unit, meaning that sick babies, some with breathing
difficulties, have had to be moved to other hospitals.

    Closing some of its eight operating theatres and merging understaffed wards.

    Cutting staff numbers and nurses' overtime pay from Pounds 15 an hour to
Pounds 10.

    The central London hospital has become a victim of its own popularity,
having treated hundreds more children in the past year than it was funded to
treat by the Government.

    But it will not get any extra money for this treatment, so has to cut costs.

    The news, described as 'shocking' by the Tories, is a PR disaster for the
Government on the eve of the launch of a health 'mini-manifesto' tomorrow,
intended to help them regain the initiative.

    Labour claims it has increased health spending from Pounds 33billion when it
came to power in 1997 to Pounds 92billion by 2008. Michael Howard is already
proclaiming there are 'no no-go areas' for the Tories after they succesfully
attacked Labour last week over Margaret Dixon's seven cancelled shoulder
operations.

    The NHS has traditionally been seen as Labour's strongest suit and Great
Ormond Street is a showpiece.

    Health Secretary John Reid faced a mauling over the funding shortfall on
ITV's Jonathan Dimbleby programme yesterday.

    Questioned by angry audience members why a hospital should be penalised for
curing sick children, Mr Reid said: 'I have been assured that Great Ormond
Street Hospital is not turning away desperately ill children, but I will be
looking into their financial deficit.' He was berated by one audience member,
who raged: 'You have sat here and told us all that you're going to spend vast
amounts of money in the NHS, but you are not going to pay overtime to the staff
at Great Ormond Street. Isn't this a kind of a contradiction? Surely that is a
minimal amount of money.

    It's a disgrace.' Rebecca Patience, whose daughter is being treated at Great
Ormond Street, described some of the disruption caused by the cutbacks.

    'Every weekend, normally Friday evening, we have to be taken all the way
over to another ward because my daughter's ward is going to be closed.

    'Sometimes the lifts are broken so we have to go all the way over to the
other side.' Tory health spokesman Andrew Lansley said last night: 'It is
shocking that so important a hospital, providing vital services to children
isn't getting the resources it needs.

    'What more telling an example could there be of Labour failing to get
resources to the frontline.' And Liberal Democrat Paul Burstow said: 'It is a
false economy for a hospital that is able to do more operations to stop doing
operations and cut nurses' pay to balance the books.' Dr Jane Collins, chief
executive of Great Ormond Street Hospital, said: 'We always hhave to say no to
some patients. At the moment what we are having to do is perhaps say no a little
bit more often.

    'We have given priority to emergency cases, particularly children where we
are perhaps the only service that provides that sort of care heart transplants
for example. If there are no other places we will make sure they can come here.

    'We are still seeing the patients we have always seen and we are trying to
see new patients as best we can, working with other units around London and the
country to try and share out the work.' But she insisted: 'Lives are not at
risk. One of the main things to do is to reassure patients and families and
those who may want to access our services in the coming weeks that we are still
very much open.' Great Ormond Street was founded in 1852 as the first children's
hospital in the English-speaking world. It is the only hospital in Britain, and
one of only three in the world, to offer gene therapy for children, and one of
only a handful in the world that regularly separates siamese twins.

    Last year it treated 11,632 inpatients, 79,156 outpatients and 6,955 day
cases. This was two per cent more by the end of January than it had expected,
which, without economies, would have left it Pounds 1.7million over its Pounds
178million annual budget by the end of the financial year in April.

    All hospitals have a legal duty to balance their books, otherwise any
overspend is cut from the following year's funding. The hospital negotiates its
funding at the start of every year from local and national NHS ' commissioners'
who are given money by the Government to buy treatment from hospitals for the
people of Britain.

    Most commissioners are regional Primary Care Trusts who pay local hospitals
to treat local patients.

    Other commissioners distribute money on a nationwide basis for specialist
treatments such as heart transplants. Great Ormond Street is a specialist
hospital so has to negotiate its funds from commissioners all over the country.

    A hospital spokesman said: 'We hoped that the commissioners would find the
money for the extra patients we have taken on, as they sometimes have in
previous years, but they have not been able to do so this year.' Comment Page 12

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2005


                              110 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 15, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: Gas bubbles that burst blood clots

BYLINE: PAT HAGAN

BODY:


    TINY bubbles that can destroy a blood clot when they burst could be a
radical new treatment for stroke.

    The gas-filled bubbles are injected into the blood stream and home in on the
clot in the brain.

    Once there, they are zapped by ultrasound waves to make them pop. As they
explode, they release a burst of energy that can help clear the blockage and
allow blood to start flowing to the brain again.

    Research shows the revolutionary technique works well when combined with
clot-busting drugs, opening up blood vessels more quickly and generating better
blood flow.

    Strokes, which are caused by a clot blocking the blood supply to the brain,
kill around 200 people every day in the UK.

    Many more are left disabled and living in fear that a second or even third
attack could kill them.

    It's estimated to cost the NHS Pounds 2.3 billion a year to treat and look
after the 130,000 people annually struck down by the life-threatening condition.

    Only cancer and heart disease kill more people.

    Because clots temporarily shut off blood to the brain, stroke victims can be
left with extensive paralysis.

    The brain has to 'relearn' many basic tasks, such as walking or holding
everyday objects. Physiomicrobubbles therapy is a vital part of the
rehabilitation process. Clinical guidelines state patients should be given
clot-busting medicines as soon as possible in order to maximise the chances of a
full recovery.

    But researchers are always looking for new ways to improve the way these
drugs work.

    Microbubbles have emerged as a powerful new tool for diagnosing diseases.

    Smaller than a red blood cell, they are injected into the bloodstream to
boost the quality of an ultrasound scan.

    This is because the bubbles vibrate particularly strongly when exposed to
very high sound frequencies. As a result, they are several thousand times more
reflective than normal body tissue, which means they show up clearly on scans.

    British scientists have even been testing whether bubbles could be used to
pinpoint certain cancers, such as liver tumours.

    However, scientists have also found that certain types of bubble release a
powerful surge of energy into blood clots once they are burst by sound waves.

    This 'shatters' the clot into tiny fragments and opens up blood vessels once
more.

    Doctors from the Hospital Vall d'Hebron in Barcelona studied 103 stroke
victims to see if the use of blood flow.

    They split them into three groups and gave one a clot-busting drug called
Tissue Plasminogen Activator, or TPA, and the second TPA and ultrasound.

    The third group received both of these plus an injection of microbubbles
into the bloodstream. Using imaging techniques, the bubbles are tracked round
the bloodstream until they reach the clot and are then could improve popped by
the ultrasound. To measure the difference, doctors recorded the rate at which
the clot broke up.

    The results, presented at an American Stroke Association conference in New
Orleans, revealed that after one minute of treatment, more than 22 per cent of
the clot was destroyed in patients given microbubbles.

    AMONG those given ultrasound and TPA it was just ten per cent and for those
on the drug alone just four percent. After two hours, more than 50 per cent of
the blockage had cleared in the microbubble patients, compared with 41 per cent
with ultrasound and TPA and ten per cent in patients on the drug alone.

    Twenty-four hours after treatment began, tests also revealed a big
difference in brain function, with the bubble-treated group improving the most.

    But Professor John Reid, from the University of Glasgow, said bubbles could
only be used once large- scale studies had proved they worked safely.

    'If they are using energy to break up clots, then potentially it could be a
hazard, because the clot has to end up somewhere. This is not a technique that
has been scientifically evaluated in the UK as far as I'm aware.' The gas used
is called perfluropropane and it's perfectly harmless. Once it's released from
the bubble, it gets breathed out through the lungs.

    Bubble technology is also being explored for use in gene therapy. Scientists
believe they could beat certain incurable diseases if they could find safe and
effective ways to get modifed genes into the body's cells.

    Bubbles can perforate cell walls when they pop, which allows the modified
gene to gain entry.

    The first signs of stroke can include weakness on one side of the body,
difficulty swallowing, impaired speech and problems recognising everyday objects
- like a kettle or a teapot.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2005


                              111 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 20, 2005

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 78

LENGTH: 745 words

HEADLINE: Pilkington bid rumours put shares in hothouse

BYLINE: IAN LYALL

BODY:


    PILKINGTON'S gyrations put the City on bid alert as the glassmaker's shares
briefly shot up 18pc. Nippon Glass, the company's 20.59pc shareholder, was
touted as a potential buyer.

    Nippon is one of the few rivals in a position to take a pop at the group.

    Larger competitors Saint-Gobain, PPG Industries and Visteon would find it
almost impossible to get the deal past the regulators.

    It was left to a Pilks spokesman to cool the heated speculation. He said
there were no bid talks taking place.

    Shares eased back though they ended the session up 73/4p, or 7pc at 1251/2p
valuing Pilks at Pounds 1.5bn.

    Pilkington based at St Helens, Merseyside was just one of a handful of
building materials firms singled out as potential takeover targets in the wake
of Swiss giant Holcim's Pounds 1.8bn bid for Aggregate Industries (up 1/4p at
1393/4p). Cash-rich private equity funds are said to be circling Aggregate's
more vulnerable rivals.

    Carillion (up 93/4p at 245p) was at the centre of recent speculation, though
Hanson (down 43/4p at 500p) saw its stock fall after a recent good run.

    The Footsie surrendered early gains to end the day down 5.6 points at
4818.3. Wall Street exerted its magnetic pull after poor corporate results,
though fears of a further rise in UK lending rates added to the gloom.

    The biggest gainer was Emap which rose 25p to 835p as investors switched out
of Financial Times-owner Pearson (down 171/2p at 620p) after it warned that
annual profits would be at the lower end of market forecasts.

    Emap's cause was given further momentum by Morgan Stanley which met with the
publisher's management on Tuesday.

    Investors took Imperial Tobacco's ex- dividend day as a cue to book some of
the profits they have made.

    Shares down to 1395p yesterday have gone up by more than a third in the past
12 months.

    The financial sector was under the spotlight yesterday thanks mainly to the
re- emergence of the former UBS Warburg banking team at ABN Amro.

    The highly-rated trio of Ian Smillie, Barrington Pitt-Miller and Ben Lambert
listed their winners and losers for the upcoming banking season of annual
results and beyond.

    HBOS (up 8p at 8441/2p) and Royal Bank of Scotland (down 3p at 1736p) are on
the 'buy' list. Northern Rock (up 14p at 7811/2p) is rated as an 'add'.

    The ABN team's 'anti- consensus' look at the industry marks out Alliance &
Leicester (up 11/2p at 908p), Barclays (up 11/2p at 5891/2p) and Standard
Chartered (down 11p at 945p) as laggards.

    The market raised a toast to pub operator JD Wetherspoon which yesterday
reported a turnaround in sales in the second quarter. Shares rose 53/4p to 259p
as the market heaved a sigh of relief that the consumer slowdown had not yet
spread to the nation's hostelries. Underlying sales for the 12 weeks to January
16 showed an increase of 0.9pc on a year earlier, compared to a decline of 0.3pc
in the previous quarter. The news gave Mitchells & Butlers (up 73/4p at 335p),
owner of All Bar One, a much-needed lift.

    Mid-cap brokers were under pressure as Bridgewell Securities turned bearish
on Collins Stewart Tullet. It fell 103/4p to 4213/4p as analyst Geoff Miller
downgraded it to underweight and advised a switch into rival Icap.

    But that was of little help to Icap which dropped 6p to 278p as UBS gave it
the thumbs down and moved its recommendation to reduce. The net beneficiary of
the chaos was Evolution Group which rose 33/4p to 157p.

    Intelligent Environments the internet firm whose software powers bank and
credit card websites for the likes of HFS and HBOS took a battering. Shares fell
11/2p to 41/2p as it revealed that three key contracts had not been signed off
in time to be included in the latest annual results.

    Revenues will be around 10pc lower than the market expected, meaning that
full-year losses will be about Pounds 300,000 compared to analysts' expectations
of Pounds 100,000.

    SHARES in Oxford Biomedica spiked 31/2p, or 18pc, to 223/4p as the market
played a guessing game over the name of its would-be merger partner. The gene
therapy specialist revealed yesterday that it had received a bid approach, but
did not disclose the name of its suitor.

    Analysts trawled the candidate list and came up with two biotech firms
France's Transgene and Medigene of Germany. Oxford's most promising product is a
cancer drug called TroVax, though it will not be on the market until at least
2008.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2005


                              112 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 22, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 2173 words

HEADLINE: KILLED BY KINDNESS

BYLINE: JAMES BARTHOLOMEW

BODY:


    THE welfare state is a political sacred cow - but an important new book
claims that Britain would have been better off if it had never been created.
Here, in our second extract, author James Bartholomew argues that the NHS is a
disaster that, far from improving health care, has wrecked it .

    . .

    AT FIRST, it seemed such a small thing. Albert Alexander, 43, got a scratch
on his face from a thorn on a rosebush. What could be more trivial than that for
a policeman in his prime? But because of that scratch, Albert's face became
infected. The bacteria multiplied alarmingly.

    The infection spread over his face, which swelled up, and his left eye
became so badly damaged that the doctors caring for him at the Radcliffe
Infirmary in Oxford had to remove it.

    Still the infection spread - to Albert's lungs and his shoulder. He was
heading straight towards an early death.

    Then he was selected to be treated with a new, experimental drug.

    He would be the first person in the world to get it. The team of scientists
who had been working for years on this drug waited nervously to see the results.

    Within 24 hours there was a dramatic improvement. Albert's temperature fell
back to normal. His appetite returned. Within five days, the swelling on his
face had subsided. Ten days after his first injection, he appeared firmly on the
road to recovery.

    Unfortunately, supplies of the new drug were extremely limited. The
scientist even collected all Albert's urine in order to extract what had passed
through his system. This was then re-injected into him. Even so, there was
precious little left.

    Meanwhile, there was a boy of 15 in the same hospital who had also been
infected with bacteria, this time after an operation. He, too, was certain to
die unless the new drug could save him. So the scientists used up the last
remaining supplies of the precious drug on him.

    Tragically, Albert Alexander then relapsed. He needed more injections but
there was nothing left to give him.

    The infection regained its hold and finally killed him.

    It was a catastrophe for him and his family, but the recovery he had shown
while receiving the drug had powerfully demonstrated its amazing power.

    Moreover, the 15-year-old boy did not have a relapse. He went on to make a
full recovery.

    That boy, whose name sadly does not seem to have been recorded, was thus the
first among tens of millions of people whose lives would be saved by this new
'miracle drug' - penicillin.

    Its development was probably the biggest single medical advance of the 20th
century. It happened in Britain, and what I find especially telling is the year
when Albert Alexander received that first injection. It was 1941: seven years
before the creation of the NHS.

    How could this be possible? Many people today seem to think that healthcare
hardly existed before the NHS arrived in 1948 - except for a few hospitals that
treated the rich, perhaps.

    But if this is true, why were British hospitals at the forefront of
developing new drugs like penicillin? And why was a humble police constable the
first man in the world to benefit?

    THE reality is that British medical care prior to the NHS was far more
impressive than most of us realise. All the great London teaching hospitals were
founded before the NHS - indeed, St Bart's, one of the most famous, dated back
to the start of the 12th century, when Augustinian friars began caring for the
sick at their priory.

    Many hospitals were founded in the 18th and 19th centuries, with benefactors
who included contemporary celebrities such as the composer Handel and Joshua
Reynolds, the artist.

    The hospitals were regarded with envy around the world.

    By the start of the 20th century there was a vast network of hospitals
across the country, treating rich and poor alike and making breakthroughs that
are still saving countless lives today.

    The difference is that back then the system wasn't run by an army of state
bureaucrats or paid for by massive, centralised taxation. It was largely based
on charity.

    The development of penicillin was supervised by Sir Howard Florey and his
team at the Dunn School in Oxford, where the crucial, most expensive stage in
their work was funded by the charitable Rockefeller Foundation.

    The building in which they worked was funded by charity (from a bequest by
Sir William Dunn, a wealthy Scottish philanthropist) as was St Mary's Hospital
in Paddington, London, where penicillin had been first noticed 13 years
previously by Sir Alexander Fleming.

    FLEMING was able to make that breakthrough only because St Mary's existed
and gave him the opportunity to do his research.

    Like countless other charitable or 'voluntary' hospitals, it relied for its
survival on donations, legacies, fees and fundraising drives.

    The great and good contributed, but so did ordinary people - through Sunday
collections in church and Saturday collections in workplaces.

    Those who could afford it paid for their treatment, often by subscribing to
regular hospital care plans, but those who could not afford it were treated,
too. That is what being a charitable hospital meant.

    Indeed, inconceivable as it may seem today, it was normal for consultants to
work for a large proportion of each day without charge, to ensure that the needy
didn't miss out.

    Frederick Nattrass qualified in 1914 and, after the war, began working at
the Royal Victoria Infirmary in Newcastle upon Tyne. He eventually became a
consultant neurologist there.

    His daughter, Anne Whittingham, remembers his routine: 'He went to work at
the hospital in the morning - all for free, because it was a charity.

    Then, to get an income, he took private patients at our home in the
afternoon.

    'This wasn't unusual. All his friends did it. All consultants did.' There
were also hospitals run by local authorities, in which local people took
considerable civic pride, but by 1936 the voluntary hospitals took 60 per cent
of patients requiring acute care.

    It wasn't a perfect system - none is - but it worked. There were surely some
poor people who received inferior treatment or none, but the vast majority got
the care they needed - in many cases from the top specialists of the time.

    So what did Clement Attlee and his colleagues in the Labour Party do in
1948? They threw it all away.

    Attlee appointed Aneurin Bevan as Minister of Health. Bevan was a brilliant,
neo-communist firebrand and set about creating the most state-controlled medical
service outside the Iron Curtain. Eight centuries of development of British
medicine was junked for an ideological socialist dream.

    Bevan pushed aside the passionate objections of the medical profession with
all the ruthlessness of a man whose thinking was rooted in Marxism.

    Looking back, what's astonishing is how little evidence he produced to
discredit the old system. The Labour Party pamphlet that recommended a 'National
Service For Health' in 1943 could find little to criticise.

    There was mention of only one waiting list, for 'rheumatic diseases', and
even this was confined to a footnote. There was no suggestion that waiting lists
were a problem in any other speciality.

    There was not a word against the quality of care, and no claims that people
were dying or incapacitated because they couldn't obtain treatment. Far from
being condemned, the charity hospitals were praised for having 'rendered great
service'.

    So why change everything?

    Because, the pamphlet said, a good medical service had to be 'planned as a
whole'.

    The old system was 'unplanned' and 'a medley of public and voluntary
institutions'. Never mind how effective it was - it offended the socialist
principle of central control.

    It had to go.

    Of course, Bevan, Attlee and the rest meant well. They intended no harm. But
harm is what they did.

    They produced a monolithic system that was grotesquely rigid, wasteful and
inefficient.

    In its first 50 years, in the name of 'mergers' and modernisation,
hundredsof hospitals were simply closed. Many were local hospitals, so that -
quite contrary to what Labour had promised during the war - people were left
further away from their nearest hospital instead of nearer. Tens of thousands of
hospital beds were carted to the dump.

    The standards and accessibility of British medicine slumped. From being one
of the best countries for medicine among all the advanced countries of the
world, we declined and became one of the worst - arguably the very worst.

    LOOK at almost any measurement of the quality of a medical service and you
now find Britain in the bottom half of the table. In one comparison of the
proportion of people surviving lung cancer five years after diagnosis, Britain
came last, below Estonia.

    According to the World Health Organisation, British men are also more likely
than those in comparable countries to die of coronary heart disease before
reaching 75. We suffer 265 deaths per 100,000 people - against 200 in Germany
and 171 in Australia.

    Worrying and depressing figures like this are hardly surprising.

    Thanks to its rigidities of structure and funding, the NHS lacks everything.
It lacks doctors. It lacks nurses. It lacks the latest equipment.

    Take CT scanners, which help doctors diagnose cancer. Recent figures showed
that Japan, despite its relatively low spending on medical services, had 84 of
them per million of population. Australia had 20.8, Germany had 17.1, and the
United States had 13.2. The average for developed countries was 12.

    Britain, by contrast, had only 6.1- fewer than Turkey or the Czech Republic.

    What equipment we do have is old and sometimes even dangerous. Dr Colin
Connolly, a former chief scientist at the Department of Health, found that more
than half the NHS's X-ray machines are past their safe life span.

    More than half the anaesthesia machines need replacing, as do half the
machines used for intensive care.

    About a fifth of the equipment used in cancer care is obsolete, and the
majority of operating tables are over 20 years old - more than twice their safe
time limit.

    The NHS gets the latest drugs and treatments later than other countries and
in smaller quantities.

    Virtually all the most exciting work on new medical breakthroughs - stem
cell technology, gene therapy, the search for a cure for heart disease - is
being led the Americans. Britain, the country that developed penicillin, is now
just a bit player.

    Notoriously, the endemic shortcomings of NHS treatment are controlled by
rationing in the form of waiting lists. And despite all the political propaganda
that has been pumped out in recent years, these lists are still of a length
unknown in any other advanced country.

    The result is that the poor get inferior treatment to the rich - who can
afford to go private - and are thus more likely to suffer and die. This in a
system that is already causing thousands of needless deaths a year.

    That may sound shocking, but look at the facts. Because the treatment of
cancer under the NHS is so far below the average standard in Europe, Professor
Karol Sikora, a cancer specialist at London's Hammersmith Hospital, has
estimated that 10,000 people a year die prematurely in Britain.

    ADD the number killed by preventable hospital infections, and our atrocious
record on infant mortality (we have the worst figures in Europe) and the total
instantly rises to around 15,000 deaths a year directly attributable to the NHS
under-performing other systems.

    This leaves out blunders committed by over- stretched staff and poor
standards in other specialities such as coronary care. Yet even at this bare
minimum, the NHS is killing the equivalent of a Paddington rail disaster every
day.

    None of this should be taken as criticism of the doctors, nurses and other
frontline staff, whose enormous dedication and humanity is all the more
remarkable given the circumstances they work in. They, too, are victims of a
terminally bureaucratic and unwieldy system.

    Some people will say: 'Ah yes, but it will be all right now. Labour is
putting lots of money into it.' Yes, more money is going in. The extra money is
raising the amount spent on the NHS in England up to the same proportion of
output as that spent on healthcare in Scotland.

    But do we want Scottish levels of healthcare? Certainly not. The Scottish
NHS is no better than the English. It is far below the standards of France or
Switzerland.

    There is simply no escaping the fact that the NHS has been a disaster for
Britain. Millions have been treated late, been left undiagnosed, been left on
waiting lists, suffered or even died. It has been one of the most catastrophic
aspects of the welfare state.

    The Welfare State We're In by James Bartholomew is published by Politico's
at Pounds 18.99. To order a copy for Pounds 14.99 (plus Pounds 1.95 p&p), call
0870 161 0870.

    TOMORROW: ELEVEN YEARS AT SCHOOL, AND STILL OUR CHILDREN CAN'T READ END

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2004


                              113 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 8, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: Could we live to the ripe old age of 120?

BYLINE: TIM UTTON

BODY:



    EXTENDING average life expectancy by another 40 years is almost in our
reach, a scientist claims.

    He says that within a generation, people could be living to 120 thanks to
therapies which he believes can stop the ravages of time.

    Dr Aubrey de Grey, based at Cambridge University, claims he knows the secret
to an extra-long life after identifying the processes that make our bodies
deteriorate.

    He says a combination of gene and stem cell therapy, along with '
vaccinations' to reprogram the body's immune system, will halt these processes
within 25 years.

    Eventually, as science advances further, living indefinitely could become a
possibility, he will claim at a conference in London later this week.

    Last night, he described the therapies as 'genuine rejuvenation processes'
that could extend and improve life. T h e current average life expectancy is
75.7 for men and 80.4 for women.

    'It could mean a 50-yearold person lives another 50 to 70 years rather than
20 to 30 and they are healthy years, we are not talking about frailty,' said Dr
de Grey.

    ' Ultimately, we could extend life indefinitely because these processes do
not simply slow down the damage which causes ageing, but repair it.' Dr de Grey,
who has worked at Cambridge's Department of Genetics for 12 years, will speak
about his findings at a two-day conference in London which starts on Friday.

    It has been organised by a Chicago-based organisation, the American Academy
of Anti-Ageing Medicine.

    Its founders have created a range of anti- ageing products.

    Dr de Grey claims to have identified seven different ageing processes.

    All involve changes in the body that accumulate over time, including cells
dying off and not being replaced or cells reproducing too quickly.

    Dr de Grey said stem cell therapy will soon be used to replace cells and
gene therapy will be able to reprogram genes that are going wrong.

    Vaccinations will also be used to reset the immune system when it starts to
fail, he added.

    Initially, research will be carried out on mice. But Dr de Grey believes
scientists will start work on humans within ten years.

    But Dr Jay Olshansky, an authority on anti-ageing medicine at the University
of Illinois, is critical of the approach.

    'To say that we're going to achieve life expectancies of 100, as a
population, any time soon is outside the realm of possibility,' he said.

    'I'd be elated if we could get ten more years of life by slowing down
ageing.

    'But talking about 50, 60, 5,000 more years? That's counterproductive.'

GRAPHIC: OLD BUT STILL ACTIVE: MEN CURRENTLY LIVE TO 75.7 YEARS ON AVERAGE

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2004


                              114 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 1, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST_STH; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: Switching off cancer

BYLINE: BEEZY MARSH

BODY:


    THOUSANDS of men suffering from prostate cancer could be saved by a gene
therapy.

    In a major breakthrough, scientists have found a way of 'switching off' the
spread of advanced prostate cancer and shrinking tumours.

    Experts have used gene therapy to stop the cancer cells responding to male
hormones called androgens which fuel the spread of the disease.

    In more than half the 27,000 men diagnosed with prostate cancer every year
doctors try to bring the disease under control by stopping production of
androgens, including testosterone.

    Hormone therapy is used to suppress testosterone, which feeds the cancerous
growth.

    In most cases, however, this treatment only works for a limited time as the
cancer is no longer sensitive to hormone control and finds other ways of
proliferating. More than 10,000 men die every year of prostate cancer.

    The new gene therapy gets to the root of the problem by effectively
'blocking' male hormones from feeding the cancer.

    Although it is not a total cure, it could slow the progression of the
disease to the extent that sufferers will be able to lead normal lives.

    The genes are delivered into the cancer via a virus that is harmless to the
body, which is given in an injection.

    Researchers say tests have shown the treatment works on cancer cells in the
laboratory, and in tests in animals.

    Trials in humans are expected within three to five years. It is hoped the
treatment will become widely available early in the next decade.

    Findings of the laboratory experiment, which is the work of a team from
Imperial College London based at the Hammersmith Hospital, are published in the
medical journal Oncogene.

    The work was partly funded by the Daily Mail due to the generosity of
readers who helped raise Pounds 1million for prostate cancer research.

    Researcher Professor Jonathan Waxman said: 'The tumours simply shrink and
die away after they are inoculated with the gene therapy.

    'We think this new therapy could prove must more effective than current
treatments in stopping the development of cancer and limiting its spread.

    'Although this could be very good news for prostate cancer patients, we do
need to be careful in interpreting the results. As yet we have not carried out
the tests in patients.' b.marsh@dailymail.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2004


                              115 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 12, 2004

SECTION: ED_3RD; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1286 words

HEADLINE: Why shouldn't ALL athletes take drugs? (After all, they've been doing
so for centuries)

BYLINE: MICHAEL HANLON

BODY:


    SPORT is a cesspit swirling with humbug and hypocrisy. On the eve of the
28th modern Olympiad, it is worth remembering that few aspects of human
endeavour are more riven with greed, lies and corruption.

    The Olympic Games historically have been run by one of the most
spectacularly corrupt organisations on the planet. Deciding which country they
would go to has, in the past, been a matter of shameless bribes, brown
envelopes, nudges and winks.

    But nowhere is the humbug more spectacular than when the pious men and women
who run sport turn their attention to drugs. For to listen to them, you'd think
the sporting authorities are waging - and have always waged - an untiring and
ceaseless war against the doping cheats.

    When athletes are 'exposed' - such as the hapless sprinter Ben Johnson after
winning the 100m final at the 1988 Seoul Olympics - the authorities trumpet
their triumph as another nail in the coffin of the culture of cheating.

    The zeal of the anti-cheaters, and their insistence that all is well, is
positively Orwellian. For their utterances are utter twaddle; the reality is
that sport - pretty much all sport - is, and always has been, steeped in
steroids, amphetamines, blood-boosters and other illegal substances.

    Maybe it is time for a radical rethink about the whole issue of drugs in
sport. Because if what some scientists believe turns out to be true, it's a war
that will soon be unwinnable anyway, and we will have to accept that, in the
quest to be 'faster, higher, stronger', drugs will play a role.

    This sounds monstrous, but we should face facts. We tend to think of doping
as a modern phenomenon, but it's not. Runners, cyclists, swimmers and so on have
always made use of whatever substances are around to give them the edge.

    Cocaine and heroin were commonly used before being banned in the early 20th
century. Alcohol, caffeine, strychnine, marijuana and other chemicals were
snorted, injected and swallowed in major quantities.

    Even the Ancient Greeks, in their supposedly 'pure' Olympic endeavours, knew
the pain- deadening effects of a glass or two of wine, or perhaps a certain
herb, before a boxing match. The only difference between then and now is that
they were honest about it.

    The current anti-drug regime is often arbitrary, and depends as much on the
whims of fashion and politics as to what constitutes, in any logical sense,
'cheating'.

    Thus there are few rules preventing the use of alcohol or caffeine by
athletes, even though both these chemicals - legal in everyday life, as on the
track - are 'drugs' in the truest sense of the word.

    Conversely, athletes are not supposed to take substances that increase the
capacity of their blood to carry oxygen - drugs such as erythropoietin (EPO).

    Sounds fair enough; can't have a chap supercharging his muscles, which is
effectively what EPO does.

    But hang on. You can achieve the same effect by training at altitude.

    The thinner air means that your body steps up productivity of
oxygen-carrying red blood cells to compensate.

    Come down to sea level afterwards and you will feel the benefits and see
them in enhanced performance. This is what many athletes do prior to
competition, and it is entirely legal.

    Of course, having to go up and down mountains is timeconsuming and
expensive. All that acclimatising also puts its own stresses and strains on the
body.

    Better, surely, to fly somewhere, spend some time training at altitude to
get your blood nice and thick, then extract and store a few pints of it to be
transfused later, when you are at a lower altitude.

    OR MAYBE you could even use someone else's blood - a tactic rumoured to be
common in several track disciplines.

    Such 'blood doping' is banned, but this is irrelevant as it is completely
undetectable. It is also illogical, as the net effect is the same as simple
high-altitude training.

    Of course, swopping blood is not a good idea for all sorts of health reasons
- but since when have the sports authorities ever cared about health?

    Certainly not in the Sixties, Seventies and Eighties. Remember the Olympics
then, when America always won (it still does, and always will), the USSR always
came second (fair enough, huge country) and, er, East Germany always came third.
That's right - a tiny, relatively impoverished nation of just 17 million people
managed to run away with the medals ahead of sporting giants such as Australia,
Britain and France.

    Although there was sniggering at the masculine appearance of some of East
Germany's top women athletes, no one said openly what every single sportsman,
commentator and Olympic official must have known - that the entire country's
athletics team was powered by huge doses of drugs.

    Only after 1989, when the files of the secret police, the Stasi, were made
public, was it proved that virtually all the athletes had been given 'supporting
means' - a quaint euphemism for drugs.

    No one talks about the fact that world-class cycling has been riven with
illegal performance-enhancers for decades, and that several cyclists have died
as a result.

    Or, indeed, that American athletics is probably more drug-ridden today than
ever before (and it was pretty bad before).

    When sprinter Florence Griffith Joyner died six years ago at just 38 from
heart failure, it lent credence to the widely held view that the triple Olympic
gold medallist's career was founded on illegal substances, including steroids.

    Nine-times Olympic champion Carl Lewis allegedly failed three drug tests in
1988, but has always refuted suggestions that he used drugs to boost his
performance.

    Most recently, British sprinter Dwain Chambers has been banned for steroid
use.

    Despite this, the message to the public from the authorities is: 'We are on
top of the drugs problem.' The reality, however, is: 'We are out of our depth.'
This summer a new, hithertoundetectable steroid called tetrahydrogestrinone
(THG) has emerged.

    When a test for it was devised and used, retrospectively, on urine samples
from a number of top athletes, it threw up several positives.

    New performance-enhancing drugs are coming on-stream all the time. A study
reported in this week's New Scientist magazine highlights the ease with which
athletes using testosterone can evade detection.

    AT LEAST the authorities can, in theory, test for THG and testosterone. But
what if a sportsman tries to genetically modify himself to make bigger muscles?

    It sounds like bad sci-fi, but as a recent report in the respected journal
Scientific American stated, 'the world may be about to watch one of its last
Olympic Games without genetically enhanced athletes'.

    Gene therapy - injecting altered DNA into your body to cure disease - has
had a dubious history, but now scientists are convinced they can get it right.

    They have raised the prospect of using synthetic genes to make the body
produce large amounts of naturally occurring musclebuilding chemicals.

    The idea is to transform the lives of people with muscle-wasting diseases
such as muscular dystrophy. But it is also, as Scientific American says, a
'dream come true' for athletes bent on doping.

    Again, it is undetectable.

    The fact is that ever since sport became all about money, this was
inevitable. Sponsorship and TV rights mean that the Chariots Of Fire ideal is
just a forgotten dream (if ever it were a reality).

    The world's top athletes care about only one thing: winning. It would be
nice to think that we can keep sport clean, but we can't, and it is pointless
trying. Athletes are adults: let them do with their bodies as they wish.

    Isn't it time to admit the war is lost?

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2004


                              116 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 28, 2004

SECTION: ED_2ND_A_0; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 1875 words

HEADLINE: I'm a proud man but sometimes I feel so helpless. I can't bear to
think that in ten years' time my little guys might not be around

BYLINE: BECKY SHEAVES

BODY:


    YESTERDAY Andrew Wragg appeared in court charged with the murder of his son
Jacob, ten, who suffered from the rare genetic disorder Hunter disease. Here,
Bob Stevens, 38 - whose sons Oliver, four, and Samuel, two, both have the same
condition - offers his deeply moving account of parenthood in the most
heartbreaking of circumstances. Bob lives in Surrey with his wife Claire, 33.
BECKY SHEAVES reports.

    WHEN my wife Claire and I need what we call 'crying time', we put on a brave
face, put our two boys to bed and only then, late at night, do we sit, hold each
other and let the tears flow.

    Our little boys - we call them 'the guys' - have Hunter disease, a genetic
disorder so rare that they are number 68 and 69 in the whole country on the
register at Great Ormond Street Hospital.

    Oliver is four and Samuel is two. They started life as normal babies, but
this disease is slowly attacking every organ in their bodies. Children with
Hunter rarely survive beyond their teens, though every prayer that we ever make
is for our boys to survive.

    Already, Oliver has had several operations and is on constant medication.

    Samuel seems so robust and healthy but the same fate lies in store for him.

    In our blackest moments it can seem as though the end of the world is nigh.

    Right now, Oliver and Samuel are great fun, very active and extremely
cheeky. They are just so full of life, it's hard to comprehend what is wrong
with them, let alone that it is so serious.

    In layman's terms, they were born with a missing gene. This prevents them
from manufacturing an enzyme vital for breaking down sugars, called
mucopolysaccharides. These sugars build up in the body and ultimately damage all
the organs.

    At night, I lie in bed and hear my sons snoring. Their airways are affected
by Hunter disease and the cartilage is not as strong as it should be, so they
can hardly breathe when they lie down. Oliver has had his tonsils and adenoids
removed to help him breathe.

    When the boys wake up in the morning, they stretch, creak and groan like old
men. All their tendons are gradually shortening and Oliver can no longer raise
his arms above his head. He's had surgery to stop his fingers from closing like
a fist and to stretch the tendons in his legs.

    As Oliver is older, he's more affected by the disease than Samuel. I kid
myself Oliver's OK until I see him trying to run around with other children.

    Then I have to face the truth: he can barely keep up, his growth is stunted
and, because the nerves in his ears are damaged, he cannot hear, or speak,
clearly. We're lucky if we can understand one word in three he says.

    I don't know if he's mentally affected. The specialists say it's too soon to
tell. He seems so sharp, so on the ball. But we have to face the possibility
that Hunter disease is attacking his brain as well as his other organs.

    He goes to the hospital two or three times a week, is on constant medication
and has had several operations. There is no cure, so we can only deal with the
symptoms. Life can be very cruel, but what I always try to tell myself is that
it is worse for the children and we must do everything we can to give them a
good life.

    My wife, Claire, copes brilliantly, far better than me. I'm a proud man and
I want to be the head of the family. But there are times when I feel so helpless
and overwhelmed. That's when I need a kick up the backside from my wife, friends
and family.

    We no longer wonder what the boys will be when they grow up. We are left
wondering if they will get the chance to grow up.

    When Claire and I met ten years ago, we were just an everyday couple with
normal expectations of life. I'm a director of a construction equipment hire
firm and Claire works part-time at a bank.

    We got married in 1997 and wanted to have a family straight away. We're both
family-minded and couldn't wait to have children of our own. If I'm honest, I
hoped for sons because I wanted to kick a ball about, take them to football
matches and, in the future, play a round of golf with them at the weekend.

    But ironically, if we'd had girls, they would have been healthy. Only boys
are affected by Hunter disease.

    When Oliver was born, he scored one out of a possible ten on his Apgar test,
which judges the health of newborns.

    Scans revealed he had a brain haemorrhage and he spent several weeks in
intensive care.

    To our great relief, he pulled through, came home and we thought the worst
was over. Soon afterwards, we decided to have another child and Samuel was born,
as we thought, happy and healthy.

    Because of Oliver's brain haemorrhage, he was being regularly monitored and
our specialist discovered that he had a slight heart murmur. The doctor put this
together with the fact that Oliver had been under the weather with one cold
after another and said he was worried there might be an underlying cause.

    At the time, it seemed unthinkable that he was seriously ill. When the
doctor broke the news, as gently as he could, it seemed like the bottom had
dropped out of our world. I asked if it could affect Oliver's life expectancy
and he could not lie to me: 'It can do,' he said. It was the worst thing I had
ever heard.

    His last words to me were to advise me not to look up Hunter disease on the
internet. 'Don't alarm yourself unduly,' he said. But of course, I could not
stop myself. And that's where I learned just how serious - and terminal - Hunter
disease can be.

    It affects children physically and mentally, causing heart disease, brain
damage and a host of other problems all over the body. There is no cure.

    From the internet, I saw that the condition was inherited and there was a
chance Sam could have it, too. When he was only six months old we pressed for
him to be tested. We've always taken the attitude that we want to know all the
facts and deal with them as best we can.

    Meanwhile, we looked with clear eyes at Samuel, this lovely little baby, and
saw that he, like his brother, had a swollen tummy. It's caused by the liver and
spleen, stressed from trying to break down the sugars in the body, getting
enlarged.

    Sure enough, six weeks after Oliver's diagnosis, we heard the news about
Samuel. I'd like to say that I took it well. In fact, I got very drunk and, in a
hell of a state, rang my best friend Mark, who lives on the Isle of Wight. He
dropped everything and came straight to see us to give us support.

    Without the help of our friends and family, I don't know how we would have
coped.

    Soon after, we went up to Great Ormond Street and had a consultation. The
specialist was just trying to help, but I found it impossible to sit there and
hear of all the possible things that might go wrong with my sons: mental
retardation, dwarfism, deafness, grotesque facial features, heart attacks: the
list seemed endless.

    I knew if I sat there a second longer I would start smashing the place up.

    As a father, all I want to do is protect my children from every danger. I've
never felt so angry in my life.

    I stormed out, leaving Claire and her mother to talk to the doctors. They
understood why I had to go. There's only so much you can take.

    Today, I'm a changed man from the optimistic bridegroom I was on my wedding
day.

    All I aim for now is to do my best for the kids and my wife. They are all
that matters. Ambition has gone out of the window, as has planning for our old
age.

    I pay into my pension but I can't bear to think about the future too
closely. The thought that in ten years' time my little guys might not be around
is too awful to contemplate.

    I've got a fantastic boss who understands that I need to take time off to go
to hospital appointments.

    Claire works two days a week purely and simply to give her a glimpse of
normality and a routine - it helps her to cope the rest of the week.

    Her mother looks after the boys for us on those days and we're so grateful
for that, as we are for all the support we get.

    At the moment, Oliver and Samuel have no idea that they are different in any
way.

    Every morning, whoever is up first wakes his brother and then playtime
starts. Last thing at night, they give each other a kiss and say goodnight.

    They are inseparable and play with each other all the time.

    Of course, we spoil them materially; who wouldn't, given the circumstances?
Our garden is like a children's playground, it's got so many toys in it.

    The boys look out for each other and never make a fuss, even when they are
ill or having operations. Oliver has been through so much without a murmur of
complaint. When he has an injection, he goes red in the face, but steadfastly
refuses to cry.

    He's very stubborn, but I'm glad of that. He's going to need all the
strength of character he can muster to get him through the tough times ahead.

    I just hope Claire and I can be that strong-minded, too.

    Meanwhile, we try to cram as much fun as we can into our lives with the
boys. Every weekend, we go to theme parks, on picnics, down to the coast.

    This autumn, we're taking them to Spain for our first holiday.

    We've had to have all their medical notes translated into Spanish and it
will be nerveracking to be so far from our doctors. But we want them to have the
experience of travel just as if they were in perfect health and so we're
determined to go.

    Claire and I have had our dark moments and we have them still. It was tough
for Claire to realise that Hunter is passed on by the mother, so she had been
carrying the disease.

    But it is so rare that she had no idea this was the case - everyone in her
family is healthy, and so is she.

    We're not bitter. In fact, I wouldn't change a thing because I love my sons
so very much. Despite everything, they are such happy children and have brought
us so much joy.

    So we don't dwell on the what-ifs - it would drive us mad. Instead, we take
one day at a time and live life for our children, trying to make sure that what
time they have here with us is as happy and healthy as it possibly can be.

    I would go to the ends of the earth to find a cure, but right now, such a
thing is just a pipe dream.

    There are some chinks of light on the horizon. One is enzyme replacement
therapy, in which the child is given a transfusion of the missing enzyme once a
week, rather like kidney dialysis.

    It's not a cure but it can halt the damage, especially to the heart, which
is what most often causes the eventual death of Hunter children. We're hoping it
will be available in the next two years for our sons.

    It'll cost about Pounds 150,000 per child every year, but God help the
politician who tries to tell me the NHS can't afford it when they're giving out
Viagra for free.

    The holy grail for us is gene therapy, which is being developed in America.
As I understand it, the children would be injected with the missing gene and
then, like magic, they would be all right. It's at least ten years off, so we
try not to set too much store by it.

    In the meantime, we just get on with our lives. I don't think about next
week or next year, I just focus on getting through each day. It isn't easy - but
what other options do we have?

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2004


                              117 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 28, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST_04; Pg. 74

LENGTH: 1458 words

HEADLINE: Forget steroids and blood doping is the gene genie out the bottle?

BYLINE: NEIL WILSON

BODY:


    Gene therapy threatens to become the next frontier for a new generation of
drug cheats. NEIL WILSON reveals how future Olympic champions could be made to
order in the womb - resulting in eight-foot basketball players or swimmers with
feet like flippers

    DOWN a long corridor painted in a psychedelic lime green that must have left
generations of visitors queasy, is a laboratory where mice are at work.

    Climbing ladders, running on wheels, mice bred and born within the walls of
London's Royal Free and University College Medical School work endlessly in
their cages for the betterment of humankind.

    They are powerful little chaps.

    The introduction of a substance called Mechano Growth Factor (MGF) in genes
within their muscles enables them to do things that your average mice could not
contemplate.

    'Schwarzenegger mice,' as Professor Geoffrey Goldspink calls them with
affection.

    The professor's research team, with mice bred by its own veterinary surgeon,
has succeeded in increasing the strength of a single muscle in a mouse by 25 per
cent in only two weeks and of a wasted muscle by 35 per cent in three.

    For sufferers of motor neurone disease, muscular dystrophy and other wasting
diseases, the research will be a godsend - and soon. A biotechnology company
will be employed to finalise commercial applications.

    However, somewhere beyond the Royal Free wait the next generation of Ben
Johnsons and Dwain Chambers.

    They will be eager to pore over Goldspink's published research with their
scientific advisers and quacks, for details of how another medical advance may
enhance their sporting performances, just as steroids, human growth hormones and
EPO did before.

    Gene therapy threatens to put stanozolol, EPO and THG back in the pill boxes
and into a sporting museum. Just when the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), with
the help of police and customs authorities, are getting on top of today's drugs,
a new wave is about to engulf them.

    Goldspink said: 'My concern is that if we make this available to patients it
will soon get out into the wider community and be abused.

    'It is very difficult to say that this should not be used as quickly as
possible because there are many patients who will benefit from it but once we
make it available, we can't contain it.' Injecting a gene into a single muscle
or into the whole body's musculature through brain stem cells - increasing
muscle strength by 25 per cent - would open a sporting Pandora's box. Would a
genetically engineered Maurice Greene run 100 metres in 7.5sec?

    Would an Andy Roddick serve at 175mph? Would a future Lance Armstrong win 10
straight Tours de France?

    Genetically modified sportsmen have been made possible by the Human Genome
Project, which identified all the body's genes. The precise genes which make us
go faster, higher and stronger are identifiable now. And so are the means of
introducing substances to enhance them.

    The vehicle for introducing DNA - such as Goldspink's Mechano Growth Factor
- into cells is a virus, because getting into cells is what viruses do best.
First remove the virus's adverse effects, then replace some of the viral genes
with your MGF and, presto, the world may be a better place. And the sports world
a less even playing field. This is not science fiction. It is here-and-now
technology.

    As Goldspink put it: 'We may have some gene doping at these Olympics. I
think it is probably already happening in parts of the world. But that is the
future. By 2008, certainly.' Dick Pound, chairman of WADA, is aware of the
threat. 'We're not going to have Frankensteins appearing in Athens,' he said.

    'At least not genetically engineered ones. But the possibility is out there.

    Most of the work is on the laboratory bench but gradually it's moving into
clinical trials.' So is fair competition facing meltdown?

    Possibly not. This time the testers may be ready, thanks to WADA's
investment. Two years ago next month the world's leading scientists in the field
briefed Pound on their work at a conference on Long Island, and he asked their
help to devise tests for gene misapplication.

    Their initial reaction was that it couldn't be done - 'not even if you could
guarantee us next year's Nobel Prize for medicine' - but later they did hit upon
a possible solution. As it was explained to Pound in layman's terms: 'The human
organism is so finely balanced that if you push here, there will be a bulge
there.' So WADA committed money to finding the 'bulge'. Pound said: 'I don't
care whether it is five years away or 25 years, we should be involved as the
framework is being established, instead of letting it get out of control like we
did in the Seventies, Eighties and Nineties.' Typical of the technology which
scientists are offering sport in its fight against doping is a machine in
Goldspink's laboratory which can amplify a specific piece of DNA a million times
within 20 minutes. 'It is an incredibly sensitive machine,' he said proudly.

    Already Goldspink has developed a genetic test that can detect the
introduction into the body of any substance by spotting the 'bulge'.

    Whatever the athletes' drug of choice, whether EPO, THG or MGF, whether
synthetic or genetic, it would show up on Goldspink's machine.

    A test is vital because, although MGF has yet to be put through clinical
trials, the cheats will not wait. Theodore Friedmann, director of the gene
therapy programme at the University of California in San Diego, says of gene
manipulation: 'To do it right you would need the strength, power and depth of a
good scientific team.

    'But to do it badly in injectible form, perhaps it could be done with just a
small group of graduate level students with the right equipment and the money,
and there's plenty of that available in the sports industry.' Cheats have proved
to be willing to risk their health - and even their lives. In the early
Nineties, after the creation of erythropoetin (EPO), a synthetic substance that
could mimic a naturally occurring one in the body to increase oxygen-carrying
red blood cells, cyclists and orienteers died in their beds because it thickened
their blood to sludge.

    Yet 10 years later, when WADA detected a test for it, cross-country skiers,
including Olympic champions, were found to be using it still.

    Goldspink said: 'For the athlete the moment of glory is everything.

    There will be those who are prepared to take the risk.' He points to use of
recombinant growth hormone, widely available at Pounds 100 a bottle on the
internet.

    'We don't know whether it has serious medical effects but having an
insulin-like action it may mess up blood sugar balance, cause coma and death.

    Yet plenty of bodybuilders are using it,' said Goldspink.

    The greater threat lies beyond Beijing 2008, beyond MGF and beyond, perhaps,
the test that Goldspink has devised. It lies in the embryo in a mother's womb.
It is there sport's next battlefield may lie.

    'Because we know what genes control these territories, the technology is
virtually there. You can take one cell and screen it at the embryo level, like
for muscular dystrophy,' said Goldspink.

    By changing the genetic makeup of an embryo, the perfect sporting specimen
becomes possible. Faster, higher, stronger - and all in the test tube.

    Eight-foot basketball players.

    Swimmers with lungs like bellows.

    Or feet like flippers. All it needs, perhaps, is another state like East
Germany desperate for sporting success to direct their scientists to the work.

    'The fusing of genes at the embryo stage?' said Goldspink. 'It could be done
now and there's probably some country in the world where it is permissible. In
the long term it is far more worrying.' Science is winning a few battles for
sport. But the war on doping is not even in the finishing straight.

    WHAT IS GENE THERAPY?

    A synthetic gene can be injected into any muscle of the body. Some genes
will make the muscle grow bulkier, while others will tweak the muscle fibre to
make it faster or slower or boost its endurance, according to the biomechanical
requirements of any given sport. The synthetic gene is introduced into a virus
which is injected into the muscle fibre.

    A virus is used as the delivery vehicle because viruses are expert at
entering living tissue.

    1 Slow fibre muscle can be changed to fast, aiding sprinters and those in
explosive events

    2 Calf muscles could be targeted to help a high jumper or shot putter

    3 Production of more slow muscle fibre would help marathon runners

    4 A gene for erythropoietin (EPO) will increase oxygen-carrying red blood
cells, of benefit in endurance events like cross-country skiing and road-race
cycling

GRAPHIC: RIPPLE EFFECT: GENE THERAPY WOULD OFFER BODYBUILDERS A QUICKER ROUTE TO
MUSCLE BULK BIG CHEESE: THE MOUSE (LEFT) IS GENETICALLY ALTERED

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2004


                              118 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                                  July 4, 2004

SECTION: FB; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: Our designer baby dream is over. What hope is there left for Zain?

BYLINE: RACHEL ELLIS

BODY:


    IT was the news Shahana Hashmi had hoped never to hear.

    After two years and six rounds of IVF treatment, attempts to create a
'designer baby' who could save the life of her son had failed.

    The news, delivered by doctors last Tuesday, signalled the end of the
controversial but heartrending effort by Shahana and her husband Raj to have a
baby whose tissue matched that of Zain, five. Zain suffers from a
life-threatening iron deficiency. The plan has been condemned by campaigners who
say the couple are trying to play God but is supported by many scientists.

    'We needed a miracle but miracles don't happen to people like us,' said Mrs
Hashmi, 40, from Leeds. 'We are devastated.' Sadly, the couple had come closer
than ever before to conceiving the child they so desperately wanted.

    Doctors had helped them to create three embryos which were a perfect genetic
match for Zain but all three had failed to develop in Mrs Hashmi's womb.

    The news means Zain must continue to endure painful drug infusions into his
stomach five nights a week and monthly blood transfusions to keep his condition
under control.

    The couple's extraordinary journey began three years ago when they applied
for permission to create what would have then been the first so-called designer
baby in Britain. Zain has a rare and potentially fatal blood disorder,
betathalassaemia major, which can be cured only by a bone marrow transplant from
a perfect genetic match.

    When a worldwide search for a suitable donor proved fruitless the couple
decided to attempt the controversial IVF treatment for which they raised the
Pounds 60,000 cost.

    Only embryos which are free of the genetic defect that causes the disorder
and which are a suitable match are implanted in the womb. When the baby is born,
stem cells taken from the umbilical cord are used for the transplant.

    After a tense debate, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority gave
the Hashmis the go-ahead for the procedure two years ago. Before the latest
failed attempt, doctors had created only two suitable embryos from 80 eggs.

    Neither survived in Mrs Hasmi's womb and now the couple have been told that
doctors are reluctant to make any further attempts because of the stress the
treatment has had on Mrs Hasmi and because of her age.

    Mrs Hashmi said: 'I had convinced myself that this was going to be the time
we got a chance to save Zain's life.

    'We feel so, so sad. Last week I just sobbed. I thought, "I am going to lose
Zain before I die." I can't bear that thought.

    You can't imagine it and yet, as he gets older, he is going to know that,
too.' Despite the setback, Shahana and Raj, who have four other children,
maintain a positive outlook.

    The couple refuse to give up on finding a cure for Zain and are already
considering other options.

    Mrs Hashmi said: 'It is not the end of the road. Six months down the line we
may decide to use the two frozen embryos that we have got from previous
treatment cycles and try again.

    'We may even take a chance and try for a baby naturally. We are also going
to really push for gene therapy to see if we can remove the defective gene that
is causing Zain's condition and replace it with a healthy one.

    'I believe there is an angel looking after Zain and that there could be a
cure for him just round the next corner.' Dr Simon Fishel, director of the CARE
fertility unit at the Park Hospital, Nottingham, who treated the couple, said:
'I just wish we could have waved the magic wand.

    'It is very cruel to have got this far and not succeeded.' He said the
couple were right to have had the treatment.

    'They have given so many other couples hope,' he said.

    Two other couples are undergoing the same procedure at his clinic and a
further three are being considered.

GRAPHIC: AT RISK: ZAIN NEEDS A LIFESAVING TRANSPLANT DEVASTATED: THE HASHMIS
HAVE BEEN TOLD THEIR HOPES MAY BE OVER

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2004


                              119 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                                 June 20, 2004

SECTION: FB; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1053 words

HEADLINE: Lifting the veil on women's suffering

BYLINE: SUZANNE MOORE

BODY:


    THERE is no uniform at my daughter's school but the pupils are not allowed
to wear hoods and caps. It could indicate gang membership or act as a disguise.

    After school the hoods are defiantly up, a statement of cool or intimidation
depending on where you're coming from.

    Is this an infringement of anyone's human right I wonder, that teenagers
cannot observe their allegiance to a gang or a fashion?

    For surely, if any of these kids were smart enough to claim they needed
their hoods up for religious, rather than cultural, reasons we would all have to
bow down our heads in reverence.

    If clothes symbolise one's allegiance to a gang, what bigger gangs are there
than the religious ones?

    We now find ourselves in the peculiar situation where Muslim girls are going
to court to argue for the right to be covered from head to toe while other girls
are getting kicked out of school for wearing far too little.

    The judge in the case of Shabina Begum, the 15-year-old Muslim girl who went
to court because she wants to wear a jilbab, a loose garment that covers the
entire body, dismissed her demand. Shabina has not been to school for two years,
insisting that because of her religious beliefs the wearing of the hijab
(headscarf) and the shalwar kameez (tunic and trousers) was not enough.

    What helped convince me that the judge was right was listening to the view
of Shabina's classmates, bright, sassy, Muslim girls who don't want to wear the
jilbab or have their religious devotion assessed by what they wear.

    Yet as a non-Muslim am I even entitled to an opinion on this? For we now
live in such overheated times that we only have to put the word Islam in front
of any other word for it to mean very bad things.

    So we now have ' Islamofacists', bad men who think and do very bad things,
but to say so might mean you have a bad case of 'Islamophobia'.

    As always, what we end up with is a total inability to separate culture from
religion. While some Muslims see this ruling as objectionable, others find it
entirely reasonable, pointing out the jilbab is not based on the teachings of
the Koran but on the dress codes of the Arab world.

    Most Muslim scholars agree that the shalwar kameez meets the requirements of
modesty.

    Britain is properly laissez-faire on most such issues, much more so than
France, although it is worth noting that Turkey manages a more secular education
system than either country.

    ON Panorama last week, some Muslim women explained why they choose to veil
themselves. They were articulate, thoughtful and challenging but still when I
see a fully veiled woman it is almost impossible for me to think, 'Here is an
honoured woman.' Quite the opposite.

    I cannot see the female body as the sole repository of all desire and
responsible for all impure thoughts, so no I wouldn't make a great Catholic
either.

    I've tried being liberal, respectful, even multicultural, down the years but
I have stood in enough school playgrounds with enough women in jilbabs to know
that they are not allowed to talk to the likes of me, and that their English
will never improve as their sons speak for them.

    I have been in maternity wings with women who have had dreadful
complications at birth because they have been forbidden from attending antenatal
appointments.

    So yes I see that burkhas, jilbabs, whatever, may shelter women from some
kinds of male lust. But in the end they still suffer the consequences of it.

    I don't doubt there are certain benefits to wearing a shroud none of the
'does my bum look big in this?' dilemma but surely any discussion of rights must
include those of women who never get given any kind of choice.

    We know who Shabina Begum is. But it's the women we literally can't see who
I worry about.

    DO psychologists ever say anything original or worthwhile?

    Some of their 'insights' about the brawling in Portugal and on Big Brother
include aggression being fuelled by alcohol and that even respectable-looking
people can still get a thrill out of this behaviour.

    Really? Also, that it's tied up with low self-esteem and the crisis of
masculinity. What isn't? And tensions arise when you put vulnerable,
attention-seekers in a small space that may lead to 'conflict'. Amazing.

    The only sensible comments come from zoologists who simply say it is the
behaviour of caged animals. Even the producers of Big Brother now resort to
this. Emma 'is to be introduced back into the group'.

    What are they? A troop of gibbons?

    WHY does anyone bother with Tony Blair's monthly Press conferences.

    'Yes, Andy, Yes, Nick, Yes, Adam.' He might as well just stand there with a
blindfold on, earplugs in and a T-shirt saying: 'I told you I was right.'

    SOME people climb mountains just because they are there. Bill Clinton is the
same with women. He committed adultery 'just because I could'. If only he could
have said that at the time instead of all that, 'I did not have sexual relations
with that woman' baloney, I might have a little more respect for him. He lied
and forced his colleagues and loved ones to lie for him. The truth may be out
there now but only because he has a book to promote.

    THE menopause test? Whoopee! What new delights await us ladies? If you think
you can plan having babies with a medical test and put them off until your 40s,
you need your brain testing. Yes, stars such as Geena Davis do it, but you can
buy anything in Hollywood. If you want a baby get to it and never put all your
eggs in just the one basket.

    Prairie vole cure for the love rats

    GENE therapy, it is said, could advance to the stage where men could be
injected with a 'love gene' to make them monogamous.

    I am not quite sure about this appliance of science. All I know is that so
far this research in the United States has been conducted on prairie voles, so
what are we waiting for?

    I'm no expert but can there really be that much difference between men's
minds and the brains of these loving little rodents?

    If Fergie's forgiven, heaven help her

    FERGIE has apparently been readmitted to the Royal fold after being exiled
for her naughtiness.

    Poor thing. She has paid off her debts, works for a living and has an
amicable relationship with her exhusband. How on earth will she fit in?

    END

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2004


                              120 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 17, 2004

SECTION: ED_3RD; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: The love rat gene

BYLINE: ROBIN YAPP

BODY:


    TRY as they might, some men seem unable to stop themselves being serial love
rats.

    Well-known philanderers such as James Hewitt and Mick Jagger have become
infamous for their bed-hopping exploits.

    To most of us, such behaviour appears simply to be old-fashioned lust. But
scientists now believe the Casanova tendency could be down to the makeup of a
man's brain and it could be 'cured' by gene therapy.

    Injecting naturally promiscuous animals with a 'love gene' can turn them
into monogamous and doting partners, research shows. And the same treatment
could work on people.

    The findings centre on the brain's response to the hormone vasopressin,
which plays a key role in human male behaviour such as aggression, communication
and sexual activity.

    American scientists who carried out the study say it raises the possibility
that a similar technique could one day be used to turn roving Romeos into
caring, home-loving types with eyes only for their spouse or partner.

    Dr Larry Young, of the school of medicine at Emory University in Atlanta,
Georgia, said: 'It is intriguing to consider that individual differences in
vasopressin receptors in humans might play a role in how differently people form
relationships.' His team studied male prairie voles, which form lifelong
relationships with a single mate.

    They also studied male meadow voles, which frequently mate with several
partners.

    The prairie vole's brain contains a large number of receptors which control
the release of vasopressin into the brain, while the meadow vole has far fewer.

    Vasopressin is released after sex, stimulating the brain's 'reward centre'.

    The researchers believe that while most individuals associate such feelings
of satisfaction with a particular partner, those with low levels of receptors do
not make this link meaning they are more likely to stray.

    They injected a single gene containing vasopressin receptors into the brains
of meadow voles and then observed their mating behaviour.

    The modified animals were instantly transformed from selfcentred serial sex-
seekers to lovestruck and faithful partners to the last female in their life
before they were injected, the journal Nature reports.

    During a 24-hour period of observation, they constantly huddled close to
their partner, ignoring another female which they would previously have been
expected to bond with, and possibly-mate with. Dr Young said it is likely that
more than one genetic factor is involved in controlling the human tendency to
form lifelong bonds or constantly seek out new sexual partners.

    But he believes vasopressin receptors could be one of them.

    'Our study provides evidence, in a comparatively simple animal model, that
changes in the activity of a single gene can profoundly change a fundamental
social behaviour of animals within a species,' he added.

    But he also warned that in the human world, culture and personal experience
may be stronger influences on behaviour. 'In other words, the human love rats
may not want to be cured.' The researchers believe their findings may also be of
relevance to disorders such as autism, where people have problems forming social
bonds, suggesting they could be related to a shortage of these receptors.

    END

GRAPHIC: LEFT: MICK JAGGER. ABOVE: A NORMALLY PROMISCUOUS MEADOW VOLE, WHICH
BECAME MONOGAMOUS AFTER THE THERAPY. RIGHT: JAMES HEWITT

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2004


                              121 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 15, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 1428 words

HEADLINE: Alice was a brilliant singer whose fans included Robbie Williams. She
was also terminally ill. Her story will move and inspire you

BYLINE: MARIANNE POWER

BODY:


    BY THE age of 30, Alice Martineau had achieved more than most, combining a
modelling career with a first-class degree before recording her
critically-acclaimed album Daydreams. Tragically, she then lost her battle with
cystic fibrosis. This month she would have turned 32, and her brother Luke, an
artist, talks to MARIANNE POWER about the wonderful legacy Alice left behind.

    A PRETTY blonde walks on stage in a small London jazz club to rapturous
applause.

    Friends, family and record executives cheer as she picks up the microphone
and starts to sing with a volume that defies her slight frame.

    After six songs she finishes her set and walks, slowly, off stage towards a
handsome, familiar face - pop star Robbie Williams, who has come specially to
see her.

    By all accounts this would be just the beginning for any singer's career,
but for Alice Martineau it was her last public performance before she died, at
the age of 30, of cystic fibrosis.

    That night she sang with only a quarter of her lung capacity and sat on a
stool because she did not have the strength to stand - but her determination has
made her a role model for CF sufferers.

    Alice's parents had no idea they were carriers of the CF gene which is
present in one in 25 of the UK population.

    When they gave birth to their first child, Luke, they rejoiced at the happy
and healthy baby and hoped for the same when Alice arrived two years later.

    Doctors knew immediately that something was wrong as she was born with
bluish skin, struggling to breathe. She was given a life expectancy of ten
years.

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common lifethreatening inherited disease in the
UK, with a one-in-four chance that a child of two carriers will suffer from it.

    It causes a sticky mucus to build up in the lungs and pancreas, causing
infection and permanent damage which will ultimately cause organ failure.

    Sufferers find it hard to breathe and have to cough constantly. They become
malnourished because they can't digest food properly. As the body breaks down,
it is common for CF sufferers to develop diabetes and liver damage.

    There is no cure.

    Luke says his parents don't talk about those early days except to say 'it
was a bolt out of the blue with awful dark days'. Alice wasn't allowed home for
months.

    As much as possible, life was kept as normal.

    Alice's father, now a judge, was rising through the ranks in the legal
profession and her mother devoted herself to her daughter's care. But with every
year that passed there was an emergency that could have killed her.

    Being ill became a part of life and she went off to school in London, armed
with a bag full of pills and letters to excuse her from games if she was feeling
unwell.

    It was only when she went to Warwick University that she realised the
severity of her illness.

    Alice arrived full of enthusiasm and filled her room with her medical
equipment, but it wasn't enough. She was away from home for the first time and
struggled.

    JUST two weeks later, she developed a serious lung infection and had to
return to London to have intravenous (IV) antibiotics, and was in and out of
hospital for four months. She didn't return to Warwick. But even when she was
frustrated by the limits being put on her life, Alice never let her condition
take over.

    Back in London, she was spotted by a model scout and did everything she
could to hide her illness when she went to castings by pretending to talk on the
phone so she could catch her breath, or using her mum's car to get around.

    She continued to live at her parents' Notting Hill home and got a place at
King's College London to read English. She got by on adrenaline, continued with
her modelling and graduated with a first-class degree, overcoming the increasing
symptoms of her disease.

    By this stage she was a regular face at the private Royal Brompton Hospital,
being treated by CF expert Professor Duncan Geddes.

    Never one to sit around, when modelling became too strenuous Alice took
singing lessons and was amazed to find she had a powerful voice. She put it down
to all the coughing.

    She booked time in studios around London where she recorded songs that she
wrote, but - as with modelling - Alice had to conceal her illness around her new
music friends.

    She was too self-conscious to cough in front of people she didn't know well.

    'The studios she was visiting were very cool places and she didn't want to
be coughing up mucus in front of the good-looking sound engineer,' says Luke.

    'So she would get her coughing done on the way there and stop herself for
the three hours she was in the studio. It was very bad for her but she did it.'
By her late 20s, however, Alice would rarely go for more than three months
without a hospital stay, and Luke recalls: 'The physical evidence of her illness
became more and more obvious. She had a little portable oxygen cylinder that
went everywhere with her.' Alice was also on regular courses of antibiotics
administered by drips, nebulisers, insulin to manage the diabetes she had
developed, oxygen and physiotherapy to clear her lungs.

    A tube was also inserted into her stomach so that she could have food
administered during the night, to keep her weight up.

    Luke remembers she started to have terrible fits. 'We would call them
funnies, but they weren't funny at all. They were extremely frightening. She
would start coughing up a lot of blood, then lose consciousness for a few
seconds and get pains in her arms.' In October 1998, at 26, Alice was given bad
news. She had cheated the statistics by living into her 20s, but now doctors
said she was unlikely to be alive in five years. Her only hope was a lung, heart
and liver transplant.

    At first she shrugged off the news.

    But eventually she realised she had no option but to be put on the
transplant register.

    A triple transplant had only been done five times before in the UK and the
chances of her getting a donor match were slim - and even if they found a match,
the risk of rejection was significant.

    At first, every time the phone rang Alice thought it would be her match, but
it never was.

    Meanwhile, she started to send off demo tapes to record executives. She told
them she had CF, but they didn't understand how sick she really was as she
looked so well.

    In the summer of 2002, Sony signed her and Alice started to record her first
album.

    Although that summer should have been the happiest time in her life, it was
the darkest. She was taken into hospital just a few weeks after signing the
record deal, and on the day her single If I Fall was played for the first time
on Radio 1, she was too ill to care.

    LUKE says: 'It was the only time I had sensed that Alice had given up. What
was extraordinary is that she came out of hospital in September for two weeks
and did interviews, recordings and her video. She somehow rallied herself and
went back into hospital, before the single was released in October.'

    Ironically, between October and March, when she died, Alice was feeling
better than she had been.

    She enjoyed the attention she was receiving and the sense that she had
achieved things. She always protested: 'I'm a singer/songwriter who just happens
to be ill.' Alice died very suddenly at home on March 6, 2003, of one of her
'funnies'. In the time it took her mother to run down to help her, she had lost
consciousness and a lot of blood, and died.

    'We had all more or less assumed that the end would be a slow disappearance
in hospital. It was quick and we have to be grateful for that,' says Luke.

    At the memorial at St Luke's Church in Chelsea, 600 people came to wish her
well. Boy band Blue, who she had met through her singing teacher, sang at the
service.

    It was then that her family decided they wanted a way to honour her life and
help others with the same condition.

    Luke, an award-winning artist, painted a series of pictures dedicated to
Alice to raise funds for the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, and in particular for gene
therapy, which seems to offer light at the end of the tunnel. In theory, it
means that healthy genes can be injected to replace faulty ones.

    'Alice didn't have time to wait for life to happen to her,' says her
brother. 'She realised that if there is anything in life you want, you have to
grab it, and that's a lesson we can all learn.' IF YOU want to buy one of Luke
Martineau's pictures or contribute to the Alice Martineau Appeal, visit
www.cftrust.uk/aliceappeal or call 020 8464 7211.

    END

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2004


                              122 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  May 27, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 63

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Good for you Anne - and I'll be next!

BYLINE: ESTHER RANTZEN

BODY:


    OLD age is fun. I know that may sound crazy when, these days, it's
considered blasphemy to suggest that old age is merry and confident compared
with the insecurity and anxiety of youth, but it's true.

    The surveys bear it out. Whenever they're asked, OAPs in Britain tell us
that, provided they have a few savings and reasonable health, they are having
the time of their lives. However, there remains one basic flaw in the third,
golden age. Once we're over 50, the reflection in the mirror starts to tell us
wicked lies.

    Instead of the youthful, mischievous, open-minded people we know we are at
heart, tired little old bags of wrinkles stare back at us from the
looking-glass. No wonder so many of us decide to raid our nest eggs and take
them to the nearest cosmetic surgeon.

    And why not? Provided we're careful about which surgeon we choose, and can
afford it, is it such a sin for a woman to make her crumpled exterior fit the
sleek, shiny soul trapped inside?

    Puritans deliver long tirades of disapproval when a woman confesses to a
facelift, as Anne Robinson has. Vanity, they say, is a mortal sin. Nature
intends us to live with the face we create for ourselves over the years, so that
is the face we deserve.

    If you have frown lines caused by years of bad temper, or a scraggy neck -
live with it, sister, you should have thought about that before you ate those
extra eclairs or smoked all those cigarettes. A healthy life and a sweet nature
would have given you an unlined forehead and apple cheeks.

    That's a load of baloney, of course. Alas, our face rarely reflects our
inner loveliness.

    Many of the world's greatest beauties are dragons to work with or to marry.
Some of the nicest people are afflicted with puddingy noses and balding pates.

    But still we judge each other on our looks - and the best lookers get the
top jobs, so rich people have always tried to improve their appearance.

    As old age overwhelmed Elizabeth I, who was no fool, she covered her face
with paint and powder, and wore a red wig. I have no doubt, scholar and
statesman though she was, that were she alive today she would have had a nip and
a tuck.

    Not that she would have admitted it: very few women are prepared to. Anne
Robinson has called herself the Mother Teresa of cosmetic surgery, because of
her saintly honesty in confessing that she has succumbed.

    ANNE doesn't, however, look much like Mother T, and if she did, no doubt she
would now be demanding money back from her surgeon.

    Mother Teresa was beautiful, as nuns and saints can be. The lines on her
face were like the creases in old silk: they suited her perfectly, and gave her
face a poetic sweetness and gravity.

    However, Mother T didn't earn her living in a television studio, as Anne
does. Nor would she have been given the chance. No matter how much gravitas the
new Director General brings to the BBC, I doubt he would ever employ a Saint to
present a primetime show if she were 60 years old and looked it.

    The overhead lighting of a TV studio is notoriously cruel. We might wish
things were different - that TV bosses were less obsessed with employing plump
young chicks and might consider a stringy old hen or two. But, with things as
they are, Anne was being professionally wise.

    Ageism doesn't only apply to women. Men, too, are deciding to go under the
knife to improve their appearance. Dale Winton has said of his own 'nip and
tuck' that, for him, it was obligatory; like an MOT on a car.

    And it isn't only the famous who queue up to have their age erased. All over
the country, ordinary men and women with normal jobs crowd into the waiting
rooms of plastic surgeons to buy themselves new noses and tighter jawlines.For
most of their customers, it's not a professional requirement, but a confidence
boost. They look better, fitter, fresher, so their self-esteem leaps up.

    But how far will the trend go?

    The time may be approaching when surgeons are replaced by gene therapists,
who will find ways to regrow new young skin for us all in a test tube. Old
people will go in for a retread every five years, so that they can keep their
young faces and bodies. But that's in the future. Right here and now, some
fortunate men and women are already spending what they can afford to improve
their looks.

    Why should anyone else complain? After all, it's their money and their
looks. In fact, we should admire them, because it does take courage and
determination to undertake what, as Anne Robinson has described, is a continuous
process.

    It is said that when Jolie Gabor, Zsa Zsa's mother, was being wheeled in for
her umpteenth facelift in her 80s, she said: 'If I die on the table, finish the
operation. I want to look my best at my funeral.' You may call it vanity.

    I call it dedication.

    END

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2004


                              123 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 9, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: A pot of maggots ... just what the doctor ordered

BYLINE: ROGER DOBSON

BODY:


    FAMILY doctors will this week begin prescribing maggots to help heal
patients with infected wounds.

    The move follows the success of maggot treatment on more than 20,000
hospital patients with a wide range of health problems.

    With pots of sterile maggots of the common green-bottle, Lucilia sericata,
available on GP prescription, the treatment - until now confined to hospitals -
can be used by patients at home.

    Once a patient has picked up their maggot prescription, a district nurse
will visit them to apply the creatures on to the wound.

    After three days, the maggots, which leave healthy tissue alone, will be
removed and disposed of.

    'It means that many more patients will experience the benefits of this form
of therapy without the need for hospitalisation,' says Dr Steve Thomas, director
of the NHS Biosurgical Research Unit at Bridgend, which produces the maggots,
marketed as LarvE.

    Research has shown that the use of maggots can revolutionise the treatment
of all kinds of wounds. In many cases, it has meant that surgery and even
amputation is no longer needed. The maggots have also been shown to be effective
against antibiotic-resistant bugs such as MRSA.

    The latest research on a group of patients with wounds affected by MRSA
shows that although their wounds had been treated unsuccessfully for up to 18
months with other therapies, the maggots were able to get rid of the infection
from all the wounds in an average of around four days.

    Many new treatments have been developed to improve recovery of soft-tissue
wounds, including growth factors, gene therapy and skin substitutes - but to
work properly they need to be applied to wounds that are free from infection.

    Although many patients are squeamish about the idea of live maggots on an
open wound, there is no pain, and the only sensation reported has been a slight
tickling under the dressing.

    END

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2004


                              124 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                February 6, 2004

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 82

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: European Motor revs up after bid talk accelerates

BYLINE: GEOFF FOSTER

BODY:


    WORD from Arthur Daley's forecourt is that another quoted car dealer is
about to lose its independence. With the corporate ink on Pendragon's agreed
600pa- share cash offer for CD Bramall barely dry, rumours suggest that
Inchcape, the daddy of the motor sector, is lining up a hostile Pounds 124.5m,
or 235p-ashare, cash offer for European Motor, 6 1/2p better at 195 1/2p.

    Inchcape (4p cheaper at 1414p), the world's largest independent distributor
of Toyotas, said in December that it was on the prowl to snap up smaller rivals
to expand its UK operations.

    European Motor would be a perfect fit.

    Run by Richard Palmer, the man who introduced Lada cars into this country,
it operates 39 car dealerships in the UK and represents most major luxury
vehicle manufacturers including BMW, Audi and Jaguar.

    Dealers expected consolidation in the sector to gather pace after EU rules
that restricted the ability of car manufacturers to dismiss dealers came into
force in October.

    Veteran investor Jack Petchey has kept a 5.2pc stake in European Motor.

    He made a big profit in June 2001 when he sold 6.6m EM shares at 86p after
paying an average 42 1/2p a share. He could soon trouser another packet.

    Other car dealers revved higher on expectations of four- star takeover
action. Lookers, which has more than 90 dealerships and an annual turnover of
over Pounds 790m, accelerated 9p to 305p.

    Caffyns purred 32 1/2p higher to 702 1/2p in a thin market. GAM Exempt-UK
Opportunities Fund has acquired a 2.9pc stake.

    The Footsie remained stuck in the slow lane. The expected 1/4pc rise in UK
interest-rates to 4pc prompted a rally, which soon petered out. The close was
14.1 points lower at 4384.4 with overall turnover looking healthy at 4.4bn.

    Fund managers were cautious ahead of today's crucial US non-farm payroll
(employment) numbers. Consensus forecasts are for a rise of 175,000 in January.
The data will provide clues on the prospect for interest rates in America.

    Wall Street retrieved an initial 16-point deficit to trade 22 higher.

    Sterling edged up to $1.8393, while the euro firmed to 68.5p and $1.2604.

    Impressive fourth-quarter figures from US peer Starwood helped
Inter-Continental Hotels rally 16 1/2p to 550p.

    Continuing takeover chatter left brewer Scottish & Newcastle up 71/4p more
at a high of 421 1/2p.

    Boosted by news of rival Universal's declining market share and an Investec
recommendation, music giant EMI touched 243p before closing 9 3/4p better at 231
1/4p.

    Manchester United scored a gain of 4 1/2p to 265 1/2p on news that top fund
manager Legal & General has bought 3.11pc, or 8.15m shares. Many dealers still
believe the escalating row between Sir Alex Ferguson and Irish multimillionaires
John Magnier and JP McManus could lead to an eventual full takeover bid.

    Business data provider The Market Age soared 121/2p to 20p following a
bullish agm. Shareholders heard that revenues would rise by more than 100pc on
last year's full results after its Pronet Analytics unit won an important
contract.

    Speculative buying lifted Phil Edmond's Central African Mining and
Exploration Company 2 7/8p to 12 3/4p. Investors who subscribed for stock at 4p
in December's placing are sitting pretty.

    Fortune Oil advanced 3/8p to 5 1/4p following the sale of its stake in the
BlueSky airport refuelling business for a premium price of Pounds 31.8m. Broker
Oriel Securities says the excellent price attained will help accelerate
Fortune's programme of investment in China's energy sector.

    An Evolution buy in the wake of the figures helped Danka Business Systems
rise 3 1/4p to 54 1/2p.

    With management banging the drum at institutional meetings, Caffe Nero
frothed 3 1/2p higher to 69p. The group is well on course to having 160 sites by
the end of the year.

    Oxford Biomedica edged up 1/2p to 24 1/4p after signing a licence agreement
for its Lentivector gene therapy technology with Merck.

    MINING explorer Minco soared 5p to 27p as punters continued to dig in amid
growing speculation that it is about to be awarded gold licences in Uzbekistan.

    Oxus Gold and Newmont Mining are already active in the region. Minco could
appoint a new stockbroker soon.

    Investors who subscribed for stock in December's placing of 12.5m shares
have watched the stock treble.

    END

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2004


                              125 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 16, 2003

SECTION: ED_3RD_SPR; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 1542 words

HEADLINE: My lovely niece Rachel has grown up fighting a terrible disease. Her
life expectancy is only 31. And I'm carrying the deadly gene that caused it

BYLINE: ALICE DOUGLAS

BODY:


    When we found out she suffered from CF, the whole family felt their joy had
been crushed, only to be replaced by worry. Caroline and Jonathan coped by
concentrating on the practical issues, although, of course, fear was always in
the background. We were told then that the average life expectancy was only 12.

    Cystic fibrosis derived its name from the fibroids clustered around the
pancreas. A genetic disease, it causes the body to produce a thick mucus which
blocks the digestive system and the lungs, leaving sufferers vulnerable to
infections and breathing difficulties.

    As the disease progresses, complications can also include diabetes and
osteoporosis.

    It is now known that there are varying degrees to the disease and some
people are affected more than others.

    Researchers are trying to discover why this should be and also why many are
not diagnosed until late in their lives.

    Doctors look out for CF early because the sooner it's discovered the easier
it is to minimise chronic respiratory infection and inflammation. It is also
crucial to diagnose the disease early to avoid malnutrition.

    Rachel was initially diagnosed by a sweat test. Children with CF produce
much more salt-concentrated sweat than healthy children. She didn't have lung
problems at that stage but there was concern because she wasn't putting on
weight normally.

    Both parents have to be carriers for a child to be born with CF. A carrier
has a single defective gene and a CF sufferer has two defective genes.

    There are 2.3 million carriers in the UK, and every week five new babies are
born with the disease. But children with CF are only born when both parents are
carriers.

    Of the 7,500 sufferers in the UK, 6,000 are under 25 and three young people
die each week. There are more than a thousand different mutations of the CF gene
which is why there are such varying degrees of the disease - but they are all
deadly.

    AFTER blood tests, both Jonathan and Caroline learnt that they were carriers
of the CF gene. That meant they had a one-in-four chance of conceiving another
child with CF.

    Despite the odds, they decided to go on to have another two children who do
not have CF.

    I don't know whether my parents were carriers, but they lost two children
soon after birth which makes me think that those babies had CF.

    The complications were similar to those that first alerted us to Rachel's
illness. In the terminology of the time, they 'failed to thrive'.

    When I became pregnant in 1990 I was tested, which was terribly traumatic.

    Although I know I had a 50/50 chance of being a carrier, having it confirmed
was very frightening. The relief was enormous when we discovered my husband,
John, an entrepreneur businessman, was not.

    Because both parents have to carry the faulty gene for a child to be
affected, doctors were able to reassure us that our child Jonathan, now 12,
would be fine. As our son Jonathan and Rachel have grown up, it has been hard
not to compare them. We have been so lucky and Rachel has endured so much.

    BUT my brother and his wife were determined to give their daughter a healthy
normal life and somehow they managed to accommodate CF with the least amount of
fuss.

    It never stopped Rachel doing anything when she was younger. She took part
in the same sports, holidays and adventures as every other child around her.

    Every time she developed a cold, we were terrified as there is always the
risk of infection setting in on the chest but until she was 12, Rachel was
healthy throughout her childhood.

    As Rachel has developed so has treatment for CF. Research has come a long
way and we now know so much more about the illness than we did in those early
days.

    One problem CF children suffered was an inability to absorb fat and protein
which left them weak and undernourished - and many died.

    But in the mid-1980s scientists discovered a way to rectify this problem by
supplementing the diet with enzymes to help the body's digestion. Rachel has to
take up to six enzyme pills with every meal, otherwise the fat and protein would
not be absorbed and gradually she'd lose weight and die.

    She also does two half-hour sessions of physiotherapy twice a day to clear
the mucus from her lungs and uses nebulisers twice a day for 20 minutes at a
time. The nebuliser helps prevent infection by spraying a mist of antibiotics
into her lungs.

    Rachel has been taking another drug called Dnase since she was 12.

    This thins the mucus in the lungs by breaking down the DNA therefore making
it easier to clear, but it's very expensive and availability depends on whether
the sufferer's area has the funding.

    Rachel had a bad patch when she was 18 and went to university; I think it
was only at that moment she realised that she wasn't like everyone else. She had
been to Ibiza for a fortnight with friends and presumably did very little
sleeping. She came home and went straight into hospital for six weeks with a
chest infection.

    It was a shock and the whole family was incredibly worried. She was given
all sorts of antibiotics which didn't seem to do much good because the infection
was out of control.

    She was coughing up blood, her chest filled up with mucus and we all started
to panic.

    Rachel was at an age when most young people are excitedly thinking about
their future and she had to confront the severity of an illness that kills most
people by their 30s. That is something that a family finds hard to reflect upon.
All we could do was focus on appreciating every moment with her.

    But she is very matter of fact about CF. Lots of people conceal their
illness but not Rachel. She never hides her pills; at a restaurant they are on
the table by the salt and pepper.

    She was lucky. Her school friends were really supportive and interested in
the disease and always wanted to try her nebuliser.

    I believe she has only one friend who is a fellow sufferer, and they really
bonded through similar experiences at school and university.

    They also both took a year out and travelled the world. Rachel travelled
with two friends from university and had a fantastic time. Even while camping
for eight weeks on the East Coast of Australia, she managed to use her nebuliser
by plugging it into the car lighter socket.

    Unfortunately she is not strong enough for a full time career but Rachel
works as an assistant at a veterinary and hydrotherapy centre in Battersea which
treats dogs with problems such as arthritis and hip problems.

    She loves the work and I hope that she will always do something she finds
stimulating; she shouldn't be robbed of a rewarding career because of illness.

    She lives life joyously and to the full but always with this bleak knowledge
inside her.

    Amazingly, she is not at all consumed with selfpity. We can all say: 'Live
for the moment because I could walk out of here and be hit by a bus,' but we
don't really believe there's a risk.

    Rachel lives with that threat permanently. The key is that she has come to
terms with it so that it's not a shadow hanging over her.

    She isn't living with her head in the clouds expecting a cure.

    I think one of the reasons people know so little about CF is that sufferers
appear to have just a bit of a bad cough most of the time.

    When they become really ill, they are taken straight to hospital which
serves as a reminder of just how deadly it is.

    Last week we held a carol concert to remember the talented singer Alice
Martineau who released the hit album Daydreams.

    She had CF and died in March aged 30, while on a waiting list for a heart,
lung and liver transplant. There just aren't enough donor organs and even after
the operation there can still be the problem of rejection.

    Transplants are only done in the last resort. It is by no means an easy
choice.

    THANKFULLY, it is something Rachel has not really had to think about.
Instead we continue to hope for a cure - by no means a lost cause.

    The UK has been at the forefront of gene therapy. In 1989 a huge leap
forward was made when the single faulty gene was found. It was an extraordinary
discovery and meant that there is a real possibility that it will be the first
genetic illness to be cured.

    In gene therapy, faulty genes are replaced with normal ones.

    UKbased researchers have already demonstrated that they can correct genetic
defects in mice, in the human CF nose and the human CF lung.

    U.S. researchers have worked on a treatment called 'induced development
therapeutics' where a good copy of the gene CFTR (which when mutated causes CF
by allowing fluid to accumulate in the lungs) is injected into the amniotic
fluid surrounding the foetus, at the time when the lungs are developing. The
foetus then breathes in the gene through the fluid.

    In April 2004, the screening of every child at birth in England and Wales
will be introduced as in Scotland.

    Progress such as this makes all our efforts to highlight CF worthwhile.

    But our family can only hope - for Rachel and all those like her - that a
breakthrough comes in time.

    DONATIONS can be sent to: The Cystic Fibrosis Trust, 11 London Road,
Bromley, Kent, BR1 1BY (0208 4647 211; www.cftrust.org.uk) END

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2003


                              126 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 8, 2003

SECTION: ED_1ST; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 109 words

HEADLINE: Drug hope for Parkinson's

BODY:


    A PIONEERING treatment for Parkinson's disease is about to start world-first
trials on a group of British patients.

    It uses gene therapy to reprogramme part of the brain to tackle the effects
of the disease, for which there is no cure.

    It has been shown to work in animals and now scientists at Oxford BioMedica,
which is developing it, are preparing the first tests on human sufferers.

    Parkinson's results when the brain stops making dopamine, a chemical that
controls movement.

    The treatment, Prosavin, turns cells in another part of the brain into
dopamine producers, restarting the body's manufacture of the chemical.

    END

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2003


                              127 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 22, 2003

SECTION: ED_SC1; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy and the DIY heart bypass

BYLINE: PAULINE MCLAUGHLIN

BODY:


    A HEART disease sufferer has received groundbreaking treatment designed to
'trick' his damaged blood vessels into regrowing.

    John Middleton, a patient at Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, has had a human gene
that stimulates growth injected into his heart.

    Doctors believe the technique could help save the lives of the 15 per cent
of heart patients who cannot undergo standard bypass surgery because their blood
vessels are too badly blocked or too thin.

    Mr Middleton, 60, must now wait for six months before doctors can assess the
results.

    Heart disease is Scotland's biggest killer, leading to about 12,000 deaths
each year.

    But experts believe that by harnessing gene therapy, they can implant the
blood vessels that feed oxygen to the heart with a special growth factor that
will trick them into regrowing.

    Consultant cardiologist Dr Neil Uren, who is leading the research at
Edinburgh Royal Infirmary, said the treatment aimed to make the patient's body
perform its own heart bypass.

    He explained: 'We are trying to stimulate the natural process of collateral
growth.

    'Many patients with quite bad cardiac disease do develop their own small
blood vessels called Dr Neil Uren: Leading research collaterals. These tend to
reduce the amount of problems that the muscle has, so they reduce the amount of
angina.

    'What we are trying to do is stimulate more and more blood vessels to grow.'

    The challenge for scientists developing the cutting- edge treatment has been
how to get the growth factor into the right cells in the body.

    They have solved the problem by allowing the gene to 'piggyback' on a common
cold virus.

    Dr Uren said: 'The virus has been modified so that it doesn't cause any
infection.

    'When it is injected into the heart through the coronary circulation, it
delivers the gene to the cells of the heart, the muscle cells and the blood
vessel cells. The gene goes inside the cell and produces protein. That protein
is then released into the heart and stimulates the blood vessels to grow.

    'What we're trying to do is encourage the patient to deliver their own heart
bypass.'If the therapy proves successful, it could become available to all Scots
within three years.

    Mr Middleton said: 'At first when Dr Uren told me about the treatment I
thought it sounded like science fiction.

    'But the more I found out about it the more I thought the opportunities were
endless for myself and other heart patients.'

    Chest, Heart and Stroke Scotland yesterday said it was an important
development. Spokesman Jan Buncle said: 'We are very excited about this new
research project. It certainly offers hope to those 15 per cent of heart
patients who are currently unable to receive treatment for clinical reasons.

    'It is also a much less invasive procedure than others that are available as
it involves an injection rather than surgery, which obviously carries its own
risks.

    'Until now there have been very few treatment options for patients
unsuitable for surgery.'

    Scotland has the highest rate of heart disease in the EU. Last year 16,807
people suffered heart attacks and 33,487 were treated for other cardiac
complaints.

    END

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2003


                              128 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 25, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 91 words

HEADLINE: Cash boost

BODY:


    GENE therapy research will receive $3million funding, with a further
$2.5million specifically to find a cure for cystic fibrosis, the commonest
life-threatening inherited disease.

    But researchers had hoped for twice as much. Gene therapy uses a genetically
modified virus to switch on or off genes involved in disease.

    So far, trials have not proved as successful as hoped. But the Government
expects to see licensed gene therapy medicines within a decade.

    The first uses are likely to be to treat cancer and heart disease.


LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2003


                              129 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                  June 1, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 56

LENGTH: 1733 words

HEADLINE: The day myDNA toldme I had just 20 years to live...;
(1)REVIEW (2)How a TV journalist became the first Briton to take a revolutionary
new gene test - and received a death sentence

BYLINE: Jonathan Maitland

BODY:


    By his body language I could tell the news was bad. The doctor's gaze was
fixed on the sheaf of notes in his hand. My genes had been mapped using the most
sophisticated screening techniques in the world, and the results were now in.

    Clearly uneasy and nervous, Dr Kari Stefansson took a deep breath and gave
me the stark facts: even though I am a 42-year-old man who has never spent a day
in hospital, I am likely to be dead by 65.

    I had gone to a clinic in Reykjavik, Iceland, to film an exclusive report
for ITV1's Tonight programme about genetic testing, which experts claim is the
most exciting medical development since the discovery of penicillin 75 years
ago.

    Recent breakthroughs, such as the mapping of the human genome, mean it is
now possible to discover the diseases we are likely to die from, and when.

    Would I, my producer asked, agree to have my genes tested for this purpose
on national television? Curiosity - and a failure to think through the
consequences - got the better of me, so I said yes.

    Gene-testing is, in effect, reliable medical fortune-telling. Simply by
taking a sample of my blood, scientists at deCode Genetics, an Icelandic
biotechnology company at the forefront of genetic research, were able to
calculate how susceptible I am to a whole range of conditions, from
schizophrenia to cancer.

    Each of us carries tens of thousands of genes in our bodies, made up of
strands of DNA - the giant twisting chain of chemicals set in a sequence that
contains the coded instructions for life. Within the human genome, the complete
'book' of instructions, are 2.9 billion chemical 'letters', each one of four
characters: adenine (A), thymine (T), cytosine (C) and guanine (G).

    In order to obtain my own unique sequence of letters, the scientists
extracted the DNA from my blood cells using a process called polymerase chain
reaction, which produces billions of DNA molecules from one initial molecule.

    By adding the chemical sodium dodecyl sulphate to separate the molecules, my
microscopic sample was ready to be fed into the AB13700 sequencing machine.

    This revolutionary new piece of equipment, the size of a fridge-freezer and
costing more than GBP 350,000, was able to read and convert the sample into the
exact combination of chemical letters in my DNA.

    The data taken from the sequencer was displayed on a computer screen.

    Highly developed software then compared my reading with a database compiled
from 80,000 anonymous volunteers in order to identity the small, but
significant, ways in which my DNA differs from that of an averagely healthy
person. The entire process took five hours.

    The alignment of letters in my code revealed that my life expectancy is ten
years lower than normal, since people of my genetic makeup are twice as likely
to suffer heart disease, a risk particularly acute when one's waistline exceeds
40in. Mine, unfortunately, crashed through that barrier some time ago.

    As Government statistics record the average lifespan of an otherwise healthy
British male at 74 years and six months, it means I am unlikely to see my 65th
birthday unless I make dramatic changes to my lifestyle.

    The end could come even sooner than that: my genetic composition also shows
I have an unusually high risk of developing adult onset diabetes.

    Although thousands of diabetics lead perfectly healthy lives, the illness
can, if not recognised and treated, lead to heart attacks and strokes. Again,
that risk is especially high in overweight people - like me.

    It is estimated that less than five per cent of the population share genetic
characteristics similar to mine. For that singular stroke of bad luck, Dr
Stefansson told me, my father is most likely to blame. Although he is alive and
well at 77, he has a history of heart problems which I have inherited and, if I
have children, will probably

    pass down to another generation.

    Looking at my genetic sequence, Dr Stefansson then informed me that in spite
of the fact that I weigh 15st 2lb and am only 5ft 9in tall, I actually possess
'thin' genes. This means the chemical letters in my DNA correspond to those of a
person who burns off calories unusually quickly, thereby preventing excess
weight gain.

    'If you had "fat" genes you would be much more overweight than you already
are,' he said. 'In some ways you are lucky. Given the amount you eat, you should
actually be twice the size.' This was a small consolation.

    In fact, I found it incredible difficult to digest the news of my personal
prognosis. But within the next five years, experts predict, genetic 'MoTs' will
be commonplace in Britain.

    The cost at this point is prohibitive specialist firms in America quote up
to $ 1million for a similar procedure but soon we'll be able to obtain the
results of our own genetic tests and those of our children on a CD-Rom for less
than GBP 50.

    Geneticists believe this new technology will revolutionise modern
healthcare. If everyone is tested at birth for genetic defects, doctors will be
able to treat some diseases years before they strike.

    Take osteoporosis, which kills 14,000 sufferers, predominantly women, in the
UK every year. If a baby girl has been given a 75 per cent chance of developing
the disease, measures can be taken to stave it off. Already we know that
osteoporosis can be prevented by greatly increasing the amounts of calcium and
vitamin D in the diet. It may even be possible to eliminate the faulty gene
altogether and stop it from passing down generations.

    Remarkably, the same goes for cancer.

    'This is very important science we are talking about here,' says Nobel
prize-winner Sir Paul Nurse, chief executive of Cancer Research UK. 'We are
going to generate new treatments and cures for a range of diseases.' Instead of
the NHS spending billions of pounds every year treating diseases, it could spend
a fraction of that figure preventing them which will help us to lead longer,
healthier lives.

    The advent of gene-testing will also enable us to follow bespoke dietary
plans. The lucky ones will be told that their genes allow them to eat whatever
food they wish without shortening their lives.

    Others will learn that if they do, they must expect the con- sequences. The
same might even apply to smoking and alcohol, and eventually explain why some
lifelong smokers and drinkers live to a ripe old age while others die young.

    The benefits of gene-testing seem clear. But critics argue that there are
wider and more dangerous implications. Early pioneering surgery has, in some
cases, had catastrophic results.

    In 1999, Jesse Gelsinger, an American teenager suffering from a hereditary
liver disease, volunteered to undergo gene treatment even though his condition
wasn't life-threatening. A few hours after being injected with a virus designed
to carry the gene into his body, he developed a high temperature and breathing
difficulties. Three days later he was dead.

    Gelsinger wasn't the only case: there have been several other gene therapy
deaths since then.

    Then there is a possibility of abuse by unscrupulous drug companies. Some
firms, it is feared, will use gene tests as an opportunity to sell us
nonessential, unproven and highly profitable treatments which we will feel
obliged to take for the rest of our lives.

    Several big players have already spotted the vast moneymaking potential in
genes.

    Another major concern is the issue of confidentiality and the impact that
the disclosure of genetic information could have on our everyday lives.

    Without proper legislation, some commentators fear we will create a genetic
underclass, where employers discriminate against people with faulty genes.

    'If there wasn't any kind of regulatory framework the situation could get
out of hand,' says Baroness Helena Kennedy, who chairs the Government's Human
Genetics Commission. 'You could end up having people who couldn't get
employment, insurance or even a mortgage on their house.' Scientists, doctors
and politicians all accept that the law currently lags dangerously behind the
technology and a new Act of Parliament will be needed to govern confidentiality
and ethics. For my part, I wonder about the psychological impact of receiving
the results of a gene test when the news is bad.

    What if a person told that he is highly likely to develop cancer by 40
decides to take his own life instead? And what if the result itself turns out to
have been wrong?

    Although my employers were both sympathetic and apologetic when they heard
my prognosis, neither they nor deCode Genetics had considered giving me
professional counselling either before or after my test. All I did was discuss
it with my girlfriend for the benefit of the cameras. She was the only one who
warned me about the implications, and she has been proved right.

    Since being given the results of my test, my initial feelings of fear and
depression have gradually been replaced by a sense of empowerment. As Dr
Stefansson told me, genetic testing is still about probabilities, not
certainties, and I should consider myself lucky that my prognosis showed no
indication of cancer.

    'There is no need to worry, providing you change your lifestyle,' he kept
repeating. So that is what I have decided to do. I now have the greatest
possible

    incentive to change my way of life. I have been told that I need to lose at
least two stones, which is achievable by following a strict regime.

    Four times a week I must exercise on a bike or Stair Master for 45 minutes,
increasing my heartbeat to my optimum fat-burning capacity of 120 beats per
minute. I must also supplement this exercise by significantly reducing my intake
of dairy products, red meat and processed foods and ensuring I eat six portions
of fruit and vegetables every day. By sticking religiously to this new regime, I
have been assured that the chances of avoiding the destiny my genes predict will
be substantially increased.

    This could prove to be gene-testing's most important achievement. It will
force many of us to confront the consequences of our lifestyles before it is too
late. I may have been handed a death sentence. But the information contained in
the footnotes may, ironically, have saved my life.

    Jonathan Maitland's report for Tonight With Trevor McDonald will be
broadcast on ITV1 tomorrow at 8pm.


LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2003


                              130 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 29, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: GM therapy offers hope of sex after prostate cancer

BODY:


    GENE therapy could help men undergoing surgery for prostate cancer to enjoy
normal sex lives, scientists said yesterday.

    Four out of five patients who have their prostate removed suffer erectile
dysfunction because crucial nerves are severed.

    But laboratory experiments using a genetically modified version of the virus
causing cold sore infections have been encouraging.

    Scientists at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Centre in the U.S.

    altered its structure so it was harmless.

    They also changed it so the virus released naturally occurring substances
called neurotrophic factors into the body, which can help injured nerves
recover.

    The virus was injected into rats, into the relevant nerves, which were then
damaged in the same way as during a prostate operation.

    Researchers found that the virus 'carried' the neurotrophic factors to the
nerve, making sexual activity possible. They believe the treatment, given before
an operation to remove the prostate gland and surrounding tissue, could prevent
the distressing side-effect in humans.

    Radical prostatectomy is used to treat the disease's early stages and has a
success rate of 70 to 85 per cent.

    Dr Michael Chancellor, unveiling details at the American Urological
Association in Chicago, said patients would probably be more willing to have the
potentially lifesaving procedure if nerve damage and side-effects were
minimised.

    Prostate cancer is the most common form of the disease among men, with
20,000 cases diagnosed in Britain each year.


LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2003


                              131 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 21, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 474 words

HEADLINE: Jab could cure diabetes within ten years

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    A SINGLE injection could soon eliminate diabetes, scientists claim.

    Experiments show a new gene therapy can reverse the condition in mice.

    Experts hope the treatment could be widely available for patients within a
decade.

    The need for an effective treatment for diabetes has never been greater.

    There are 1.4million sufferers in Britain, including Olympic rowing hero Sir
Steve Redgrave and the Deputy Prime Minister John Prescott.

    An estimated million more are thought to be undiagnosed and the total is
expected to double within a decade. After heart disease and cancer, it is
Britain's third highest cause of death and experts warn it will swallow a fifth
of the NHS budget by 2010. The cost could reach GBP 10billion a year.

    Diabetes is a condition in which the body cannot turn food into energy.

    Malfunctioning genes stop the pancreas producing insulin, the hormone that
regulates blood sugar levels.

    Obesity and lack of exercise are associated with the most common form of the
condition. Diabetics are treated with changes to diet and increasing exercise,
and in more serious cases insulin injections.

    The research suggests that in the future, patients could have an injection
of a gene to make them produce normal levels of insulin.

    American scientists introduced a gene to mice that enabled their livers to
generate insulin, according to a report published today in the scientific
journal Nature Medicine.

    'It's a proof of principle. The exciting part of it is that mice with
diabetes are "cured",' said Professor Lawrence Chan, who led the research at the
Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas. It offers the possibility of an
alternative treatment using a single injection. This could help overcome the
long-term complications suffered by many diabetics.

    The scientists genetically modified a virus similar to that which causes the
common cold so that it contained a gene called Ipf1, which helps pancreas cells
work properly.

    The doctored virus was then used to carry the gene into the mouse liver
cells. On its own, the gene partially corrected the disease.

    Combined with a naturally-occurring chemical that promotes cell growth, the
diabetic mice were cured for at least four months. An added benefit was that the
modified liver cells also produced three hormones that are thought to play a
role in controlling insulin production and release.

    Scientists at the University of Bath, who are working on a similar
treatment, have already carried out tests on human liver cells.

    Adding the gene made some of the cells start behaving like pancreas cells
and produce insulin.

    The breakthrough offers hope of an injection for diabetes that would involve
no further treatment. They predict the jabs could be available within ten years.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2003


                              132 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 25, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 1871 words

HEADLINE: THE PROSTATE MEDICINE CUPBOARD;
Your complete guide to the treatments available, how they work and what
side-effects to expect

BYLINE: Roger Dobson

BODY:


    BEING one of the 21,000 men diagnosed with prostate cancer in Britain every
year can be terrifying as the sufferer struggles to come to terms with the
disease. There are more potential treatments for this condition than almost any
other illness, but many men end up with a particular one simply because it is
recommended by the first specialist they see. Here ROGER DOBSON examines what is
available.

    ULTRASOUND

    FOR: A non-invasive treatment. The tissue is heated to 70C-90C for up to
four seconds at a time, killing the cancer without damaging tissue surrounding
the prostate.

    AGAINST: Effectiveness still being evaluated.

    HIGH-intensity focused ultrasound - soundwaves - are fired at the tumour to
break it up in a similar way to ultrasound treatments for kidney stones.

    LASERS

    FOR: Localised treatment that doesn't damage surrounding tissue.

    AGAINST: Results of trials are still coming in from centres such as
University College Hospital, London.

    LASERS can be used in a number of ways to destroy cancerous tissue. The
prostate is very sensitive to heat.

    Photodynamic therapy: A new treatment where cancerous cells are first made
sensitive to light, which makes them easier to target. When the laser is fired
at the area, highly light-sensitive cancerous cells are destroyed.

    INHIBITORS

    ANGIOGENESIS INHIBITORS: As a tumour develops, it needs new blood vessels to
keep it supplied with nutrition. Once it has grown to more than two millimetres,
it needs this blood supply to keep expanding. Inhibitors such as thalidomide,
and a generation of new drugs, will block the formation of these cells, denying
the tumour the nutrition it needs.

    GROWTH FACTOR INHIBITORS: In order for cancerous cells to grow they require
the stimulation of naturally produced compounds known as growth factors.

    These drugs are being designed to stop the growth factor from getting
through to the tumour.

    CHEMOTHERAPY

    FOR: Can halt aggressive cancers.

    AGAINST: Drugs used are very toxic and unfortunately kill fast-growing
cells, which include cells in bone marrow, gut and other areas.This leads to
sideeffects such as anaemia, weakness, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea.

    KILLS fast-growing cells but has not proved particularly effective against
slow-growing prostate cancer cells.

    Chemotherapy is also being tried in conjunction with hormonal therapy for
men whose advanced cancers are no longer responsive to hormonal therapy alone.

    COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES

    FOR: Have fewer sideeffects than mainstream treatments.

    AGAINST: Evidence of effectiveness is limited.

    ACUPUNCTURE, herbs, meditation, yoga, nutritional supplements and vitamins
are among those used, and some prostate cancer patients say they are beneficial.

    The only mineral or herb which might protect against prostate cancer is
selenium, according to a small number of studies.

    Patients should consult their GP to avoid interaction with other therapies.

    Supplements based on red clover cause large numbers of prostate cancer cells
to die, according to new research. Scientists carrying out a clinical trial
found that in men taking the supplements, early stage prostate cancer cells died
at five times the rate seen in an untreated group of patients.

    They say the discovery may help explain why men from Asian cultures suffer
less with prostate cancer.

    One study found that only 1.8 per cent of men in China developed prostate
cancer, compared with 53.4 per cent of Americans.

    RADIOTHERAPY

    FOR: Does not require surgery.

    AGAINST: Can cause rectal and bladder damage, as well as impotence and
difficult urination.

    EXTERNAL beam radiation can shrink tumours and relieve discomfort. It's
painless and each session lasts only a few minutes, but it can kill some healthy
cells and cause impotence.

    Conformal radiation allows externally delivered radiation to be better
targeted using sophisticated software to shape the distribution of radiation
beams.

    In palladium seed brachytherapy, scanners guide needles-into the prostate,
through which palladium, iodine or iridium seeds made of radioactive material
are delivered. It takes about an hour under local anaesthetic.

    The seeds transmit radiation for several weeks, then remain harmlessly in
place. Good for low-level disease.

    Brachytherapy plus external beam radiation combines treatments to tackle the
more serious cancers.

    Radiotherapy plus hormonal treatment combines external radiotherapy and
hormonebased treatments. The main advantage is that if one approach doesn't
work, the other might.

    ICE THERAPY

    FOR: Can be repeated and on an outpatient basis.

    Incontinence seldom a problem.

    AGAINST: Risk of impotence because the nerves that control an erection can
be damaged.

    There is also a risk that not all the cancer is removed.

    CRYOTHERAPY uses liquid nitrogen to kill prostate cancer cells. Needles are
placed in targeted locations in the prostate gland and thin, metal cryo probes,
or small wires, are passed into the prostate.

    Liquid nitrogen in the cryo probes forms a mini ice ball that freezes the
cancer cells.

    As the cells thaw, they rupture.

    The procedure takes about two hours and requires general or regional
anaesthesia. A warming catheter protects the urethra, but nerves can become
frozen, and that can lead to impotence.

    Argon cryotherapy is being investigated to see whether it should become
available nationally as a first-line treatment. The freezing kills the tissue
and in the first few weeks after the therapy tissue swells as a result of the
reaction to the cold-burn.

    After about six weeks, the gland begins to shrink, and by three months the
entire area has scarred over. Biopsies taken afterwards confirm that the
cancerous tissue is dead.

    NO TREATMENT

    FOR: Many men who do wait will die of other diseases long before prostate
cancer becomes a threat, and by waiting, they avoid unnecessary treatment.

    AGAINST: Risk of missing early stage detection.

    WHEN the cancer is confined to the prostate area, one option is watchful
waiting. This procedure is based on the idea that localised prostate cancers
grow slowly and are unlikely to cause problems.

    The most obvious candidates for watchful waiting are older men whose tumours
are small, slow-growing, and, at this stage, painless.

    A number of studies have found that, for at least ten or even 15 years, the
life expectancy of men treated with watchful waiting is not that different from
men treated with surgery or radiation.

    Watchful waiting does, however, reduce the chance of discovering and
treating the disease before it spreads. Another downside is that some men have
difficulty adjusting to having cancer and doing nothing about it.

    SURGERY

    FOR: Good survival rates - 90 per cent alive after ten years where there has
been no spread of the cancer.

    AGAINST: A lot of men lose the ability to maintain an erection.

    Incontinence can be a problem.

    IN MINIMAL surgery a tube is passed through the urethra with a laser or a
tiny cutting edge at the end. Usually backed up by radiotherapy to kill anything
left behind. Side-effects can include retrograde or dry ejaculation.

    Radical prostatectomy involves taking away the entire prostate.

    Used widely in the U.S. and increasingly in the UK, but carries a risk of
long-term problems, including sexual impotence.

    Nerve-sparing surgery cuts the risk of impotence by avoiding cutting or
stretching nerves and blood vessels that run closely along the surface of the
prostate gland needed for an erection.

    Orchidectomy (testes removal) stops testosterone production and removes the
hormonal stimulation the tumour needs. Not done as often as it once was.

    The testicles are removed through a small incision in the scrotum. Causes
tumours and infected lymph nodes to shrink, but can cause hot flushes,
impotence, and a loss of interest in sex. Most men will opt for hormonal
injections which can have the same effect but is reversible.

    DRUGS

    FOR: May offer less invasive therapy.

    AGAINST: Many of the drugs are still in trials.

    RESEARCHERS are investigating the possibility that drugs might keep
pre-cancerous cells from developing into active cancers.

    In the U.S., 18,000 healthy men over the age of 55 have been taking part in
a trial involving the drug finasteride.

    Vitamin A is also being tried, as is thalidomide.

    GENE THERAPY

    A FUTURE therapy still at the experimental stage, it is a way of
re-educating the immune system to recognise cancer cells as dangerous.

    Prostate cancer cells would be taken from the patient, grown in the
laboratory and modified.

    Then, when they are injected back into the body they would trigger the
immune system to kill both them and any real cancerous cells.

    HORMONAL THERAPIES

    FOR: As this is a whole-body treatment, it can tackle disease that has
spread beyond the prostate.

    AGAINST: Not a cure, but it slows down progression. A man deprived of
testosterone for a long time will suffer bone thinning and a loss of libido.

    SYNTHETIC hormones that mimic the real thing, these therapies combat
prostate cancer by cutting off the supply of male hormones such as testosterone,
which encourage cancer growth.

    lso helpful in alleviating the pain of advanced disease and is being
investigated, too, as a way of stopping cancer before it has a chance to spread.

    Although hormonal therapy by itself cannot cure, it will usually shrink or
halt the advance of disease, often for years. Some of the most common are:

    Anti-androgen therapy:

    Stops testosterone from stimulating the growth of the tumour.

    Antiandrogens block the activity of any male hormone.

    Oestrogen therapy:

    Aimed at countering the production of testosterone by the testes.

    Not used much now largely because in elderly men it increases the risk of
heart attacks and clotting. Other hormonal methods now preferred.

    Progesterone:

    Therapies for disease that has spread works for only a limited time, and
cancer cells that don't need testosterone begin to grow. A range of other drugs
such as hydrocortisone and progesterone can then be used.

    Pituitary down-regulators:

    Used in drug or injection form, they block testosterone secretion from the
testes, cutting off hormonal stimulation to the growing cancer.

    10 QUESTIONS TO ASK YOUR GP

    What stage is the cancer at, what grade and what is my PSA level? (A
Prostate Specific Antigen test measures PSA levels, in the blood. A high level
can be a sign of cancer.)

    What is my prognosis?

    Would it be useful to get a second opinion and what other doctors should I
consult - cancer specialist, surgeon, or radiation oncologist?

    What are my treatment options?

    What are the benefits of each treatment?

    What are the possible problems?

    Are there clinical trials that would be appropriate for me?

    How much experience does the doctor have?

    How many times a year does he or she perform the procedure?

    Is the surgeon familiar with nerve-sparing techniques?

    For further information please contact the Prostate Cancer Charity Tel: 020
8222 7622 or visit www.prostate-cancer.org.uk


LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2003


                              133 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 4, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 69

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: Hays fever in the air over break-up hints;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:


    BREAK-UP bid speculation had punters climbing aboard business services group
Hays. The shares raced away to 80p before closing 1p better at 73p on turnover
of almost 30m.

    Dealers heard a jackanory that new chief executive Colin Matthews may today
announce the GBP 350m sale of its logistics side along with the interim figures,
and that this will herald the oftrumoured break up of the company.

    Hays, through its adviser Schroder Salomon Smith Barney, has been sounding
out potential bidders for logistics for months. Possible buyers include Deutsche
Post and TPG, as well as UK rivals Exel (31/2p dearer at 567p) and Tibbett &
Britten (unchanged at 365p).

    Miffed institutional shareholders have been pressing for a break-up after
disappointing trading and two profit warnings in the past year or so.

    To appease them, when Colin Matthews joined in November, he indicated he
would consider a break-up as part of his strategic review.

    Davis Services Group, whose interests range from cleaning overalls to tool
hire, jumped 121/2p to 334p on confirmation that it has received approaches from
parties interested in acquiring its tool hire business, HSS.

    Better-than- expected results from motor components group GKN (131/2p up at
171p) and media giant Pearson (36p better at 516p) gave the market an early
fillip. So did reports of the dismantling of weapons of mass destruction by
Iraq. If war could be avoided, the short-term upside could be huge.

    The Footsie retrieved a 15-point deficit to trade 59 higher before closing
29.1 points better at 3684.7.

    Wall Street celebrated the capture of alleged Al- Qaeda leader Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed with an initial gain of 90 points, but soon ran out of steam.

    Sterling hardened to $ 1.578, while the euro firmed to 68.95p and $ 1.0875.

    Speculation that it could be interested in J Sainsbury's property arm lifted
Land Securities 29p to 773p.

    Buying ahead of next week's interim figures helped Canary Wharf rise 43/4p
to 2423/4p.

    As Six Continents traded 19p lower to 600p after the board's rejection of
Hugh Osmond's GBP 5.5bn offer, Whitbread frothed up 13p to 534p.

    The restaurant, pubs and David Lloyd group could easily be the next
underperforming leisure combine on the receiving end of a bid.

    Shrugging off the disappointment of the Worthington Cup defeat to
Liverpool-Manchester United scored an 8p gain at 1211/2p. Punters believe the
world's richest football club is 'in play'.

    Malcolm Glazer, the US sports tycoon owner of Tampa Bay Buccaneers, has
recently bought a 2.9pc stake, as has Dutch media billionaire John de Mol. A
handful of outside sports and TV personalities now own a remarkable 30pc of the
equity. The ManU board must be feeling a bit twitchy.

    Medical supplies company SSL International found good support, closing 12p
higher at 2181/2p. Its Scholl subsidiary announced the spring launch of the next
generation of Flight socks, worn to prevent the risk of deep vein thrombosis.

    The extended range includes a new ladies' knee-high stocking to provide a
more stylish look. They also keep feet fresh.

    Software company iSoft eased 10p to 2061/2p. General Atlantic, a US
investment firm that invests in IT, process outsourcing and communications
businesses, has forked out GBP 34.2m for a 13pc stake.

    It bought 10m shares from the group's founder at 215p. iSoft banks GBP
12.4m, which will bolster its balance sheet and fund acquisitions.

    Fire simulator group IFTE held at 35p despite chairman David Williams'
purchase of 200,000 at 343/4p.

    Drugs minnow Oxford Biomedica edged up 5/8p to 71/8p after the UK Gene
Therapy Advisory Committee gave ethical approval for its therapeutic cancer
vaccine, TroVax, to enter Phase Two clinical trials in patients receiving
chemotherapy.

    & RAISING cash for a small company in this market is not easy. But Seymour
Pierce has managed to raise GBP 750,000 for Knowledge Technology ( 1/4p off at
31/8p), by placing 25m shares at 3p with institutions. KT says 2003 got off to
an excellent start with a strong take-up of QuoteTerminalTM, its UK market data
product. A new product supplying international market data will be launched
later this year.


LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2003


                              134 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 4, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 69

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: Hays fever in the air over break-up hints;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:


    BREAK-UP bid speculation had punters climbing aboard business services group
Hays. The shares raced away to 80p before closing 1p better at 73p on turnover
of almost 30m.

    Dealers heard a jackanory that new chief executive Colin Matthews may today
announce the GBP 350m sale of its logistics side along with the interim figures,
and that this will herald the oftrumoured break up of the company.

    Hays, through its adviser Schroder Salomon Smith Barney, has been sounding
out potential bidders for logistics for months. Possible buyers include Deutsche
Post and TPG, as well as UK rivals Exel (31/2p dearer at 567p) and Tibbett &
Britten (unchanged at 365p).

    Miffed institutional shareholders have been pressing for a break-up after
disappointing trading and two profit warnings in the past year or so.

    To appease them, when Colin Matthews joined in November, he indicated he
would consider a break-up as part of his strategic review.

    Davis Services Group, whose interests range from cleaning overalls to tool
hire, jumped 121/2p to 334p on confirmation that it has received approaches from
parties interested in acquiring its tool hire business, HSS.

    Better-than- expected results from motor components group GKN (131/2p up at
171p) and media giant Pearson (36p better at 516p) gave the market an early
fillip. So did reports of the dismantling of weapons of mass destruction by
Iraq. If war could be avoided, the short-term upside could be huge.

    The Footsie retrieved a 15-point deficit to trade 59 higher before closing
29.1 points better at 3684.7.

    Wall Street celebrated the capture of alleged Al- Qaeda leader Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed with an initial gain of 90 points, but soon ran out of steam.

    Sterling hardened to $ 1.578, while the euro firmed to 68.95p and $ 1.0875.

    Speculation that it could be interested in J Sainsbury's property arm lifted
Land Securities 29p to 773p.

    Buying ahead of next week's interim figures helped Canary Wharf rise 43/4p
to 2423/4p.

    As Six Continents traded 19p lower to 600p after the board's rejection of
Hugh Osmond's GBP 5.5bn offer, Whitbread frothed up 13p to 534p.

    The restaurant, pubs and David Lloyd group could easily be the next
underperforming leisure combine on the receiving end of a bid.

    Shrugging off the disappointment of the Worthington Cup defeat to
Liverpool-Manchester United scored an 8p gain at 1211/2p. Punters believe the
world's richest football club is 'in play'.

    Malcolm Glazer, the US sports tycoon owner of Tampa Bay Buccaneers, has
recently bought a 2.9pc stake, as has Dutch media billionaire John de Mol. A
handful of outside sports and TV personalities now own a remarkable 30pc of the
equity. The ManU board must be feeling a bit twitchy.

    Medical supplies company SSL International found good support, closing 12p
higher at 2181/2p. Its Scholl subsidiary announced the spring launch of the next
generation of Flight socks, worn to prevent the risk of deep vein thrombosis.

    The extended range includes a new ladies' knee-high stocking to provide a
more stylish look. They also keep feet fresh.

    Software company iSoft eased 10p to 2061/2p. General Atlantic, a US
investment firm that invests in IT, process outsourcing and communications
businesses, has forked out GBP 34.2m for a 13pc stake.

    It bought 10m shares from the group's founder at 215p. iSoft banks GBP
12.4m, which will bolster its balance sheet and fund acquisitions.

    Fire simulator group IFTE held at 35p despite chairman David Williams'
purchase of 200,000 at 343/4p.

    Drugs minnow Oxford Biomedica edged up 5/8p to 71/8p after the UK Gene
Therapy Advisory Committee gave ethical approval for its therapeutic cancer
vaccine, TroVax, to enter Phase Two clinical trials in patients receiving
chemotherapy.

    RAISING cash for a small company in this market is not easy. But Seymour
Pierce has managed to raise GBP 750,000 for Knowledge Technology ( 1/4p off at
31/8p), by placing 25m shares at 3p with institutions. KT says 2003 got off to
an excellent start with a strong take-up of QuoteTerminalTM, its UK market data
product. A new product supplying international market data will be launched
later this year.


LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2003


                              135 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 March 2, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 98 words

HEADLINE: Bio firm's test boost

BODY:


    OXFORD BioMedica will announce tomorrow that it has received ethical
approval from the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee to press ahead with the next
stage of tests on its therapeutic cancer vaccine, TroVax.

    The vaccine is designed to stimulate a patient's immune system to recognise
and destroy cancer cells.

    Approval is essential if TroVax, which is being tested on patients with
colon cancer, is to meet hopes of coming to market by 2007.

    Shares in Oxford Bio-Medica, which was spun out from Oxford University by Dr
Alan Kingsman in 1995, ended last week at 61/2p.


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2003


                              136 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 21, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: Could the E-coli bug beat prostate cancer?

BYLINE: Martyn Halle

BODY:


    DOCTORS are on the verge of a breakthrough against prostate cancer, using
the E-coli food poisoning bacteria to target tumours and kill them.

    E-coli has been linked to serious food poisoning outbreaks, but by
genetically altering one strain of the virus, British scientists have made it
harmless to healthy body cells yet lethal to cancer cells.

    In effect, the scientists have succeeded in 'turning off' the E-coli
bacteria's poisoning effects until it is inside the cancer.

    'It is a brilliant bit of engineering,' says Dr Nick James, the oncologist
co-ordinating trials of the therapy at hospitals in the UK, including Queen
Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, the research centre involved.

    'The treatment is being aimed at men who have been treated for prostate
cancer but have had a local recurrence of the disease.

    'Surgery is often the only option because many of these patients are
resistant to drugs. But with surgery, the nerves responsible for causing an
erection can be damaged.

    'Using the gene therapy treatment, we can preserve patients' ability to have
sex and also hopefully eradicate the cancer.'

    Doctors use the adenovirus - a form of the common cold - to deliver the
E-coli bacteria to the cancer cells. 'It is only when it gets into the cancer
cells that the bacteria is released by a genetically encoded trigger,' says Dr
James.

    Trials are also under way to use the same therapy on patients suffering from
liver cancer, kidney cancer and head and neck tumours.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2003


                              137 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 16, 2003

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: Obesity gene hope

BODY:


    OBESITY could be treated by drugs which shut off genes that control the
build-up of fat, according to scientists.

    Researchers at Harvard University made the discovery while conducting tests
on roundworms, which share much of their genetic makeup with humans.

    The worms became sleek and trim when 300 genes related to fat production
were switched off.

    However, biologists cautioned that drug companies would need at least a
decade to safely develop a genetic therapy for obesity.


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                              138 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                December 3, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 335 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy brings hope to Parkinson's sufferers

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    DOCTORS are to attempt to cure patients suffering from Parkinson's disease
with pioneering gene therapy.

    The treatment involves injections of a virus that has been genetically
modified to carry genes which create vital brain chemicals.

    The technique has proved so successful on animals that researchers are about
to try it on 12 Parkinson's patients.

    They hope it will calm the tremors and other movement disorders of the
devastating brain disorder.

    An effective new therapy for Parkinson's would be a major breakthrough.

    The disease affects more than 120,000 people in Britain and experts warn
numbers are rising as the population gets older.

    Although most of the 10,000 people diagnosed each year are aged over 60, one
in 20 is under 40. Actor Michael J.

    Fox and boxer Muhammad Ali are sufferers.

    Currently, Parkinson's is incurable. Treatment with the drug levodopa can
restore normal movement in patients with early signs of the disease, but it
gradually loses effectiveness.

    Dr Matthew During and Dr Michael Kaplitt, who have pioneered the gene
therapy treatment, say they had just been given approval to use it in a trial on
a dozen patients.

    The approval was based, in part, on the encouraging results of laboratory
studies published in a recent issue of the journal Science.

    Dr Kaplitt, a Parkinson's researcher at the Weill Medical College of Cornell
University in New York, said the trial will start late this year and involve
patients who have exhausted all standard treatments.

    Gene therapy involves silencing faulty genes responsible for defects, or
switching on genes that could suppress illnesses.

    One way of doing this is to use a virus, such as the one that causes the
common cold, which has been engineered so that it is harmless.

    It can then be used to carry new genes into the body.

    'We are encouraged that in addition to quieting symptoms, we have evidence
that suggests it may arrest or delay disease progression,' says Dr During.


LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2002


                              139 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 27, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 24;25

LENGTH: 658 words

HEADLINE: MONKEY HELL;
Packed together in mile after mile of cages, these monkeys are bound for the
animal testing labs of the West condemned to an agonising death because they are
so similar to humans that they experience pain and suffering much like we do ...

BYLINE: Michael Hanlon

BODY:


    THOUSANDS of hands, disturbingly humanlike, cling to the bars and grilles of
their cages; they seem to know that an unpleasant destiny awaits them. Others
cower at the back of their cages, petrified of any human contact.

    Their existence is defined by a round brass disc that hangs from their necks
bearing their species, age and details of their breeding history.

    This is Monkey Hill in southwest China, one of the world's biggest breeding
centres for primates, which are sold on to research labs all over the world.

    And there is an insatiable demand for the results of this miserable
production line.

    We live in an age where medicine is making advances that a generation ago
were unimaginable.

    Gene therapy, hopes of cures for Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's,
innovative cancer treatments - almost every month comes a report of yet another
treatment that may offer hope to the most intractable cases.

    Yet all this progress has a price.

    Put bluntly, much of today's medical research would not be possible without
testing on live animals.

    These pictures taken at Monkey Hill - officially called the Yunnan National
Lab Primate Centre of China - are evidence of an industrial-breeding programme
of species that are, say animal welfare experts, worryingly close to humans, and
able to experience suffering much as we do.

    Inside, the noise is terrible. Every time a worker approaches, the monkeys
scream piteously and cower in groups, clinging to one another, until the worker
moves on.

    One Rhesus monkey, Ling Ling, has been sick for weeks, according to his
carers.

    Ling Ling is a member of the performance troupe for the visitors' wing; some
of the monkeys earn their living entertaining tourists, and Ling Ling has been
trained to do tricks such as playing basketball and climbing ladders to amuse
the crowds.

    Undignified this may be, but he is one of the lucky ones. He will escape the
fate that awaits the others.

    Monkey Hill has facilities to breed up to 7,000 monkeys (breed stock is
taken from local wild monkey populations which are in serious decline) and
exports 1,000 a year to Europe and America for biomedical research.

    Most exports involve two species.

    Rhesus monkeys are bred for pharmaceutical research laboratories because of
their close genetic relationship to humans and the red-faced macaque is sold to
the cosmetic industry, which favours them for their delicate and sensitive
facial tissue. After being flown to foreign laboratories - spending up to 70
hours in the hold of an airliner - the monkeys are likely to face an endless
series of experimental tests 'That's where the real money comes from,' said the
centre's Hao Yushou, pointing past locked steel gates and barbed-wire fences.

    'They breed laboratory monkeys for export to the United States, at around
GBP 1,000 each - that's a lot of cash.' Hundreds of steel cages snake up and
down Monkey Hill for the better part of a mile, protected by walls crested with
broken glass.

    It takes an army of scientists, feeders and cleaners simply to keep the
thousands of monkeys alive. However, the animals are never held or caressed.

    Yang Shenfu, chief breeder and 'king of the hill', explains: 'We have to
ensure minimal human-animal contact, the laboratories in the United States and
Europe have very strict standards for diseasefree animals.' Here in Britain, the
RSPCA is deeply concerned about the breeding and importing of primates for use
in research because of the degree of suffering endured by these highly
intelligent animals.

    Yet around 3,000 - including 1,500 imported from overseas - are used in
experiments every year in the UK alone.

    Modern medicine is a wonderful thing, and few would deny that animal
experiments are necessary if we are going to find cures for some of our most
terrible diseases.

    But as these pictures show, it is humankind's cousins who must suffer on our
behalf.


GRAPHIC: LIVING IN FEAR: WHEN WORKERS APPROACH ANY OF THE HUNDREDS OF CAGES THE
MONKEYS SCREAM AND CLING TO EACH OTHER

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2002


                              140 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 22, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 42

LENGTH: 159 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy to fight breast disease

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS are developing a new gene therapy designed to stop breast cancer
spreading.

    The treatment involves using a genetically modified virus to stop tumours
migrating.

    So far, experiments have been conducted only on human cancer cells in the
laboratory.

    But scientists at Cancer Research UK (CRUK) believe the therapy could be a
breakthrough in the treatment of breast cancer, the most common form of the
disease in Britain, which affects one in ten women.

    Gene therapy silences faulty genes responsible for genetic defects, or
switches on genes to help suppress illnesses.

    One way of doing this is to use a virus, such as the one that causes the
common cold, engineered to be harmless.

    Experts at CRUK, working with a team at King's College, London, say that
treating women with the virus before surgery may in the future hold cancer cells
in place within the tumour, improving the chances of a successful operation.


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2002


                              141 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 10, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 81

LENGTH: 1227 words

HEADLINE: Pioneer's bright vision for new age of medicine;
the CITY interview

BYLINE: Cliff Feltham

BODY:


    SIR William Castell once described the voyage of discovery being undertaken
by life sciences group Amersham as like 'Christopher Columbus visiting the New
World'.

    In the leafy Buckinghamshire countryside, close to the town of the same
name, Amersham scientists are moving ever closer to finding ways to deliver a
life free of sickness and disease.

    Science fiction? Not as Castell sees it. The advances made by Amersham are
impressive. He is thrilled by what he sees as the dawn of a new age of medicine.

    It is a massive transformation for a company that even now is not clearly
understood by investors despite profits of GBP 314m last year.

    Amersham's health business uses patented chemicals that identify tumours and
improve definition of X-rays. One of its devices is used in a diagnosis every
two seconds, somewhere in the world.

    The biosciences side manufactures the gene sequencing machines that mapped
the human genome and other equipment for drug discovery and development and for
research institutes and universities.

    The combination of skills and technology, brought about by a series of
acquisitions and ventures inspired by Castell, gives Amersham a unique profile
in medicine.

    But its uniqueness, and the lack of any comparable business, makes it
difficult for the City to understand precisely what Amersham is doing and how
its success can be measured.

    In 1982 it became the first company privatised by the Thatcher government.

    Worth GBP 70m then, it is now valued at GBP 3.6bn.

    THE company's roots go back to 1940 when it was set up in a farmhouse in
Buckinghamshire to exploit radium found on an impounded German ship. After the
war its mission changed to researching and supplying radioactive isotopes for
drug firms.

    Ministers described floating the company as a 'liberating' move.

    Amersham prospered by producing enzymes used as the US biotechnology
revolution gathered pace.

    But profits were faltering and debts were rising when Castell, then 42, was
recruited as chief executive in 1989.

    He had a background in marketing and accountancy and had risen fast through
the ranks of Wellcome, now merged with Glaxo, to become commercial director.

    Amersham today owes its shape to a series of bold moves by Castell. In two
global deals, he merged its medical imaging side with Nycomed of Norway and its
biosciences arm with Pharmacia of Sweden. He also focused research on
potentially viable rather than worthy projects.

    Earlier this year Amersham took full control of the biosciences side on
terms that analysts believed put a value on this business alone of more than GBP
1.5bn.

    Castell admits that his dream is to put Amersham in the vanguard of the move
towards 'personalised medicine' using genetic profiling to create specially
targeted drugs.

    As more is understood about our genes, many scientists maintain it will be
possible to provide drugs precisely structured for the individual.

    'I first developed a passion for this vision of molecular medicine in 1984,'
he says. 'We are at last seeing the first signs of it being interpreted into
science.

    'We cannot call the timescale but enough has happened in the last year to
say that personal medicine will be a reality. Looking at genes and how they
impact on the cells will be a critical part of medicine.' Will we still be
popping pills?

    Castell says: 'They will be more targeted at the moment it is the average
drug for the average person, but in future it will be targeted at you. There
will be greater emphasis on diagnosis and prevention.

    'We can head off many illnesses such as cervical cancer, Aids and HIV. We
will see vaccines developed that will train the body not to be invaded by these
viruses.' The real triumph for Castell will be the day science can neutralise
killer cells by altering their structure. This ability to offer an early warning
for those vulnerable to diseases excites the Amersham boss. He cites himself as
an example. He could be at risk from heart problems, which caused the death of
both his parents.

    He believes it will one day be possible to identify the genes which make
people vulnerable.

    'I have no genetic proof that I have inherited my parents' genes but I think
I need to take better care of myself. So when we have found the genes relevant
to heart disorders, I would like to have that certainty.

    'The last magical issue is whether we can change the genes.

    I believe that one day gene therapy will be a reality, where we introduce
genetic structures that are deficient in our cells.' Amersham is already
supplying materials for drug groups in advanced clinical trials that show gains
in controlling cancer cells.

    Analysts question the present structure of Amersham, wondering whether the
two sides of its business sit together.

    Castell insists they fit well: 'We are a leading diagnostics group.

    We have the skills to understand what is happening within the body. We can
tell you what condition your heart is in, if you have bone cancer, Parkinson's
disease, or another disorder.

    'The biosciences part of our business explores the biology of the individual
cell. Biology has gone to a new level in examining how genes are developing, so
this area is itself now on the cusp of being a diagnostic business.

    'Each business has got technologies relevant to the other. You certainly
have to make people understand what brings success and make sure they are
motivated and facing in the right direction.

    'You don't want to lead research too tightly because true research is about
innovation and doing the unthinkable. You have to establish a vision and stick
to it.

    'We focused on molecular medicine. Ten years ago I would not have dreamt we
would be where we are today.' Investors in Amersham have escaped fairly lightly
but other biotech shares have plummeted.

    Castell says it is vital that people do not lose faith in ventures that
could advance medical science, even if the wait is long.

    'Today there are nearly 100 drugs which do phenomenal things in the body,
which came from a wave of investment in the mid and late 1970s.

    'This is a risk industry. If you are trying to develop something you may
have to wait for 10 to 15 years to see if you are lucky.' HIS time at Amersham
has seen great achievements but spreading his wisdom elsewhere has not proved so
beneficial. Castell sits on the board of Marconi, which has been nearly wiped
out by its disastrous US acquisitions. Does he share the blame?

    It is an uncomfortable subject for Castell, who pauses before answering.

    'I feel immense responsibility for all of the stakeholders associated with
the company and continue to give it my best.' He makes no attempt to wriggle out
of what is clearly an embarrassing issue. 'You would have to say those policies
in most areas failed. Like the majority of the board, I accepted the policies
being pursued.' Married to Renice, a doctor, for 31 years 'and still in love, I
always find that amazing, must be something in my genes' he has two daughters
and a son, and a passion for horseracing and sailing.

    Castell says: 'I think you become wiser with all the experiences you go
through in life. In my job I see myself as conductor of an orchestra.

    'My dream is to be regarded as a good conductor. That is what I try to do.'


GRAPHIC: CASTELL: DREAMS THAT AMERSHAM WILL LEAD THE WAY IN CREATING DRUGS
TAILORED TO INDIVIDUALS

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                              142 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 4, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy scare as pioneer patient develops leukaemia

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    THE safety of pioneering gene therapy experiments was called into question
last night as doctors revealed that a young patient has developed leukaemia.

    The three-year-old boy is one of 15 children born with defective immune
systems given the therapy in a joint exercise between two hospitals in Britain
and France.

    The treatment appeared to be going well until the child, who would have been
otherwise condemned to life in a sterile plastic bubble, developed the cancer.

    Initial investigations suggest his illness has been triggered by the
treatment, which uses a geneticallymodified virus to cure a genetic defect.

    Experts suspect that as well as silencing the defective gene that causes
Xlinked severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), the technique switched on a
gene implicated in leukaemia.

    French doctors treating the boy announced they were suspending their trials
while the case is investigated.

    But experts at London's Great Ormond Street Hospital, which is also
pioneering the treatment, said they would continue to offer it because they were
convinced the benefits outweighed the risks.

    The advisory committee set up by the Government to oversee gene therapy
studies said that it would be ' unjustifiable' to withdraw consent for the
British trials.

    The case will come as a fresh blow to the field of gene therapy, which aims
to cure disease by replacing or 'knocking out' faulty genes.

    Major concerns were expressed three years ago when American Jesse Gelsinger,
18, who suffered from a rare metabolic condition, died four days after a gene
therapy injection into his liver.

    It was later discovered that his immune system had attacked the virus that
was ferrying the genes into the organ, which caused multiple organ failure.

    By contrast the treatment of children with SCID known as 'baby in the bubble
syndrome' was a dazzling success and had convinced many that gene therapy had
the potential to revolutionise medicine.

    Only affecting boys, the disorder means sufferers have no functioning immune
system to fight off infection.

    So far, Great Ormond Street has successfully treated three children and an
adult.

    In the first British success story, twoyearold Rhys Evans, from Cardiff, was
apparently cured of the condition.

    A further 11 patients have been treated at the Necker Children's Hospital in
Paris.

    The Department of Health's Gene Therapy Advisory Committee held an emergency
meeting to consider whether it should suspend trials.

    Chairman Norman Nevin said: 'This was an extremely difficult issue to
consider 'However, because the treatment options are so limited, we have decided
on ethical grounds that approval should continue.'


LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2002


                              143 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 4, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 137 words

BODY:


    FOR the first 18 months of his life, Rhys Evans's world was the interior of
a sterile plastic bubble.

    The rare congenital condition Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Disorder
meant he had no immune system.

    After undergoing pioneering treatment at Great Ormond Street Hospital in
London, Rhys, pictured above, was finally allowed to go outdoors, get dirty and
get a hug from his mum and dad. He now lives life like any other two-year-old.

    Rhys's mother Marie last night gave her support to the decision to continue
the British trials. She said: 'Gene therapy has saved Rhys's life he is a happy,
healthy toddler now. We've just celebrated his second birthday which is a
miracle.

    'Last year we thought he may not even reach his first. I would not hesitate
to make exactly the same choice again.'


LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2002


                              144 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 6, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 37

LENGTH: 617 words

HEADLINE: Doctors hail gene therapy that wipes out cancer cells

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have discovered a technique that could revolutionise cancer
treatment.

    Experts say it can kill off cancer cells without giving patients serious
side-effects.

    In tests, rogue cells causing cervical cancer which kills more than 1,250
women a year in Britain were wiped out by the therapy, which targets specific
genes while leaving healthy tissue unharmed.

    Doctors believe the breakthrough could transform treatments for other forms
of the disease such as lymph cancer and leukaemia by avoiding the need for
surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy.

    It could even be used to treat Aids.

    Researchers at the University of York 'knocked out' aggressive genes carried
in a virus linked to cervical cancer, which are thought to trigger the disease
and tumour growth.

    Cervical cancer is caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV) which attacks
two natural tumour suppressors in the body.

    The new technique, called RNA interference, works by knocking out genes
within cervical cancer cells which are crucial to the virus.

    The RNA ribonucleic acid acts as a 'messenger' molecule within cells and is
crucial to their function.

    The scientists have developed a way of interfering with this process in
rogue genes by inserting other RNA 'messengers'.

    These force cells to die and stop the disease process.

    Doctors hope their experimental approach may lead to new treatments for
patients within three to five years.

    It could result in the development of an ointment which could be applied
locally if signs of cervical cancer are detected.

    Experts believe that other forms of cancer which have been linked to viral
infections may also respond to RNA interference.

    Professor Jo Milner, who led the research, said: 'Our work has identified a
novel agent with major therapeutic potential for the treatment, and possibly
also the prevention, of human cervical cancer.' The scientists, who reported
their work in the journal Oncogene, were taken by surprise by the success of the
technique.

    They had not expected all the cancer cells to die. Professor Milner said:
'The results are absolutely remarkable.' She said she was 'optimistic' that the
RNA interference technique could work with other cancers triggered by viruses.

    'We are already looking at other tumours now,' she said.

    'Several types are caused by viruses, including certain types of lymphoma
and certain types of leukaemia. They should be targetable as well.'

    Scientists in America are planning the world's first clinical trial of the
technique.

    Dr John Rossi, of the Beckman Research Institute at the City of Hope Cancer
Centre in Duarte, California, aims to use RNA interference on a group of Aids
patients undergoing bone-marrow transplants for lymphoma.

    If it works against HIV, he believes there is a good chance it will prove
successful against other incurable diseases.

    'We envision within a year or two at the most, that we'll be able to do the
first RNA interface testing in patients because we have the infrastructure
already laid for this kind of therapeutic approach,' he said yesterday.

    In Britain, the plight of women suffering cervical cancer was highlighted by
Coronation Street star Amanda Barrie, whose soap character Alma Haliwell died of
the disease.

    Miss Barrie said yesterday: 'I am absolutely overjoyed at any advancement in
cancer treatment. After the Coronation Street plot line, I feel very strongly
about it.' Elaine King, chief executive of Yorkshire Cancer Research which
funded the York study, said: 'This really is encouraging news and proves once
again that the research we fund really is world class.'

    b.marsh@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2002


                              145 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 17, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: The fantastic fifty;
Jubilee list of items that changed the way we live

BYLINE: David Wilkes

BODY:


    FROM everyday laboursaving devices such as the TV remote control to
controversial advances in animal cloning, they have all changed the world we
live in.

    Now a list of the greatest scientific achievements of each of the last 50
years has been compiled by a panel of Britain's leading scientists to mark the
Queen's Golden Jubilee.

    Their roll of honour places breakthroughs such as space travel and the
Internet alongside more down to earth inventions including TV dinners and the
non-stick saucepan.

    Among the most life-changing inventions are the home computer, first seen in
1975, the VHS video recorder from 1976, and the Internet browser, which went on
sale in 1991.

    The top 50 innovations and advances in science, medicine and technology will
feature in an exhibition, Jet Age To Genome, which opens on Saturday at
Birmingham's Thinktank museum of science and discovery.

    Ruth Gill, Thinktank's director of content, said: 'We wanted to choose the
most important invention from each year of the Queen's reign to show just how
much our lives have been transformed.

    'We have things like the first farepaying passenger jet, space travel and
Dolly, the first mammal cloned from an adult cell.

    'But there are things that we use every day like the telly remote, which
most people would be lost without.

    'Even more importantly, TV dinners quick meals that you can eat on your lap
have changed family life for ever. Gone are the days of the whole family sitting
down for a home-made meal. People just don't have the time any more.

    'That is one recurring thing about the exhibition a lot of the inventions
involve saving us time.' To show that not all developments have been successful,
the exhibition also features items that sounded good at the time but never made
the grade. These include the Betamax video system, the Sinclair C5 three-wheeler
electric car and the Femidom, a female condom.

    d.wilkes@dailymail.co.uk

    TOP 50 ACHIEVEMENTS

    1950's

    1952 - First fare-paying passengers in a Comet jet airliner 1953 -
Cinemascope. First film is the religious epic The Robe 1954 - TV dinner

    1955 - Non-stick saucepan

    1956 - TV remote control

    1957 - Sputnik escalates the space race by taking the first animal into
space - a dog called Laika.

    1958 - Ultrasonic image of unborn child

    1959 - The first Mini produced

    1960's

    1960 - Implanted pacemaker

    1961 - The Pill on sale in UK

    1962 - TV satellite relays live pictures

    1963 - Cassette tape and birth of portable music machines 1964 - Home kidney
dialysis

    1965 - Packet switching a system whereby information is made into a computer
generated 'package' so it can be sent down a phone line 1966 - Whole-earth
satellite viewing of the weather 1967 - Breathalyser introduced

    1968 - First supersonic airliner, the Soviet T-144 1969 - Astronauts make
first steps on the Moon (second man on the moon, Buzz Aldrin above)

    1970'S

    1970 - Watches with LCD displays

    1971 - CAT scan

    1972 - Pocket calculator

    1973 - Cars with air bags

    1974 - Barcodes on supermarket products

    1975 - Birth of home computer

    1976 - VHS and Betamax video recorders

    1977 - Maiden voyage of space shuttle

    1978 - Birth of Louise Brown (below with mother), who was conceived by IVF
1979 - Xerox shows off the graphical-user interface which led to the Windows
system to Apple engineers

    1980'S

    1980 - Ghetto blaster and Sony Walkman

    1981 - Compact discs go on sale. The first was Billy Joel's 52nd Street
album 1982 - Video keyhole surgery

    1983 - Synthetic human insulin cleared for sale

    1984 - DNA fingerprint

    1985 - First registered dot com

    1986 - Laptop computer

    1987 - Prozac (right) goes on to market

    1988 - First Internet worm unleashed. Disables 10 per cent of computers 1989
- Toaster becomes first machine controlled by Internet

    1990's

    1990 - First gene therapy takes place, on a four-year-old girl with a rare
disorder that strips the body of the ability to fight infection 1991 - First
Internet browser

    1992 - Mobile phone text message

    1993 - Global Positioning Satellites

    1994 - GM tomatoes

    1995 - First entirely computer generated feature film, Toy Story (right Buzz
Lightyear)

    1996 - First ever 'deep field' photos of the universe, showing how it looked
10billion years ago

    1997 - Dolly the sheep, first mammal cloned from an adult cell 1998 - First
section of the international Space Station launched 1999 - The world's first
electronic, reusable paper

    2000's

    2000 - Knockout pigs. Pigs with a gene removed the first step to overcoming
the problem of humans rejecting transplanted animal organs 2001 - Bionic eye
microchips inserted into retinas of three blind men, restoring their vision

    2002 - Iris scanner, installed at Schipol airport, Amsterdam, at entrances
to high security areas


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2002


                              146 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 12, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: Nightmare of the manmade virus;
Scientists create polio artificially and it paralyses

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have built an organism from scratch in an experiment that raises
questions about the very nature of life.

    The research, reminiscent of Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, will horrify many
religious leaders, politicians and philosophers.

    The world's first synthetic organism is a tiny polio virus constructed
artificially in the laboratory. But it is a first step towards creating more
complex forms of life.

    Within a century, some scientists believe it will be possible to
'reconstruct' species that have become extinct, or create totally new organisms.

    The researchers who created the version of the polio virus said they wanted
to prove how easy it would be for terrorists to make deadly biological weapons.

    A team at the University of New York at Stony Brook assembled the virus and
then injected it into mice. The animals were just as they would have been by a
naturally-occurring polio virus, and then killed.

    'The reason we did it was to prove that it can be done and it now is a
reality,' said Dr Eckard Wimmer, leader of the research team, which reports its
findings today in the journal Science.

    'This approach has been talked about, but people didn't take it seriously.'

    The polio virus is tiny in genetic terms, but building an artificial replica
took several years.

    The scientists followed a genetic 'recipe' for polio downloaded from the
Internet and using genetic material DNA from a mail-order supplier to use as
building blocks.

    They made a series of small genetic changes to its structure compared to a
normal polio virus a kind of 'artist's signature' to prove that they had
produced it artificially. Most scientists do not consider viruses to be alive,
because they depend on host organisms for survival.

    Dr Wimmer added: 'No, I would not say I created life in a test tube. We
created a chemical in a test tube that, when put into cells, begins to behave a
little bit like something alive.' But the research paves the way for the
construction of more complex organisms. For instance, smallpox, which has been
eradicated in the wild, is a much larger and more complex virus than polio.

    Some experts believe it would now be possible to recreate it for use as a
biological weapon.

    Vadim Agol, a virologist at the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences in
Moscow, said: 'In principle, yes, it's possible to synthesise smallpox.'

    James LeDuc, director of the Division Control and Prevention in Atlanta,
Georgia, added: 'It is a little sobering to see that folks can create a virus
from scratch.' Despite the concerns, there are potential benefits to research on
synthetic viruses.

    Viruses are increasingly being used in gene therapy, carrying genes into the
cells of patients and correcting genetic disorders.

    Organisms to clean up pollution, or even generate fuel, could also be
created.

    Dr Clyde Hutchison, of the University of North Carolina and The Institute
for Genomic Research, told a recent scientific meeting that he is not concerned
about the ethics of creating lifeforms in the laboratory.

    Ultimately, perhaps within 100 years, Dr Hutchison said mankind might be
able to use the technology to reconstruct species that have become extinct.

    'I like the idea of making extinction obsolete, ' he declared.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2002


                              147 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 12, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: Nightmare of the manmade virus;
Scientists create polio artificially and it paralyses

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have built an organism from scratch in an experiment that raises
questions about the very nature of life.

    The research, reminiscent of Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, will horrify many
religious leaders, politicians and philosophers.

    The world's first synthetic organism is a tiny polio virus constructed
artificially in the laboratory. But it is a first step towards creating more
complex forms of life.

    Within a century, some scientists believe it will be possible to
'reconstruct' species that have become extinct, or create totally new organisms.

    The researchers who created the version of the polio virus said they wanted
to prove how easy it would be for terrorists to make deadly biological weapons.

    A team at the University of New York at Stony Brook assembled the virus and
then injected it into mice. The animals were just as they would have been by a
naturally-occurring polio virus, and then killed.

    'The reason we did it was to prove that it can be done and it now is a
reality,' said Dr Eckard Wimmer, leader of the research team, which reports its
findings today in the journal Science.

    'This approach has been talked about, but people didn't take it seriously.'

    The polio virus is tiny in genetic terms, but building an artificial replica
took several years.

    The scientists followed a genetic 'recipe' for polio downloaded from the
Internet and using genetic material DNA from a mail-order supplier to use as
building blocks.

    They made a series of small genetic changes to its structure compared to a
normal polio virus a kind of 'artist's signature' to prove that they had
produced it artificially. Most scientists do not consider viruses to be alive,
because they depend on host organisms for survival.

    Dr Wimmer added: 'No, I would not say I created life in a test tube. We
created a chemical in a test tube that, when put into cells, begins to behave a
little bit like something alive.' But the research paves the way for the
construction of more complex organisms. For instance, smallpox, which has been
eradicated in the wild, is a much larger and more complex virus than polio.

    Some experts believe it would now be possible to recreate it for use as a
biological weapon.

    Vadim Agol, a virologist at the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences in
Moscow, said: 'In principle, yes, it's possible to synthesise smallpox.'

    James LeDuc, director of the Division Control and Prevention in Atlanta,
Georgia, added: 'It is a little sobering to see that folks can create a virus
from scratch.' Despite the concerns, there are potential benefits to research on
synthetic viruses.

    Viruses are increasingly being used in gene therapy, carrying genes into the
cells of patients and correcting genetic disorders.

    Organisms to clean up pollution, or even generate fuel, could also be
created.

    Dr Clyde Hutchison, of the University of North Carolina and The Institute
for Genomic Research, told a recent scientific meeting that he is not concerned
about the ethics of creating lifeforms in the laboratory.

    Ultimately, perhaps within 100 years, Dr Hutchison said mankind might be
able to use the technology to reconstruct species that have become extinct.

    'I like the idea of making extinction obsolete, ' he declared.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2002


                              148 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 18, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 44

LENGTH: 1588 words

HEADLINE: Prostate: Don't let shyness kill you

BYLINE: Rory Clements

BODY:



    EVERY 25 minutes in Britain, a man is diagnosed with prostate cancer.

    The discovery will turn his life upside down and bring heartache and fear to
him and his family. He will face a bewildering array of treatments from which
he, not his doctor, will have to choose. He will suffer years of uncertainty
about his future. His sex life may suffer or disappear as surgery or drugs take
away his libido. Ultimately, there is a very real danger he will lose his life.

    Of those men diagnosed with prostate cancer, 43per cent - 9,500 a year -
will die.

    RORY CLEMENTS reports.

    WHAT IS IT?

    THE prostate is a doughnut-shaped gland the size of a walnut that is found
only in men. It is located between the pubic bone and the rectum and has a role
in both sex and urination - which is why one of the main symptoms of the disease
is problems passing water.

    With prostate cancer, cells in the gland grow abnormally. Sometimes the
tumour is

    contained in the gland, where it can be treated by radiotherapy or surgical
removal of the prostate.

    In other cases it can spread beyond the gland itself, when other options may
be required.

    Prostate cancer is fed by the male sex hormone testosterone.

    WHO GETS IT?

    ALTHOUGH men in their 30s have been known to develop the disease, it is
still extremely rare in those under 50. It most commonly afflicts men in their
70s.

    Cases of prostate cancer are rising.

    Thirty years ago, 40 out of every 100,000 men had prostate cancer.

    Now that figure has risen to 80.

    Until 1990, the death rate was steadily climbing - to a peak of over 50 pc
of sufferers. Since then, thanks to new treatments and earlier diagnosis, more
men are surviving.

    WHAT ARE THE SYMPTOMS?

    THE most common symptom is a frequent and urgent need to urinate.

    You may find yourself getting up several times a night.

    When you get to the toilet, however, it may be difficult to pass water.

    There may be a weak trickle rather than the more usual powerful powerful
stream. You may suffer lower back pain. Rarely, there may be blood in the urine.

    Not all prostate cancer sufferers experience these symptoms. It is important
to have regular checkups after the age of 50, particularly if there is a family
history of the disease.

    HOW DO I KNOW IF I HAVE IT?

    THE first check - and the one that causes most embarrassment - is the DRE,
or digital rectal examination.

    Your doctor will ask you to lie on your side and, wearing a rubber glove,
will insert a finger into your rectum to feel the prostate. It should be soft
and smooth, with no hardening or lumpiness.

    The next test is the PSA prostate specific antigen reading - which is taken
as a simple blood test. This measures a protein produced only by the prostate
gland.

    A high reading indicates enlargement, inflammation or infection. It is not a
definite diagnosis, but it is a sign that further tests are needed. You will go
to a hospital as an outpatient for the next test, a biopsy. A needle is inserted
into the prostate - guided by an ultrasound scanner - to collect a microscopic
amount of tissue for testing in a laboratory.

    If you have cancer, doctors will try to categorise it as either slowgrowing
or aggressive to help determine the correct treatment.

    Other scans may be necessary to see if the disease has spread.

    WHAT TREATMENTS MIGHT BE OFFERED?

    BECAUSE prostate cancer is fed by the male hormone testosterone, one
treatment is to end its production, either by castration surgical removal of the
testicles or 'chemical castration', which uses hormone drugs.

    Both treatments kill sexual function.

    Hormone drugs cut off or block your supply of testosterone, and treatment is
usually continued indefinitely. They may be administered as a three-monthly
injection or as daily tablets.

    For those with less aggressive cancers, which have not spread beyond the
prostate itself, doctors

    will usually present a range of options to the patient. Brachytherapy is an
exciting new possibility.

    This can be used instead of, or as well as, radiotherapy.

    It is a highly localised radiation treatment in which tiny radioactive
'seeds' are planted directly into the prostate, giving a higher dose of
radiation than is possible with conventional radiotherapy, which uses a beam
directed from outside the body.

    The aim of radiation therapies is to destroy the cancer by killing the
cells. The danger of external radiotherapy, which may be more difficult to
target precisely, is that other non-cancerous cells could be harmed.

    A U.S. study showed 85 pc of men who had brachytherapy showed no increase in
PSA levels ten years later.

    Brachytherapy is offered at ten centres in the UK, but is not accessible to
all. Older men in their 70s are likely to be offered conventional radiotherapy.

    Surgical removal of the prostate is often offered to men under 70 when the
cancer is

    contained to that area. The advantage is that the cancer may be completely
eradicated.

    The disadvantages are a high risk of impotence and a small risk of
incontinence.

    One of the main treatments is not having anything done at all - watchful
waiting, as it is known. Where a cancer is slowgrowing and causing no
discomfort, it may take many years for any problems to be noticed. In the case
of watchful waiting, your doctor will simply monitor you.

    New treatments may be on the way. One is called cryotherapy, cryotherapy, in
which the prostate is frozen to destroy the cancer.

    Gene therapies are also being researched, and immunotherapy - in which the
body's own defences are triggered against the cancer - is being tested.

    CAN DIET HELP?

    RESEARCH suggests that diet can play a vital role in preventing prostate
cancer - and that it can even slow down or reverse the progress of the disease.

    High consumption of red meat and dairy products such as fullfat milk and
cheese has been linked to an increased risk.

    Men who eat a lot of animal fats tend to have higher levels of testosterone
- the hormone that feeds prostate cancer.

    The disease is far more rare among people who eat soya beans and green
vegetables for instance, vegetarians and men who live in China and Japan, where
soya forms a large part of the diet.

    Good sources of soya include soya milk and yoghurt, and products such as
tofu.

    THE DAILY MAIL CAMPAIGN UPDATE SINCE we launched our Dying Of Embarrassment
campaign two years ago and, thanks to the generosity of our readers, raised GBP
1 million for research, men are becoming more aware of their health and more
willing to face up to the dangers.

    That GBP 1 million has been spent by the Prostate Cancer Charity on four
important projects: _ Trials at Mount Vernon, Hertfordshire, are comparing
brachytherapy to conventional radiotherapy.

    _ Scientists at Hammersmith Hospital in London are trying to find out why,
in some cases, patients stop responding to hormone therapy.

    _ Bristol researchers are investigating why there are racial differences in
the prevalence of prostate cancer. African-Caribbean men tend to develop the
disease ten years younger than other races.

    _ A study in Liverpool aims to find out whether there is a genetic influence
in the spread of prostate cancer to other organs.

    TESTICULAR CANCER COLIN OSBORNE, 39, works in the printing industry and
lives at Hainault, Essex, with his wife Sandra, a hospital radiographer, and
their two sons, Ashley, 11, and Elliott, seven. He almost died of testicular
cancer - and believes every man should check themselves regularly.

    Colin says: IF I HADN'T been married to a radiographer, I probably wouldn't
be alive today.

    It was two weeks after I'd found a pea-sized lump in my left testicle that I
mentioned it to my wife, Sandra. She said I had to go to the doctor straight
away.

    Part of the problem for men is that you know if you go to the doctor you're
going to be examined - and that means dropping your trousers and someone
prodding and poking you. I wasn't scared just embarrassed.

    My GP referred me to a surgeon, who did an ultrasound scan. The next day I
got a phone call asking me to come back.

    I went on my own. I knew what it was just by the way the surgeon looked at
me.

    That was the worst day of my life. I thought I was going to die. I went into
shock and can't even remember driving home. Sandra was in the kitchen and I
said: 'I've got cancer and I'm going to die.' The next day I saw a urologist,
and he told me I had to lose one of my testicles. I was told I'd probably had
the disease for six months for the lump to get to that size.

    I had the orchidectomy (removal of testicle) the next day. It was a fairly
quick operation under general anaesthetic.

    I was booked in to have a course of chemotherapy at St Bart's Hospital in
London.

    Then they discovered the cancer had spread to the lymph nodes in my abdomen.

    had four lots of chemotherapy in three months and went into remission.

    But some weeks later it spread to my pelvis and lungs.They gave me another
course of chemotherapy, but still the tumours were growing.

    The doctor treated me with a new drug called Taxol and the tumour in my
lungs virtually disappeared.

    Later, Professor Tim Oliver, who was treating me at Bart's, told me I would
have lived just two months if the drug hadn't worked.

    In all, my treatment lasted 18 months. I had seven lots of chemotherapy and
an operation to remove my lymph nodes. You could say I've been through the mill.


LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2002


                              149 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 11, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 64

LENGTH: 148 words

HEADLINE: Oxford pins hopes on gene reform

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have successfully transferred genes into mouse embryos using
Oxford Biomedica's technology.

    If this can be reproduced in man, it could help cure diseases such as
muscular dystrophy by replacing a faulty gene with a healthy one.

    Practical obstacles are not too great, Oxford's chief executive, Professor
Alan Kingsman, thinks. But there are ethical hurdles before the breakthrough by
Imperial College can be converted into sales. Before anyone could treat human
embryos, a new regulatory process would have to be set up.

    Kingsman thinks this will change only if someone goes to the regulators with
a proposal to treat a specific disease. 'It could happen within a year,' he
says.

    Oxford's gene therapy technology is already helping to develop medicines for
cancer and Parkinson's disease.

    Oxford lost GBP 9.5m last year, but has GBP 30m in the bank.


LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2002


                              150 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                  May 26, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 36

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Hope at last for the children whose blistered skin is as delicate as a
butterfly's wing

BYLINE: Nicola Pay

BODY:


    HER skin is so delicate that the slightest touch is enough to make it break
out in agonising blisters.

    But now 13-year-old Alex Hood and others like her have finally been given
hope of an end to their nightmare.

    Alex is likely to be one of the first in the world to benefit from
revolutionary gene therapy that could help thousands of victims of epidermolysis
bullosa (EB).

    The devastating disease is commonly known as butterfly syndrome, as it
causes the sufferer's skin to become as delicate as a butterfly's wing. In spite
of her painful ordeal, Alex has battled to lead as normal a life as possible and
has become an inspiration for EB victims throughout the world.

    Now scientists in Italy believe they have discovered a way of correcting the
faulty gene responsible for the disease and have been given the go-ahead to
carry out clinical trials.

    Alex's father, Robin, who has devoted his life to finding a cure for EB,
said: 'She has no skin left on her feet and so many blisters in her mouth and
gullet that she can no longer eat solids. But I have promised my daughter that
one day we will walk barefoot in the sand and at last we have real hope that our
dream will come true.' Mr Hood, from Kirkcudbright, has been told that if the
trials are successful a cure for the disease could be available within two
years.

    The scientist giving Alex and thousands of other EB victims renewed hope is
Dr Michele De Luca, who has spent more than four years perfecting a cure under
strict laboratory conditions.

    The results are so impressive that Italian medical authorities have given Dr
De Luca permission to begin tests on a single EB sufferer.

    The technique involves taking cells from the patient to grow a new sheet of
skin a few centimetres square.

    Using the most advanced hi-tech medical techniques, the growing cells are
supplied with healthy copies of the missing or faulty gene which causes victims'
skin to blister and peel. The new skin will then be grafted back onto the
patient without the danger of rejection because it has been made from their own
cells.

    John Dart, director of Debra the charity which raises money to help EB
victims said yesterday: 'Getting consent for this was not easy, but it offers
real hope for people like Alex.'


GRAPHIC: YEARS OF SUFFERING: ALEX HOOD, AGED 13

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2002


                              151 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 April 14, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 34;35

LENGTH: 1176 words

HEADLINE: We felt Rhys was dying in our arms.Only pioneering gene therapy could
save our 'baby in the bubble';
The poignant diary of the parents whose son has made medical history

BYLINE: Rachel Ellis

BODY:


    A YEAR ago, Rhys Evans was on the brink of death. Born without an immune
system, he was unable to fight the slightest infection and lived in isolation.
But last week the 18-month-old made British medical history after pioneering
gene therapy was declared a success. Rhys's illness came to light when he
developed a chest infection at four months which antibiotics could not cure.
Here, in exclusive extracts from their diary, his parents Mark and Marie reveal
the anguish of watching their son fight for his life . . .

    February 27 2001 Rhys is admitted to the Prince Charles Hospital, Merthyr
Tydfil, after he coughed himself out of breath and his lips went blue.

    Doctors think he has bronchial pneumonia and Rhys has spent ten days in an
oxygen tent. His weight has dropped dramatically. It feels like he is dying in
our arms but no one can make a decision about what is wrong. We feel so
helpless.

    April 23 Doctors finally transfer Rhys to Cardiff intensive care unit where
they ventilate him because he is so poorly. Doctors diagnose pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia and say that someone with a normal functioning immune system
would be able fight this off. They take us into a room and tell us that Rhys
could have HIV and that if he has, one of us will also have it.

    It's a real shock but thankfully, Rhys and Marie are negative. Then the
doctors tell us if it isn't HIV, it will be something worse. Rhys is like a
sitting duck. The slightest infection could be fatal.

    May 10 Rhys moves to the intensive care unit at Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London.

    May 14 Rhys is put in an isolation room. One of us is in there with him all
the time. He has made remarkable improvements.

    The first week, he was a little grumpy and didn't sleep very well. He'd lost
the use of his limbs and was very fragile, he didn't like bathing and was
generally unhappy. But he soon bounced back and is beginning to smile and use
his arms and legs. He's sleeping well and has started to eat solids like rice
pudding.

    May 15 The doctors know Rhys has an immune system disorder so the search for
a suitable bone marrow donor begins because that is the only way to cure him.

    May 30 A blood sample arrives showing a possible donor in Wales. The Anthony
Nolan Bone Marrow Trust shows there are 26 possible donors worldwide. Fingers
crossed for a suitable match.

    June 5 Rhys has put on weight he now weighs 14lb 7oz. But he has a
temperature of 40 degrees plus and is shivering and generally unwell. Even
though he is in isolation he still manages to catch infections.

    It's all about keeping him alive. We are on our own with him all day and all
night.Twenty-four hours is a long time when your child is living on the edge and
you know that most children with this condition die before their first birthday.

    June 7 Bad news. The Wales donor is a mismatch. We are both feeling a little
low.

    Must look forward and be positive. Still awaiting blood from donor in
Bristol and news of other possible donors.

    June 14 They've found a donor in America who is a nine-out-often match which
is good enough to use for Rhys. We feel overcome and a little bit confused. I
don't really think it has sunk in yet.

    June 15 Rhys is diagnosed with X linked SCID (a disorder that affects boys
which is caused by a faulty gene in the immune system) passed on by Marie.

    Children with the condition are often called ' bubble babies' because they
have to be kept in totally sterile conditions.

    The doctors give us two options. The first is gene therapy which involves
harvesting Rhys's bone marrow and replacing the faulty gene, then returning his
marrow after five days. Rhys will be the first child in the UK to have the
treatment.

    The second option is a bone marrow transplant. Chemotherapy and other
intravenous drugs will be used. We have mixed emotions and are giving a lot of
thought about what to do for the best.

    The doctors don't pressure us and make it clear it is our decision.

    June 28 We have made a decision that whatever comes up first we will go for.

    Rhys is much stronger.

    June 30 Doctors say plans for gene therapy are going well and hopefully Rhys
will be able to have the treatment on July23.

    July 9 A full bone marrow match has been found. Two weeks and counting.

    July 22 Rhys will have the gene therapy tomorrow. Both of us feel a little
anxious to say the least and there's tension between us both of us thinking the
same thing and neither of us wanting to talk about it.

    July 23 Rhys went to theatre at 8.15am and returned to the ward two hours
later. He has two dressings on his lower back and he's losing a little blood.

    After a few hours' sleep, Rhys is back to his normal, babbling and generally
happy self. He doesn't seem to be bothered by the bone marrow harvest and is
showing no signs of being in pain. The doctors hoped to have between 15 and 20
million stem cells from the bone marrow. They found over 80 million which is
reassuring.

    July 26 Rhys has the bone marrow infusion the first child to receive gene
therapy in the UK. It looks like a clear bag of fluid and takes just half an
hour to run through.

    Rhys is obviously impressed by all the commotion and is awake all day.

    July 30 It's all done and now it's just the waiting game. It's been a very
difficult time for all of us and our families. It's hard to think that after
nearly three months in London, it's all done. Everyone keeps asking us questions
that we don't have the answer to because Rhys is the first patient in the UK.
But the doctors are very confident that the gene transfer has been 'perfect' and
their confidence gives us hope.

    September 7 We go outside with Rhys for the first time since the gene
therapy treatment. It is like having a newborn child again.

    October 10 Rhys leaves Great Ormond Street after five months. It has been a
rollercoaster ride. Rhys has been our priority and I don't think we realise how
tired we have been. We have been at his bedside throughout.

    We have argued but we have got through it together with the help of the
staff on the ward who we got to know so well. When we get home, the flags are
out in the street and a big banner on the garage says 'Welcome home'.

    December 31 Rhys takes his first few steps.

    February 13, 2002 It has taken a long time to get to this point. Rhys is now
eating well. And for the first time he is allowed to start mixing with other
children and playing outdoors.

    april 4

    Now that we can look back at what happened, we can't believe what Rhys went
through. We also now realise what we went through. It hit Mark a lot worse, I
think because it is more difficult for a man than a woman to talk about their
feelings and he is still off work sick. We have written this diary so that when
Rhys grows up, he can see what he went through and realise his place in British
medical history.

    Rhys's treatment was funded by the charity Jeans For Genes. To make a
donation call 0800 980 4800 or see www.jeansforgenes.com.


GRAPHIC: THE JOY OF EVERYDAY LIFE: RHYS EVANS NOW WITH PARENTS MARK AND MARIE.
LEFT: IN HIS 'BUBBLE' LITTLE LONER: RHYS SPENT MONTHS IN ISOLATION ON THE
GIRAFFE WARD

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2002


                              152 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 April 14, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 34;35

LENGTH: 1177 words

HEADLINE: We felt Rhys was dying in our arms. Only pioneering gene therapy could
save pour 'baby in the bubble'

BODY:


    A YEAR ago, Rhys Evans was on the brink of death. Born without an immune
system, he was unable to fight the slightest infection and lived in isolation.
But last week the 18-month-old made British medical history after pioneering
gene therapy was declared a success. Rhys's illness came to light when he
developed a chest infection at four months which antibiotics could not cure.
Here, in exclusive extracts from their diary, his parents Mark and Marie reveal
the anguish of watching their son fight for his life . . .

    February 27 2001 Rhys is admitted to the Prince Charles Hospital, Merthyr
Tydfil, after he coughed himself out of breath and his lips went blue.

    Doctors think he has bronchial pneumonia and Rhys has spent ten days in an
oxygen tent. His weight has dropped dramatically. It feels like he is dying in
our arms but no one can make a decision about what is wrong. We feel so
helpless.

    April 23 Doctors finally transfer Rhys to Cardiff inten- sive care unit
where they ventilate him because he is so poorly. Doctors diagnose pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia and say that someone with a normal functioning immune system
would be able fight this off. They take us into a room and tell us that Rhys
could have HIV and that if he has, one of us will also have it.

    It's a real shock but thankfully, Rhys and Marie are negative. Then the
doctors tell us if it isn't HIV, it will be something worse. Rhys is like a
sitting duck. The slightest infection could be fatal.

    May 10 Rhys moves to the intensive care unit at Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London.

    May 14 Rhys is put in an isolation room. One of us is in there with him all
the time. He has made remarkable improvements.

    The first week, he was a little grumpy and didn't sleep very well. He'd lost
the use of his limbs and was very fragile, he didn't like bathing and was
generally unhappy. But he soon bounced back and is beginning to smile and use
his arms and legs. He's sleeping well and has started to eat solids like rice
pudding.

    May 15 The doctors know Rhys has an immune system disorder so the search for
a suitable bone marrow donor begins because that is the only way to cure him.

    May 30 A blood sample arrives showing a possible donor in Wales. The Anthony
Nolan Bone Marrow Trust shows there are 26 possible donors worldwide.

    Fingers crossed for a suitable match.

    June 5 Rhys has put on weight he now weighs 14lb 7oz. But he has a
temperature of 40 degrees plus and is shivering and generally unwell. Even
though he is in isolation he still manages to catch infections.

    It's all about keeping him alive. We are on our own with him all day and all
night.Twenty-four hours is a long time when your child is living on the edge and
you know that most children with this condition die before their first birthday.

    June 7 Bad news. The Wales donor is a mismatch.

    We are both feeling a little low.

    Must look forward and be positive. Still awaiting blood from donor in
Bristol and news of other possible donors.

    June 14 They've found a donor in America who is a nine-out-often match which
is good enough to use for Rhys. We feel overcome and a little bit confused. I
don't really think it has sunk in yet.

    June 15 Rhys is diagnosed with X linked SCID (a disorder that affects boys
which is caused by a faulty gene in the immune system) passed on by Marie.

    Children with the condition are often called 'bubble babies' because they
have to be kept in totally sterile conditions.

    The doctors give us two options. The first is gene therapy which involves
harvesting Rhys's bone marrow and replacing the faulty gene, then returning his
marrow after five days. Rhys will be the first child in the UK to have the
treatment.

    The second option is a bone marrow transplant. Chemotherapy and other
intravenous drugs will be used. We have mixed emotions and are giving a lot of
thought about what to do for the best.

    The doctors don't pressure us and make it clear it is our decision.

    June 28 We have made a decision that whatever comes up first we will go for.
Rhys is much stronger.

    June 30 Doctors say plans for gene therapy are going well and hopefully Rhys
will be able to have the treatment on July23.

    July 9 A full bone marrow match has been found. Two weeks and counting.

    July 22 Rhys will have the gene therapy tomorrow.

    Both of us feel a little anxious to say the least and there's tension
between us both of us thinking the same thing and neither of us wanting to talk
about it.

    July 23 Rhys went to theatre at 8.15am and returned to the ward two hours
later. He has two dressings on his lower back and he's losing a little blood.

    After a few hours' sleep, Rhys is back to his normal, babbling and generally
happy self. He doesn't seem to be bothered by the bone marrow harvest and is
showing no signs of being in pain. The doctors hoped to have between 15 and 20
million stem cells from the bone marrow. They found over 80 million which is
reassuring.

    July 26 Rhys has the bone marrow infusion the first child to receive gene
therapy in the UK. It looks like a clear bag of fluid and takes just half an
hour to run through.

    Rhys is obviously impressed by all the commotion and is awake all day.

    July 30 It's all done and now it's just the waiting game. It's been a very
difficult time for all of us and our families. It's hard to think that after
nearly three months in London, it's all done. Everyone keeps asking us questions
that we don't have the answer to because Rhys is the first patient in the UK.
But the doctors are very confident that the gene transfer has been 'perfect' and
their confidence gives us hope.

    September 7 We go outside with Rhys for the first time since the gene
therapy treatment. It is like having a newborn child again.

    October 10 Rhys leaves Great Ormond Street after five months. It has been a
rollercoaster ride. Rhys has been our priority and I don't think we realise how
tired we have been. We have been at his bedside throughout.

    We have argued but we have got through it together with the help of the
staff on the ward who we got to know so well. When we get home, the flags are
out in the street and a big banner on the garage says 'Welcome home'.

    December 31 Rhys takes his first few steps.

    February 13, 2002 It has taken a long time to get to this point. Rhys is now
eating well. And for the first time he is allowed to start mixing with other
children and playing outdoors.

    April 4 Now that we can look back at what happened, we can't believe what
Rhys went through. We also now realise what we went through. It hit Mark a lot
worse, I think because it is more difficult for a man than a woman to talk about
their feelings and he is still off work sick. We have written this diary so that
when Rhys grows up, he can see what he went through and realise his place in
British medical history.

    _ Rhys's treatment was funded by the charity Jeans For Genes. To make a
donation call 0800 980 4800 or see www.jeansforgenes.com.


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2002


                              153 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 50 words

HEADLINE: Freedom at last for boy in a bubble

BODY:


    A TODDLER born without an immune system has left the germ-free plastic
bubble where he spent the first year of his life after pioneering gene therapy
was pronounced a complete success.

    Rhys Evans, 18 months, is at last allowed to play outdoors, get himself
dirty and sleep in his own bed.


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                              154 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Great escape for boy in a plastic bubble

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A YEAR ago Rhys Evans's world was the interior of a sterile plastic bubble.

    The baby boy had no immune system and his parents feared that every day may
be his last.

    But yesterday Rhys was free of his germ-free bubble and out playing in the
park like any other 18-month-old after a pioneering gene therapy was declared a
complete success.

    After almost a year of hospital therapy, he can now go outdoors, get himself
dirty and go home to his own bed.

    He was sealed off from the outside world after doctors diagnosed a rare
congenital disorder. Even the most ordinary infection could have killed him.

    He was denied even a cuddle from his mother and father and doctors told Mark
and Marie Evans that Rhys might not live to see his first birthday.

    But the miracle for which they had prayed arrived in the form of a treatment
never before used in this country.

    'Now we live at home like a normal family,' said Mrs Evans, 31. 'He can walk
and run around like any toddler.' Mr Evans, 40, said: 'We can't do enough for
him. We're over the moon and really proud to have our son back.' Rhys, from
Cardiff, had appeared to be normal until he was four months old and stopped
breastfeeding.

    Then his health deteriorated, his weight dropped and he caught chest
infections that antibiotics could not shift, said Mr Evans. 'At the age of
fouranda-half months he was just skin and bone, too weak to hold his head up,'
he added.

    Eventually Rhys was transferred to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London.

    Doctors diagnosed the genetic condition X-SCID Severe Combined
Immunodeficiency Disorder.

    Patients are not expected to live beyond two years without treatment and can
be kept alive only in totally sterile conditions.

    Mr Evans, who gave up his job with a gas company to care for Rhys, says it
was hard to cope with the anxiety caused by the illness. His wife, a teacher,
said they were 'devastated' by the diagnosis.

    Because Rhys did not have a sibling who could donate bone marrow they had to
wait more than two months for the results of a worldwide search.

    But just as they were told of a potential donor in America, they discovered
a British team were ready to offer an experimental gene therapy.

    The couple faced a tough choice but decided on the therapy because the
transplant also meant chemotherapy.

    Mr Evans said: 'I did not want to see my child go through chemotherapy
because of the effects on his fertility, the loss of hair and the other side
effects.' The gene treatment began last summer and in the last six months Rhys
has become the normal little boy they dreamed of. He returned home in time for
Christmas and by February his blood results were almost normal. He stopped
taking medication to boost his immune system six weeks ago.

    Dr Adrian Thrasher, who led the gene therapy team, said they were 'ecstatic'
about Rhys's progress.

    But he added: 'Rhys will be followed up for years and only long-term can we
compare the outcome of gene therapy with other patients who have had transplant
procedures.' j.hope@dailymail.co.uk


GRAPHIC: BACK IN THE SWING OF THINGS: RHYS EVANS PLAYING IN A LONDON PARK
YESTERDAY

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                              155 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 50 words

HEADLINE: Freedom at last for boy in a bubble

BODY:


    A TODDLER born without an immune system has left the germ-free plastic
bubble where he spent the first year of his life after pioneering gene therapy
was pronounced a complete success.

    Rhys Evans, 18 months, is at last allowed to play outdoors, get himself
dirty and sleep in his own bed.


LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                              156 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Great escape for boy in a plastic bubble;
Pioneering gen therapy prevents plants form ageing and frees the toddler born
with no immune system

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A YEAR ago Rhys Evans's world was the interior of a sterile plastic bubble.

    The baby boy had no immune system and his parents feared that every day may
be his last.

    But yesterday Rhys was free of his germ-free bubble and out playing in the
park like any other 18-month-old after a pioneering gene therapy was declared a
complete success.

    After almost a year of hospital therapy, he can now go outdoors, get himself
dirty and go home to his own bed.

    He was sealed off from the outside world after doctors diagnosed a rare
congenital disorder. Even the most ordinary infection could have killed him.

    He was denied even a cuddle from his mother and father and doctors told Mark
and Marie Evans that Rhys might not live to see his first birthday.

    But the miracle for which they had prayed arrived in the form of a treatment
never before used in this country.

    'Now we live at home like a normal family,' said Mrs Evans, 31. 'He can walk
and run around like any toddler.' Mr Evans, 40, said: 'We can't do enough for
him. We're over the moon and really proud to have our son back.' Rhys, from
Cardiff, had appeared to be normal until he was four months old and stopped
breastfeeding.

    Then his health deteriorated, his weight dropped and he caught chest
infections that antibiotics could not shift, said Mr Evans. 'At the age of
fouranda-half months he was just skin and bone, too weak to hold his head up,'
he added.

    Eventually Rhys was transferred to Great Ormond Street Hospital in London.

    Doctors diagnosed the genetic condition X-SCID Severe Combined
Immunodeficiency Disorder.

    Patients are not expected to live beyond two years without treatment and can
be kept alive only in totally sterile conditions.

    Mr Evans, who gave up his job with a gas company to care for Rhys, says it
was hard to cope with the anxiety caused by the illness. His wife, a teacher,
said they were 'devastated' by the diagnosis.

    Because Rhys did not have a sibling who could donate bone marrow they had to
wait more than two months for the results of a worldwide search.

    But just as they were told of a potential donor in America, they discovered
a British team were ready to offer an experimental gene therapy.

    The couple faced a tough choice but decided on the therapy because the
transplant also meant chemotherapy.

    Mr Evans said: 'I did not want to see my child go through chemotherapy
because of the effects on his fertility, the loss of hair and the other side
effects.' The gene treatment began last summer and in the last six months Rhys
has become the normal little boy they dreamed of. He returned home in time for
Christmas and by February his blood results were almost normal. He stopped
taking medication to boost his immune system six weeks ago.

    Dr Adrian Thrasher, who led the gene therapy team, said they were 'ecstatic'
about Rhys's progress.

    But he added: 'Rhys will be followed up for years and only long-term can we
compare the outcome of gene therapy with other patients who have had transplant
procedures.' j.hope@dailymail.co.uk


GRAPHIC: BACK IN THE SWING OF THINGS: RHYS EVANS PLAYING IN A LONDON PARK
YESTERDAY

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2002


                              157 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 28, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 59

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: New series, old trick

BYLINE: Peter Paterson

BODY:


    ER: Four Corners (C4); The Boy Can't Help It (BBC1)

    WITH seven previous seasons under its belt, the American hospital drama ER
was back last night, as frenziedly busy and complicated as ever.

    It shows tremendous selfconfidence to do what writers Jack Orman and David
Zabel did with this opening episode, taking a technique famously used by the
Japanese director Akira Kurosawa 51 years ago in his Oscar-winning film
Rashomon, but rarely used since.

    Kurosawa told the story of a robbery and murder in a medieval forest four
times over, with each witness or participant recounting the same event as he or
she saw it.

    I have particular cause to remember the film because the slow repetition of
the story through different eyes almost made me die of boredom, and I confess
that I fled the cinema before the end.

    ER's was a much more freehand version of the same technique. The central
event in this episode was the suicide of Alice, a teenage patient who jumped
from a hospital window.

    Life in the Emergency Room that day was recounted by various doctors, though
one of them John Carter - was not even present when Alice killed herself.

    Chief ER doctor Kerry Weaver was in her office when she heard the girl fall
through a porch over the hospital's rear entrance, and helped briefly in the
unsuccessful struggle to save her life.

    She hurriedly withdrew from the resuscitation team, however, when she was
smothered in blood from Alice's body, and limped off.

    What was preoccupying the terse Weaver, who had just returned from a
sabbatical in Africa, was whether her confession to her boss, Dr Robert Romano,
that she was a lesbian had been leaked to her colleagues while she was away. It
hadn't.

    Dr Peter Benton's story was next.

    As the man on duty, he found himself dealing with several casualties from a
Jerry Springer-style confessional talk show that had ended in violence.

    One man injured in the brawl was outraged that his wife had been revealed on
air to be a man - and the host of the show had been bitten on the arm by a
transsexual.

    Then Benton moved to Alice, who had been struck in the face and stomach with
a chair. The girl was in great emotional distress because her mother had
announced on TV that her boyfriend was, in fact, her half-brother. SHE wouldn't
listen when her parent blamed the show's producers for urging her not to tell
her daughter first, because it would make the girl's reaction 'more real'.

    Benton's examination revealed that Alice was ten weeks' pregnant.

    She asked him to draw the curtains around her bed, and moments later he
heard, without registering what it was, the sound of her body hitting the
pavement.

    Finally, Dr Mark Greene was facing an inquiry left over from the previous
series into whether he had allowed a serial killer, whose life he might have
saved, to die.

    He had been called away from ER to see hospital manager Dr Romano, when a
secretary interrupted to tell them a patient had leapt from the fourth floor.

    'Keep the Press away, and don't make any statements,' ordered Romano at
once, just like an NHS manager.

    Greene, however, then had to face a meeting of hospital executives and some
of his colleagues, to answer more questions about the death of the
killer-patient, quite unaware of the fight to save Alice.

    Only later did he talk briefly to her mother, as the girl's body was waiting
to be handed over to the coroner.

    So there we have it. ER cleverly took an idea from the past, and brought it
bang up to date while thankfully eliminating the boredom factor.

    But I don't think it's a habit they should get into.

    _ MANY of us will remember the moving 1989 documentary about John Davidson,
the Scottish youth who suffered from Tourette's syndrome- making him shout
obscenities at passers-by and twitch uncontrollably.

    Last night's The Boy Can't Help It caught up with John as an adult, and
introduced us to eight-year-old Greg Storey, who also has the distressing
symptoms of Tourette's.

    John Davidson has grown up to be a pleasant and amiable individual, but the
apparently incurable condition has not ameliorated, though he is clearly able to
cope with it better.

    Who can forget the moment recalled for us last night - in the hush of the
public library in Galashiels, when John startled an elderly gentleman searching
for a book by shouting '**** off!' at the top of his voice.

    Young Greg is a bright, thoughtful and brave little soul who is starting to
feel a compulsion to swear out loud, in addition to the high-pitched screams
that punctuate his waking hours.

    His ambition is to become a scientist and find a cure for Tourette's, and
already he has a grasp of gene therapy.

    But as always with this type of programme, it is hard to avoid a feeling
that we are intruding on the distress of individuals.

    It may be that publicity contributes to tolerance and understanding; but I
still wonder whether it is justified in the public interest, or is simply of
interest to the public.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002


                              158 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 28, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 59

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: New series, old trick

BYLINE: Peter Paterson

BODY:


    ER: Four Corners (C4); The Boy Can't Help It (BBC1)

    WITH seven previous seasons under its belt, the American hospital drama ER
was back last night, as frenziedly busy and complicated as ever.

    It shows tremendous selfconfidence to do what writers Jack Orman and David
Zabel did with this opening episode, taking a technique famously used by the
Japanese director Akira Kurosawa 51 years ago in his Oscar-winning film
Rashomon, but rarely used since.

    Kurosawa told the story of a robbery and murder in a medieval forest four
times over, with each witness or participant recounting the same event as he or
she saw it.

    I have particular cause to remember the film because the slow repetition of
the story through different eyes almost made me die of boredom, and I confess
that I fled the cinema before the end.

    ER's was a much more freehand version of the same technique. The central
event in this episode was the suicide of Alice, a teenage patient who jumped
from a hospital window.

    Life in the Emergency Room that day was recounted by various doctors, though
one of them John Carter - was not even present when Alice killed herself.

    Chief ER doctor Kerry Weaver was in her office when she heard the girl fall
through a porch over the hospital's rear entrance, and helped briefly in the
unsuccessful struggle to save her life.

    She hurriedly withdrew from the resuscitation team, however, when she was
smothered in blood from Alice's body, and limped off.

    What was preoccupying the terse Weaver, who had just returned from a
sabbatical in Africa, was whether her confession to her boss, Dr Robert Romano,
that she was a lesbian had been leaked to her colleagues while she was away. It
hadn't.

    Dr Peter Benton's story was next.

    As the man on duty, he found himself dealing with several casualties from a
Jerry Springer-style confessional talk show that had ended in violence.

    One man injured in the brawl was outraged that his wife had been revealed on
air to be a man - and the host of the show had been bitten on the arm by a
transsexual.

    Then Benton moved to Alice, who had been struck in the face and stomach with
a chair. The girl was in great emotional distress because her mother had
announced on TV that her boyfriend was, in fact, her half-brother. SHE wouldn't
listen when her parent blamed the show's producers for urging her not to tell
her daughter first, because it would make the girl's reaction 'more real'.

    Benton's examination revealed that Alice was ten weeks' pregnant.

    She asked him to draw the curtains around her bed, and moments later he
heard, without registering what it was, the sound of her body hitting the
pavement.

    Finally, Dr Mark Greene was facing an inquiry left over from the previous
series into whether he had allowed a serial killer, whose life he might have
saved, to die.

    He had been called away from ER to see hospital manager Dr Romano, when a
secretary interrupted to tell them a patient had leapt from the fourth floor.

    'Keep the Press away, and don't make any statements,' ordered Romano at
once, just like an NHS manager.

    Greene, however, then had to face a meeting of hospital executives and some
of his colleagues, to answer more questions about the death of the
killer-patient, quite unaware of the fight to save Alice.

    Only later did he talk briefly to her mother, as the girl's body was waiting
to be handed over to the coroner.

    So there we have it. ER cleverly took an idea from the past, and brought it
bang up to date while thankfully eliminating the boredom factor.

    But I don't think it's a habit they should get into.

    _ MANY of us will remember the moving 1989 documentary about John Davidson,
the Scottish youth who suffered from Tourette's syndrome- making him shout
obscenities at passers-by and twitch uncontrollably.

    Last night's The Boy Can't Help It caught up with John as an adult, and
introduced us to eight-year-old Greg Storey, who also has the distressing
symptoms of Tourette's.

    John Davidson has grown up to be a pleasant and amiable individual, but the
apparently incurable condition has not ameliorated, though he is clearly able to
cope with it better.

    Who can forget the moment recalled for us last night - in the hush of the
public library in Galashiels, when John startled an elderly gentleman searching
for a book by shouting '**** off!' at the top of his voice.

    Young Greg is a bright, thoughtful and brave little soul who is starting to
feel a compulsion to swear out loud, in addition to the high-pitched screams
that punctuate his waking hours.

    His ambition is to become a scientist and find a cure for Tourette's, and
already he has a grasp of gene therapy.

    But as always with this type of programme, it is hard to avoid a feeling
that we are intruding on the distress of individuals.

    It may be that publicity contributes to tolerance and understanding; but I
still wonder whether it is justified in the public interest, or is simply of
interest to the public.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2002


                              159 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 26, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 31

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: Jab that could end the agony of angina

BODY:


    A SIMPLE injection could free millions from the pain of angina, scientists
say.

    Trials of a jab designed to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels in the
heart have shown it to be safe and effective.

    Angina affects more than 1.4million people in Britain. It is caused by the
build-up of deposits in the arteries.

    Attacks are treated with drugs.

    But in more serious cases patients must undergo either a heart bypass or an
angioplasty, in which a balloon-tipped catheter is inflated in a blocked vessel
to widen it.

    Researchers who have tested the injection were amazed by how patients
improved.

    The Angiogenic Gene Therapy trial is the first major test of the therapy,
which involves injecting a human growth factor gene into the heart.

    Dr Cindy Grines, who led the study at the William Beaumont Hospital in Royal
Oak, Michigan, in the U.S., said: 'There is no product approved to stimulate the
growth of new blood vessels.

    'We think the growth factor gene used here restarts this natural response.

    It is a completely different approach.' Dr Robert Engler, a cardiologist at
the University of California in San Diego, who helped develop the gene therapy,
said: 'The results of the study are very encouraging.'


LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2002


                              160 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 26, 2002

SECTION: Pg. 31

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: Jab that could end the agony of angina

BODY:


    A SIMPLE injection could free millions from the pain of angina, scientists
say.

    Trials of a jab designed to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels in the
heart have shown it to be safe and effective.

    Angina affects more than 1.4million people in Britain. It is caused by the
build-up of deposits in the arteries.

    Attacks are treated with drugs.

    But in more serious cases patients must undergo either a heart bypass or an
angioplasty, in which a balloon-tipped catheter is inflated in a blocked vessel
to widen it.

    Researchers who have tested the injection were amazed by how patients
improved.

    The Angiogenic Gene Therapy trial is the first major test of the therapy,
which involves injecting a human growth factor gene into the heart.

    Dr Cindy Grines, who led the study at the William Beaumont Hospital in Royal
Oak, Michigan, in the U.S., said: 'There is no product approved to stimulate the
growth of new blood vessels.

    'We think the growth factor gene used here restarts this natural response.

    It is a completely different approach.' Dr Robert Engler, a cardiologist at
the University of California in San Diego, who helped develop the gene therapy,
said: 'The results of the study are very encouraging.'


LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2002


                              161 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 19, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: NHS crisis deepens as watchdog names eight trusts with GBP 54m of debt

BYLINE: Eddie Barnes

BODY:


    THE scale of the crisis in the NHS in Scotland was thrown into stark relief
last night when it was revealed that eight hospital trusts ran up debts of GBP
54million last year.

    The overspend follows a surplus of just GBP 30million the year before
suggesting that the NHS I stumbling into bankruptcy.

    Lack of Government direction and inept hospital managers were blamed for the
crisis, allowing spending on needless trimmings and red tape rather than on
frontline services.

    Ministers hit back yesterday, claiming the crisis had been solved because
they had written off the debts earlier this year with a special one-off payment.

    Health Minister Malcolm Chisholm said: 'NHS Scotland is not "in the red".

    The deficit figures refer to historic trust deficits at the year health
spokesman Nicola Sturgeon said last night: 'Audit Scotland's annual report makes
very grim reading and is further evidence that Labour's stewardship of the NHS
is disastrous.' The figures found that eight out of 28 hospital trusts in
Scotland failed to break even in 2000-2001.

    Between them, they accumulated debts of GBP 54million, offset by a surplus
of GBP 22million built up by Scotland's 20 other trusts, leaving the NHS in the
red by GBP 31.9million.

    end 2000-01. These were all cleared by an additional GBP 79million we
invested in September.' But a report compiled by independent watchdog Audit
Scotland suggested such moves were mere sticking plasters that would hardly stem
the long-term problems facing the NHS, which has to find money for new hitech
treatments and rising patient expectations.

    Experts warned the problem would grievously threaten patient care, as
hospitals would be forced to service their debts rather than spend money on
frontline facilities. SNP

    Auditor General Robert Black said: 'Many trusts particularly acute hospital
trusts faced mounting financial pressures in 2000-01. These pressures are
continuing.' The debt figures come as questions rise over whether Ministers are
allocating their health budget wisely.

    Last week, they were criticised for spending GBP 1million on an ethnic
minority resource centre for hospitals while cancer care in Scotland is in
crisis.

    Patient and doctor groups last night said that whenever hospitals went into
the red, it was patients who suffer.

    A spokesman for the British Medical Association in Scotland said: 'The
effect the deficits have is that trusts are forced to make cutbacks to reduce
the overspend.

    'Clearly there will be an effect on patient services.' Mike Stone, of the
Patients' Association, Association, added: 'Too much is spent on nonessentials
rather than on frontline services. You have to ask whether the deficits are
caused because of this.' The worst offender last year was Tayside University
Hospitals Trust, which sank GBP 15.9million into debt.

    Lanarkshire Acute Trust plunged GBP 12.7million into the red, while North
Glasgow University Hospitals NHS Trust which until recently ran the beleaguered
Beatson Oncology Centre fell GBP 9.5million into debt.

    The report concludes that debts are likely to increase at present levels of
public funding as Scotland's population grows older and new treatments such as
gene therapy are used.

    Scottish Tory health spokesman Mary Scanlon criticised the Executive's
decision to write off the debts of the trusts.

    She said: 'The Executive must shoulder its responsibility for these
appalling figures and come to terms with the need for radical NHS reform.'

    The statistics were published as the SNP issued figures claiming to show
that waiting lists are 25 per cent higher than the Executive claim.

    Ministers say 81,000 people are on waiting lists, while the SNP says a
further 25,000 people are waiting on a so-called 'deferred' list.

    The SNP said the 25,000 patients had been removed from the main lists
because they could not accept an admission date, a suggestion described by an
Executive spokesman as 'rubbish'.

    The guilty men in charge

    THE Tayside health cash scandal the worst of all the cases identified in
Audit Scotland's new report.

    It ran up debts of GBP 15.9million in the last year, and needed a GBP
12million bailout from the Scottish Executive earlier this year cash that could
have gone on frontline services across the country.

    A Scottish parliamentary committee carried out an investigation into the
affair and found blame for the deficit lay at the doors of four senior managers
running the hospitals.

    The report took the unusual step naming and shaming former chief executive
Paul White, former chairman Sir William Stewart,

    Tayside health board chief executive Tim Brett and former NHS chief
executive Geoff Scaife.

    Paid up to GBP 110,000 each, the managers allowed Tayside's debts to soar,
recruiting more staff even when they knew they had no funds to pay salaries.The
Audit Committee found the foursome mishandled public funds and lost financial
control of the trust. 'Public money was not being properly managed and those
responsible were not properly held to account,' the committee concluded. Blame
was also laid at the door of the Scottish Executive for failing to properly
oversee health trusts.


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2001


                              162 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                December 7, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 41

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: Twin who will have a cancer jab to save her sister's life

BYLINE: Paul Kendall

BODY:


    A TRIAL cancer vaccine is to be given to a healthy woman in an attempt to
save her twin sister's life.

    Mother-of-two Josephine Hazell will take the treatment because doctors hope
it will encourage her body to produce cancerkilling cells.

    These cells will then be transplanted into her sister Cathryn Nosrati, who
suffers from lymph node cancer. They should help kick-start Mrs Nosrati's immune
system.

    Because the twins, 44, have the same DNA there is little chance of the cells
being rejected.

    The operation, which will be a world first, could take place within two
weeks.

    Mrs Hazell, a nursing home owner from Cadnam, in Hampshire's New Forest,
said she was pleased to be able to help her twin.

    'I do not see that I have got anything to lose and Cathryn has got
everything to gain,' she said.

    'Because we are twins we have always been close. Cathryn having cancer
changed my whole perspective on life. It has made me rethink my own mortality.

    'I don't know how I would cope without her. It would be like a part of me
dying.' She said the plan had encouraged her to take better care of her health.

    'I lead a very active, very stressful life, but now there is this added
responsibility.

    'I must make sure I stay safe until the doctors can harvest my stem cells.'

    Mrs Nosrati was diagnosed with cancer in 1997 and two years later became the
first person to receive the new genetic vaccine developed at Southampton
University.

    It was designed to help prevent cancer returning in patients in remission.

    Scientists have tested the vaccine on 20 patients, who have received varying
dosages. But Mrs Nosrati, from Verwood, Dorset, received the lowest dose of the
drug and her cancer returned.

    Now, because of chemotherapy, her immune system is too weak to handle a
higher dosage.

    But since she is an identical twin, doctors have another option.

    Once Mrs Hazell has been injected with the vaccine they will wait for her
immune system to react, developing special cancer-killing cells.

    Then they will isolate and extract stem cells or 'mother' cells from her
immune system and inject them into Mrs Nosrati.

    The stem cells should develop into millions of cancer-killing cells.

    Mrs Nosrati said she was very disappointed when the vaccine failed.

    'I had been feeling so well. But now I am looking forward to the next stage.

    I cannot switch off.

    'I think cancer all the time. Every day I wake up and wonder how long I'll
stay in remission.' Professor Terry Hamblin, a consultant haemotologist at
Bournemouth University, said Mrs Nosrati's situation was unique.

    'It would be the first case in the world where this has been done but we
need permission from the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee.

    'It is clear that Cathryn was not on a big enough dose. There is clear
evidence that patients who have the vaccine do get an immune response.

    'But we are still waiting to see if it is beneficial in terms of stopping
them relapsing.

    'The problem with vaccinating cancer patients is that the disease itself
harms their immune systems and so does chemotherapy.

    'Because donors have not had lymphoma or chemotherapy they are more likely
to produce an immune response,' he said.

    p.kendall@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2001


                              163 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 13, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Half-hour heart 'cure';
Gene injection could end need for bypass

BYLINE: James Chapman;Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A SIMPLE jab can revive dead heart tissue and may herald the end of
bypasses, saving thousands of lives, say scientists.

    The treatment, which could take only 30 minutes, increases blood flow
through parts of the heart damaged by attacks or clogged by fat.

    Patients with severe coronary heart disease, whom doctors expected to die at
any time, have had their lives transformed by the injection.

    'When I met one of my patients before treatment he was at death's door,'
said Dr Richard Schatz, who led a U.S. study into the new therapy.

    'Two years after treatment, he remains pain-free and he's digging ditches in
his yard.' The breakthrough involves injecting patients with a gene which
stimulates the growth of new blood vessels in the heart.

    Unveiling the results of the first long-term study of the gene therapy, Dr
Schatz, of the Scripps Clinic in San Diego, said the majority of patients
reported less severe chest pain.

    Many too weak even to move around experienced remarkable improvements in
their daily lives, he told the American Heart Association's scientific
conference in California.

    The 'one-hit' jab direct into the heart allowed a significant number of
patients to stop taking pain-relieving medication.

    Experts are so excited by the results they are planning much bigger trials.

    These will involve a group of patients in the UK, where heart disease claims
140,000 lives a year.

    About 100,000 Britons survive a heart attack each year and some 24,000 go on
to have bypass surgery.

    At least 500 patients die before reaching the operating theatre and
thousands more are not suitable for treatment.

    Dr Schatz said the long-term trial in the U.S. suggested a gene injection
could offer an alternative, safe treatment.

    'I'm very comfortable saying this gene therapy is definitely safe,' he said.

    'There has never been a complication from the gene itself.' Patients
involved in his study, and another in Boston, Massachusetts, had 'end-stage'
coronary heart disease, suffered disabling angina and were at high risk of
sudden death.

    None of them could be helped by procedures such as bypass surgery or balloon
angioplasty.

    In Boston, Dr Peter Vale treated 30 patients aged 48 to 74 with the gene,
VEGF-1, which controls the production of a protein called vascular endothelial
growth factor. This is involved in the growth of new blood vessels.

    Two years after the therapy, 27 of the 30 patients reported fewer weekly
angina episodes from an average of 56 to about four. They also reported taking
around three painkillers a week instead of an average 60.

    'Most of our patients also have had a continued improvement in their ability
to function during their daily lives,' said Dr Vale.

    In the second study, Dr Schatz reported results of tests on 30 patients aged
between 39 and 77 at five different medical centres.

    They recorded similar, dramatic improvements.

    'The question now is why so many of our patients all but two are still
alive,' said Dr Schatz.

    'Studies have shown that 20 to 25 per cent of people with advanced coronary
artery disease and this level of angina die each year. So these results are
striking.' To inject the gene, an incision was made in the patient's chest to
expose the heart.

    Other experts are working on ways to deliver the gene via a thin guide wire
threaded into the body via the groin. This would take only half an hour.

    Leading cardiologist Dr Duncan Dymond, of St Bartholomew's Hospital, London,
said the results were 'incredibly exciting'.

    He added: 'We have to be cautious because we need many more trials, but it's
looking encouraging. If these results are reproduced elsewhere then it's a huge
breakthrough.

    'Anything we can do that improves symptoms for people in this situation is
wonderful. We are talking about increasing numbers of people.'


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2001


                              164 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 18, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 45

LENGTH: 257 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for heart failure

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    HEART failure could be prevented using gene therapy, say scientists.

    They have used a new gene treatment to correct a biochemical problem that
leads to cardiac health problems.

    Scientists in the U.S. replaced defective genes in the heart cells of rats
which had been genetically engineered to develop human symptoms.

    Four weeks later, 63 per cent of the treated rats had survived compared with
just 9 per cent of those without the gene repair.

    The success opens the door to potential new treatments for human heart
patients, say the experts. They predict that gene therapy treatments for heart
failure could be available for people within 'a couple of years'.

    Pre-clinical trials involving large animals are under way, according to
scientists at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.

    They are studying a molecular pump that regulates calcium flow and allows
the heart to contract and relax.

    'Heart failure in ageing people is due to the fact that this pump is
abnormal,' says Dr Roger Hajjar, from the

    hospital's Cardiovascular Research Centre.

    'It doesn't allow the heart to relax and fill appropriately.' The
researchers replaced a defective gene responsible for the calcium pump not
working properly.

    They found that as well as mending the pump, the gene therapy improved the
general energetic state of the heart.

    'Fixing this one problem corrects a large number of abnormalities in the
heart,' says Dr Hajjar, whose findings are unveiled today in the leading medical
journal Circulation.


LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2001


                              165 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 5, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1073 words

HEADLINE: 50p a day drugs reduce the risks for stroke victims;
GBP 1bn cost of nurses 'who can't do the job'

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A COMBINATION of two drugs costing about 50p a day could prevent stroke
survivors from having further attacks.

    Researchers found the drugs almost halved the risk of repeat strokes or
fatal heart attacks.

    They also reduced the possibility of serious stroke complications such as
disability and dementia.

    British experts have hailed the findings as the most significant
breakthrough for stroke victims.

    The treatments, which lower blood pressure, are already available in
Britain, where they are routinely prescribed to those at high risk of heart
disease.

    There are about 100,000 new cases of stroke each year in Britain with 10,000
in those under 55.

    One in five survivors will suffer another stroke or heart attack within five
years.

    A study involving more than 6,000 stroke patients worldwide, including 700
from Britain, investigated the effect of using two drugs.

    Half were given active treatment with the ACE inhibitor perindopril, which
lowers blood pressure, and some of these patients also got the diuretic
indapamide used to deal with fluid retention. The other half were given standard
treatment.

    The study found for every 11 patients treated with both drugs for five
years, at least one would be saved from further serious heart and circulatory
problems.

    The combination treatment produced a cut of 42 per cent in repeat strokes
and first heart attacks.

    Perindopril alone gave a 28 per cent reduction in strokes and a 26 per cent
reduction in major coronary problems including heart attacks and death.

    There were 150 strokes among patients given both drugs compared with 255
among patients taking standard medication such as aspirin.

    The findings were even more dramatic for survivors of strokes caused by
bleeding into the brain who are not allowed to take aspirin because its
blood-thinning properties would increase the risk of a second stroke.

    After taking combination therapy, this risk dropped by 50 per cent.

    The study's most remarkable finding was that the drugs worked even for those
who did not have high blood pressure.

    About half of the patients taking part had normal blood pressure, while the
remainder had high blood pressure, a classic risk factor for stroke.

    The study results showed blood pressure was lowered in most patients by at
least 7 per cent.

    Study chairman Professor John Chalmers, from the University of Sydney and
Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney, said: 'This is the best news ever for
stroke patients.

    'Until now there has only really been aspirin on offer to survivors and
there was nothing for patients who had suffered a stroke caused by bleeding into
the brain. Not only is this one of the most expensive health problems to deal
with because of the cost of hospital and rehabilitation care, there is the
enormous strain on the family of survivors who may have to cope with dementia
and disability.

    'The cost of these drugs is not high and would be more than recouped in
savings on hospitalisation and community care.' The study findings were unveiled
yesterday at the European Society of Cardiology's annual conference in
Stockholm. The conference also heard how doctors have used gene therapy to grow
new blood vessels in patients with severe heart disease.

    The 'one-hit' treatment was injected directly into the hearts of patients
who were able to stop taking their pain-relieving medication completely.

    The technique will soon be tested on British patients after dramatic results
from a small Swedish trial. The therapy offers hope to patients suffering angina
attacks who cannot be treated with surgery.

    THE NHS is spending nearly GBP 1billion a year on second-rate temporary
nurses simply to keep hospitals open despite risking patients' lives, it emerged
yesterday.

    A damning report by the Audit Commission revealed that hospitals are forking
out a record GBP 810million annually on temporary cover as the health service
struggles with a 15,000 nursing shortfall.

    Every day, ten per cent of shifts are covered by highly-paid casual staff,
with trusts each spending an average of GBP 2.5million for the nurses 20 per
cent up on last year.

    It was disclosed that many of the 20,000 temporary nurses are not up to the
job, yet are still hired by managers desperate to fill vacancies.

    In the study of more than 4,000 nurses in every NHS trust across England and
Wales, researchers unearthed a catalogue of risks and wasted cash.

    Some nurses with forged references and criminal records have been let loose
on

    patients after agencies and hospitals failed to make proper checks.

    Blunders by the staff who may be paid nearly three times more than their NHS
equivalents have led to patient deaths and shoddy care.

    Hospitals were criticised for using NHS 'bank' nurses who work overtime in
their own or nearby trusts in wards where they have little or no expertise.

    The NHS was also accused of wasting millions through unnecessary shift
bookings, failure to spot simple timesheet errors and 'exorbitant' commission
charges paid to private nursing agencies.

    With vacancy rates as high as 20 per cent in some London teaching hospitals
as overworked nurses desert the health service for better pay elsewhere, there
are fears the crisis will escalate.

    Labour has pledged to provide an extra 20,000 nurses by 2004, but unions
warn this target cannot be met.

    Controller of the Audit Commission, Sir Andrew Foster, said: 'If you look at
the shortage of nurses across the country, it is hardly surprising it has a
knock-on effect on the use of temporary staff.

    'Patients turn up thinking the nurse is bound to have proper qualifications
and training.

    'But in many parts of the country it is not inevitably the case. There is
evidence the patient's contract is being broken and if this area of using
temporary nurses is growing, that chance increases.

    'We are not deprecating these nurses but this is a proven area of
vulnerability.

    'Some lessons go unheeded and tragedies continue to occur.

    'The best way of reducing these risks is to reduce the demand for temporary
staffing.

    'Every chief executive of trusts should be making sure they know the
qualifications and training are checked.' In response to the report, the
Government announced that a new service, NHS Professionals, which aims to
centralise 'bank' nursing recruitment, would start next month.


LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2001


                              166 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 August 2, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 6

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: Surgeon in race claim

BODY:


    THE head of the transplant unit at a leading Scottish hospital has accused
Glasgow University of race discrimination.

    Rahul Jindal, a leading surgeon at Glasgow's Western Infirmary, is taking
the university to an employment tribunal.

    He alleges two counts of racism, claiming he was not given a professorship
for two years running.

    The university has denied Mr Jindal was discriminated against on the grounds
of his race.

    Mr Jindal left his home in Indianapolis in the U.S. to take up the post as
head of the transplant unit working at the Western and the city's Royal Hospital
for Sick Children at Yorkhill. He claims he was promised a professor's position
when he was originally offered the job.

    Since then, he says, he has been turned down twice by the university.

    He lodged two separate complaints alleging racial discrimination, in August
last year and in May this year.

    Mr Jindal, a specialist in kidney, liver and pancreas transplant surgery, is
also involved in research into gene therapy for diabetes, organ rejection and
clinical trials involving immunosuppressant agents.

    His case will be heard by a tribunal in Glasgow, although no date has yet
been fixed.


LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2001


                              167 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 17, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 45

LENGTH: 1395 words

HEADLINE: When our precious daughter died of a brain tumour we vowed to find a
cure. Now, at last,a treatment is in sight;
MEDICAL HEALTH

BYLINE: Lucy Shakeshaft

BODY:


    SAMANTHA DICKSON lost her brave fight against brain cancer when she was only
16. After her death, her parents Angela and Neil told the Mail how they were
setting up the Samantha Dickson Research Trust to raise funds for research into
childhood brain tumours.

    At last they can report a breakthrough. Here, Neil, who lives in Hampshire,
tells LUCY SHAKESHAFT about their fight . . .

    ONE of my most precious memories of Samantha is when we went for a walk
along the canal near our home. She was worried about me.

    She linked her arm through mine and said: 'Don't worry, Daddy, whatever will
be will be.

    Always remember that I love you to the Moon and back.' She was only 15. A
year later she was dead.

    Brain cancer struck down our daughter when she was in her prime. She was
active, bubbly and energetic, and we were looking forward to seeing what she
would make of life. But we never got the chance to watch her blossom into a
woman, see her walk down the aisle or hold her first baby.

    When Samantha died, virtually no research was being carried out into
juvenile brain tumours, despite it being the second biggest childhood killer,
after leukaemia. Yet children with leukaemia have a 75pc chance of survival
thanks to research into the disease. That's compared with only 25 pc for
children with malignant brain tumours.

    We wanted them to have the same chance - even if that meant fighting for it
ourselves to save other families from experiencing the nightmare we went
through.

    And now it looks like we're really getting somewhere.

    Samantha was our middle child - the noisy one. She excelled at everything
she did - dance, drama, horse riding, playing the flute and piano. She packed so
much in, it was as though she knew she wasn't going to be around very long and
wanted to cram in as much as possible.

    SHE WAS 13 when she started getting migraines.

    Later she had fits. After various tests and a CAT scan, her consultant told
us she had a swelling in the brain.

    She had a biopsy. Five days later, the results showed she had a brain
tumour. She was only 14.

    A doctor came to see us. He told us the brain tumour was inoperable. The
only good news? About 25pc of sufferers live for five years.

    Our world caved in.

    Angela cracked up when she realised this illness was going to kill our
little girl. We were in a daze. It took three attempts before we plucked up the
courage to tell Samantha.

    We said it was very serious and she could die, but we didn't want to destroy
her hope, so we decided not to tell her it was terminal.

    She was so positive and grownup and said: 'I'm going to beat this.' She
fought for normality, throughout her pain, and went on to pass four GCSEs.

    She always strove to be an equal to her friends and wanted to believe she
had a future.

    Samantha was put on steroids to reduce the pressure in her head, and
chemotherapy and radiotherapy followed. These are the only available childhood
treatments if surgery is not possible.

    You cannot just wait for a loved one to die and do nothing. So when Samantha
was diagnosed, I spent days in a library reading about brain tumours. I phoned
cancer support groups for information and ploughed through newspapers to see if
any new treatment was available.

    I wanted to know everything about the disease, but I was shocked that there
was so little up-to-date information.

    I got in touch with a doctor in the U.S. and sent him copies of Samantha's
scans for a second opinion. I flew to Boston with a sample from her biopsy.

    But he confirmed the diagnosis.

    We were only clutching at straws, but when your child is dying you'll do
anything.

    Samantha was so brave. She had her lovely, long hair cut off - she wanted to
be seen as she was - and latterly she became almost blind. For those
two-and-a-half years everyone fought to save her life.

    After her heroic fight against brain cancer, she died on October 31, 1996,
just six days before her 17th birthday. Her courage and dignity during her
illness was incredible, and she inspired all who met her.

    We asked for donations rather than flowers at her funeral, and couldn't
believe it when we discovered that the sum raised was GBP 10,000.

    We looked around for a suitable project to give it to - we had loved
Samantha so much and we were determined to keep her spirit alive. That's when it
really hit home that there was so little out there - fewer than ten serious
research projects. That figure should have been in the hundreds.

    So we decided to do something ourselves, and fund a research project of our
own.

    I'd already set up an office above the garage, when I was desperately
looking into research to save Samantha's life, and from there we started writing
to people in the community, the local newspaper, research scientists - anyone we
thought could help.

    AS I RUN my own aviation travel company, I could get the girls at work to do
mail shots, while my wife Angela replied to every letter we received. The
Samantha Dickson Research Trust was registered as a charity three months after
our daughter's death.

    In the past four years we've raised GBP 1 million and we've put together a
medical and scientific advisory board of leaders in the field of neurology -
experts we've met who give their time free of We've sponsored seven projects
with three more planned for later this year. The trust is the largest single
provider of brain tumour laboratory research in the UK.

    We have already achieved one of our aims - to double research into brain
tumours in the UK.

    Best of all, we are nearing completion of some our research projects, and
three of these have produced some exciting results.

    Our hope is to carry them forward for clinical trials.

    It would be fantastic to produce a new drug treatment which is an
alternative to the present regime used in treating brain cancer, and is also
non-toxic.

    One of our projects at King's College, London, has discovered that
chlorimipramine, a chemical found in a licensed antidepressant drug (Anafranil),
which has been in general use for 30 years, reduces tumour growth.

    This is fantastic news because it's already a licensed drug so if the trials
are successful, the treatment could be introduced quickly. It's also non-toxic
and can be taken orally.

    Basically, brain tumours are particularly dangerous because the harmful
cells separate from the main tumour and start attacking the rest of the brain.
Anything that can stop this happening should improve the patient's quality of
life.

    Professor Geoffrey Pilkington is about to proceed to clinical trials, and if
these are as successful as the laboratory tests, we should have an alternative
treatment for brain tumours by 2003. Other charge and help us to determine how
to use the money.

    promising research includes establishing whether there is a link between
aspartame (an artificial sweetener found in soft drinks) and brain cancer;
investigating gene therapy and how it may be used to kill malignant cells in the
brain; and looking at a technique to scan the DNA from childhood tumours.

    It's been hard work over the past four years. If it had been one of her
brothers who had died, I don't know if we'd have gone through it because they
would not have liked the attention. But Samantha was outgoing and I think she
would have been pleased.

    Angela works seven days a week replying to letters, organising fundraising
events and making phone calls.

    She also visits Samantha's grave twice a week to lay new flowers because the
deer and rabbits from the surrounding fields eat them.

    WE RECEIVE dozens of calls from people who have lost loved ones or whose
friends or family members have been diagnosed with a brain tumour.

    They are devastated by the news that after surgery, other than radiotherapy
and chemotherapy, nothing can be done for them and they must watch them die.

    It is heartbreaking.

    I feel we cannot stop our search for a cure because of all the people who
need someone to do something positive about it. Maybe that is Samantha working
from above.

    * FOR more details or to make a donation, write to the Samantha Dickson
Research Trust (registered charity number 1060627), The White House, Chatter
Alley, Dogmersfield, Hook, Hants RG27 8SS. Tel/fax: 01252 617843. Website:
www.intec.co.uk/sdrt


LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2001


                              168 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 30, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 60

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: Leech told to trim ML

BYLINE: Cliff Feltham

BODY:


    MULTI-millionaire Kevin Leech must slim down his biotech firm ML
Laboratories following a review by banker NM Rothschild.

    Several drug projects will be sold to help 'investor perception' in the
group, whose shares have slumped from 423p to 72p where it is valued at GBP
111m.

    Leech, once 17th in Britain's rich list, has faced a string of setbacks in
his far-flung empire. Fears he may be forced to trim his 33pc stake in ML to
fund other ventures have depressed the shares.

    The City has also been critical of ML's diverse activities, spanning cancer
and Aids treatments, dialysis products, painkillers and gene therapies. Some
face being sold following the review. A deal has been struck with US venture
fund Paul Capital to pump in GBP 17.5m for a share of future royalties.

    Halftime losses rose from GBP 4m to GBP 7.6m. Sales fell from GBP 5.3m to
GBP 4.6m. One for the brave.

    * Scotia Holdings, the cancer therapy firm that went into administration in
January, is in rescue talks with a bidder.


LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2001


                              169 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 27, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 29

LENGTH: 140 words

HEADLINE: GM virus trial to beat prostate cancer

BODY:


    PROSTATE cancer patients are to be injected with a genetically modified
virus in trials starting next month.

    It will target tumour cells in the organ.

    The GM virus, it is believed, can mark the cancer cells out for attack by a
drug that leaves healthy cells unharmed.

    The new process will technically turn the patients into genetically modified
organisms for at least 48 hours because their bodies will contain the virus.

    During this period the volunteers will be cared for in isolation units until
they have shed the virus.

    If it succeeds in infecting the tumour cells, further trials will be held to
see if the cancer cells can be selectively attacked.

    Dr Nick James from Birmingham University told a conference in Brighton that
gene therapy had the potential to beat the most stubborn forms of the disease.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2001


                              170 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 25, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 884 words

HEADLINE: Fighting back against this killer of men;
With prostate cancer predicted to become the most common form, an expert demands
action

BYLINE: Professor Gordon Mcvie

BODY:


    OUR prediction that prostate cancer will become the commonest cancer in the
developed world by the year 2020 seems to have taken some experts by surprise. I
believe that is because the disease has been underestimated as a problem for the
last ten years at least and people have failed to take into account the fact
that we are all living longer and that this is an older man's cancer.

    If I am beginning to sound alarmist, I don't mean to. A diagnosis of
prostate cancer is not an automatic death sentence. Indeed, many men with the
disease die of other causes without even realising they have cancer. But I do
think it is time men started making a bit more of a fuss.

    Ten years ago, breast cancer in this country was considered something of a
taboo subject, but women here took the lead from their American sisters who are
much more open about the disease. They demanded that breast cancer go to the top
of the public health agenda, with enormous success.

    Unfortunately there is little use waiting for a prompt from American men,
who seem content to leave it up to their wives. Perhaps, just for a change, we
Scots could take the lead.

    As I have said, I believe prostate cancer will become the commonest cancer
in the UK by 2020 which is amazing, given that it can affect only half the
population. It is absolutely essential that we find better ways of protecting
against and treating the disease.

    This is not going to be possible without more money for research. The two
big cancer charities the Cancer Research Campaign and Imperial Cancer Research
Fund along with the Medical Research Council have been shouting about this for
some time and have recently announced a GBP 600,000 increase in funding which
the British Government is matching pound for pound.

    But while this is undoubtedly a step in the right direction, there is still
a long way to go before we start spending the same amount of money on prostate
cancer as we do on breast cancer.

    There are three major challenges we need to confront; detection of the
disease, treatment and methods of prevention. One of the major problems with
prostate cancer, for both doctors and patients alike, is that only some men with
the disease actually need treatment.

    We already have a test the PSA blood test that can detect prostate cancer at
an early stage and which could in theory be used to screen men.

    But we don't know if screening would actually save lives. The test is not
good at distinguishing between cancers that are life- threatening and those
which may not require treatment.

    It is clearly not a good idea to give often old and frail men intensive
treatment where they may be fine without it. Surgery and radiotherapy can have
extremely unpleasant side effects, including impotence, incontinence and bowel
problems.

    The campaign is committed to trying to find ways of screening for prostate
cancer that will allow doctors to know exactly which cancers need treating, and
which can safely be left alone.

    Some of the most important research in this area is happening in Scotland,
in Professor Freda Alexander's lab i n Edinburgh. Professor Alexander is looking
for a genetic test that could pinpoint those prostate cancers that need urgent
treatment.

    We are looking also at a number of ways in which we could improve the
treatment of prostate cancers. The biggest boon to men with the disease will be
advances in targeted treatments, whether they be in new forms of radiotherapy,
more advanced surgery, or through brand-new techniques such as gene therapy.

    Targeted treatments will allow doctors to attack tumours while leaving
healthy tissues alone not only tackling the cancer more effectively, but freeing
men from some of the side- effects that can make treatment for prostate cancer
so unpleasant.

    Just last week, the campaign announced the development of a new type of
imaging technique which should allow radiation to be targeted more accurately
during radiotherapy. But, as I have been saying for many years, the key to
winning the battle against cancer is to prevent it happening in the first place.
Researchers are looking into ways of using hormone-based drugs to prevent
prostate cancer from ever developing.

    These drugs may not be in widespread use by the year 2020, but I think they
could become key weapons against the disease in the third and fourth decades of
this century.

    In the meantime, men are going to have to start becoming more aware of the
dangers of prostate cancer. Traditionally, we men have been hopeless about our
health and, if it were not for the women in our lives, we would be in a sorry
state.

    Up to 80 per cent of older men show some signs of prostate cancer by the
time they die, so the tired old line that it will never happen to me just
doesn't wash in this case.

    Part of the problem with prostate cancer is that many of the symptoms
difficulty urinating, sometimes accompanied by pain or bleeding are extremely
common in older men and are often nothing to do with cancer. As a result, many
men fail to take their symptoms seriously.

    While I would not want to worry men unnecessarily, I would stress that it is
always best to get your symptoms checked out. Chances are it'll be nothing
serious but better safe than sorry.


LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2001


                              171 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  June 7, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 26

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: Haemophilia gene hope

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have found a gene therapy which could end the life threatening
effects of haemophilia.

    It could be available within three years to victims of the hereditary
disorder, which affects 10,000 people in the UK.

    The breakthrough involves taking a few cells from a patient's skin,
genetically modifying them in a laboratory so they produce a key blood clotting
agent and injecting them back into the body.

    So far, six people have undergone the pioneering therapy. Four are producing
higher levels of the clotting protein and two are apparently completely cured.

    One major effect of haemophilia, which affects only males, is spontaneous
internal bleeding. This mostly happens in the muscles and joints but elsewhere,
especially in the brain, can be fatal.

    The findings of the scientists at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Centre
in Boston, Massachusetts, are revealed today in the New England Journal of
Medicine.

    Karin Pappenheim, chief executive of the Haemophilia Society UK, said: 'This
research is encouraging.

    Current methods of treatment involve painful regular injections.'


LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2001


                              172 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                  May 27, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 111

LENGTH: 967 words

HEADLINE: The Frankenstein factor stalking the Olympics...

BYLINE: Michael Calvin

BODY:



    THE year is 2020 and the battle against drug abuse has been abandoned as an
irrelevance. Hybrid humans are rewriting the record books. A new generation of
designer athletes, created in the womb, is threatening to dominate the Olympic
Games.

    The world 100 metres record is likely to be slashed to just over six
seconds.

    Ninety-minute marathons are the norm.

    Long-jump pits have been extended twice in the past decade.

    Such a doomsday scenario seems fantastic, but in 10 days' time the
International Olympic Committee meets in Lausanne to discuss the Frankenstein
Factor.

    And in September, the World Anti-Doping Agency is to stage a seminar for
athletes, administrators, scientists and bio-ethicists in an attempt to
establish guidelines for the future.

    The IOC was first warned about the inevitability of genetic engineering
impinging on sport by Canadian scientists in 1997.

    Governments in Scandinavia, North America and Australia are already
sponsoring research on the subject.

    The magnitude of the problem is not lost on Jacques Rogge, the Belgian
orthopaedic surgeon who will become the most powerful figure in world sport if,
as expected, he succeeds Juan Antonio Samaranch as IOC president in July.

    'Athletes using genetic engineering to cheat is the next danger lying
ahead,' he admitted. 'Doping has already reached an unacceptable level.

    'How long will the public, governments, and the economic world support sport
if they believe all athletes are cheating? It is our number one threat.' He may
already be too late.

    Though some administrators argue it will take a decade for gene technology
to find an outlet in sport, others insist the journey to the heart of darkness
is under way.

    Andy Miah, from De Montfort University in Bedford, is a key member of the
Forum for the Analysis of Sport Technology, an international research group.

    He confirmed: 'The technology is certainly available. It is most likely that
athletes are learning about, if not using, this technology.' He is supported by
speed skating legend Johann Olav-Koss, the triple Olympic gold medallist from
Lillehammer in 1994, who is the most influential figure in the new intake of IOC
members.

    Koss, a doctor appointed by the Norwegian government to lead the fight
against drugs, believes 'certain methods' of genetic modification are already in
use.

    He explained: 'As an athlete you focus only on yourself. You wonder if the
world is against you. You become a victim. It is an incredible problem to
protect you from yourself.' Viewed cynically, the advantages are obvious. A
solitary dose of genetic material avoids the need for the cocktail of
performance-enhancing drugs and masking agents which currently sustains crooked
athletes.

    Miah said: 'The anti-doping campaign in sport is still strong, but genetics
makes such efforts pointless. Technology will make detection impossible.'

    Sprinters would be administered the gene which controls the development of
fast-twitch muscle fibres in the calf and thigh.

    High jumpers would be assisted by the addition of muscle bulk in their
takeoff leg. Long distance runners would have genetic assistance in increasing
red blood cell levels.

    Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania have successfully doubled the
red blood cell count in monkeys, using a synthetic gene.

    Experiments on mice, using gene therapy designed to counter muscle
degeneration in the elderly, have recorded a 27per cent increase in muscle
strength.

    The pace of change is startling.

    Professor Ron Trent, head of molecular genetics at Sydney University, has
isolated a so-called gene marker, responsible for the combination of explosive
power and endurance that identifies a natural rower.

    Working with the Australian Institute of Sport, he intends to test the DNA
of rowers, to see if they share the gene. If they do not, it is likely they will
be eased out of the programme.

    He said: 'It will save the Institute money and resources, because it will
have another marker of an elite athlete. It will prevent an individual from
spending two or three years of his or her life training very hard, and still not
making that elite group.' Trent believes passionately in the medical benefits of
gene therapy. He argues that the mapping of the body's 30,000 genes is a more
important advance than the splitting of the atom.

    Other, less moral doctors will cash in. They will use three methods to
genetically modify athletes.

    The safest, but most complex, method involves the extraction and
re-implantation of adjusted cells.

    Direct injections can be used only on muscle fibres.

    Introducing the gene through a virus is effective, but carries the threat of
widespread contamination. The other option - creating a designer athlete in the
womb - is an ethical minefield.

    MIAH believes sports administrators must avoid the knee-jerk responses which
have shaped anti-drugs policy. He said: 'It is a much broader issue than drugs.
The genetically engineered athlete is not a cheat.

    'If athletes have been engineered before birth they have done nothing wrong,
so how can we exclude them?

    'The notion of a natural athlete is nonsensical in this hi-tech age. With
the latest equipment, and support from nutritionists, biomechanists,
physiotherapists and others it makes little sense to think of the athlete as a
non-technological entity.

    'How technological are we prepared to allow our athletes to become before we
see it as a problem? We allow them many new pieces of equipment to enhance
performance, but not drugs and maybe not genetics. There is a hypocrisy here,
somewhere.' Maybe so. But a freak show, featuring humans who belong in a virtual
reality game, is the ultimate hypocrisy. Prepare to be appalled.


LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2001


                              173 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                  May 27, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 111

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: Shameful, painful history of sports cheats

BYLINE: Michael Calvin

BODY:


    DRUGS have been a feature of sport since the seventh century BC, when Greeks
competing in the original Olympic Games were sustained by hallucinogenic
mushrooms.

    Each era has had its poison, from strychnine to steroids.

    Villains enter legend.

    Ben Johnson, the sprinter who lurched from hero to zero. Richard Virenque,
the cyclist who symbolised the Tour de France that died of shame. Claims persist
that Florence Griffith-Joyner's track performances and early death were due to
drugs.

    The current market for blood substitutes is worth about GBP 1.5 million.
EPO, Virenque's drug, has been superseded by PFC, a synthetic steroid used by
cross-country skiers.

    Female gymnasts are given 'brake drugs' such as cyproterone acetate.

    Designed to combat prostate cancer in men and premature hair loss in women,
it assists the development of narrow hips and small breasts.

    A seminar on teenage steroid abuse in the US was told of parents
pressurising doctors to give their children human growth hormone.

    A promising basketball player asked her doctor to break her arms - and reset
them so they could become longer.

    Gene therapy is an extension of the current morality.

    As Australia's leading sports scientist Peter Larkins said: 'We have seen
the incredible risks athletes are prepared to take with their health. Tell them:
"we are going to take some of your tissue, stimulate it so that it does a better
job, and then put it back" and they would take the risk.'


LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2001


                              174 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 23, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 16

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: If bingeing on chocolate makes your trousers too tight, blame the
genes

BYLINE: Paul Kendall

BODY:


    CHOCOHOLICS no longer need to feel guilty about their craving.

    They are simply a victim of their genes, scientists have found.

    The so-called 'sweet tooth gene' has been identified by separate teams of
researchers and helps explain why some find it harder to resist chocolate bars
and cream cakes.

    It also raises the possibility of designing a drug which could 'switch off'
the gene and help resist sugary foods. Children, in particular, risk their
health by eating too many sweets and chocolates. The proportion of British
youngsters with weight problems has more than doubled since the mid-1980s, with
one in ten now overweight or obese.

    To identify the gene, the research teams based at Harvard Medical School in
Boston and Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York conducted almost identical
experiments using mice which have differences in their ability to taste sweet
foods. They compared the DNA of the two types of mice and noticed differences in
a gene called T1R3.

    Dr Gopi Shanker, of the Mount Sinai team, said: 'It contains information
which produces a protein called the sweet taste receptor.

    'This recognises the sweet contents of food and initiates a cascade of
events which signal to the brain that a sweet food has been eaten.'

    Dr Shanker, whose research is published in the journal Nature Genetics,
added: 'Exactly the same gene exists in humans, so it means that if your parents
have a sweet tooth then you probably will as well.'

    Research by the Harvard team, reported in Nature Neuroscience, has come to
the same conclusion.

    But Aubrey Sheiham, professor of dental public health at University College,
London, said the results did not provide chocoholics with an excuse to give up
dieting.

    He said: 'We have always known that some people have a sweeter tooth than
others. But it has also been proved that if you gradually expose people to less
sugar, then the body becomes accustomed to less.

    They will be satisfied with a lower level of sweetness.'

    Mr Sheiham warned against any form of gene therapy which sought to
deactivate the sweet tooth gene.

    'We have produced this gene through evolution because sweet foods in nature
are not poisonous and also give us energy. We all need to have some sugar in our
diet.'

    The U.S. researchers are using their discovery to develop artificial
sweeteners without an aftertaste.


LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2001


                              175 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 17, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Scientist in 'GM babies' ethical row

BODY:


    ONE of the world's leading scientists has sparked an ethical furore by
calling for the law to be changed to allow the creation of genetically modified
babies.

    Dr James Watson, whose pioneering work into DNA won him the Nobel prize,
said restrictions should be lifted so scientists can alter the genes of sperm,
eggs and embryos.

    Such genetic changes could, he said, wipe out inherited diseases, such as
Huntington's disease, which progressively destroys key nerve cells.

    But the U.S. scientist's remarks were condemned by medical ethic groups as
'outrageous' and 'foolish'.

    They fear that altering the genes of embryos could lead to doctors 'playing
God' allowing 'designer babies' that are more intelligent, better looking and
healthier than their unmodified counterparts.

    In The Independent yesterday, Dr Watson wrote: 'Working intelligently and
wisely to see that good genes dominate as many lives as possible is the truly
moral way for us to proceed.' Scientists are already able to screen people's DNA
and warn them if they are predisposed to a particular disease. But altering the
genes of sperm, eggs and embryos germ-line gene therapy is outlawed in Britain,
America and many other countries.

    Dr Sue Mayer, of the policy research group Genewatch, said genetically
engineering babies could have 'disastrous consequences'.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                              176 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 17, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 15

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Scientist in 'GM babies' ethical row

BODY:


    ONE of the world's leading scientists has sparked an ethical furore by
calling for the law to be changed to allow the creation of genetically modified
babies.

    Dr James Watson, whose pioneering work into DNA won him the Nobel prize,
said restrictions should be lifted so scientists can alter the genes of sperm,
eggs and embryos.

    Such genetic changes could, he said, wipe out inherited diseases, such as
Huntingdon's disease, which progressively destroys key nerve cells.

    But the U.S. scientist's remarks were condemned by medical ethic groups as
'outrageous' and 'foolish'.

    They fear that altering the genes of embryos could lead to doctors 'playing
God' allowing 'designer babies' that are more intelligent, better looking and
healthier than their unmodified counterparts.

    In The Independent yesterday, Dr Watson wrote: 'Working intelligently and
wisely to see that good genes dominate as many lives as possible is the truly
moral way for us to proceed.' Scientists are already able to screen people's DNA
and warn them if they are predisposed to a particular disease. But altering the
genes of sperm, eggs and embryos germ-line gene therapy is outlawed in Britain,
America and many other countries.

    Dr Sue Mayer, of the policy research group Genewatch, said genetically
engineering babies could have 'disastrous consequences'.


LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2001


                              177 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 March 11, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 67

LENGTH: 1347 words

HEADLINE: Why we owe lives to this lord of flies;
Book of the Week

BYLINE: Craig Brown

BODY:


    Fly: An Experimental Life by Martin Brookes Weidenfeld GBP 16.99 % GBP 13.99
(0870 165 0870) *****

    Ever since the extraordinary success of Dava Sobel's Longitude, publishers
have swarmed to popular science like bees to honey or, if you would prefer, like
fruit flies to a glass of wine.

    In just the first six months of this year, at least 150 new books of popular
science are due in the shops.

    They include studies of flight, dyslexia, autism, the moon, light, the
contraceptive pill, caffeine, video games, sharks and mammoths.

    More often than not, they come with jaunty fairground titles to reassure the
reader it'll be infinitely less painful than a school textbook.

    Forthcoming titles include The Northern Lights: How One Man Sacrificed Love,
Happiness And Sanity To Solve The Mystery Of The Aurora Borealis, Seeing And
Believing: The Story Of The Telescope Or How We Found Our Place In The Universe
and The Map That Changed The World: A Tale Of Prison And Plagiarism, A Homeless
Man And The Birth Of Science. It can't be long before there is a book of popular
science that sets out to explain the scientific reasons behind the growth in
books of popular science. It will be called Money For Old Rope: How Publishers
Set Out To Take Money From Punters Who Always Wished They'd Got A Higher Grade
In Biology A-level.

    As one of the few people alive who achieved the lowest possible grade a 9 in
Biology O-level, I am in many ways the perfect guinea pig for any book on
popular science. If I can get through a book full of white-flag words like
'chromosomes', 'molecular' and 'genome', then anyone can.

    Martin Brookes has come up with the idea of writing a history of the fruit
fly. At first glance, this might seem like scraping the barrel, the sort of
thing you could only think of writing about after every other species has
already been written about. By every normal measure, the fruit fly lacks
charisma. It is half the size of a grape pip, looks like a full stop and, as
Brookes points out, you can easily squash a hundred without noticing.

    Children don't keep fruit flies as pets; Walt Disney have yet to give a cute
little wide-eyed fruit fly even a walk-on part in a movie; there are no fruit
fly cuddly toys or fridge-magnets; people don't queue at the Natural History
Museum to catch a glimpse of its fruit fly collection; in the small ads on
Valentine's Day, you find no mention of 'Huge Huggies for My Big Brown Bear from
His Little Fruit Fly.' Yet for all its lack of popular appeal, the fruit fly has
been at the forefront of scientific research for the past 100 years. Unlike the
rabbit or even the rat, it costs virtually nothing to house or to feed. Two hun-

    dred fruit flies can live perfectly comfortably for a fortnight on a piece
of rotting banana. On top of this, it does virtually everything that every other
animal can do by way of being born, eating, breeding and dying, but in
double-quick time: a single pair of fruit flies can produce 200 offspring in a
fortnight, and after another eight weeks, if all goes well, they will have
produced more descendants than there are people on earth. Furthermore, in the
Thirties a leading fruit fly experimenter, Theodosius Dobzhansky, discovered
that fruit fly populations can evolve, in Darwinian terms, over a matter of
months rather than thousands of years.

    Our lack of sentimentality towards the fruit fly is another reason it has
proved ideal for experimentation.

    Even the most hardhearted among us would find it hard to tolerate the sort
of Hammer-horror experiments that have been applied to fruit flies if they had
been performed instead on, say, hamsters or mice. Flies with no heads but two
anuses, flies with legs where their antennae are meant to be, flies with heads
within their stomachs: Martin Brookes's ghoulish list of what has happened to
flies in science labs should make every reader pray that reincarnation is untrue
or that, if it is true, they haven't done anything so awful in this life that
they find themselves in the life to come buzzing about beneath a microscope.

    Brookes shows that the fruit fly has given back to the human being in
scientific and medical research far more than it has taken out of his wine glass
and his jam jar. For 30 years, it has been at the centre of genetics, laying the
foundation of gene therapy, cloning and the human genome project.

    It has also contributed to research into cancer, global warming, ageing,
alcohol and drug addiction, Alzheimer's, Huntingdon's and even jet lag.

    This is all fascinating stuff and even if I, as a biology no-hoper, find it
hard to follow every single twist and turn in, say, the testing of chromosomes
(for some strange biological reason, my eyes tend to blur whenever I read the
words 'cell division'), I can still see that the discovery of the fount of life
from such an apparently insignificant creature as the fruit fly makes for an
exciting tale.

    If Brookes makes a mistake, it is to underrate the reader's interest in his
subject. He writes exceptionally clearly, and often wittily, and he is very good
at explaining fairly complex experiments so that even duffers like me can just
about understand them. But he spends too much of his time trying to liven up a
subject that is already quite lively enough. Fly: An Experimental Life has a
persistent jocularity about it that becomes tiring and self-defeating, rather
like someone wearing a funny hat and a revolving bow tie forever saying: 'I hope
I'm not boring you.' But is there anyone more boring than the man who puts all
his energy into not being boring?

    His central joke, greatly overused, is to see the fly in human terms. At one
moment, he calls the fruit fly 'a shameless self-publicist', at another he says:
'Don't knock flies. They're the young generation. And they've got something to
say.' Brookes himself spent eight years in biological research, four of them
studying a particular type of moth on the sand dunes of South Wales. This
induced in him an understandable terror of what he calls 'textbook tedium' and
'abstract gobbledegook'. Fair enough, but there are times when you wish he would
resist the fear of being thought dull, just trust in his subject, and get on
with the story.

    But beneath all the jokes and toy-town analogies ('Think of a building site
instead of a body', 'Instead of the body, think of a map of the USA,' etc, etc),
lies plenty of extraordinary information. He has assembled, for instance, a
splendid cast list of eccentric scientists. My personal favourite is Francis
Galton, the cousin of Darwin, who, to prevent his mind from overheating,
invented a self-ventilating top hat with a hinged lid that could be raised by
squeezing a rubber bulb. Galton was mad on correlating and assessing everything
that came into his path. He once worked out the boredom level of an audience by
scientifically measuring the amount of fidgeting that was going on. He also
produced a 'beauty map' of Great Britain, finding the greatest concentration of
female beauty in London and the lowest, I am sorry to say, in Aberdeen.

    At another time, he conducted a statistical analysis into the usefulness of
prayer. Oddly enough, Galton discovered that prayer has an inverse effect on
longevity: the pious types in his survey who prayed every day died younger than
those who never gave God a second's thought from one year to the next.

    The whole book is full of strange and unexpected facts. The male fruit fly
serenades the female with a type of song made by the vibration of its wings.

    In some areas, the fruit fly is cleverer than the dog or the cat or even the
human being: experiments show that it can learn to associate an odour with pain
after only one encounter, whereas we would take three or four. And every now and
then, Brookes's jokes and analogies have a peculiar resonance: I was happy to
read, for example, that the penis of the Mediterranean rabbit flea 'with its
hooks, levers, barbs and springs has more accessories than your average Swiss
Army knife'.


GRAPHIC: CLOSE ENCOUNTER...THE FRUIT FLY LACKS APPEAL BUT HAS BEEN A VITAL PART
OF SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENTS FOR MORE THAN 100 YEARS

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2001


                              178 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 6, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 22

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: The jab that heals hearts

BODY:


    A SIMPLE injection can make a damaged heart repair itself, claim scientists.

    In a breakthrough which could offer hope to millions who have suffered heart
failure, they say they have found a way to revitalise dead tissue.

    Researchers report dramatic success in reversing cardiac damage caused by
heart failure in animals.

    They hope to test the treatment a form of gene therapy on humans within
three years.

    The new technique works by inhibiting the effects of a debilitating hormone
linked to heart failure.

    Professor Walter Koch, the surgeon who pioneered the treatment at Duke
University Medical Centre in North Carolina, said the gene was given to a rabbit
with heart failure.

    'One week after the therapy, the damage suffered by the heart cells was
reversing. The cells were returning to normal,' he said.

    Heart failure in which the heart cannot keep pumping enough oxygen-rich
blood around the body is very difficult to diagnose and treat.

    Usually caused by coronary artery disease or a heart attack, it affects more
than half a million people in the UK.

    Professor Koch, whose research is published today in the medical journal
Circulation, said the gene could be carried into a patient using a modified form
of a virus which normally causes a cold.

    Delivered by an injection or through a catheter, the technique is 'minimally
invasive'.

    Current experimental gene therapy has to be delivered directly to the heart
muscle during open heart surgery.


LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2001


                              179 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 27, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 181 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy 'cancer cure'

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS said yesterday that they may be able to use gene therapy to
tackle some types of cancer in humans.

    The U.S. researchers made their claim after they were able to prevent cancer
in mice for the first time with gene treatment.

    The team from Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia targeted a gene
called FHIT, which is damaged in many forms of cancer, from breast to colon
cancer.

    They bred mice without the gene and then dosed them with a chemical known to
cause oesophageal cancer.

    The researchers then gave a virus containing the FHIT gene to the mice and
found that it prevented them developing cancer.

    While they do not believe gene therapy can cure cancer, the researchers
think their experiments may help the search for new and better cancer drugs and
may offer ways to prevent cancer from developing in the first place in
vulnerable people, such as smokers.

    Dr Carlo Croce, who lead the research, said his findings may affect
treatments for cancers including lung cancer, colon cancer, some types of breast
cancer and bladder cancer.


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2001


                              180 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 12, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 4;5

LENGTH: 1070 words

HEADLINE: A code to crack disease

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    THE end of disease could be only 50 years away after scientists unveiled the
genetic 'book of life' yesterday in what was hailed as the most important
discovery in the history of mankind.

    They released the first details of the human genome the genetic recipe of
mankind that they say will lead to new ways of diagnosing, treating and
preventing cancer, heart disease, diabetes and even depression and addiction.

    But, alongside the jubilation, there were fears about the ethical
implications posed by the knowledge.

    Genetic testing seems certain to allow doctors to predict which diseases
patients are likely to develop years before they show symptoms raising the
prospect of a 'genetic underclass' discriminated against by insurers and
employers.

    Further in the future, people might try to use the technology to select
offspring with various 'desirable' genetic traits.

    Last June, it was announced that more than 90 per cent of the genome had
been deciphered in a draft version.

    The remaining gaps in the code have now been filled in and the results will
be published this week for independent experts to analyse.

    One of the most important findings is that the human genetic recipe contains
far fewer genes than anyone previously imagined.

    Each of us has 30,000 genes only 300 more than the mouse and just five times
as many as bacteria. One tiny plant, thale cress, is known to have 25,498 genes.

    The low number of human genes may mean that it will be easier to work out
their functions than researchers had thought. Experts believe about ten per cent
probably correspond to potential drug targets for common diseases.

    The scientists who have traced out the map of mankind say it has also
exposed the idea that we are 'hardwired' or controlled by our genes as a myth.

    Environmental factors must be more influential than we previously believed.

    For instance, while genetics may make some of us more vulnerable to heart
disease, it is factors such as diet or smoking which make vulnerable people
develop the condition.

    Similarly, the idea that criminals are genetically predisposed to crime
appears to be a false claim.

    Most immediately, doctors will be able to advise people identified as at
high genetic risk of disease to change their lifestyles at an early stage
increasing the chances of them staying healthy.

    The genetic map has also revealed that differences between humans across the
world are minuscule with just 0.2 per cent of the genome accounting for all the
various traits.

    'It is telling us far more about ourselves and about our history than anyone
would have thought,' said Dr Craig Venter, the American scientist whose company
Celera was one of the leading players in the deciphering of the genome.

    'Really, we are all just identical twins and we have the same building
blocks as mice, as dogs, as cats, as monkeys.' Dr Venter headed a
privatelyfunded venture that has been racing a public project to complete the
first draft.

    The often bitterly fought battle will end this week with the publication of
the two versions in the world's leading scientific journals, Science and Nature.

    But the acrimony was continuing last night, with each side claiming theirs
was more accurate than the other.

    Dr Michael Dexter, director of the Wellcome Trust, said the publicly-funded
sequence would become one of the most valuable maps in the history of mankind.

    'The information we are now accumulating will provide us with an ability to
carry out diagnostic tests, to use existing medicines better, to use medicines
not yet in clinical use, and the ability to develop new medicines, because we
have new targets,' he said.

    'It will guide researchers for centuries.' Sir John Sulston, former director
of the Sanger Centre in Cambridgeshire, where Britain's arm of the
publicly-funded effort was based, said: 'All this information should be in the
public domain.

    It should not be something which is essentially based in profit-making.'

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk

    Benefits

    THE most immediate benefit of unravelling the genome is likely to be a new
raft of genetic tests that will indicate susceptibility to disease.

    Within the next few years, doctors are likely to be able to screen patient's
saliva, blood or even hair and determine their chances of developing cancer,
Alzheimer's or heart disease.

    This will enable them to start treating disease before it even appears.

    Gene-based treatments for many conditions will be developed. Already,
preliminary treatments are envisaged for asthma, Alzheimer's and depression.

    Within the next decade, scientists expect medicines to be tailored to suit
the genetic makeup of individual patients.

    By 2020, gene therapies designed to 'knock out' disease-causing genes are
expected to be routine.

    Around the same time, we will probably begin to contemplate creating the
first GM humans altering the genetic makeup of babies to eliminate genes that
cause unwanted effects.

    * Q What have the scientists done?

    * A They have cracked the DNA code the essential 'recipe' for a
human-contained in every cell in our bodies.

    * Q What is a gene?

    * A It's a piece of information passed from parent to offspring. All of the
genes put together make up the 'instruction book' of how to put a complete
organism together. Scientifically, genes are stretches of DNA that tell cells in
the body how to make proteins.

    * Q What is the Human Genome Project?

    * A An international collaboration funded by charities and governments to
map out the 'standard' human genome. It has been racing American company Celera
Genomics to produce the first draft.

    * Q How has the code been cracked?

    * A The genome has been mapped by isolating genes and locating them on one
of the 23 pairs of human chromosomes bundles in each cell made up of DNA.

    * Q Whose DNA has been studied?

    * A The British team used blood and sperm samples from between ten and 20
anonymous donors. Celera selected 30 men and women of different ethnic
backgrounds. Five were chosen for the final analysis.

    * Q How soon will we see the benefits?

    * A Genetic screening for some illnesses, such as breast cancer, is already
becoming available.

    * Q What does it all tell us?

    * A That we're not as complicated as we might have thought with 30,000
genes, only twice as many as fruit flies.


GRAPHIC: DR CRAIG VENTER: HEADS THE PRIVATELY-FUNDED VENTURE

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2001


                              181 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                February 9, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: 30 years away, the brave new world of GM man;
Scientist's sweeping vision of a cure for all ills

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    GENETICALLY modified human beings will exist within 30 years, one of the
world's most eminent scientists predicted yesterday.

    Dr Francis Collins, a leader of the worldwide project to decode the human
genome, said mankind would inevitably start tinkering with its genetic makeup to
'take control of evolution'.

    His forecast was part of a breathtaking outline of where genetic science
will take mankind soon allowing us all to live to an average age of 90 and to
detect and treat many illnesses before symptoms even appear.

    Those who do develop heart disease, cancer and infections will be prescribed
medicines specifically tailored to their own genetic makeup.

    Dr Collins, director of the National Genome Research Institute, the U.S.

    partner in the publicly-funded Human Genome Project, made his predictions at
the World Life Sciences Forum conference which opened yesterday in Lyon, France.

    By 2010, he said, predictive genetic tests would be available for dozens of
diseases. Simply by taking a swab from a patient's cheek, a doctor would be able
to tell whether he or she was likely to develop Alzheimer's, cancer or heart
disease. New treatments would be available to reduce the risk for vulnerable
people.

    By 2020, research would suggest that 'germline' gene therapy permanently
altering the genetic make- up of humans so they pass the changes on to their
offspring is safe.

    There will be moves to remove genes for inherited disorders such as
Huntington's disease and muscular dystrophy. Gene- based designer drugs for
diabetes and hypertension will be coming on to the market, and the treatment of
mental illness will be transformed as studies reveal it to be largely genetic.

    By 2030, GM humans will exist and a major debate will be under way about
widespread genetic engineering to 'improve' mankind as a whole.

    A comprehensive genetic healthcare system will mean that the average human
lifespan is 90 years.

    Dr Collins said: 'In 2030, if all goes well, there should be individualised
preventive medicine based on your individualised risk, instead of a "one-size
fits all" approach.

    Mental illness may be one of the major beneficiaries.

    'We are certainly close to understanding hereditary contributions to mental
illness to schizophrenia, to obsessive compulsive disorder, to autism in a way
that should lead us at last to a better biological understanding of these vexing
problems.' Dr Collins admitted he was worried about the 'enormous ethical and
moral considerations' of GM humans.

    'I wouldn't be surprised if in another 30 years some people begin to argue,
as Stephen Hawking already is, that we ought to take charge of our own evolution
and should as a species try to improve ourselves,' he said.

    'I must say I find this an interesting but somewhat chilling discussion,
because it implies that somebody would know what an improvement was, and it also
implies that we will be sure enough about the safety issues to contemplate
altering our very biology.

    'That is an enterprise that I would hope that we would not undertake for a
long time if ever.' Scientists have already used their ability to manipulate
genes to create last month the world's first GM primate.

    Dr Collins told 1,200 experts from 45 nations at the conference that they
should be prepared for increasing 'anti-science' protests.

    'I cannot imagine, with all of this rapid movement forward, and the concerns
that are already out there in society, that this kind of advance in genomic
technology applied to ourselves will not encounter a good deal of resistance,'
he said.

    'The only serious antidote against the parts of that resistance that are
ill-founded, is education and communication and involvement of the general
public in all of these decisions not as an afterthought.' He warned that the
focus on genetic data might make some people consider themselves little more
than 'robots' controlled by their DNA, but said this would be misplaced.

    'Understanding the human genome will not take away the concept of free will,
it will not help us very much understand the spiritual side of humankind, or to
know who God is or what love is,' he said.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk

    IN ten years doctors will be able to tell just by taking a swab from the
mouth if a patient is likely to develop Alzheimer's, heart disease or cancer

    IN 20 years scientists will have the technology to alter our genetic makeup
permanently to remove genes which cause hereditary disorders

    IN 30 years, genetically modified humans will exist, preventive medicine
will be individually tailored and the average lifespan will be 90 years

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2001


                              182 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 19, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 83

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: Leech calls for review as float is shelved

BYLINE: Peter Cunliffe

BODY:


    KEVIN Leech's biotech and medical devices group ML Laboratories shelved
plans to float its inhaler company on Nasdaq.

    Seen by critics as a 'biotech conglomerate', ML has ordered merchant bank NM
Rothschild to carry out a strategic review to revive its ailing share price.

    Last July, when the whole of ML was valued at GBP 280m, the planned US
listing of Clickhaler-maker Innovata Biomed was expected to raise about GBP
200m.

    But investors have turned cool on the sector and the shares have tumbled.

    Down 10/2p to 1031/2p, the group is capitalised at GBP 165m, a quarter of
its 1996 level.

    Jersey-based Leech, chairman and biggest shareholder, and chief executive
Stuart Sim will consider all options, except taking the group private.

    'It is of great concern to us that our current share price does not, in our
view, adequately reflect the value of our exciting portfolio of products and
technologies,' they say.

    With four divisions, spread across cancer and Aids treatments, dialysis
products, painkillers and gene therapies, ML looks ripe for disposals.

    Annual pre-tax losses to September widened from GBP 6.9m to GBP 11.8m on
sales up from GBP 9.5m to GBP 11.9m.

    Research spending rose by GBP 3.4m to GBP 9.2m as ML burned GBP 14m of cash.
After the GBP 11.5m share placing in July it has GBP 14.9m cash left.

    If investors refuse to stump up more, American fund Elliott Associates has
agreed a GBP 12m convertible debenture, threatening the dilution of existing
holdings.


LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2001


                              183 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 13, 2001

SECTION: Pg. 64

LENGTH: 935 words

HEADLINE: Diploma bosses deserve a medal for their efforts;
INVESTMENT EXTRA

BYLINE: Michael Walters

BODY:


    ON initial impressions, you might bet against Diploma. An anodyne name, a
mixed bag of businesses, a big chunk of turnover in specialised steels, and a
declining five-year record on almost any level you care to name even boring old
'value' investors UBS and Phillips & Drew as large shareholders.

    Just the sort of company you could do without.

    Look more closely, however, and Diploma emerges as a most impressive
restructuring story. Chatting to the directors at the agm, in the grandiose
confines of The Members' Room in London's Chartered Accountants Hall this week,
confirmed these boys are on the ball.

    They have been deliberately shrinking the business disposing of a ragbag of
low-growth, low-margin businesses and doing it patiently, working to get decent
prices. Over the last three years, they have sold five businesses for a total of
around GBP 80m, realising an after tax PE of over 20.

    Still better, they have not squandered the takings on a new empire, but have
delivered real value, returning GBP 62m to shareholders, and creating a group
with a smaller structure and capital base. At the annual meeting, chief
executive Bruce Thompson explained his five-point strategy.

    He is concentrating on supplying growth industries, increasing the range of
product lines, adding value by offering additional services, expanding
geographically outside the UK, and growing the e-commerce operation an obvious
way of increasing efficiency.

    Supplying analytical instruments and consumables to the life science
research laboratories of pharmaceutical and biotech companies, and to research
institutions, should be a growth area.

    The completion of the human genome project and advances in proteomics have
spawned a mass of biotech research customers.

    Progress last year was unsettled by mergers among the pharma giants, but
with the Glaxo/SmithKline Beecham deal at last accomplished, demand from the big
boys should now click into higher gear. A start-up business supplying the
mushrooming German biotech industry is doing well. A firmer euro should help
profits.

    Life science supplies sit alongside Hercules, the leading catalogue-based
distributor of hydraulic seals and seal kits in North America.

    Over the past two years, the number of products carried has doubled.

    That helps lock in customers, who increasingly seek to use fewer suppliers.
A parallel business was acquired in the UK in April 1999.

    The third Diploma division takes in companies distributing high performance
wiring, thermal shrink components, and interconnect products to the fast-growing
aerospace, motor sport and electronics industries. Thompson is particularly
pleased with a developing business in Germany.

    House broker Beeson Gregory, which came aboard in autumn, projects a rise in
group pre-tax profits for the year to September from GBP 10.4m to GBP 11.3m
(earnings of 28.8p), and then to GBP 12.9m (earnings 33p). That suggests that
Diploma shares sell on a prospective 2001 PE of just under ten at 282p.

    That may be cheaper than most distributors, but does not make Diploma a
screaming buy until you look at the rest of it. There is a special steels
company which supplies the oilfield equipment industry from operations in
Sheffield, Glasgow and Houston. When oil was cheap, this struggled. Last year,
soaring oil prices triggered a recovery, and the division broke even at
operating level. It should be making money now.

    Significantly, it has net assets of GBP 15m, and plainly does not fit the
group's new profile. A sale looks probable, and might bring in GBP 10m, without
taking a penny off profits.

    That would sit nicely alongside a hefty GBP 19.2m cash in hand at September
30. There is also over GBP 4m (disregarding depreciation) of property held for
resale. If steel and surplus properties go, the cash pile could head comfortably
over GBP 30m (130p plus per share), almost half the GBP 70m market
capitalisation.

    The board might return some of that to shareholders via share buybacks, and
use some to expand by acquisition. Knock the potential cash out of the equation,
and the ongoing business is valued at under GBP 40m around five times earnings.

    That is way too low for such a cleverly-managed, growing company.

    Unless the rating moves up, it could be vulnerable to a bid.

    The days of watching shares double or treble in a month or two have gone, so
it is pointless to guess about Diploma. But the shares offer a low-risk
opportunity of an above-average gain.

    Shares update

    This monkey business is good for MMI THOSE cute little monkeys from Oregon,
hopping all over the TV news on Thursday evening, are good news for investors in
MMI (Medical Marketing).

    One of the key alliances in the MMI portfolio is with Oregon Health Sciences
University, which has a vast and growing store of valuable research.

    Despite controversy about primates in research, it has emerged that mice do
not accurately mimic symptoms found in patients with genetic disorders, ranging
from muscular dystrophy to cancer.

    Using monkeys takes an important step closer to successful human gene
therapy.

    The immediate impact on MMI of ANDi, the Oregon monkey with a green
jellyfish gene, is modest. But it illustrates the potential in the portfolio of
intellectual property being built by MMI boss David Best and his team.

    There are already talks on the commercial potential of these developments,
and they could result in a new company being spun out of the Oregon-MMI joint
venture. Look for a continuing newsflow from MMI. Hold the shares.


LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2001


                              184 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                December 6, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Jab that could be a cure for haemophilia

BODY:


    A CURE for haemophilia could be just an injection away, according to
research published today.

    Scientists say they can reverse the hereditary blood clotting disorder,
which affects 10,000 people in the UK.

    The breakthrough centres on a form of gene therapy tested on animals. Human
trials are now planned.

    The injection replaces malfunctioning genes that stop the production of a
crucial blood clotting protein.

    It is insufficient amounts of this protein, called factor IX, that causes
haemophilia type B, affecting 20 per cent of sufferers.

    Other sufferers have haemophilia A, caused by a deficiency in clotting
factor VIII.

    Once the gene is injected, scientists say it multiplies in the body to
correct the deficiency.

    The disease, which usually only affects males, causes bleeding mainly in the
muscles and joints. However, internal bleeding in the brain can kill.

    Current treatment involves injections of blood products, which can improve
symptoms but does not offer a cure.

    The scientists at the University of North Carolina, whose research is
published in the journal Molecular Therapy, said the results of gene jab
experiments on haemophiliac mice were 'startling'.

    'Surprisingly and unexpectedly, the mice were producing amounts of this
blood-clotting factor, 100 to 1000 times more than we've observed before,' said
Dr Christopher Walsh, who led the research.

    But he warned the injections would not be available for some time because of
restrictions on human tests after an American teenager with a liver disorder
died testing a drug.


LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2000


                              185 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 23, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: The gene jab that may cure diabetes

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    A CURE for diabetes may be in sight, according to a scientific study.

    In what is being hailed as the biggest step forward in the development of a
treatment for the condition, which affects 1.4million Britons, experts have
found a way to reverse it using a form of gene therapy.

    Although experiments have so far been carried out successfully only on
animals, the scientists say the breakthrough paves the way for trials in humans.

    The Korean and Canadian experts cured rats and mice of diabetes by replacing
malfunctioning genes which stop diabetics producing insulin, the hormone that
regulates blood sugar levels.

    They genetically altered an aden-ovirus a type of germ which causes chest
infections so that it could carry a gene that releases insulin directly to the
liver and pancreas. The scientists, whose research is published today in the
scientific journal Nature, hoped the gene would replace the malfunctioning one
that caused diabetes.

    They were amazed when a simple injection meant the animals, which were all
suffering from the more serious type 1 diabetes, went into remission without any
noticeable side effects.

    They continued to produce insulin for another eight months after the
injection, the scientists from Yonsei University in Seoul and Calgary University
report.

    Though they stressed it was too early to say if the therapy would work in
humans, they hailed it as a signifi-By James Chapman Science Correspondent cant
step forward. 'This gene therapy may have potential therapeutic value for the
cure of auto-immune diabetes in humans,' they said.

    Dr Jerrold Olefsky, a diabetes expert at California University, says in a
commentary published alongside the research: 'This represents a definite step
forward and offers a good example of how fundamental research can be applied to
problems of human health.' Bill Hartnett, of the leading charity Diabetes UK,
hailed the breakthrough as 'a very exciting development for people with
diabetes'.

    But he added: 'It's likely to be a long way from being used in people.

    'Gene therapy is in its very earliest stages. We will await developments
with interest to see if this might become an appropriate therapy.' Type 1
diabetics need as many as four daily insulin injections to control blood glucose
levels.

    Without regular doses, they develop complications which may lead to
blindness and serious blood circulation problems.

    The condition is the single biggest cause of blindness in Britain and the
most common cause of lower leg and foot amputations among adults of working age.
It also raises the risk of heart disease.

    The findings are a boost for scientists working on controversial gene
therapies for various diseases, which all essentially involve altering the
genetic makeup of patients.

    They believe a host of genetic conditions could be eliminated with gene
therapy administered by injection or even inhaled through a nose spray.

    The number of Britons with diabetes is expected to double in the next ten
years, partly because more are becoming obese.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              186 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 22, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 81

LENGTH: 49 words

HEADLINE: WLS penny float

BODY:


    INVESTORS have paid 1p a share to invest in a new bioscience company which
floats today. World Life Sciences will invest in gene therapy, metabolic
disorders, and medical devices. Valued at GBP 7.6m, it is being spun out of
Billam, the ex-engineer which now backs hi-tech businesses.


LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                              187 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 14, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 1103 words

HEADLINE: I was 17 when they removed my brain tumour. I couldn't walk or talk.
But the nightmare was only just beginning...

BYLINE: Joely Carey

BODY:


    WHEN Bryony Carr, 22, complained of a stiff neck, everyone thought she had
been studying too hard.

    Months later, when the pain became unbearable, she asked to see a
physiotherapist. Only then did doctors discover that she had a huge brain
tumour. Bryony lives with her mother Jill, a teacher, father Derek, a software
engineer, and sister Erica, 18, in Bristol. Here, she tells JOELY CAREY her
story . . .

    CASEBOOK BACK in April 1996, I was studying for my A-levels, but the pain in
my neck made concentrating impossible. My GP couldn't find anything wrong and
suggested it could be due to bending over my books.

    I improved my posture, but six months later I was still in immense pain.

    With just days to go before my first exam, I pleaded with my GP to let me
see a physiotherapist. He said he would send me to an emergency physio at our
local accident and emergency unit.

    My parents dropped me off on their way to work, and after three hours
waiting my turn, I was taken into a room and examined. I had my blood pressure
checked, my abdomen felt, and then the young doctor shone a light in my eyes.

    She became very flustered at that point and said she had to get someone
else. Later, she admitted to me that she wanted to cry because she knew then
that I was seriously ill, and quite probably dying.

    A string of doctors came in, all looking into my eyes. I started to get
nervous. One of the doctors looked at me gravely. 'We need to contact your
parents,' he said. At that point, I started crying.

    Numerous CAT scans, body scans and X-rays followed. My parents arrived and I
was transferred to Bristol's Frenchay Hospital, where we finally learned what
was wrong.

    'There is no easy way to tell you this,' the doctor said. 'You have a large
tumour at the back of your brain, and we need to operate urgently.' Surgery was
a risk, he said, but either I had the tumour cut out or I would die.

    If I hadn't gone to the hospital when I did, I would have been dead within a
week. The tumour - a rare form of cancer - had been pressing onto my spinal
cord, causing the pains in my neck.

    That night was very emotional. My sister Erica couldn't stop crying, Mum was
devastated, and Dad did his best to keep himself composed for my sake. There was
no guarantee that I would survive the surgery, let alone that it would be
successful.

    Early the next morning, I was wheeled off to theatre, and the next thing I
remember is waking up to see my parents' faces. I tried to speak, but my words
came out as nonsense. My head was extremely sore and I was paralysed, too.

    The doctors explained that things had gone well and they had managed to
remove all of the tumour - but from where I lay, it seemed things were pretty
awful.

    The next week was a haze of scans and medication. I kept trying to speak,
but every attempt was incomprehensible and my frustration was immense.

    Then, about ten days later, my mouth suddenly seemed to do what it was
supposed to, and I managed to ask for some water. I still couldn't walk, and I
couldn't move my hands or arms. My brain was in shock and any kind of movement
took too much concentration.

    I couldn't even dress myself.

    I hated everything that had happened to me and wished I was anywhere but on
a grotty hospital ward.

    Two weeks after the operation, I was allowed home - but this was just the
start of my real recovery. Once I had regained some strength, I had to have
intensive radiotherapy and endless rounds of physiotherapy.

    Life was pretty unbearable, and I'm afraid I made it uncomfortable for my
family. I was a very impatient patient. I hated having to work so hard to do
simple things, like catch a ball, and I wanted my old life back.

    My right side was still very weak, I had difficulty walking and I couldn't
write. Needless to say, my academic ambitions had been put on hold.

    Life did move on, though, and as the months passed I gradually felt better.

    I learned to write with my left hand, and a year later was well enough to
take my A-levels in Biology and Chemistry.

    I passed and was able to go to the University of the West of England in
Bristol to take a degree in Biomedical Sciences.

    THEN, in February 1999, after one of my routine quarterly CAT scans, the
unthinkable happened. I knew something was wrong when I looked at my
specialist's face. Usually he was very cheery, but on this occasion he was
particularly grave.

    'It's back, and I'm so very sorry,' he said. He told me the tumours were
everywhere - in my brain, my spine - and that the outlook wasn't great.

    I was admitted to hospital and spent the next six months having regular
chemotherapy, followed by a bone marrow transplant.

    Eventually, it was all finished and I was allowed home.

    Tests showed the cancer was again in remission, and although I felt tired, I
was happy it was all over.

    I still need regular scans to make sure the cancer isn't trying to creep
back, but I feel well and hope that this time I have beaten it for good.

    Although I was the one with the brain tumour, it affected the whole family,
changing us all. Today, I'm much nicer to be around - less selfish and more
appreciative.

    We spend more time together as a family. What happened made us realise the
value of life. When you have been as close to dying as I have, you savour every
single minute.

    And that is what I intend to do for the rest of my life.

    IMPERIAL Cancer Research Fund: www.imperialcancer.co.uk

    DIAGNOSIS

    CONSULTANT neurosurgeon Ian Pople carried out Bryony Carr's operation. He
says:

    MEDULLOBLASTOMAS have very ordinary, almost subtle symptoms - headaches,
vomiting, clumsiness. As the tumour continues to grow, it can obstruct the flow
of cerebral fluid, which produces dramatic pressure in the head, causing severe
headaches, even death, quite quickly.

    Medulloblastoma is extremely rare, but slightly more common in children and
young adults.

    Any brain surgery is difficult because you have to be so careful to avoid
damaging any of the normal surrounding brain, particularly in the region of the
cerebellum, where the medulloblastomas often crop up. The cerebellum controls
coordination, but the deeper parts are connected to the brain stem, which
controls your breathing, everything.

    If all the tumour is successfuly removed, there is a 30pc chance of the
tumour recurring at some stage; but there is a 65pc long-term survival rate.

    Progress with image guidance technology makes it safer for us to tackle
deep-seated tumours, and advances with gene therapy look promising for the
future.


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2000


                              188 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 10, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 53

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: HOW BONE MARROW COULD GROW YOU A NEW LIVER

BYLINE: Martyn Halle

BODY:


    DOCTORS have discovered a process which could lead to new livers being grown
for transplantation.

    Hundreds of lives each year are saved thanks to the livers of dead donors,
but finding an exact match is difficult.

    However, liver experts have found that the cells which make up the liver are
present in the body's bone marrow. This discovery could lead to the growing of
new organs rather than having to rely on donations.

    The liver is famed as the only organ in the body capable of regenerating
itself if part of it is lost through disease or injury. For years doctors have
wondered why it is that, uniquely, the liver is able to re-grow.

    Now, for the first time, doctors have found the key to the mystery.

    'We have proved that in humans there are stem cells (embryonic cells which
grow into mature cells) for the liver in the bone marrow,' says Neil Theise,
Professor of Pathology at New York University School of Medicine, who led the
research.

    'These cells could potentially be used as a source of cells for liver
transplants, as a pool of cells for the development of an artificial liver, and
in gene therapy to treat many liver diseases.' Stem cells were long thought to
be limited to organs which supply fresh sources of new cells throughout life,
such as blood cells from the bone marrow and skin cells from skin.

    And it was thought that cells from bone marrow, for example, couldn't become
anything but blood cells.

    The liver - even if half of the organ is removed from the body - regenerates
with breathtaking speed, but researchers have disagreed for many years about the
origins of the liver's new-found cells. Some suspected there might be stem cells
from the liver itself, but they lacked proof of their existence - until now.

    'This is an exciting finding and incredibly surprising because the bone
marrow has never been considered as a source of liver cells,' says Professor
Diane Krause, of Yale University School of Medicine, author of the new study.

    'Bone marrow is supposed to turn out blood cells. Liver is supposed to turn
out liver cells,' says Dr Krause.

    'The goal is now to harness the potential of this finding into new
treatments.' The liver is the body's workhorse for many metabolic functions, and
it also supplies blood-clotting factors.

    It is theoretically possible that healthy genes could be inserted into liver
stem cells from the bone marrow, and these new cells would correct metabolic and
blood-clotting abnormalities caused by damaged genes.

    As around 5,000 people die each year from chronic liver diseases and
cirrhosis, any type of new treatment would be welcomed. However, it could be
many years, if ever, before liver stem-cell transplants are attempted.


LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                              189 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 3, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 41

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: A killer we can help to cure;YOUR CUT-OUT AND KEEP GUIDE TO BOWEL
CANCER;
GOOD HEALTH

BODY:


    YOUR CUT-OUT AND KEEP GUIDE TO BOWEL CANCER

    WHAT CAUSES IT?

    * IT IS thought that most bowel cancers arise from polyps common benign
tumours which develop from normal colonic mucus, and which are present in about
one-third of the population.

    * IT IS estimated that around 5 pc of these polyps become malignant over
five to ten years.

    What triggers the change is not clear; diet is one possibility.

    * RECENT research suggests diets with less red and processed meat, and more
vegetables and fibre, are associated with a reduced risk of bowel cancer. High
alcohol consumption, especially in men, has been linked to an increased risk, as
has obesity.

    * TREATMENT for the 30,000 new cases a year diagnosed in the UK depends on
the stage of the cancer. They include surgery, drugs, chemotherapy and
radiotherapy. Several new drugs are on trial, and gene therapy and vaccines are
being investigated.

    * FIVE-year survival rates f or colon cancer have risen from 23 pc in 1971
to 39 pc, but are still considered far too low.

    * DETECTION and treatment of polyps at an early stage is possible, and a
number of potential screening methods are being investigated. One estimate is
that 5,000 deaths a year among over-60s could be prevented b y screening.

    * TO contact Beating Bowel Cancer, call 020 8892 0171.

    THE SYMPTOMS

    THE most frequent symptom is rectal bleeding, but this is quite common and
usually harmless - one in seven of us experiences this in any one year for some
reason or another. The trick is knowing when to take it seriously. Other
symptoms include:

    * A RECENT, persistent change of bowel habit with looser stools, trying to
pass a motion more often or having continual diarrhoea-like motions for more
than a few weeks.

    If this is accompanied by bleeding, this is an even clearer potential
symptom. Constipation is less likely to be bowel cancer but can cause straining
and lead to rectal bleeding. This is more likely to be due to lack of fibre in
the diet, not enough fluid drunk with and between meals, or a lack of exercise.

    * RECTAL bleeding without any other symptoms. Piles are the main cause of
bleeding, but are accompanied by lumps, pain and itching.

    * INSTANCES of rectal bleeding in those over 60. Bowel cancer is more likely
to happen as you get older - the average age group is in the 60s and 70s,
although several thousand people under 60 develop the disease every year. If you
have rectal bleeding and are over 60 then you should be investigated. If you do
have piles,it may be masking a more serious problem.

    * OTHER symptoms without bleeding. High-risk symptoms are: unexplained
anaemia with or without tiredness; a lump or mass in your tummy which can be
felt by the doctor; and persistent severe abdominal pain if you are in an older
age group.

    SIX-WEEK WATCH AND WAIT

    FOR the first time with a major disease, doctors are saying it is safe to
watch and wait for up to six weeks - it will make no difference to the outcome.

    'In that time, you should see if you can influence symptoms by getting
advice from your pharmacist and trying a change in diet and exercise habits,'
says Dr Roger Leicester, consultant bowel surgeon at St George's Hospital in
Tooting, South London.

    If you have diarrhoea, this may be due to changes in diet or a virus, and a
preparation such as Immodium or Lomotil may solve the problem.

    Constipation is often due to lack of fibre or fluid in the diet, so try
lactulose solution, take in more fibre and fluids, and exercise regularly.

    If you have rectal bleeding and the blood is bright red, try haemorrhoid
remedies such as Anusol cream or suppositories.

    However, if the symptoms persist you should visit your GP and be referred
for investigation within two weeks. If you feel you are not being taken
seriously, take a copy of this article to show your GP or ask for a second
opinion.

    HOW DIET CAN HELP

    THERE is evidence that eating a high fibre diet - particularly leafy green
vegetables, wholemeal products, (cereals, bread, pasta and rice) pulses and
fruit could reduce the risk of bowel cancer.

    Fibre, along with at least two litres of water a day, helps stimulate the
bowel regularly. Cutting down on red meat and animal fats and eating oily fish
could also help to reduce the risks.

    And scientists are now using vegetables and curries in the fight against the
disease. Broccoli and curcumin, derived from tumeric, a spice widely used in
Asian cooking, are being studied for their role in reducing the risk of this
cancer, which was responsible for 17,090 deaths in the UK in 1998. As well as
helping to prevent the disease, experts believe natural ingredients in these
foods could slow down the growth of cancers.

    Both contain natural chemicals which seem to play a part in inhibiting cell
growth.

    Trials on a new type of super-broccoli, a cross between ordinary broccoli
and a wild Sicilian variety, are underway.

    Meanwhile, researchers at Leicester University have been looking at spices
in curries in a bid to explain the low rates of colon cancers among the town's
Asian community.

    Their investigations led them to believe that curcumin has aunique ability
to resist cancer growth.

    Dr Ricky Sharma says: 'We are getting some encouraging results.'

    HOW YOU CAN HELP

    IF YOU would like to help improve the quality of bowel cancer diagnosis
across the country, please make your donations payable to Beating Bowel Cancer
and send to 39 Crown Road, Twickenham TW1 1EJ, or call the credit card hotline
on 020 8892 0171. Lines open from 9.30am-5pm, Monday to Friday.


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2000


                              190 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 30, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 809 words

HEADLINE: A breakthrough in cardiac treatment and the latest advice on
prevention;
The gene jab that could end the need for heart bypasses

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have found a way to revive 'dead' heart tissue in a breakthrough
which could herald the end of bypasses for many cardiac patients and save
thousands of lives.

    The researchers have had startling success in increasing blood flow through
areas of muscle rendered useless by heart attacks or the build-up of fat in
arteries.

    The experimental technique involves injecting patients with a gene which
stimulates the growth of new blood vessels in the heart, a process known as
angiogenesis.

    Nine patients who were all so seriously ill that they could barely perform
day-today tasks or move around comfortably have made remarkable recoveries after
taking part in the gene therapy trial.

    They had all had at least one heart attack

    and undergone bypass surgery. All suffered from continual chest pain.

    After the treatment they all felt significantly better, with scans showing
blood flow to their hearts had markedly improved. Their reliance on medication
was greatly reduced.

    The gene given to the patients is called VEGF, which controls the production
of a protein in the body called vascular endothelial growth factor.

    This substance is involved in the growth of new blood vessels.

    Surgeons made a small incision in the chest and injected doses of the VEGF
gene directly into four places in the heart.

    Professor Jeffrey Isner, who led the research at Tufts University in Boston,
said the therapy appeared to revive areas of the heart that appeared to be dead
but which were in fact only 'hibernating'.

    'This is a potentially important finding that was quite unexpected,' said
Prof Isner, whose research is published in the journal Circulation. 'We saw
large areas where there was no blood flow to the heart, but many of those
defects were gone after gene transfer.' Six months after the gene injections,
the average number of painful angina attacks among the patients had dropped from
48 per week to two per week. Average weekly use of nitro-glycerine pills used to
control angina fell from 55 to two over the same period.

    Most importantly, areas of heart muscle that were assumed to be dead scar
tissue caused by a heart attack had restored function in the nine patients
within 60 days of gene therapy.

    Four patients had partial and five patients had complete restoration of
blood flow to the 'hibernating' areas.

    Prof Isner said: 'What we have shown is that VEGF gene transfer is
sufficiently potent to provide enough blood supply to rescue an area of
hibernating heart muscle.' Dr James Symes, another member of the research team,
said: 'It seems to work. We have to recognise that we are still talking about a
very small number of patients, but it is very clear to me, as the surgeon who
injected this into most of these people, that it does have the ability to modify
blood flow going into certain areas of the myocardium (heart muscle).' Heart
disease claims 140,000 lives annually in the UK. About 100,000 Britons survive a
heart attack each year and some 24,000 go on to have bypass surgery. About 500
patients die before they even reach the operating theatre and thousands more are
not suitable for treatment.

    Dr Duncan Dymond, of London's St Bartholomew's Hospital, one of the UK's
leading cardiologists, said the research could bring about a 'quantum leap' in
the treatment of heart disease.

    'We have all been waiting for this,' he said last night. 'It really is
something to be excited about. I can think of a dozen patients just in my clinic
who would be suitable.

    'More and more people are surviving longer and outliving not just one bypass
graft but two. You get to the stage where you have no more blood vessels to do
anything with. If we can wake up hibernating heart tissue with the VEGF gene
then that is a huge step.' Dr Dymond said that many more trials would be needed
before gene

    therapy could become more widely available. Although the American
researchers believe the treatment could make bypass surgery largely redundant,
Dr Dymond said there would always be a place for the operation, which has proved
safe and effective over 20 years.

    A universal vaccine against almost all types of cancer could be developed,
research suggests.

    Though such a breakthrough is likely to be many years away, American experts
who have been experimenting on telomerase a protein present in virtually all
cancerous cells believe it could form the basis of a new form of cancer
treatment.

    Tests showed telomerase can trigger the development of immune cells which
fight cancer cells.

    They destroyed cancer cells in the test tube and also slowed the growth of
tumours in mice, reports the journal Nature Medicine today.

    The team at Duke University Medical Centre, New Carolina, hopes to develop a
treatment based on telomerase.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2000


                              191 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 16, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 60

LENGTH: 168 words

HEADLINE: Cancer cure hopes see BioMedica shoot ahead

BYLINE: Janice Warman

BODY:


    SHARES in Aim-listed Oxford BioMedica soared 14p to 891/2p as it revealed
the discovery of a range of genes which could help to fight cancer and heart
disease.

    The discovery will give BioMedica a head start in the race to identify the
role of specific genes in causing disease.

    The rough draft of the human genome the 'book of life' containing mankind's
genetic blueprint was completed in June.

    Chief executive Prof Alan Kingsman said: 'This is a new business opportunity
for the company and gives a third arm to what we do gene therapy, immunotherapy
and now gene discovery.' BioMedica can now clinch further deals with major
pharmaceutical companies, which can use the information to design new drugs.

    BioMedica raised GBP 8.5m from institutional investors last week to fund the
new research. It plans to move from Aim to the main market early next year.

    The shares, though well below their 124p February peak, have outperformed
the European drugs sector by 114pc this year.


GRAPHIC: GENE RESEARCH: NEW DRUGS

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2000


                              192 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 10, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: The genius gene;
Breakthrough that could guarantee a baby's intelligence

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS claim they are close to identifying the genes that make a genius.

    The discovery could enable doctors to test the potential intelligence of
newborn babies to find which are Einsteins in the making.

    It could even help them develop ways of genetically engineering IQ levels
before birth.

    Critics believe the advance will fuel the demand for designer babies while
encouraging the discarding of those with less innate intelligence.

    Researchers working for the U.S.

    National Institutes of Health analysed the DNA of 200 of the brightest
children in America and compared them with the genetic material from ordinary
youngsters.

    The results of their study, due out next year, are believed to show
significant differences in certain genetic regions of the brain.

    Team members believe more than one gene is involved. But, taken together,
the genetic differences can make a big difference to a person's intelligence.

    Professor Robert Plomin, who led the research, said: 'I think we need to
recognise that genetic influences are important and that we will find the genes
for intelligence. Each may account for a small piece of the action but together
they give us a significant source of prediction for intelligence.'

    The next step will be to discover how these genius genes work, with the key
theory being that they help make nerve cells which transmit signals from one
part of the brain to another.

    The discovery is likely to reignite the nature versus nurture argument in
which some scientists and thinkers claim that if the environment in which a
child grows up contributes relatively little to intelligence, society should not
waste its resources on education and social opportunities for all.

    Rightwing thinker Charles Murray is co-author of The Bell Curve, a
controversial book which claims society should foster the talents of the lucky
few whose genes have given them high IQs.

    He believes the 'new genetics' will change political views about IQ and
social policies will have to be changed as scientists are forced to concede that
genes play a much bigger part in shaping intelligence than environment or
schooling.

    'We have had the scientific community denying the obvious,' Mr Murray told
BBC TV's Newsnight on Tuesday.

    'We've had people saying that IQ is virtually all determined by the
environment and we can change it by the proper social interventions and a whole
bunch of other things that are simply not true.' Professor Plomin says, however,
that the genetic findings should inspire Leftwing thinkers to ensure equality of
opportunity by concentrating on those who need the most help those with the
least IQ.

    He said: 'Depending on your values, you can say "right, genetic influences
are important in intelligence, therefore what I'll do is not put my money into
those kids who are going to do good anyway.

    'I'm going to put it into the lower end of the distribution to make sure
that we don't lose our citizens that they don't fall off the end of the curve
and feel disenfranchised as citizens".' But Jeremy Rifkin, an American
biotechnoilogy critic and author, believes the greatest threat comes from
ambitious parents.

    'Every parents wants the best for their child,' he said. 'In the future the
parent could become an architect and each child the ultimate shopping
experience.

    'In the next ten or 20 years we could have eugenics with a smiling face. We
will no longer require the lower classes to have fewer babies we will just have
them have better babies as we learn to do gene therapy.'

    j.hope@dailymail.co.uk


GRAPHIC: BORN BRILLIANT: ALBERT EINSTEIN

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2000


                              193 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 28, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1188 words

HEADLINE: My two children and I share a genetic abnormality. So why does this
weeks scientific milestone scare me so much?

BYLINE: Tom Shakespeare

BODY:



    THIS week, scientists unveiled one of the greatest advances in scientific
history. It will, they claim, deepen our understanding of human existence and
lead to the eradication of disease.

    It could also mean that people like me and my two children - we have a
genetic abnormality - might never be born in the future. That is a prospect I
find very frightening.

    I am, of course, referring to the Human Genome Project, described by
President Clinton yesterday as 'learning the language in which God created
life'.

    But, as a result of this kind of rhetoric, I believe there is a danger of us
seeing ourselves purely in genetic terms, ignoring all the other factors that go
to make up a human being.

    I was born with a genetic abnormality called achondroplasia, which leads to
restricted growth - I am just 4ft 5in. But a purely genetic description of my
condition does not explain my life.

    I have a doctorate from Cambridge and a good job. I have a happy family,
with two children, Ivy, and Robert, both of whom have the same condition as I
do.

    In social and career terms, I am a successful person.

    Fortunately, I came from a comfortable background, since my father, Sir
William Shakespeare - who also had achondroplasia - was a doctor.

    Though I still get stared at in the street, the problems of disability have
not affected me as much as they do those from more disadvantaged upbringings.

    But what that shows is that the difficulties relate, not to the fact of
being short, but to the way society treats people like me.

    I passionately believe, therefore, that it would be wrong to look at
anyone's genetic makeup and then predict exactly how they would turn out, and
whether they should or should not be born.

    I know that other genetic conditions can create far more serious problems
than mine, leading to severe learning difficulties and suffering. But the point
remains that our genes can never mean that a life is not worth living.

    Disability often comes with other qualities, as several of the great figures
of art, science and literature demonstrate.

    Beethoven is a classic case. He was a fifth child, and his siblings were
affected by deafness, blindness, syphilis and tuberculosis.

    Given this genetic family history, in the modern era his mother might have
been told, 'Abort this pregnancy'.

    Beethoven would not have been born and we would have lost some of the most
inspiring music ever written.

    So we have to recognise that genes cannot tell us everything about life. But
we must also face the fact that this rough draft of mankind's complete genetic
code does raise disturbing questions crucial to future generations.

    Just how will we use this information to terminate selectively certain
pregnancies - a technique already available for some genetic disorders - which
may be affected by a so-called 'faulty gene'?

    Will we shift towards a brave new world of 'tentative pregnancies', where
women will wait to check their developing embryos for a range of genetic
diseases before deciding whether to press ahead with birth?

    Even if society did allow terminations on genetic grounds, where would the
line be drawn?

    Some might say it is obvious that we should try to avoid particular mental
and physical disabilities, but a lot more than just disease is controlled by
genetics.

    For example, will we start selecting the sex of our babies?

    Will parents be allowed to choose certain looks, or a type of personality or
skills?

    We cannot do this yet, but the genome information opens up the possibility.

    It is urgent we debate this issue now and decide where the limits on such
interventions be set.

    We also have to consider what we do with genetic information as it affects
people today. We may now be able to find out how likely we are to become ill or
even die from a certain ailment. But do we really want this knowledge?

    Sometimes, a person might be able to take steps to avoid disease, but in
other cases nothing can be done. For example, the gene for Huntington's Disease,
an incurable, degenerative disease of the brain, was discovered several years
ago.

    But what researchers have found is that, of all the people who may be at
risk of Huntington's because it runs in families, only 12 per cent actually want
to find out if they are going to acquire it.

    Most people do not want to know. Understandably, they do not want to live
under the shadow of a death sentence.

    Genetic ignorance can be bliss.

    And, despite the extravagant claims of politicians and scientists earlier
this week, we are still a long way from curing all diseases, including cancer,
for which we know the genetic cause.

    Gene therapy, in which scientists try to replace a faulty gene with a
correct one, is still in its infancy. It is absurd to pretend the genome now
heralds the end of human illness. In fact, it is only just the beginning of our
understanding.

    We still do not know how many genes there are: estimates range from 30,000
to 150,000. Nor do we know what all these genes do and how they relate to the
functioning of the human body.

    After all, we share 51pc of our genetic material with yeast, 57pc with
cabbages and 97pc with chimpanzees. Obviously, there is a massive difference
between humans and these other life forms. So, for all this week's excitement,
there is much we need to learn.

    If we do proceed with more widespread genetic testing as a result of the
advances made so far, there is another issue to be addressed: just how widely
should the results of these tests be made available?

    If insurers, for instance, have the right to genetic information, will they
be able to discriminate against those who are likely to develop a certain
disease?

    On the other hand, if the right to genetic privacy were enshrined in law,
and an individual found out he was likely to die prematurely of cancer, he could
take out a lucrative insurance policy in favour of his family.

    This is not some fictional scenario. In the U.S., the insurance companies
are genuinely worried about the growing numbers of potentially ill people taking
out policies, which will push up premiums for healthy people. Indeed, many are
predicting that genetic information will destroy the private medical industry in
America.

    So, for all the hype, there are huge concerns about the consequences of the
genome breakthrough. The problem is that we do not yet have the social and
ethical understanding to regulate it properly and prevent abuses.

    What is needed is a major debate to provide the public with more knowledge
about the implications of genome. The GM foods fiasco shows that if the public
is taken for granted, ignored or patronised, then it will will react against
these scientific developments.

    I believe scientists have a duty to be accountable for the application of
their work. They have made a giant leap forward in knowledge. It is now up to
all of us to see that it is used properly for our benefit.

    * Tom Shakespeare is director of the Policy, Ethics and Life Sciences
Research Institute, Newcastle University.


GRAPHIC: 'WE MIGHT NEVER BE BORN IN THE FUTURE': TOM, WITH IVY

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2000


                              194 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 26, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1091 words

HEADLINE: Scientists unlock the secret of genetic code;
After years of study, researchers learn the 'recipe' of life that could wipe out
diseases and allow people to live for ever

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    THE race to crack the human genetic code, described as the biggest-ever
breakthrough in medical science, is over, experts will announce today.

    After years of work by thousands of researchers across the world, scientists
are expected to reveal that they have read all three billion 'letters' of the
code, or genome.

    It is an achievement that will have massive repercussions for health and
society. It has been labelled more important than man landing on the moon or the
work of Charles Darwin.

    Now we understand the essential 'recipe' for a human being, scientists say,
we should be able to use the knowledge to eliminate a whole range of genetic
diseases, including cancer. Doctors could treat patients for diseases before
they even appear, using drugs specially tailored to individuals.

    Understanding the genome could dramatically extend life expectancy, allowing
people to live at least twice as long as today and even, conceivably, for ever.

    But confirmation of the breakthrough will also add to the fierce controversy
over whether such knowledge should be exploited for profit.

    Two groups have been racing to finish reading the 'book of life', which is
contained in every cell in our bodies. British scientists have been playing a
key role in an international team at The Human Genome Project, based at the
Wellcome Trust's Sanger Centre, near Cambridge.

    In the U.S., the work using hi-tech 'sequencing' machines has been done by
the privately- owned Celera Genomics headed by controversial Dr Craig Venter.

    Though the rivalry between them has been fierce and often bitter, they are
believed to have agreed to make a joint announcement of the completion of the
genome.

    The code is enormous it has been estimated that it would fill 200 telephone
directories and take nine years to read out loud. The letters that make it up
As, Cs, Gs and Ts spell out our genes, the stretches of DNA that tell a cell how
to make the proteins in an organism.

    But the completion of 'working drafts' of the code about ten per cent of it
proved impossible to read because of its repetitive nature mark only the
beginning for scientists.

    They will now have to use the information to understand disease and develop
drugs to prevent and treat illness, or to pioneer gene transplants which could
eliminate a susceptibility to disease.

    Dr John Harris, professor of bioethics at Manchester University and a member
of the Government's Human Genetics Commission, says research into how to treat
the diseases of old age, such as dementia, cancer and arthritis, could
ultimately extend the maximum age way beyond its current length.

    In a recent article, he wrote: 'New research allows a glimpse into a world
in which ageing and even death may no longer be inevitable.' Scientists have
already identified a single gene, called p21, that may hold the key to
conquering cancer, arthritis and Alzheimer's disease. They say it may one day be
possible to treat them all with a single drug. As well as heralding a medical
revolution, the reading of the genome also poses fundamental ethical questions.

    It raises the prospect of 'designer babies' or discrimination against people
predisposed to certain diseases by insurers and employees. In the U.S., a law
has already been introduced banning discrimination on the basis of genetic tests
between people who apply for insurance.

    There are also doubts over whether we would really want to know, for
example, that our genetic makeup means we are likely to die at an early age.

    Dozens of companies have already taken out patents on gene sequences thought
to play a part in disease, despite widespread criticism that no one should be
able to 'own' part of the blueprint.

    Researchers at the Human Genome Project have been posting their discoveries
nightly on the Internet. But Celera, based in Rockville, Maryland, has kept its
findings to itself. Dr Venter has already sparked outrage by suggesting that the
human genome can be exploited for profit.

    The area has become so controversial that earlier this year Tony Blair and
Bill Clinton issued an unprecedented joint declaration that access to the human
genome should be freely available to everyone.

    For their massive task, the British team took blood and sperm samples from
between ten and 20 anonymous donors for DNA to analyse.

    Celera selected 30 men and women of different ethnic backgrounds through a
newspaper advertisment. Dr Venter refuses to say whether his own DNA was added
to the mix.

    The first analysis of the code from the Cambridge project including the
precise number of genes it takes to make a human being is likely to be published
later this year in the journals Science and Nature.

    Dr Peter Little, of Imperial College in London, has compared it to
Christopher Columbus arriving in America. He said: 'It was an exciting moment
but actually the world didn't change. But now, when you look at who is living
and working in America, you realise the importance of what had been discovered.'
j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk

    Hope of a cold cure for cancer )

    SCIENTISTS believe they have found a way to modify the common cold virus so
that it triggers the destruction of brain tumours.

    Experts at the University of Manchester claim the technique could also be
used to treat diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's.

    They genetically altered an adenovirus a type of germ which causes chest
infections so that it could carry a gene that releases anticancer proteins
directly to the brain. When the virus was injected into rats with tumours, the
cancer appeared to regress. The virus did not provoke a dangerous reaction from
the immune system a problem that caused the death of a teenager undergoing gene
therapy treatment in the U.S. The anticancer genes also carried on working in
the brain for at least 12 months.

    Announcing the breakthrough at the Forum of European Neuroscience conference
in Brighton yesterday, Professor Pedro Lowenstein said: 'We can get the virus to
inhibit the growth of brain tumours in rodent models. The tumour regresses and
the animal survives.' He said if the virus was injected into patients with
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's, it could carry genes that promoted the repair of
damaged brain cells.

    'These new treatment delivery systems will be safe, extremely efficient and
stable so we can harness them for the treatment of chronic and ongoing
degenerative brain diseases, as well as for the treatment of brain tumours,' he
said.


GRAPHIC: CONTEST: A RESEARCHER IN THE U.S. COMPANY'S LABORATORIES

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                              195 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 22, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 34

LENGTH: 260 words

HEADLINE: Firm fined after worker was suffocated by gas

BODY:


    A LEADING medical research unit was fined GBP 25,000 yesterday after
admitting responsibility for the death of a worker.

    James Graham, 51, was suffocated by a cloud of freezing nitrogen gas while
he worked alone at a Human Genetics Unit in Edinburgh, run by the UK-wide
Medical Research Council.

    The MRC admitted safety failings, including inadequate ventilation, failing
to ensure an alarm was switched on and failing to fit a device to control a
liquid nitrogen storage tank. The lives of other staff at the unit, based at the
Western General Hospital, were endangered.

    MRC executive director Nick Winterton said: 'We took professional advice in
designing the liquid nitrogen store in 1997. I think at the time the dangers
associated with a serious leakage of liquid nitrogen were not fully appreciated
and the facility was not properly designed.' Sheriff Iain MacPhail, QC, said:
'Generally where death is the consequence of a criminal act, as it sadly was in
this case, that is regarded as an aggravating feature of the offence. The
penalty therefore has to reflect public disquiet at the unnecessary loss of
life.' Edinburgh Sheriff Court heard that Mr Graham, who had worked with liquid
nitrogen for 10 years, died after about 700 litres of the gas leaked into a
freezer room, depleting oxygen in the air.

    The unit took part in Britain's first gene therapy trial for cystic fibrosis
and conducts research in genetic therapy for incurable diseases including some
forms of blindness. It is at the forefront of medical research.


LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2000


                              196 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  June 2, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 44

LENGTH: 560 words

HEADLINE: UK sets the pace in prostate cancer fight;
Scientists bring good news in battles against two of our biggest killers

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    british methods to beat prostate cancer are being adopted across the world.

    As a result of the treatment, which uses hormone therapy rather than
radiotherapy or surgery, the chances of a British man surviving the disease are
as good as in the U.S.

    Experts said yesterday that death rates in England and Wales are virtually
the same as in the U.S. even though doctors there prefer radical surgery and
radiotherapy. The Cancer Research Campaign says that British methods are now
being increasingly favoured elsewhere in the world.

    At face value, statistics show the U.S. has far higher survival rates for
the disease than the UK reaching more than 90 per cent compared with only 49 per
cent.

    But scientists say that this is caused by the diagnosis of more cases at an
earlier stage.

    There was a massive increase in prostate cancer in the UK throughout the
1980s and early 1990s, rising to at least 21,000 cases a year.

    Around half of sufferers are eventually killed by the disease.

    Mortality rates for 1997, the latest available, showed there were between 14
and 16 prostate cancer deaths per 100,000 in both the U.S. and England and
Wales.

    CRC director general Professor Gordon McVie said: 'It stands to reason that
the more patients you have registered with early stage disease, the better your
survival figures look.

    'The bottom line in all this is the death rates they tell a different story.
It does not change the outcome, as we can see from the mortality data.' Kate Law
of the CRC said some Americans are being diagnosed with prostate cancer up to 10
years before their UK counterparts.

    'The survival rates look staggering until you realise that these men are
simply living 10 years longer with the knowledge that they have prosta te
cancer,' she said. 'British men are more likely to have hormone treatment which
is less toxic and distressing.

    'It is significant that hormone treatments are currently becoming more
popular elsewhere, including the U.S.' A screening trial using the PSA test
(Prostate Specific Antigen) to look for possible markers for prostate cancer in
the blood is currently being considered by the Medical Research Council.

    Discovery brings hope of 'targeted treatment' A NEW discovery could allow
doctors to predict whether breast cancer sufferers will get the disease in other
parts of their body.

    A four-year research project has identified a gene that appears to stop the
cancer spreading in some women.

    The discovery is an important addition to research which aims to build up
genetic profiles of patients with the disease and target treatments.

    Women have a one in 10 risk of developing the disease and around 13,000
women die from it each year in the UK.

    The experts at Penn State University in Pennsylvania said the gene known as
BRMS1 could clear the way for early diagnostic tests to identify women likely to
develop metastasizing tumours, the most aggressive forms of cancer.

    Some women with the natural defence might be able to avoid unnecessarily
aggressive chemotherapy. Ultimately, the scientists hope to develop a gene
therapy that would help stop breast cancer spreading in women who do not have
the gene.

    Professor Danny Welch said: 'We might actually be able to get enough data to
help physicians diagnose and plan therapy more accurately.'


LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2000


                              197 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  May 30, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: cured before birth;
diseases 'could be beaten by gene treatment in the womb'

BYLINE: James Chapman

BODY:


    A HOST of genetic diseases in humans could be cured before birth, say
scientists who have experimented on unborn monkeys.

    They have succeeded in altering in the womb the genetic makeup of a species
closely related to humans.

    The U.S. experts who carried out the research on macaque monkeys hailed it
as a major breakthrough with vast medical potential.

    If the technique were used on humans, it could be used on genetic defects
including those that cause diseases such as cystic fibrosis or predispose people
to cancer.

    But opponents of genetic engineering warned that the technology could be
used to create 'designer babies' in the future and claimed that experiments in
the area were 'out of control'.

    Dr Bruce Bunnell, who led the experiments, said: 'The finding holds out the
hope that gene therapy can be safely administered to human foetuses to treat
genetic diseases, although such experiments are years away.' The research team
at the Children's Hospital in Columbus, Ohio, injected 14 macaque foetuses with
a light- emitting 'marker gene' derived from jellyfish.

    They also added strands of DNA from either the murine leukaemia virus or the
HIV virus because these are easily detectable in certain cells. The DNA was
engineered to be harmless.

    All the monkeys were carried to term and then delivered by caesarean
section.

    Dr Bunnell said that at birth all 14 appeared healthy and normal, except
that the marker gene could be detected in every cell of their bodies.

    The success of the procedure suggested that gene transfer can be carried out
in the womb without causing malformations in offspring.

    He admitted, however, that after a month the marker gene could not be
detected in the monkeys. The reasons for this were not known.

    Dr Bunnell said the macaques could have mounted an immune response to the
foreign proteins.

    Dr Sue Mayer, of the campaign group Genewatch, said last night that such
uncertainty illustrated how little is known about the effects of gene therapy.
She added that many would find the experiments abhorrent.

    'There are enormous ethical concerns,' she said. 'These experiments have
huge implications which we need to address. It has been fairly obvious for some
time that scientists want to move in the direction of altering the genetic
makeup of humans.

    'We urgently need to decide whether this is the right thing to do.

    Not only will these genetic alterations affect the foetus, they will be
passed down to future generations.

    'One of the concerns we have is that unless we get a hold of this technology
it will be commercially driven.

    Things like designer babies will become the most attractive areas, rather
than curing diseases.' Dr Patrick Dixon, an expert on genetic technology, said:
'It's designer life to order. It raises extraordinary possibilities for
in-uterine correction of genetic defects, but also the spectre of gross
interference in the process of human creation.' The future of human gene therapy
experiments was called into question earlier this year after a damning report
into the death of an American teenager.

    A gene treatment administered in an attempt to cure 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger's liver disorder provoked a fatal immune system response.

    But there have already been notable successes in the area. Fifteen-month-old
Shah Rahman, from East London, who was condemned to spending his days in a
sterile 'bubble' because of a rare genetic defect which left him with no immune
system, responded well to a gene therapy trial.

    He was injected with a 'corrective' gene which should help him become fit
enough for conventional therapy.

    j.chapman@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2000


                              198 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 29, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 39

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: The pioneer: Shah Rahman with his father last year The baby boy saved
from life in a bubble

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh;Rebecca English

BODY:


    A DESPERATELY ill baby boy has been given a chance of life in a pioneering
gene therapy trial.

    Fourteen-month-old Shah Rahman was condemned to spending his days in a
sterile 'bubble' because of a rare genetic defect which left him with no immune
system. Even a simple cold could have killed him.

    Yet now he has been injected with a 'corrective' gene which has kickstarted
his system and should help him become fit enough for conventional therapy.

    Shah has not been completely cured of the condition, called Severe Combined
Immuno-Deficiency (SCID), because of a previous complication with an enlarged
spleen. But doctors say that without the gene treatment he would already be
dead.

    Shah, whose parents live in East London, was one of five boys aged between
six and 21 months who were involved in the trial at the Necker children's
hospital in Paris.

    Three of the other babies in the trial, reported this week in the journal
Science, have been cured and sent home to their families. It is too early to say
if the treatment has worked for the fifth child.

    Shah, the sickest of the programme's tiny patients, is still being treated
at Great Ormond Street Hospital in London.

    Doctors hope he will be able to have a bone marrow transplant, which has an
90 per cent chance of success. However, only half of the children who suffer
SCID are able to find a suitable donor.

    SCID, which affects only four baby boys in Britain every year, arises when a
defective gene stops white blood cells being produced.

    These cells are vital for the body to fight disease and infection and
without them sufferers can contract fatal conditions at any time.

    Like all infants, Shah received a BCG vaccination against tuberculosis but
his body could not fight off the bacteria and his lungs, liver and spleen were
damaged.

    As he later came into contact with everyday germs and viruses, he grew
weaker and weaker. His condition was diagnosed when he was ten months old.

    Specialists at Great Ormond Street contacted colleagues in Paris where they
knew the gene trial was under way. The French doctors were taking bone marrow
from infected babies, injecting it with a perfect version of the defective gene,
incorporating it into a harmless virus and then replacing in the children.

    'Gene therapy was Shah's only chance because he was too ill to risk a bone
marrow transplant, the conventional way of treating this disease,' said Dr
Marina Cavaz-zano-Calvo, the Necker team's biologist. 'If the donor marrow had
been incompatible it would have killed him.

    'His clinical condition was very bad. He had an inflated liver and spleen
and needed an oxygen mask because his lungs were so weak he couldn't breathe.

    We went ahead because we were his only chance.

    'The operation was six months ago and although his results are not as good
as with the other babies, the news is encouraging.

    'He is in a much more stable state, his lungs are no longer infected so he
does not need oxygen and his liver is much better.

    'Although he is not cured, his doctors at Great Ormond Street can now try a
classic bone marrow transplant.' Yesterday doctors at Great Ormond Street
revealed plans to introduce their own gene therapy unit to offer the
revolutionary treatment to other British babies by next year.

    b.marsh@dailymail.co.uk


LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2000


                              199 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 21, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 61

LENGTH: 903 words

HEADLINE: What a plodding plot

BYLINE: Christopher Mathew

BODY:


    Futurecast (C4); Harry Enfield's Real Kevins (BBC1) THE blurb in the Radio
Times for Futurecast was at pains to point out that this series of three
technothrillers which began on Channel 4 last night is factually-based.

    Normally speaking, phrases like this pass unremarked. But since the stated
purpose of the series is to 'question the consequences of today's scientific and
technological advances', and given that most of us are highly suspicious of
anything scientific we do not quite understand, one couldn't help wondering
which bits were based on facts and which were made up.

    Is it feasible for a start, that by 2012 all television will be broadcast
via a world internet website? And, if so, could a pirate broadcaster hack into
the main news programme of the day and set about putting the world to rights,
watched by the goggling millions?

    In last night's episode, a central casting activist with staring eyes and a
vaguely German accent called Sepp Kurtz (Adrian Shiller) burst on to the world's
screens to announce that his outfit, Action TV, not only covered 'the medical
stories they don't want you to know about' but promised 'an instant and
effective democratisation of the Euro health system'.

    This, he assured us was the ultimate TV experience. 'What you see is what
you get.' What we actually got was a lot of jerky, handheld camera work,
complete with intermittent picture interference, and a rambling attack on the
world's big drug companies, who deny access to health care which we all need and
to which, as taxpayers, we are entitled.

    Was this the 'fact' on which the story was based, one wondered. Is it
seriously predicted that in a few years' time, gene therapies will cost GBP 1/4m
a go and will be available only to those with health insurance? And that the
Russians will have developed the same wonder-drugs at a fraction of the cost,
only to have their supplies blockaded by the money-grubbing European drug
cartels?

    Sepp certainly believed so and, to aid him in his cause, recruited Louise
Richardson (Paula O'Grady), a hysterical young woman from Leeds whose husband
Craig (Gary Sefton) was dying of leukaemia because they couldn't afford
treatment, packed them into a van and drove them off to the South of France.

    The idea was to kidnap the head of one of the biggest drug companies,
Terence Singh (Ranjit Krishnamma), force him to treat Craig, and confess his
sins to the world.

    But Craig got killed by Singh's bodyguard and everything went pear-shaped.

    So, unfortunately, did the plot.

    SINGH was subjected to a 'trial' in the absence of a continuing storyline,
which proved as tedious for us as it was for him.

    This involved showing film clips of 'witnesses', accusing him at inordinate
length of a variety of 'crimes', including taking blood samples from Panama
Indians without their consent, discriminatory genetic screening and putting
profits before people.

    While Louise demanded to know how Singh pleaded and as he attempted a weary
defence, a pistol-toting Sepp invited viewers to deliver their verdict - though
not, unfortunately, us.

    This heavy-handed sequence of polemic blast and counter-blast was
interspersed with more live, often handheld, and apparently ubiquitous footage
provided, miraculously, by the real news team.

    But in the end it was all a waste of everyone's time and money, because
Singh was let off, Sepp and Louise were arrested, the titles came up and
everyone went home for tea.

    Which all goes to show that, though fact may well be stranger than fiction,
when it comes to thrillers - techno or otherwise - nothing beats a good script.

    * HARRY ENFIELD'S Real Kevins started off equally promisingly, got bogged
down in a welter of ribnudging amiability, and fizzled out like a loose
Catherine Wheel in a cabbage patch.

    Using Harry's inspired creation as the role model for all teenage boys
between 12 and 17, producer Paul Sommers and director Rupert Edwards cobbled
together scenes of real Kevins complaining, shouting at their parents and being
thoroughly bolshy.

    There was also teenage memories from jocular celebs (Morrissey, Clunesy,
Reevesy, Wossy, Parky), and clips of spotty Herberts in action from
long-forgotten sitcoms.

    Led by a relentlessly waggish script and delivered in a husky monotone by Jo
Brand, the programme lurched from one hormone-driven preoccupation to the next
(unreasonable parents, unwashed bodies, devotion to computer games, horrible
hair styles, aversion to shopping, snogging girls etc), inviting us to chuckle
at our teenage sons' least appetising characteristics and marvel at Harry
Enfield's impersonation.

    But the whole point is that it is an impersonation, a brilliant comic
creation. What makes it so funny is the sight of a 38-year-old, dressed up in
terrible clothes, with a back-to-front baseball cap, jammed over curtains of
lank blond hair, throwing fits and screaming that 'it isn't fair.' Lumpy
13-year-old David whingeing on at his mother about how boring holidays are and
how he'd rather be at home with his Play-Station is, well, boring.

    The celebs did their best to beef things up with some self-mocking anecdotes
and the real Kevins had a couple of good moments (16-year-old lover-boy Simon at
a Virgins' Ball failing to get a single snog). Even so, one couldn't help
thinking they were all having a better time of it than we were.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2000


                              200 of 210 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 18, 2000

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: Aerosol drugs could see off pills and jabs

BYLINE: Roger Dobson

BODY:


    NEW drugs that you sniff are poised to revolutionise treatment for millions.

    Scores of drugs for a host of diseases and conditions, from diabetes to
osteoporosis, could be sniffed or inhaled rather than injected or swallowed.

    Work has already started on the development of a 'sniff' version of Viagra,
the anti-impotence treatment, which doctors says would make it much faster
acting.

    A nasal spray that desensitises the immune system to pollen grains is also
being tested on hayfever sufferers in the UK.

    Similar sprays for people allergic to house dust and pet hairs are in
development, too.

    Other sprays - including treatments for migraine, flu and osteoporosis
alongside drugs such as antibiotics, painkillers, and even for stopping smoking
- are either available or in development.

    Hormonal and gene therapy may also be delivered in this way.

    Doctors believe that most of the therapeutic compounds that are now injected
or swallowed could be delivered through sprays into the nose or mouth.

    Drugs that are sniffed or inhaled are much more patient-friendly than
injections, and they do not need a health professional to give them. They also
work much faster than oral preparations.

    Drugs taken orally in pill or capsule form are absorbed in the stomach and
must then pass through the liver before getting into the blood stream.

    That means that they not only take time to get into the bloodstream and take
effect, but also that a higher drug dose must be given to make up for the
sometimes large amount lost in the gut and liver.

    Nasal spray drugs work by getting the therapeutic material directly into the
bloodstream

    through the vast number of tiny veins that lie close to the surface in the
lining of the nose.

    Tiny aerosols effectively penetrate the vein walls delivering the
therapeutic c o m p o u n d s rapidly into the bloodstream so they start working
almost immediately.

    Scientists in Kentucky who have been working on a nasal delivery of
sildenafil, the active ingredient of Viagra, say that the effects could be
dramatically speeded up if it were sniffed rather than swallowed.

    'It can take an hour before the effects of the pill to become apparent and,
because of the nature of Viagra's use, people don't want to wait that long,'
says Dr Lewis Dit-tert, whose work suggests that nasal delivery could cut down
the reaction time to five minutes.

    Given by this route, a lower dose of the drug would be just as effective as
the established oral method. Pfizer, the makers of Viagra, has tested its
inhaled version of the drug on dogs and human volunteers and development could
start soon.

    Professor Homer Boushey, a

    leading expert on asthma, says: 'The advantage of using the nose for
delivering drugs is that it is a well vascularised area.

    'The nose is designed so that any foreign particles we may inhale are
removed before the air reaches the lungs.

    'By inhaling the drug you get it all into the blood stream straight away so
it begins to work very quickly and you need to put much less in.' Hayfever
sufferers in Britain one in five of the population could also benefit from a new
nasal spray that tackles the problem rather than the symptoms.

    CONVENTIONAL treatment involves the use of antihistamines and decongestants
which alleviate the symptoms but do not tackle the root cause - the body's
allergic reaction to grains of pollen.

    The new approach centres on a nasal spray designed to desensi-tise the
sufferer's immune system using genetic material taken from the allergen - the
pollen - so the immune system is conditioned to stop producing antibodies to it.

    The new technique, developed in Britain, and now being tested, could be
available to patients by next year. A nasal spray for treat- ing migraine has
already been produced and Sandoz Pharmaceuticals has developed one for treating
postmenopausal osteoporosis, a chronic condition affecting one in four women.

    Sprays into the mouth are also being tested. An anti-flu drug is already
available as a powder for oral inhalation, and aerosol liquid versions of other
drugs for a range of conditions are being worked on.

    These are designed to deliver drugs straight into the lungs from where they
pass directly into the blood stream.

    The advantage of using the

    lungs rather than the nose, is that the surface area for transferring the
drug is very much greater.

    'The nasal route is good but the available area, relative to the lungs, is
small. The surface area of the nose is about the size of a piece of A4 paper,
the lungs' surface area is equivalent to that of a tennis court,' says Dr Jerry
Okikawa of the leading biotech company in the field, Aradigm.

    The company is in the process of running clinical trials with three of its
products: a therapeutic drug for cystic fibrosis, insulin for diabetics, and
morphine for pain relief.

    'We believe that this kind of thing will be the treatment of the future
because it is noninvasive - you don't need an injection and the effects are very
quick,' says Dr Okikawa.

    The ease of use and the speed of the drugs' effects are likely to be
particularly attractive to patients with chronic conditions who now need regular
injections.

    However, doctors believe that almost any drug could be delivered in this
way. 'Any drug that is being given now could be considered to be given via this
route pain medication, antibiotics, hormone replacements insulin, growth
hormones - the list is endless,' says Professor Boushey.


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2000
