
                              14 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 3, 1999 Friday

SECTION: INTERNATIONAL NEWS; WORLD REPORT; Pg. A17

LENGTH: 86 words

HEADLINE: Death caused by gene therapy: report

BYLINE: REUT

BODY:

   An internal investigation has found that a teenager's death during a
gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania was caused by the
treatment, not by any errors by the research team, The Washington Post reported
yesterday.

   The death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., was the first attributed
to gene therapy.

   The experiment was controversial even before Mr. Gelsinger's death, because
it tested large doses of a gene-altered virus on relatively healthy volunteers
with a rare liver disorder.
 Reuters

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              19 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 22, 1999 Monday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 1247 words

HEADLINE: Nexia milks transgenic technology  BIOPRODUCTS The Quebec firm aims to
produce potentially life-saving human protein as well as synthetic spider silk
protein through the mammary glands of genetically engineered goats.

BYLINE: LEONARD ZEHR Biotechnology Reporter

DATELINE: Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, Que.

BODY:

   On a small farm outside of Montreal, Nexia Biotechnologies Inc. is getting
ready to celebrate more than the arrival of the new millennium.

   Willow, one of Nexia's first genetically engineered goats with a potentially
life-saving human protein in her milk, is pregnant and due to give birth next
month. The company also is awaiting the birth of another transgenic goat, who
will be the "founder animal" for a new herd capable of producing a synthetic
spider silk protein in their milk.

   "These will be significant milestones for us," says president and chief
executive officer Jeffrey Turner. "We're not trying to make genetically modified
animals here, but rather the products those animals can deliver."

   Closely held Nexia, founded in 1993, focuses on mammary cell lactation
systems. Developed by Mr. Turner at Montreal's McGill University, Nexia is now
one of only four companies in the world with the commercial capability to
produce the building blocks for pharmaceuticals and industrial bioproducts in
transgenic animals.

   The others are Genzyme Transgenics Corp. of Boston, Pharming NV of the
Netherlands and PPL Therapeutics of Scotland, which made headlines in 1997 when
it produced Dolly the sheep, the first cloned mammal.

   To become an international player, Nexia has developed a line of African
dwarf goats into genetically modified BELE goats. The acronym, pronounced
"billy," stands for breed early, lactate early.

   These transgenic animals contain a normal complement of goat genes in
addition to a foreign gene that can produce a valuable protein in the mammary
glands.

   The advantage of BELE goats, Mr. Turner says, is that they breed year-round,
resulting in shorter intervals between generations. This can significantly
reduce the time required to develop a transgenic herd and accelerate bringing a
product to market.

   "We believe we can manufacture pharmaceuticals for 5 per cent of the cost of
traditional manufacturing systems," Mr. Turner claims.

   Not only will Willow's offspring inherit her transgenic gene, which can be
passed along to new generations, but Willow herself will begin producing "huge
amounts of milk, perhaps one to two litres a day," containing the transgenic
protein.

   For now, the company is calling its transgenic product NEX41. It is a
therapeutic protein that forms the basis of a generic drug, which Mr. Turner
declined to identify because of a research and development collaboration with
Genzyme.

   Nexia plans to collect batches of NEX41 for preclinical animal testing next
year by building a herd of about 20 female transgenic goats with the compound in
their milk. Human trials should start at the end of 2000. Mr. Turner figures the
drug should begin generating revenue for Nexia in three to five years.

   Producing proteins for pharmaceuticals using transgenic animals is advancing
rapidly. Genzyme, for example, is currently in Phase III clinical trials (the
last step needed before marketing approval) with a blood-clotting product that
can be used in heart bypass surgery. The product was developed from Genzyme's
own transgenic goats. It could be on the market as early as next year.

   PPL Therapeutics also is in Phase III with a transgenic treatment for cystic
fibrosis; Pharming is in Phase II trials with a product to treat Pompe's
disease, a glycogen storage disorder. (Glycogen is a carbohydrate that serves as
energy reservoir by helping break down sugars.)

   While the pharmaceutical side of the transgenic business packs lots of
sizzle, Nexia could begin spinning off revenue as early as next year with its
spider silk research.

   The technology relies on anatomical similarities between a spider's silk
gland and a goat's mammary glands. In both cases, cells on the surface of the
gland manufacture and secrete water-soluble, complex proteins in large amounts.

   In a process similar to manufacturing NEX41, Nexia removes the silk gene from
the spider's DNA and transfers it to the mammary glands of its BELE goats, which
breed at the age of three months and produce kids five months later.

   Mr. Turner says there is a one-in-20 chance that the spider's gene will
attach itself within an embryo. Embryos are implanted into female goats, and
researchers know which offspring are transgenic after birth. If a female goat is
transgenic, it can produce the silk protein, which Nexia calls BioSteel, in its
milk.

   The next step is easier. Half of the offspring produced by mating a female
transgenic goat with a normal male goat would carry the silk gene -- though only
the female offspring would be able to produce milk.

   "Let me tell you, milk with BioSteel in it will be a red-letter day around
here," he says, with the enthusiasm of an expectant father.

   E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., the U.S. Army and several universities in the
United States are also conducting leading research using plant and bacterial
systems to develop a process to make synthetic spider silk.

   "Dragline" silk, which spiders spin to make webs, is one of the world's
strongest natural biomaterials -- it has twice the tensile strength of steel.
Researchers such as Mr. Turner suggest that if spider silk were bundled into a
cord, it would be strong enough to stop a 747 jet.

   The potential market for industrial and medical bioproducts developed from
synthetic spider silk could top $1-billion a year, Costas Karatzas,
vice-president of research and development of Nexia, told a recent biotech
conference.

   On the industrial side, for example, BioSteel can be applied to make thinner,
more flexible fibre-optic cables and structural components for the aerospace and
transportation industries.

   Nexia is working with the Canadian and U.S. defence departments to turn
BioSteel into flexible, soft-body armour for the military.

   Mr. Turner says Nexia is likely to initially target the medical sector with
BioSteel as an application to make ultra-fine sutures for delicate surgical
procedures. Surgical implants to replace tendons and ligaments, and the
cosmetics industry -- a major user of silk -- also represent potential markets.

   Nexia's initial studies indicate that each transgenic female BELE goat will
be able to produce 10 grams of silk per litre of milk per day, or 3.65 kilograms
a year. The company also predicts it will be able to remove the silk protein
from milk with dairy-processing equipment and spin it into fibre at a cost of
$50 a kilogram.

   By the end of 2000, Nexia expects to be selling small amounts of BioSteel
while it continues to improve and upgrade its spinning capabilities. "We're
looking for a big jump in sales in 2002 and full production in 2003," Mr. Turner
predicts.

   Nexia has attracted $13.5-million of financing and is currently attempting to
raise an additional $10-million, which will carry the company's operations for
the next two years.

   But there's no rush to go public, Mr. Turner adds. "We have sophisticated
investors with deep pockets who are willing to continue funding us as a private
company. Perhaps it's something we'll go after when we're profitable and have
products on the market."

   Related Web site

      http://www.nexiabiotech.com

   COMPANY SNAPSHOT

   Nexia Biotechnologies
Inc.,
Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue,
Que.

What: A biotechnology company capable of producing the building blocks for
pharmaceuticals and industrial bioproducts in transgenic animals.

Founded: 1993

Employees: 35

Revenue: None

Principals: MDS Capital Corp.; Société Innovatech du Grand Montréal; Canadian
Medical Discoveries Fund; and Sofinov, a subsidiary of Caisse de dépôt et
placement du Québec.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              20 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 20, 1999 Saturday

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Pg. D29

LENGTH: 315 words

HEADLINE: CRIME PICKS  California Fire and Life

BYLINE: MARGARET CANNON

BODY:

   by Don Winslow, Knopf, 337 pages, $35

     This novel has a lot going on, and the action is clipped into 138 short
chapters of arson, betrayal, murder, Vietnamese gangs and Russian Mafiya, all in
Don Winslow's snappy dialogue and cold, spare prose:

   "Woman's lying in bed and the bed's on fire.

   "She doesn't wake up.

   "Flame licks down her thighs like a lover and she doesn't wake up.

   "Just down the hill the Pacific pounds on the rocks.

   "California fire and life."

   That's chapter one.

   Crime Zero

   by Michael Cordy, Bantam Press, 400 pages, $22.95

     Novels by ex-marketing men tend to be bad. Crime Zero is an exception,
though it isn't great and it feels like a movie. The year is 2008 and the United
States is faced with the greatest crime wave in its history, a torrent of
violence undeterred by capital punishment. Along comes a group of scientists
with the solution: gene therapy. Just rework the DNA and eradicate the problems.
All goes well until FBI psychologist Luke Decker discovers a conspiracy among
the scientists. No one believes him, and his only ally is the beautiful
geneticist who created the crime-fighting gene therapy. Can't rely on cops,
world must be warned, etc. The plot is ancient, but the execution is slick and
fast.

   The Experiment

   by John Darnton, Dutton, 421 pages, $34.99

     This is another novel about rogue science, but since it's written by
Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist John Darnton, it has a lot more depth and plot
than Crime Zero. It is the end of the millennium in New York. A corpse is found
with face and fingertips removed. On an idyllic island off the Florida coast, a
young man watches his friends disappear. Elsewhere, an expert on twins sees a
case he can't explain or ignore. All these isolated events come together when a
strange, terrified young man meets a Manhattan journalist, and they set out to
expose a scientific experiment of enormous power and evil.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              25 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 29, 1999 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS MAGAZINE; Pg. 128

LENGTH: 4197 words

HEADLINE: FOOD FRIGHT  The backlash against gentically modified foods is
spreading from Europe to North America. The scientists who created them, and
farmers who grow them, insist they're a good thing. But can they win over
consumers?

BYLINE: MICHAEL SMITH

BODY:

    On a cloudless July day, biologist David Dennis points proudly through the
glass wall of a rooftop greenhouse on the Queen's University campus. His plants,
thriving in the summer heat, are nothing much to look at--no profusion of blooms
or spectacular fruit. They're mostly pretty standard-looking canola--thin stalks
topped by pale-yellow flowers--with a few other species thrown in. But for
Dennis, they are the future: Thanks to genetic engineering, some resist drought,
some thrive in poor soil, some need less fertilizer, others grow larger than
usual. "We are developing new crops for the world's farmers," Dennis says in a
soft north-of-England burr, repeating the mantra of his biotech start-up,
Performance Plants Inc.

    Performance Plants, with about 30 employees split between the Queen's campus
in Kingston, Ont., and a lab in Saskatoon, is one of the few Canadian companies
practising the type of agricultural biotechnology that creates new plants by
manipulating genes. It's a high-stakes game, with enormous potential for profit.
International giants like Monsanto, Novartis and DuPont have invested billions
in genetically modified crops, and expect to spend billions more. A small
company with some good ideas can expect to attract interest--and cash--for its
science. Performance Plants, for example, has a $2.2-million deal with Dow
AgroSciences Canada that gives Dow the right to sell seeds under licence. Dow
will pay Performance Plants a royalty fee out of the profits--when there are
any. Dow also has an option to buy a 7% stake in Performance Plants.

    Although the future looks bright on this sun-drenched day, there are clouds
on David Dennis's horizon: whipped-up public

    fear of a technology he sees as immensely beneficial. "In Britain, you can
read the most horrendous articles," he says, "and there seems to be no one
challenging them, saying 'This is nonsense.'"

    Could public opposition in Canada and elsewhere consign Performance Plants
to the compost heap of history? Dennis says he hopes not, but he adds it's up to
the industry to make sure it doesn't come to that. "We have to calm things down
and explain the science," he says. "It's not like England here." He pauses.
"Yet."

   JULY 26. LYNG, ENGLAND. About 30 people, garbed in decontamination suits,
descend on farmer William Brigham's fields, snip open padlocked gates with bolt
cutters and begin ripping up his corn, which is part of a government-sponsored
test of genetically modified crops. The white-suited activists are, they say,
"decontaminating" his field. Police arrest the leader, Peter Melchett, a Labour
member of the House of Lords, a former government minister and now executive
director of the British branch of Greenpeace, and hold him overnight.

    It's a scene that has been repeated many times over the past year, as the
British campaign against so-called GMOs--genetically modified organisms--gains
in fury and hysteria. After his stint in the hoosegow, Melchett is released on
bail, with a condition that he not organize similar raids. But he is
unrepentant, and no one thinks the raids will stop.

    Although not as vehement as it is in Britain, the backlash has spread to
North America. In October, American GMO opponents notched a major victory when
St. Louis, Mo.-based Monsanto Co. announced that it will not commercialize the
chillingly nicknamed Terminator technology. It consists of seeds that cannot
reproduce themselves after one generation. Monsanto didn't develop the
technology. But the company will gain control of it as part of its proposed
acquisition of Delta & Pine Land Co. The technology would safeguard the
company's intellectual property by preventing farmers from saving its patented
seeds from year to year, or buying them from the black market. Farmers would
have to come back to Monsanto for more seed.

    In Canada, opposition to GMOs has so far been muted, but it is growing. In
September, Ottawa announced plans to create standards for the voluntary
labelling of genetically modified foods. Shortly after that announcement,
Greenpeace Canada and the Council of Canadians launched a protest campaign
asking the Loblaws supermarket chain to remove genetically modified ingredients
from its popular President's Choice and No Name brands. They also want
international brands such as Kraft and Cadbury to offer Canadians GMO-free
products.

    Will opposition in Canada continue to grow? Unlike the British, we tend to
trust our government regulators to make sure foods are safe (see below), and our
farmers not to poison us. "It comes down to consumer confidence," says Doug
Powell, an assistant professor of plant agriculture at the University of Guelph,
Ont. In Britain, he says, the public has been rocked by food scandal after food
scandal, including the infamous Mad Cow debacle. Britain has also seen regular
outbreaks of bacterial infections, such as so-called hamburger
disease--abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting and fever. "They just have problems
with food," Powell says.

    In such a climate of distrust, it's not surprising that the public is
worried. There has also been what Powell calls an "information vacuum" left when
regulators lost their credibility and scientists kept their mouths shut. Into
that vacuum leapt protest groups.

    GMOS-DUBBED "FRANKENFOODS" by the always-colourful British press--are living
things that have been genetically altered in some way (see box, page 134). For
example, more than half of the canola planted in Canada is classified as
transgenic (genetically modified)--in most cases to make it resistant to
herbicides such as Monsanto's popular weed-killer Roundup. To achieve that end,
scientists took a gene from a soil microbe called agrobacterium and used it to
insert a gene that transfers herbicide resistance to the canola. The result is a
plant identical in almost all respects to its forebears, except that it can live
through a rain of Roundup.

    Herbicides are expensive, and some are toxic, but farmers use them because
they need to get rid of weeds. Until recently, that meant different herbicides
for different kinds of weeds, increasing the cost of--and the exposure to--what
are, after all, poisons. But Roundup is what's called a "non-selective"
herbicide; it kills most plants, including normal canola. Cheap and widely used
by farmers and homeowners for many years, Roundup was of little use to canola
growers once their crop was planted, until the genetically engineered version of
canola came along. Now, according to Monsanto, farmers can throw away all the
other herbicides and spray once, or perhaps twice, with Roundup. The result: a
weed-free crop that costs less to produce because it uses fewer chemicals,
making it better both for the farmer and the environment.

    Regardless of how much of that you believe--and activist groups such as
Greenpeace don't believe much of it--farmers have leapt on the new technology.
According to federal government estimates, Canadian farmers planted 1.7 million
hectares of transgenic canola, corn and soybeans in 1997. The estimated total
for 1999 is 3.9 million hectares.

    Supporters of the technology, such as farmer Mary Lou Garr of Grimsby, Ont.,
say they need genetically modified crops to save money, produce higher yields
and reduce the use of herbicides and pesticides. Garr is a vice-chair of AGCare,
a coalition of 16 Ontario farm groups that has been working for years to reduce
the use of chemicals on crops. In a series of news conferences this summer,
AGCare stepped into the battle over GMOs, arguing that the genetically modified
corn now in the fields is, in Garr's words, "the best thing we've seen in the
past few years" to reduce pesticide use.

    BUT THERE ARE clear risks as well. The corn Garr talks about has been
designed to carry a bacterial gene that produces a toxin called Bt, which
poisons an insect known as the European corn borer. Bt is harmless to humans;
it's even used in spray form by organic farmers. But spraying Bt doesn't work on
the corn borer. As the insect's name implies, it bores into the stalk and ears,
where it chows down on parts of the corn untouched by the spray. The Bt corn,
though, has the toxin in every cell; there's no more free lunch for the borer.

    If such an innovation happened in the normal course of evolution's arms
race, the corn borer would soon develop resistance to Bt. Plant and insect would
be back to square one. That's a realistic fear in this case as well, Garr says.
That's why she and other farmers are setting aside refugia--land where they
plant non-Bt corn as a haven for the corn borer. The idea is that even if some
superborers survive their Bt-laced lunch long enough to breed, they'll breed
mostly with normal insects from the refugia, and widespread resistance won't
develop.

    There's also a risk to what Garr calls "non-target species." Earlier this
year, Cornell University researchers found that if they put pollen from Bt corn
on milkweed, it would harm Monarch butterfly larvae that feed on the plants. How
likely that risk is outside the lab is another question--one that's under study
at the University of Guelph. Will butterflies eat tainted milkweed if they have
a choice? Even if they do, will a nearby cornfield produce enough pollen to
cause harm? Garr doesn't know, and while admitting that no new technology comes
without risk, she says, "The secret is to manage those risks in a responsible
manner."

    For the opposition, that's whistling past the graveyard. The risk, they say,
is simply too great to be managed, so great that the technology has to be
stopped completely and never used again. There are really two main arguments. In
the first place, we don't really know what we're doing when we modify plants,
and once they are out in the world, they can't be recalled. Their genetically
modified pollen will have spread, they will have contaminated their
non-engineered cousins, and the novel genes will have jumped to closely related
species. Whether all this is immediately harmful, or not, isn't the issue. There
may be unintended effects, perhaps decades down the road, and it will be too
late to do anything about it. "Suppose something goes wrong," says Peter Tabuns,
a former Toronto city councillor and now executive director of Greenpeace
Canada. "How do they call it back?"

    THE SECOND ARGUMENT is more political: The modified plants are being made by
giant multinational corporations whose goal is to dominate agriculture worldwide
and turn farmers into peons dependent on the company. Monsanto is painted as the
big villain here: Its main GMOs are crops that are resistant to the herbicide
Roundup, which is made by--conspiracy theorists rush to point out--guess who?
Monsanto's second-quarter results for 1999 showed earnings of $344 million
(U.S.) on record worldwide sales of $2.6 billion, led by strong sales of
Roundup.

    To environmentalists, Monsanto's talk of increasing crop yields to help feed
a hungry world and reducing herbicide and pesticide use is a smokescreen. "The
primary concern of these corporations is in fact to make money and to bring
farmers to the market every year to buy seed and to buy chemical inputs for
farming," says Lucy Sharratt, who's heading up the antibiotech campaign for the
environmental group Sierra Club of Canada.

    It also doesn't help, in the eyes of critics, that Monsanto has been
aggressively protecting its engineered crops, by requiring farmers to sign an
agreement that they won't save seed from year to year and threatening them with
legal action if they do. In the first case to make it to court anywhere,
Saskatchewan farmer Percy Schmeiser is being sued for growing Monsanto's canola
without a licence (see box, page 136); his defence is that modified seed blew
onto his land and took root.

    But Monsanto Canada Inc. president Ray Mowling argues that the licences are
an essential part of a strategy that will ensure the company can continue to
develop new genetically engineered products. It's akin to software companies
fighting to suppress pirated copies of their programs. "We're really protecting
the interests of the other 20,000 growers who have signed these agreements in
good faith," says Mowling.

    A third argument--one that's not emphasized very much, but which underlies
the whole debate--is what you might call the theocratic view: that God (or
Nature) created species to be separate. If you put a bacterial gene into a corn
plant, you enter some sort of natural no-fly zone. "We're creating very new
organisms," says Sharratt. "We're crossing the species barrier, the kingdom
barrier--something that's never been done before." In the June 13, 1998, edition
of Britain's Daily Telegraph, no less a personage than the Prince of Wales gave
the clearest expression of this view: "I happen to believe that this kind of
genetic modification takes mankind into realms that belong to God, and to God
alone...do we have the right to experiment with, and commercialize, the building
blocks of life?"

    The last argument isn't really susceptible to rebuttal--either you believe
or you don't. So the major logical debate is about risk: One side says you can't
make an omelette without breaking eggs; the other says we'll have to live
without the omelette because cracking the eggs is just too dangerous. And risk
is notoriously difficult to communicate, especially when--as in the case of most
of the gene-altered crops to date--the benefit for consumers is indirect. Sure,
if farmers get bigger yields at lower costs, food prices will stay low. And the
environment may well benefit from less pesticide and herbicide use. But how will
those arguments play against the mysterious, unknown dangers cited by Tabuns?
Interestingly, Prince Charles made an exception for genetic engineering for
medical purposes, perhaps because he understands that consumers will not be
willing to give up the potential for new medicines.

    DAVID DENNIS and his colleagues are hoping their technologies will be seen
in the same light as medical genetics. The problem, as Doug Powell argues, is
that "people don't buy technology." Instead, they buy food. The much-touted
transgenic Flavr-Savr tomato of a few years back failed in the marketplace--not
because it wasn't a good tomato, Powell argues, but because it couldn't compete.
The Flavr-Savr's advantage was that it could be picked in California, be shipped
to Ontario and still last, red and ripe, on the shelves for several days.
Unfortunately, hothouse tomatoes from Leamington, Ont., also have a long shelf
life, because they don't have to be shipped thousands of kilometres, and they're
cheaper. End of story. End of transgenic crop.

    For Performance Plants, the target market is still the farmer, not the
consumer. "The next phase of agbiotech," Dennis says, "is modification of plant
metabolism--actually changing the plant to produce...more oil or higher-quality
oil or new products or better protein." So Performance Plants is working on ways
to make plants that grow larger with the same nutrients, grow in drier
conditions, produce low-fibre seeds that will make better-quality cattle feed,
and flourish with less fertilizer. Such modifications are more difficult than
today's single-gene insertions, but they are not pie in the sky either:
Performance Plants has more than 250 lines of canola growing in test fields, as
well as alfalfa, corn and soybean crops in various stages of testing. "You've
got to get it out in the fields and show it works," Dennis says.

    In the company's cramped boardroom, accompanied by company vice-president
Dan Lefebvre and business manager David Gauthier, Dennis flashes a slide of two
heads of experimental lettuce. One is normal and one is transgenic, using the
company's so-called GET technology, which enhances growth by improving the
efficiency of photosynthesis. The heads were grown in the labs upstairs, under
low light--and "lettuce hates low light," Dennis says. The difference is
striking: The light-starved transgenic lettuce looks fine--green, bushy and
vibrantly healthy--while the normal head, equally light-starved, appears almost
dead. The same technology, applied to canola plants, appears to produce up to
15% more seed and a plant that's 25% bigger than normal, Dennis says.

    Canola, of course, is one of the company's target crops, along with corn,
alfalfa and soybeans. Together, these four crops have a yearly farm-gate value
in North America of about $50 billion (U.S.), so that a 15% increase in yield
would mean big money. Farmers would get most of it, Dennis concedes. But the
company that developed the technology--Performance Plants, if all goes
well--could also expect to come out with a pretty good cash flow.

    There are other reasons to do the work, as well. Improving the insect
resistance of soybeans is all very well, but it doesn't do much to vindicate the
real promise of agricultural biotech: feeding more people more easily. "The fact
is," Dennis says, "that the world's population is growing; it's going to double
in 35 years and one can't ignore that." More productive plants, using fewer
resources to grow the same food at the same or lower cost, should be easy to
sell to the general public--assuming a public outcry doesn't stop the research
in its tracks. "What we need," says Gauthier, "is the time to develop things
that [consumers] want and need." The company's technologies may ultimately prove
more acceptable to the gene opponents as well, because they mostly involve
modifying the plant's own genes, rather than introducing foreign DNA.

    BUT AT THE MOMENT, the scientists are on the defensive. Greenpeace Canada,
according to Peter Tabuns, will step up its protest campaign. Will it involve
the kinds of demonstrations that have landed his British counterpart in jail?
"I'm not ruling it out and I'm not ruling it in," Tabuns says. A rumour running
through the biotech industry is that Greenpeace has earmarked $50,000 for its
campaign--a large amount for environmentalists--on the grounds that Canada may
be an easier target than the United States. Tabuns laughs, and denies the
figure. "We haven't set a budget yet," he says.

    Monsanto Canada's Ray Mowling is grumpy about the beginnings of a backlash
here in Canada. "It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy--gosh, they've got
problems in the U.K., therefore we're going to have problems here," he says. "I
don't think that's necessarily true." Mowling would prefer to emphasize the
future of biotech. "It's hugely exciting...when you talk about improving yields,
improving how crops are grown, producing more food on less acreage," he says.

    But those considerations may not win over consumers in a grocery store. The
next wave of products will have some consumer benefits, such as reduced
cholesterol. That, Mowling says, will make the job of defending them easier.

    Greenpeace's Tabuns begs to differ. It's his view that Canadians and
Americans are just becoming aware of the issue. "I would say the battle in North
America is just going to be joined in the next year or so." The storm cloud,
Tabuns thinks, is about to rain on David Dennis's parade.

   The Road to the Dinner Table

   What proportion of Canada's crops are genetically modified? Are foods made
from those crops safe?

    Good questions. The answers are: a) lots, and b) probably.

    The proportion of genetically modified plants varies by crop. The main ones
are soybeans, canola, corn and potatoes.

    According to federal government estimates, 57% of this year's canola crop
was genetically modified, 45% of the corn, and 25% of the soybeans.

    Also, it's highly likely that any product in North America with soy in it
has some gene-modified components. Ditto for canola oil.

    In Canada, genetically modified foods must clear several regulatory hurdles.
Stop 1 is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. Margaret Kenny, acting director
of the agency's biotech office, says the first task is an environmental
assessment. Until this stage, the plant has been grown in isolation in a lab or
in a greenhouse. Among the issues examined is the potential for the plant to
become a weed or to have its pollen spread to other species.

    The next step is outdoor field trials conducted by the manufacturer. Agency
inspectors are supposed to make sure the company follows the rules it agreed to
in its assessment.

    Finally, the plant's makers can apply for a licence to sell it. At this
point, Kenny says, there's another environmental assessment--one for a
commercial crop. The whole process generally takes four to seven years.

    If the crop is intended for animal feed, the agency also does a feed safety
assessment. If the crop is intended for human consumption, Health Canada
conducts a similar examination.

    Critics argue that those studies are not enough. The raw data for the
studies are supplied by plant developers, leading environmentalists to charge
that Health Canada and the food inspection agency are little more than pawns.

    Kenny replies that "we set the information requirements...it's the company's
responsibility to get that research carried out."

   Gene Splicing

    Evolution is really nothing but genetic engineering: nature tinkering over
billions of years with the inheritance of all creatures great and small.

    But it was only with the discovery in 1953 of the structure of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) that genetic engineering by scientists became
theoretically possible. It took decades for the theory to become reality. In
1999, while gene splicing is not exactly routine, it is common.

    DNA, a long, chainlike molecule found in all living cells, is basically
simple: Four submolecules, called bases, are arranged in various orders along a
backbone of what is essentially sugar, arranged like a spiral staircase. If the
bases are ordered just right, they are called genes. They are used by the cell
as the blueprint for proteins, which do most of the work in the body.

    A gene whose bases are disordered in some way usually produces a defective
protein, or none at all, with sometimes fatal consequences. The disorder may
also have no substantive effect (my brown eyes and your blue eyes), or it may
actually enhance the organism's abilities in some way.

    The first goal of genetic engineering was to correct the human body's
mistakes: Researchers hunted for--and found--the gene defects responsible for
such diseases as cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy. Repairing defects
proved to be orders of magnitude harder: To date, no human gene therapy has
become commonplace, at least partly because experimenting on humans is frowned
on.

    In the plant and animal kingdoms, genetic manipulation has worked. Pigs have
produced human insulin, corn plants produce their own insecticide, and bacteria
produce human growth hormones. A Quebec company is even trying to get goats to
produce spider silk in their milk.

    In Canada, about 40 so-called transgenic crops are approved by the federal
government, although not all are grown here. The biggest crops are canola and

    soybeans, modified to be resistant to the herbicide Roundup. There are also
corn varieties that resist the European corn borer, and potatoes that resist the
Colorado potato beetle. As well, modified tomatoes, wheat, flax, squash and
cotton have been approved.

   Blowin' in the Wind

    Percy Schmeiser, a 68-year-old farmer from Bruno, Sask., is the target of
the first lawsuit aimed at protecting genetically engineered plants that will
actually go to trial. The case is scheduled to go to court in Saskatoon next
June.

    Monsanto Canada filed the lawsuit in August, 1998, alleging that Schmeiser
grew its genetically modified canola in 1997 without a licence from the company.
Monsanto alleges as well that Schmeiser harvested seed from his first crop and
planted a second crop in 1998.

    According to his lawyer, Terry Zakreski, Schmeiser did no such thing. He
says that seed from genetically altered canola drifted onto Schmeiser's land,
100 km east of Saskatoon, and took root. A truck carrying the seed probably
spilled some of its load.

    Critics of genetically modified crops around the world are alarmed. They say
that Schmeiser's defence confirms their worst fears about such plants--that they
can and do spread modified genes beyond farmers' fields and into the ecosystem.

    But supporters of the new technology are worried as well, because of the
legal implications for intellectual property. Monsanto sells its seed under a
Technology Use Agreement, which is much like a user's agreement for computer
software.

    The buyer agrees to grow one crop and not keep seed from it for subsequent
use.

    Monsanto Canada president Ray Mowling said the lawsuit is aimed at creating
a "level playing field for the farmers who have signed agreements." It's also
aimed at protecting Monsanto's intellectual property, of course, in the same way
that software companies prosecute alleged pirates.

    The agreement is a new form of control on seeds, and one that farmers appear
to be accepting: Mowling says about 20,000 Canadian farmers signed the
agreements in order to grow the company's plants in 1999.

    But if Schmeiser wins, it could make enforcing the more difficult, since
transgressors could argue they were the innocent recipients of drifting seed.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              26 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 28, 1999 Thursday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: TECHNOLOGY STRATEGY; UPSTARTS & STARTUPS; Pg. T4

LENGTH: 1165 words

HEADLINE: New CEO, new focus revive ailing cancer-therapy firm  Inex
Pharmaceuticals had spread itself over too many projects and was running out of
money until it concentrated on its lead drug

BYLINE: LEONARD ZEHR

DATELINE: IN TORONTO

BODY:

   David Main doesn't have any regrets about leaving QLT PhotoTherapeutics Inc.
in 1996 and joining Inex Pharmaceuticals Corp., three years before a blockbuster
treatment for blindness sent QLT's stock price through the roof.

   "It's had zero financial impact on me," says the former QLT vice-president.
"Whatever QLT stock I had is still in my RRSP."

   While at QLT, Mr. Main helped arrange $100-million of financing and its
alliance with marketing partner CIBA Vision Corp. of Atlanta. He joined
Vancouver-based Inex with a mandate to develop a corporate strategy for the
fledgling cancer-therapy firm.

   His appointment as president and chief executive officer of Inex in July was
part of a sweeping reorganization designed to breathe new life into the firm.
Inex was running out of money and falling out of investor favour because of
missed milestones and a risky development program focused on drug-based gene
therapies for cancer.

   After going public in 1996 at an initial price of $10, Inex's stock slumped
to a low of $1 late last year, prompting the board of directors to seek a
drastic overhaul of Inex.

   The company was working on too many projects and none of them were moving
forward very quickly, says Mr. Main. "The No. 1 killer of small companies is
being spread too thin."

   So far, Inex's restructuring has involved trimming 25 per cent of staff, to
its current level of 60 employees; changing its business plan to push its lead
product to market instead of developing new technologies; and cutting its burn
rate -- or spending -- to $800,000 a month from $1-million.

   The stock closed at $4.35 on the Toronto Stock Exchange Tuesday, giving the
company a market capitalization of nearly $50-million.

   "The business strategy is now back to what investors were sold at the IPO,"
says Cameron Groome, an analyst with National Bank Financial Inc. in Toronto.
"Nobody in the stock was going to stick around for 10 years while Inex fiddled
around trying to turn genes into drugs."

   Inex's lead drug is Onco TCS, a treatment for aggressive and recurring
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, which is a cancer of the lymphatic system. The disease
affects the spleen, appendix, lymph nodes, tonsils and bone marrow, among other
sites.

   According to the American Cancer Society, the form of lymphoma is the
sixth-leading cause of cancer deaths in the United States and has a rapidly
growing mortality rate. Some 300,000 people are currently suffering from the
disease and 56,800 new cases are expected to be diagnosed this year.

   The Inex treatment, which is in human clinical trials, consists of
vincristine, a widely used generic chemotherapy drug, that is encapsulated in
the company's delivery technology, known as the transmembrane carrier system
(TCS).

   Unfortunately, vincristine, like other chemotherapy drugs, is toxic not only
to cancer cells, but also to normal, healthy cells. But when vincristine is
encapsulated with TCS, Mr. Main says, the "reformulated" drug has been shown to
be less toxic to normal cells and more effective on cancerous cells than
vincristine alone.

   Inex's TCS technology is effectively a lipid, or fat "envelope" that carries
a drug through the bloodstream to the disease site. TCS is designed to load a
high concentration of drugs in the envelope, which extends the drug's life span
in the circulatory system so it can find more disease cells. As a result, the
technology prolongs the drug release at disease sites, Mr. Main adds.

   TCS is the brainchild of B.C. scientist Peter Cullis, who has been working on
lipid-delivery systems for drugs since the 1970s. Mr. Cullis, who previously ran
Canadian Liposome Co., is now senior vice-president of research for Inex.

   Mr. Main says vincristine is one of the most commonly used anticancer drugs
but lacks hype because it has been generic for two decades. "Onco TCS has a
low-risk clinically because we're not introducing a new drug, only making an
existing one better."

   Yorkton Securities Inc. analyst Ezra Lwowski calls Inex the "next biotech
success story." In a recent research report, he says he considers Inex to be
undervalued when compared with two other companies that have developed drugs for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma that have smaller patient populations than Inex is
targeting. Mr. Lwowski has a 12-to-18 month target of $10 for the stock.

   In June, Inex reported encouraging interim results for Onco TCS in a Phase
IIa clinical trial at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston. Of 34
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma patients, 41 per cent responded favourably to the drug.
In each patient who responded to Onco TCS, the size of tumours was reduced by at
least 50 per cent, Inex said.

   A follow-up Phase IIb trial, which is effectively a premarketing study, is
scheduled to begin by year's end. Mr. Main says the 18-month trial should be
finished by mid-2001 when the company will file for marketing approval with the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. In June, the FDA said it would look at
fast-track approval for Onco TCS.

   Before Inex files with the FDA, Mr. Main wants to sign up a pharmaceutical
partner to distribute Onco TCS. He's hoping to land a rich deal because Inex is
doing all of the clinical testing itself.

   While acknowledging that Onco TCS is unlikely to be a blockbuster drug, Mr.
Main says the drug has a sales potential for relapsed non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of
$150-million (U.S.) a year. If Onco TCS can replace vincristine alone as a
treatment for leukemia, and lung and prostate cancers, he figures the sales
potential could top $400-million a year.

   Inex has two other drugs gearing up for human clinical testing. INX-3280 and
INXC-6295 are being developed to make tumours more receptive to treatment with
conventional anticancer drugs.

   Mr. Main says both drugs target a specific gene, c-myc, that is believed to
trigger uncontrolled cell division leading to cancerous tumour growth. The 3280
drug is expected to be tested for safety with cisplatin, a chemotherapy drug,
this year.

   Inex claims that tumours eventually become resistant to cisplatin and that
INX-3280 has the potential to reduce resistance in cancer cells and increase the
therapeutic impact of cisplatin.

   The company says a TCS-encapsulated version of INXC-6295 has been shown to
reduce spreading cancerous cells in preclinical testing and is scheduled to
begin human testing next year.

   But all eyes are on Onco TCS. When asked whether the drug can do for Inex
what the blindness treatment did for QLT, Mr. Main remains optimistic. "We own
100 per cent of Onco TCS and we don't need a blockbuster. . . . If we can
replace 50 per cent of patients getting vincristine with Onco TCS, that's a big
opportunity for us."
Site seeing
    http://www.inexpharm.com

   COMPANY SNAPSHOT

   Inex Pharmaceuticals Corp., Vancouver
What: A pharmaceutical firm that works at making cancer drugs more effective,
and with fewer side effects.
Founded: 1992
Employees: 60
Revenue: None
Principals: David Main, president and CEO; James Miller, chairman; and Peter
Cullis, senior vice-president, research

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              27 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 26, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; GENETIC ENGINEERING; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 676 words

HEADLINE: Animal semen used to make human protein

BYLINE: KIM HONEY Science Reporter

BODY:

   A team of Laval University scientists has successfully produced a human
protein in the semen of a mouse, the first time seminal fluid has been tapped
for its pharmaceutical potential.

   For the past decade, most of the work on therapeutic protein production has
focused on genetically engineering cells in the mammary glands of sheep and
goats. But the process is slow, because it takes time for the animals to mature
sexually and for them to bear their young.

   The Laval breakthrough could allow scientists to use easily harvested semen
as an alternative to milk to make a human protein needed for drugs, reproductive
physiologist François Pothier says.

   And the ideal animal? The boar.

   "We call the pig the domestic mouse because it can multiply" so quickly, said
Dr. Pothier, who hopes to genetically engineer pigs to produce protein in their
ejaculate.

   Boars produce prodigious amounts, as much as half a litre at a time, and can
be "milked" once a day.

   That compares to the measly five to six millilitres produced by humans, six
to eight produced by a bull, and eight produced by a ram.

   There are other advantages, too. Pigs reproduce quickly: It takes 15 to 20
minutes to complete ejaculation; gestation periods are four months; they produce
10 to 12 piglets in a litter, and males reach sexual maturity in six months.

   It takes a pregnant ewe seven or eight months to produce a lamb, on the other
hand, and the progeny won't reach sexual maturity for at least nine months or
more, depending on the season they were born.

   The big disadvantage is that no matter how much semen a boar parts with in a
year, it can never match the 500 to 1,000 litres of milk that a goat or a cow
can produce. Dr. Pothier has calculated that it would take 50 pigs to produce 10
kilograms of therapeutic protein in a year, the equivalent of what one cow could
make.

   The semen method seems to work in a genetically altered mouse that carries a
human gene, as Dr. Pothier and a team of scientists from Laval's Reproductive
Biology Research Centre report in the November issue of Nature Biotechnology.

   First they used a human gene that carries the blueprint for a protein called
human growth hormone and injected it into the nuclei of fertilized mouse eggs.
The human gene was then linked to a mouse gene that targeted where the growth
hormone is produced, in this case the area where semen is created.

   The human growth hormone did show up in the semen, but it was also found in
the kidney, where it was absorbed into the mouse's bloodstream.

   "In the end, [the mice] were about 150 per cent larger," said Michael Dyck,
co-author of the paper. "We were excited because we knew we had something that
was working."

   Although the hormone entered the mouse's bloodstream through the kidney, Mr.
Dyck said they're not worried about the same thing happening again. That's
because the human growth hormone was used only because it can be easily traced,
and subsequent studies on pigs will use different proteins and genes.

   Therapeutic proteins such as Factor 8, used by hemophiliacs to help blood
clot, have in the past been extracted from donated blood or tissues, made in
bacteria, or grown in mammalian cell cultures. Each has its drawbacks: Blood and
tissue can be contaminated by communicable diseases; bacteria can't activate the
protein itself; cell cultures require supersterile conditions.

   Some researchers have tried to manufacture and isolate foreign proteins in
the blood of other animals and even have engineered cells in the bladder to
secrete them into the urine.

   Jeffrey Turner, president of Nexia Biotechnologies Inc. of Montreal, said Dr.
Pothier is on the right track if he is considering niche markets for his
products. In other words, he should stick to proteins that are needed by a few
patients or a medicine given in small doses.

   That's because he won't be able to compete with companies such as Nexia,
which hold the patents on the production of therapeutic proteins in milk.

   "If you need to give a patient a gram of drug a day, then there's just no way
this is going to be commercial."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              32 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 21, 1999 Thursday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Mice inherit artificial chromosome: report  Canadian firm's research
called breakthrough

BYLINE: Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: London

BODY:

   A Canadian biotechnology company has inserted an artificial chromosome into
mice that was passed on to offspring, a breakthrough that could revolutionize
gene therapy, a magazine reported yesterday.

   New Scientist magazine also warned that the development could raise new fears
about the possibility of genetic engineering producing designer babies.

   "This is obviously going to open up the debate again in the field of germline
gene therapy," said Norman Nevin, chairman of Britain's Gene Therapy Advisory
Committee.

   Eillen Utterson, vice-president of Chromos Molecular Systems in Burnaby,
B.C., announced the achievement at a London biotechnology conference this week.
"It's the first time an artificial chromosome has ever been shown to be
inherited in any mammal," she said.

   Ms. Utterson said the company planned to use the technology, which does not
interfere with the cell's own genetic machinery, to create genetically modified
animals with milk containing pharmaceuticals.

   The magazine said Ms. Utterson is insistent the procedure will be tightly
regulated and not be used for human germline gene therapy -- the breeding in or
out of particular characteristics.

   "We are in control of the technology, and we don't want to engage in germline
gene therapy," she said.

   Scientists routinely create transgenic animals, in which genes have been
altered for research purposes. Gene therapy in humans involves introducing a
gene to target cells to fix a defect like cystic fibrosis.

   Because it is so difficult, gene therapy is usually restricted to a less
risky procedure of adding therapeutic genes to specific tissue so it can be
taken up by enough cells to correct the problem.

   Any changes are not passed on to offspring.

   "However, if genes could be ferried into embryos in an artificial chromosome
that would safely be inherited without interfering with the rest of the genome
-- the collection of all genes -- germline therapy might not be so risky," New
Scientist said.

   The Canadian company said it was working on human artificial chromosomes that
could be used for conventional gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              38 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 19, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; SECOND OPINION; Pg. C11

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: Who pays the price of progress?

BYLINE: DR. MIRIAM SHUCHMAN

BODY:

   Last month, an 18-year-old from Arizona died in the service of science. Jesse
Gelsinger's death in a gene therapy experiment run by the University of
Pennsylvania underscores, once again, the enormous human costs of medical
progress. And it raises questions about who should be asked to bear those costs.

   Mr. Gelsinger had an incurable disease, an amino acid deficiency which
prevented his body from metabolizing ammonia. Most people with his condition die
in infancy. But Mr. Gelsinger had a mild form of the disease. He stayed
relatively healthy by eating a strict no-protein diet, and taking about 50 pills
a day.

   Then a doctor told him about an experiment using gene therapy. The experiment
did not offer a cure, but it was the sort of study that had to be done on the
way to a cure. It was a test to learn whether gene therapy could be given safely
to people with his disease, and if so, at what dose. The chance of complications
was considered low, around one in 5,000, his dad told reporters. And, his dad
added, Jesse Gelsinger thought he could "beat that."

   No doubt, Gelsinger and his dad were told a lot about the possible risks. As
Dr. Richard Tozer of the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre notes, patients who
consider entering a gene therapy trial receive so much material on the possible
harmful consequences, it's as if the patient is given a small book. The "small
book" is known in the business as a consent form.

   But since his death -- the first one known from gene therapy -- doctors and
scientists have been debating whether Jesse Gelsinger should ever have been
offered the chance to enter the study. After all, this was a young man who had
no symptoms of disease, and his condition was not terminal. With the diet and
the pills, he might have lived a long life. Maybe doctors should have judged him
ineligible to participate in a potentially risky study of an unproven treatment.

   This was discussed. According to the Philadelphia Inquirer, in 1995, plans
for the University of Pennsylvania study were presented before a committee of
experts overseeing gene therapy in the U.S., and one of the scientists raised
the question of whether it was right to do gene therapy on patients who had no
symptoms of disease.

   More commonly, when doctors are studying experimental treatments which
haven't yet been established as safe or effective, the only patients included
are those who have a terminal illness. For example, Dr. Tozer is running a study
of gene therapy in Hamilton, Ont., but it's only being offered to patients with
advanced cases of melanoma. Melanoma may spread before it's detected, and after
it spreads, median survival is about five to six months. "These patients have no
great options," explains Dr. Tozer. The standard forms of chemotherapy for
melanoma have response rates of only about 20 to 25 per cent.

   Presented with a choice between well-studied but not very effective
chemotherapy, and unstudied and potentially risky gene therapy, Dr. Tozer finds
that many of his melanoma patients decide to try gene therapy. "I'm certainly
not trying to sell it," he adds. "It's just another option on a plate: you can
try this, you can try that." Patients like having a few different alternatives
to choose from, and if the first fails, they can sometimes try another.

   The study at the Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre is based on work that was
done in the animal laboratories of Drs. Frank Graham and Jack Gauldie at
McMaster University. Mice with melanoma tumours got better on gene therapy;
their tumours regressed and their cancers didn't spread. These sorts of animal
studies are the motivating force behind the entire field of gene therapy.

   "We have lots of animal models to show that it can work," says Dr. Tozer. So,
even after ten years without success on the human gene therapy front, "there's
still a tremendous amount of hope that this is going to work."

   The fact that there's been one death should not dash those hopes. A
breakthrough in gene therapy may be just around the corner. Other treatments for
cancer -- therapies which are now considered standard -- resulted in deaths
early on, when doctors were uncertain how much of a new chemotherapy agent to
give, or how to administer it. Unfortunately, this is sometimes the only way to
move ahead in medicine. But in the aftermath of Jesse Gelsinger's death, the
risks and benefits of gene therapy experiments have to be reassessed. Probably,
gene therapy should be reserved for people who may soon die from their
conditions.

   And what if a person decides that their disease is wreaking havoc, even
though the disease is not terminal? An individual in that situation might want
the option of trying something experimental to improve their quality of life,
even at the risk of shortening it. Maybe that's how Jesse Gelsinger felt.

   With the benefit of twenty twenty hindsight, I wish his doctors had suggested
that he continue his medicines and wait a few years. Gene therapy, they might
have told him, has promise. This year, next year, through testing on individuals
with a terminal illness, we may get the answer we've been waiting for. Then gene
therapy will be worth a try for you. It's just not there yet.
E-mail Dr. Shuchman at:     shuchman@acsu.buffalo.edu

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              39 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 13, 1999 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find burger bacteria can destroy cancer cells  Canadian
team uses E. coli strain to cleanse bone marrow

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM Medical Reporter

BODY:

   The bacteria that give hamburger a bad name and send millions of people
scrambling for a toilet each year are being recast by Canadian scientists as a
bug with the ability to battle cancer.

   A team of researchers in Toronto and Edmonton has discovered that the toxin
produced by the nasty strain of E. coli usually associated with undercooked meat
and bloody diarrhea, can penetrate certain cancer cells and prompt them to
self-destruct.

   In laboratory tests using human blood samples, researchers used the bacterial
toxin to purge cancerous cells from the bone marrow of patients with some breast
cancers, leukemia, non-Hodgkins lymphoma and multiple myeloma, a cancer of the
immune system.

   What's more, the microbe's toxin does not appear to harm the marrow's healthy
stem cells, which are the building blocks of red and white blood cells.

   The implication is that the bone marrow -- cleansed with the E. coli toxin
outside the body -- could then be reimplanted into a patient's body without
reintroducing the disease, which is now a major problem of performing bone
marrow transplants.

   "Up until now there hadn't been a way to weed out the cancer cells," said
Linda Pilarski, a researcher at Edmonton's Cross Cancer Institute and professor
at the University of Alberta.

   The irony, she said, is that scientists are using one disease-causing enemy
to fight another disease-causing enemy.
   The researchers, whose work is published in this week's issue of the journal
Blood, have attracted considerable interest.

   Jean Gariépy, the senior scientist at the Ontario Cancer Institute who
pioneered the technique, was asked to brief oncologists at the celebrated Mayo
Clinic this summer. Drug companies have also been calling.

   "Within two hours . . . companies were knocking on my door," said Dr.
Gariépy, adding that the OCI at Princess Margaret Hospital has patented his
work.

   The researchers have now asked the federal Health Protection Branch for
permission to begin the first trials in patients this spring. They plan to
involve half-a-dozen Edmonton patients with multiple myeloma. Myeloma is a
fast-killing cancer that spoils the blood and eats holes in the bone. At any
given time, it affects about 6,000 Canadians.

   Those who suffer from it are generally given only three to four years to live
after diagnosis, and the bone marrow transplants sometimes used to treat it are
risky. Most multiple myeloma patients relapse, said Dr. Pilarksi, who also
worked on the project with researcher Andrew Belch.

   "In theory," she said, "we'll have patients survive longer" with the
procedure.

   Dr. Gariépy said myeloma is the ideal cancer to choose for the first human
trials precisely because researchers would be able to quickly evaluate whether
the procedure is successful.

   "We are beyond showing this [procedure] can work in animal models," he said.
"But the gap between animal and human models is a huge gap."

   Harnessing bacteria to fight bacterial diseases is hardly a new concept.
Penicillin, the first antibiotic, was born this way. Viruses have been proving
to be useful organisms to deliver genetic therapies and Dr. Gariépy saw wider
applications for the qualities found in E. coli.

   In 1993, Dr. Gariépy, also an associate professor of medical biophysics at
the University of Toronto, grew interested in work showing that the strain of E.
coli containing a particular toxin could somehow kill lymphoma cells.

   The mechanism, Dr. Gariépy said, was that a shiga-like toxin, which causes
hemorrhagic diarrhea and kidney failure, seemed to bind to a particular
receptor, or molecule, on the surface of a lymphoma cell. This receptor is known
as CD-77.

   Once the toxin attaches itself, the receptor draws the bacterial poison into
the lymphoma cell and the toxin moves stealthily toward its target, the area of
the cell that behaves something like a factory, producing proteins that allow
the cell to function.

   "It's like the toxin immobilizes this factory," Dr. Gariépy said. "And so the
cell decides to shut down and die. . . . It kicks in a system to self-destruct
and it's a very clean death."

   Dr. Gariépy first showed the bacterial toxin could kill lymphoma cells in
human blood samples in 1996. But in the past year and a half, he hooked up with
the clinical researchers in Edmonton to demonstrate that the toxin could have a
similar effect on other cancerous cells if the cells had the same CD-77
receptors on their surfaces.

   Once the cancerous cells are purged, Dr. Gariépy said, the toxin can then be
"washed" out of the marrow and returned to the patient.

   The researchers have now teamed up with a private company to produce the
toxin as a clinical treatment for patient trials, which will initially
investigate whether the procedure is safe. Their concern is that other human
cells in the intestines and kidneys also have the receptors, which might make
them vulnerable to the toxin.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              44 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             October 1, 1999 Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 695 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may have killed patient  U.S. man dies while undergoing
experimental liver treatment using genetically altered virus

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM Medical Reporter

BODY:

   An 18-year-old patient in the United States has died while undergoing
experimental gene therapy, becoming the first known death tied to the field,
which is hoped to revolutionize medicine.

   The patient, Jesse Gelsinger of Arizona, fell ill within 24 hours of being
injected with a high dose of a genetically altered virus to treat a liver
disorder. He died four days later, on Sept. 17, after suffering multiple organ
failure.

   The University of Pennsylvania, where Mr. Gelsinger was treated, has since
halted its clinical trials voluntarily and is investigating what role the
genetic therapy may have played in the young man's death.

   Steven Raper, the principal investigator in charge of the trial, said he
suspects that the therapy may be responsible because the severe reaction quickly
followed the one injection that Mr. Gelsinger received.

   "One of the reasons we think there is a link is because of the timing," Dr.
Raper said. "We're going to work very hard to find out what happened to Jesse .
. . so it doesn't happen to anybody else."

   Should the treatment ultimately be proved as the cause of death, it will be a
notable setback in a field in which results have fallen short of expectations.

   This particular treatment, which involves delivering a corrective human
genetic trait to the body through the DNA of a common cold virus, is being
studied as a possible remedy for everything from heart disease to cancers.

   Researchers around the world have been receiving E-mail information about the
incident over the past week, including a report forwarded to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, which sanctioned the trials.

   But researchers in the United States and Canada -- where more than 20
gene-therapy trials in humans are under way -- say the field is still worth
pursuing.

   "I do believe gene therapy holds great promise in the next decade and the
next century," Dr. Raper said. "What we've shown is that, despite great promise,
there's also great risk."

   Frank Graham, a molecular biologist and virologist at McMaster University in
Hamilton, said using a virus to deliver a corrective gene into cells has been
known to have toxic effects, but usually not much more than a mild fever or
inflammation.

   This is because the genes that allow a virus to propagate are first removed
and replaced with genes that will produce proteins to correct the condition in
question, said Dr. Graham, a pioneer in developing this technique.

   But Dr. Raper said he could not have predicted Mr. Gelsinger's reaction.

   The teenager had a condition in which his liver was unable to process
ammonia. He agreed to participate in a trial to test the safety of a gene
therapy to treat this condition.

   Mr. Gelsinger, who had been clinically stable, received an infusion treatment
in which doctors threaded tubing through an artery to ensure that the virus --
in this case, an adenovirus -- flowed through the blood stream to his liver.

   By the next morning, Mr. Gelsinger was jaundiced, Dr. Raper said. Then, 12
hours later, he slipped into a coma. By the time of his death, his lungs, liver,
kidney and heart had all failed and there was "neurological deterioration."

   None of the other 17 patients in the trial had serious adverse reactions.

   Health Canada is following the Pennsylvania investigation, and Harold Rode,
acting manager of the division that oversees gene-therapy trials, said current
Canadian experiments will be reviewed if the findings in Pennsylvania suggest a
wider problem with the treatment.

   Dr. Rode, an immunologist, said progress in the field "has been slower than
hoped," but he suspected Mr. Gelsinger's death was a "one-off" incident.

   Keith Stewart, head of the cancer gene-therapy program at Toronto's Princess
Margaret Hospital, said Mr. Gelsinger's death is unlikely to hinder trials here.

   "I think this will be noted, like other adverse drug reactions," said Dr.
Stewart, whose six early-stage experiments have involved about 40 cancer
patients. "This research is still in its early days."

   Dr. Stewart said trials so far have shown the therapy can shrink some
cancerous tumours. But finding the correct dosage to have a permanent corrective
genetic effect on a disease has been tricky.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              45 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 20, 1999 Monday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: Genetic repair in lab rats bodes well for humans

BYLINE: MAURA LERNER Minneapolis-St. Paul Star Tribune

BODY:

   Scientists say they have for the first time successfully used a form of gene
therapy to permanently repair a genetic disease in animals. The researchers
corrected a genetic defect in lab rats that causes a liver disease known as
Crigler-Najjar syndrome.

   Although the disease is extremely rare in humans, the findings raise hope for
repairing other genetic defects that cause diseases such as cystic fibrosis,
sickle cell anemia and hemophilia, said Dr. Clifford Steer, the study leader and
professor of medicine and cell biology at the University of Minnesota.

   "This is a powerful technique that offers great potential for future
treatment of numerous genetic diseases in humans," he said.

   Although scientists have been trying gene therapy for conditions ranging from
heart disease to leukemia and Parkinson's disease, they have had limited
success.

   In some cases, they have attempted to cure diseases by replacing the
defective genes with healthy ones, only to find that the genes ended up in the
wrong place, or their effects didn't last.

   But in this case, the scientists found a way to help the rats' cells correct
their own genetic defects. They developed a drug, made of synthetic DNA and RNA,
that resembles the rat's own gene, only without the mutation that causes the
disease.

   When injected into the animal, the drug tracked down the defective genes and
activated their own repair systems, converting them into normal genes. The
repairs lasted up to two years, leading researchers to conclude that the fix was
permanent.

   Experts had predicted this kind of treatment, known as "site-directed gene
repair," wouldn't be possible for another decade, Dr. Steer said. "We did it
nine years early."

   Scientists hope to begin the first human experiments next spring, if approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Only about 500 people worldwide are
known to have Crigler-Najjar syndrome, a deadly condition leaving victims
without the enzyme that breaks down bilirubin, a toxic byproduct of liver
processes.

   They plan to test the treatment on volunteers from the Amish and Mennonite
communities in western Pennsylvania, who share the same genetic mutation.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              47 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 15, 1999 Wednesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 518 words

HEADLINE: Growth factor revives brain cells shrunken by age  Doctors want to try
gene therapy on Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Associated Press; AP

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Aged brains have been restored to youthful vigour in a gene therapy
experiment with monkeys that may soon be tested in humans with Alzheimer's
disease, researchers report. Scientists hope the treatment will reinvigorate
thinking and memory.

   "To our surprise, this technique nearly completely reversed" the effects of
aging on a group of key brain cells that had shrunk in elderly rhesus monkeys,
said Dr. Mark Tuszynski of the University of California at San Diego.

   Dr. Tuszynski is senior author of a study that appeared yesterday in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The studies reinforce a new understanding of how the brain ages and suggest
that neurons in the older brain do not die at first, but atrophy, he said.
"We've all heard the dogma that we lose 10,000 neurons a day after the age of
20. Well, that is false. That doesn't happen."

   An actual count of the cells in the cortex, a key area in the thinking part
of the brain, shows that very few cells are lost with age, he said.

   Instead, he said, his team found that control neurons in another part of the
brain, called the basal forebrain, were most dramatically affected by aging.
These cells, Dr. Tuszynski said, had shrunk in size and had stopped making some
regulatory chemicals, a change that seriously affects the thinking cortex.

   "These cells are like the air-traffic controllers of the brain," said the
researcher. "They are on the ground, deeper in the brain, controlling the
activities of cells up there in the cortex. They control the flow of information
in the cortex."

   The researchers found that about 40 per cent of the basal forebrain cells
could not be detected in old monkeys, and the other 60 per cent had shrunk in
size by 10 per cent.

   But the cells were not dead, Dr. Tuszynski said. By inserting genes for nerve
growth factor, NGF, into the brain, he said, the cells were restored to nearly
full vigour.

   But the therapy is so promising that the researchers applied in June to the
Food and Drug Administration to test the gene therapy technique in humans with
Alzheimer's disease.

   If the FDA gives its approval, NGF genes will be injected into the brains of
Alzheimer's patients to see if they will restore some cognitive powers gradually
destroyed by the disease, he said.

   Alzheimer's disease does not occur in animals exactly the same as it does in
humans, said Dr. Tuszynski, so the only way to test the gene therapy technique
is in human patients. The early trials, called Phase I, would involve only a
small number to determine safety. It could be years before the technique's full
value is proved, he said.

   Dr. Bradley Wise of the National Institute of Aging said the study, done with
rhesus monkeys, is important because it suggests that "the decline in the
numbers and size of neurons with aging may be reversible.

   "A lot of studies have been done in rats in this area, but this is a step
forward because it used primates," said Dr. Wise. However, he cautioned that "a
lot of work will have to be done," including determining how long the gene
treatment lasts, before the technique can be used routinely in humans.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              55 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 7, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; SMARTENING UP; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 1062 words

HEADLINE: The ethics of enhancing brain power  Researchers can now boost mice
memories; would human alteration flout nature's wisdom?

BYLINE: NICHOLAS WADE New York Times Service; NYT

BODY:

   Now that researchers have shown that mice can be made smarter, a whole world
of opportunities opens up.

   Those long-neglected inventors of smarter mousetraps will at last get their
calls returned. Smarter cats will be needed. And everyone will have a list of
humans who might benefit, starting perhaps with the baseball umpires.

   Pleasant as it may be to contemplate a smarter world, there are serious
quandaries in enhancing human abilities, as well as in trying to raise the
intelligence of animals, possibilities raised last week by Princeton University
biologist Joe Tsien and his colleagues when they announced they had developed a
genetically smarter strain of mice.

   In mice, monkeys and probably humans, nature has engineered a deliberate
fading of memory with age. The brain-cell receptor that helps associate two
events -- the basic mechanism of memory -- is made of components that change
over a life span, making the receptor less efficient in older animals. It is
this process that was counteracted in Dr. Tsien's mice. He genetically
engineered the mice so that their brain cells produced more copies of the
youthful component of the memory receptor, thus enhancing its performance.

   The receptor was souped up in brain cells throughout the mice's forebrain and
hippocampus, a brain module that helps mice remember places -- and humans to
recall places and faces.

   The altered mice did better than normal mice on six standard tests of rodent
intellectual performance, like remembering where to find a hidden platform when
dropped into a bucket of murky water, or recognizing new objects.

   Because the improvement was consistent in all the tests, for which the mice
had to use many different areas of the brain, Dr. Tsien concluded that, in
improving the basic mechanism of memory, he had also enhanced the mice's
learning ability and general intelligence.

   Dr. Tsien and other scientists are far from sure that tweaking the memory
receptor would be similarly helpful in the more complicated human brain. After
all, with too retentive a memory you might clutter up your mind with all kinds
of things you'd be better off forgetting. Still, scientists agree that the
receptor is a promising place for intelligence enhancement to start.

   But would the improvement of human acumen dangerously flout nature's wisdom?
After all, intelligence is so precious for survival that surely nature makes
every animal as smart as possible without transgressing some pivotal balance.

   This doesn't seem to be the case, however, at least with laboratory mice.

   Dr. Tsien's strains are smarter than their normal cousins, without any
visible drawback. And behaviourally, modern man is so new a species -- 50,000
years is the blink of an eye in evolutionary time -- that perhaps the forces of
natural selection have scarcely had the chance to make the most of the human
brain's capacities.

   Still, genetic engineers must surely pause at the fact that nature has
designed memory to become less retentive with age. The danger of tampering with
this system is that the brain's memory storage room could quickly be overwhelmed
if learning were to continue at the same rate in adult life as in youth,
suggests Dr. Charles Stevens, a neurobiologist at the Salk Institute in La
Jolla, Calif.

   He believes the brain's capacity, vast as it is, must have limits. The human
brain has 100 billion neurons, and each neuron makes about 1,000 connections
with other neurons, giving a potential 100 trillion units of memory.

   "So there is enormous storage capacity, but we don't know how much we need,"
Dr. Stevens said.

   Even if the limit of that storage capacity is never reached in a human
lifetime, the increasing access time that is needed to scan a growing store of
knowledge may be one reason why nature arranges for information to be acquired
more slowly once the youthful thirst for knowledge has passed.

   Despite the risk of running out of space on one's mental hard drive, the
temptation to try to enhance intelligence by promoting the youthful form of the
memory receptor will doubtless prove irresistible. Drugs might be developed to
target the nerve-cell system that Dr. Tsien altered by genetic means. Gene
therapy could one day supply smart genes to an embryo -- or even to adults,
since the hippocampus is one of the few areas of the brain that generates new
cells throughout adult life.

   Three categories of people might benefit: the medically ill, the elderly and
everybody else.

   Ethicists see no problem in trying to treat memory deficits in patients with
brain diseases, which would be no different from any other medical intervention.
Helping older people remember better is also not likely to be controversial,
"because in our culture we see old age as something like a disease rather than
as natural life process," said Dr. Victoria Sharpe, a bioethicist at the
Hastings Center in Garrison, N.Y.

   A drug to enhance the intelligence of healthy individuals sounds great for
job interviews or quiz programs. But if the smart pill were costly, it could
worsen social inequities. And such a drug could easily be abused by parents.

   "I think we will have to think through our social policies very carefully so
we don't get into an enhancement race among parents and don't in effect develop
a new kind of child abuse," said Dr. Leroy Walters, director of the Kennedy
Institute of Ethics at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C.

   Dr. Walters said it would be "a plausible and morally justifiable application
of genetic techniques" to raise the intelligence of a child with very low IQ
scores, because that could be regarded as remedial, but enhancing the IQ of
someone at or above the mean would be much more controversial, in his view.

   Pioneers such as Dr. Tsien are eager to explore the new possibilities created
by genetic engineering.

   Nature may be wise, he notes, but it often doesn't act in the individual's
best interest. The body's cells don't have to rust and wear out like cars: They
could renew themselves indefinitely. Since nature lets us die, Dr. Tsien
believes, it may also have neglected to make humans as smart as they can be.

   He finds it hard to understand the recent flurry of apprehension about human
cloning, because a clone, being an exact genetic copy, adds nothing new to the
world.

   But making an individual more intelligent would be novel and interesting.
"Everyone," he said, "wants to be smart."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              62 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 17, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 710 words

HEADLINE: Breast-cancer drug creates cost dilemma  Expensive new treatment can
prolong life, but will governments pay?

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM Medical Reporter

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

   Health Canada has approved the first genetic therapy to fight breast cancer,
a costly designer drug that can extend life for certain patients in advanced
stages of the disease.

   But the drug's approval, which the federal government fast-tracked over the
past nine months, leaves the provinces to find a way to pay for it. And there is
no guarantee that each of them will.

   Trastuzumab, marketed under the brand name Herceptin, is expected to cost
$3,000 a month or $36,000 a year per patient.

   It has become the latest product to highlight the growing gap between
technology's newest wonder drugs and the public's ability to pay for them.
Doctors, patients and health officials acknowledge it is difficult to discuss a
treatment in terms of cost versus benefit when it comes to prolonging life --
even if only for a few precious months.

   "When it's you that might die you feel that of course it's all worth it. I
have always assumed my government and my system would be there for me," said Lee
Smith, a 51-year-old Ottawa woman who is fighting an aggressive inflammatory
breast cancer. "Then as a taxpayer, maybe you think something else."
   Herceptin has been proven to shrink tumours and stop growth in others when
taken along with a standard chemotherapy drug in the late stages of breast
cancer. But it is not a cure. At best, clinical trials suggest it can increase
median survival time by five months.

   Donald Cowan, executive vice-president of Cancer Care Ontario, which
co-ordinates cancer treatment across the province, estimates that 250 to 300
women will be eligible for Herceptin in Ontario and the annual bill could reach
about $6-million.

   "It's probably amongst the most expensive drugs we've seen," said Dr. Cowan,
who runs the cancer-drug program.

   "At the moment we have no absolute guarantee [from the province] that we'll
be funded for it," he said, but Cancer Care Ontario is planning to provide it.
"We're doing this on faith."

   Dr. Cowan said the drug's manufacturer wrote in a letter that it had received
Health Canada approval and expects the drug to be widely available after Aug.
27.

   Ms. Smith, who 18 months ago was given 18 months to live, was among those who
lobbied the government and drug companies to receive Herceptin on a
compassionate basis before it was approved. She did that precisely because it
could give her a few extra months to live.

   "I know there is no cure. I know I am going to die from this," she said, "But
when I found out I could get Herceptin I was optimistic about living longer. . .
. I got married in the back yard!"

   Herceptin was developed over the past decade by Genentech Inc., a San
Francisco-based biotechnology firm that has since been purchased by Swiss
pharmaceutical giant Roche Holding AG.

   Demand for it exploded last year in the United States, where the Food and
Drug Administration rushed through approval within five months and Genentech
watched its stock soar.

   Herceptin, however, is only applicable in 25 to 30 per cent of breast-cancer
cases that involve a particular gene defect.

   That defect leads a cell's gene or genes to produce excessive amounts of a
protein called HER2, which in turn leads to runaway growth of cancer cells and
tumours.

   Herceptin works by blocking the overproduction of the HER2 protein, which
inhibits or stops cancer-cell growth without harming healthy cells or producing
side effects such as nausea or hair loss.

   But Karen Gelmon, oncologist and head of the breast-tumour group at the B.C.
Cancer Agency, said presence of excessive HER2 protein is only part of the
strict criteria of who will be eligible for the drug.

   "You want to provide it to those women who are most likely to benefit the
most from it according to the evidence," Dr. Gelmon said, explaining that it
will be offered to patients whose cancer has returned and is spreading and who
are also taking the chemotherapy drug Taxol.

   "The question is how to provide care without breaking the bank," she said,
adding that Canada will continue to research the drug's potential uses.

   Pathologists in British Columbia and Ontario are also planning to evaluate
which testing methods can best identify those patients producing excessive
amounts of the HER2 protein, Dr. Cowan said, adding that there can be problems
with false positives.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              67 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            July 21, 1999 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS INDEX; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: NEWS INDEX: WEDNESDAY, JULY 21, 1999  THE NATION

BODY:

   Cancer drug approval expected

   Cancer researchers in Canada expect the first genetic therapy to fight breast
cancer will be approved by Ottawa this fall. The gene-targeting drug was
approved in the United States last year and a strong demand among women in the
late stages of the disease has followed.
   Page A2
Man held in U.K. slaying

   Scotland Yard says it is holding a man in connection with the death of Fatima
Kama, the Montreal woman whose body was found in a suitcase at Heathrow airport
in London. However, the man's description does not match that of a former
boyfriend who was said to be aggressive. Police said they were also seeking
another man, who is believed to have left Britain.
   Page A3

   THE WORLD

   Democracy first, Taiwan says

   Taiwan President Lee Teng-hui told China's Communist regime yesterday that it
will never see unification with the island of 22 million people unless it puts
in place a system of democracy. The only concession that Mr. Lee offered to
Beijing was to promise that he was not ruling out eventual reunification if
democratic conditions were met.
   Page A10
China cracks down on group

   Chinese secret police have begun a national crackdown on falun gong, a
mystical religious group led by a former Chinese grain official who preaches a
doomsday message and rails against rock 'n' roll and the evils of science from
his base in New York.
   Page A10

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              68 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            July 21, 1999 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 573 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer drug awaiting approval  New gene-targeting therapy is
expected to get go-ahead in Canada by this fall

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM Medical Reporter

BODY:

   Canadian cancer researchers expect that the first genetic therapy to fight
breast cancer will receive federal approval this fall.

   The gene-targeting drug, called trastuzumab, was approved in the United
States last year. Heated demand among women in the late stages of the disease
has followed, along with soaring stock prices for the California biotechnology
company that created the drug.

   Clinical trials have suggested that in conjunction with a standard
chemotherapy drug for advanced breast cancer, the gene-based treatment can
nearly double the response rate, shrinking some tumours and stopping growth in
others.

   The therapy, however, is applicable only in about 25 to 30 per cent of
breast-cancer patients -- those who carry a particular gene defect that spurs
cancer growth.

   As a result, doctors in Canada are now trying to evaluate which test might be
the most reliable in identifying potential patients who carry the faulty gene
amid the expected rush of those who will be asking for it. The drug is currently
available on a compassionate-release program only.

   "I suspect that this drug will burst like a bombshell on the market once it
gets [Health Canada] approval," said Susan O'Reilly, the head of medical
oncology for the B.C. Cancer Agency. "But at the moment we have not cleared up
in Canada how to test or screen for potential candidates."

   Not only do health officials want to avoid spreading false hope or missing
those who could be helped, but they also want to avoid unnecessary costs for a
pricey treatment.

   Dr. O'Reilly, who is also the manager of B.C.'s budget for cancer drugs, said
the therapy runs at $3,000 a month and is administered by weekly intraveneous
injections.

   Trastuzumab has been in development during the past decade under the brand
name Herceptin. San Francisco-based Genetech Inc., which has been purchased by
Swiss pharmaceutical giant Roche Holding AG, genetically engineered the drug to
block cell production of a protein known as HER2.

   A faulty gene or genes produce excessive amounts of the HER2 protein, which
then leads to runaway growth of cancer cells. The idea is that blocking the
protein stops or inhibits such growth.

   "I think this is the beginning of a whole new family of drugs for breast
cancer," said Dr. O'Reilly, noting that it has considerably fewer toxic side
effects than existing treatments.

   This is because the gene-based treatment, unlike most cancer drugs, does not
annihilate healthy cells along with the cancerous ones. But Dr. O'Reilly
cautioned that prescribing Herceptin as a single therapy to very advanced
breast-cancer patients has not been promising.

   As well, accurately determining who is carrying such a faulty gene or
producing excessive amounts of the HER2 protein can be tricky.

   There are currently about half a dozen tests available to scientists. Antonio
Wolff, an oncologist at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, said the tests are
performed by examining biopsy tissue from breast-cancer patients.

   One of the tests, he said, is suspected of being unreliable because the
number of results showing excessive amounts of HER2 does not jibe with the
one-quarter to one-third of patients known to have this genetic condition.

   "There is a concern in the U.S. that [the tests] are turning up false
positives," Dr. Wolff said.

   However, he noted that identifying patients who have this condition might
also help doctors choose a more aggressive cancer treatment from the beginning.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              69 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 13, 1999 Tuesday
                                National Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Scientists fight over Lincoln's blood  DNA tests may destroy wife's
cloak as well as some cherished myths

BYLINE: Associated Press; AP

DATELINE: Chicago

BODY:

   For years, the blood-spattered velvet cloak that Mary Todd Lincoln is
believed to have worn on the night U.S. president Abraham Lincoln was shot has
mostly hung untouched.

   But with recent developments in DNA testing, researchers say the garment
could reveal some of the mysteries surrounding the health of the 16th U.S.
president.

   History buffs at the Chicago Historical Society acknowledge, however, that
testing could destroy a valuable relic of history and prove false some of the
stories and myths about Lincoln.

   "The question at hand is what value would DNA testing have and would it be
worth the risks of losing a historical specimen," said Nancy Buenger, textile
conservator at the society. "We also have to ask: 'Do we want to know? Do we
really want all these wonderful mysteries solved?' "

   A group of scientists, conservators and historians met at the society
recently to debate those issues, and recommended that the institution hold off
DNA testing. The society said it would probably abide by the panel's
recommendation.

   Testing could settle a long-running debate on whether Lincoln suffered from
Marfan Syndrome, a genetic disease that makes people susceptible to blood clots.

   The syndrome could account for Lincoln's gangly appearance. It could also
have proved fatal if assassin John Wilkes Booth's bullets at the Ford Theater
had not.

   Testing on the cloak and about a dozen other items, including the sheet
thought to have come from Lincoln's death bed, could eventually help to
authenticate much of the society's collection.

   While existing documentation supports the specimens' origins, it is not
always reliable, Ms. Buenger said. She noted that the society had to put away a
suit -- purported to be the one Lincoln wore at the time of his assassination --
after evidence surfaced that another museum may have the real garment.

   Ms. Buenger added that many of the objects came from the collection of
Charles Gunther, a turn-of-the-century Chicago candy-maker who donated "a mixed
bag" of artifacts, including obvious hoaxes such as the skin of the snake from
the Garden of Eden.

   Even with DNA testing, she said, proving the blood was Lincoln's would be
difficult because no samples have been taken from his remains and there are no
living Lincoln descendants.

   Dr. Robert Gaensslen, a forensic scientist who participated in the
conference, said the cons of testing still outweigh the pros. He said current
methods to extract DNA include cutting specimens or removing blood from them,
while in 10 years' time, scientific development might mean a harmless scan could
provide the same results.

   "We have to be cautious before we cut," he said.

   Not everyone agrees.

   Dr. Victor Mckusick, a medical geneticist at Johns Hopkins University who has
pushed for DNA testing of Lincoln artifacts, said scientific developments have
come so far that testing would cause only minimal damage.

   "The interest in finding out is tremendous," said Dr. Darwin Prockop, a
gene-therapy researcher at Philadelphia's MCP Hahnemann University. "People are
fascinated by him."

   Testing the cloak, Dr. Prockop said, "could answer an important historical
question that could go far in helping those struggling with the disease today."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              72 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 2, 1999 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: CANADIAN; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1028 words

HEADLINE: Canadian innovators frustrated in attempts at commercial success  Lack
of capital is grounding promising scientific ventures, experts say

BYLINE: SHAWN McCARTHY Parliamentary Bureau

DATELINE: Ottawa

BODY:

   It's been a long, frustrating process for renowned geneticist Lap-Chee Tsui
as he and his colleagues have tried to spin world-beating science into
wealth-creating commerce.

   Dr. Tsui, of Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, made a monumental
discovery of the gene that causes cystic fibrosis through his pioneering
techniques for hunting down disease-causing genes.

   Ten years later, he is a partner with three other geneticists in a fledgling
company, EllipsisBiotherapeutics Corp., that is attempting to commercialize his
patented gene-hunting process by developing diagnostic tools and therapies for
inflammatory bowel diseases and rheumatoid arthritis.

   But two years after incorporation, Ellipsis is running on a shoestring,
subcontracting critical lab work and managing without its own offices. Ellipsis
has had two placements of $250,000 each from the London, Ont.-based Canadian
Medical Discoveries Fund, but that has barely been enough to limp along, Dr.
Tsui said.

   What he finds particularly galling, however, is that U.S. competitors, who
started the decade far behind Canadian gene hunters, have generated scores of
high-flying diagnostic and gene-therapy companies, fed by a cornucopia of
venture capital.

   "The venture capital here has been very conservative," Dr. Tsui said in a
telephone interview from his office at Sick Kids.

   "The problem is that to invest in disease-gene research, you have to have
some vision, some faith that something is going to happen. Obviously, without
the investment, they are never going to find out."

   Dr. Tsui's story is a familiar one to policy makers in Ottawa. Recently, a
panel of experts warned the Liberal government that Canada is not aggressive
enough in capitalizing on its research efforts to spawn innovative companies and
well-paying jobs.

   The experts from academia and industry found generally what Dr. Tsui and his
colleagues have experienced firsthand: While much ground-breaking research is
being done in Canada's labs, there is no sense of mission or culture that brings
together researchers and venture capitalists in more than an ad hoc
relationship.

   Panel member Tom Brzustkowski, president of the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council, said Canadian universities have to adopt
innovation as part of their core mandate, in addition to teaching and research.

   He said faculty time needs to be freed up, not only to do the research but to
construct a business plan, find financing and work with private sector partners
to turn the research into new goods and services for the marketplace.

   Mr. Brzustkowski echoed Dr. Tsui's complaint that venture capital markets in
Canada are insufficient, and perhaps more importantly, that venture capitalists
fail to provide the management and marketing skills that will help pilot the new
firm out of the harbour.

   "There is not the availability of informed investors with venture capital
appropriate to each stage of development," he said. "Conditions are changing but
not quickly enough. We have a few of them; the U.S. has gobs of them."

   In the United States, he noted, universities with close ties to the venture
capital community have been the incubators for some of the hottest startup
companies of the past decade, including a whole host of Internet companies.

   In a report last month to the government's Advisory Committee on Science and
Technology, the panel noted that it is critical for Canadian universities to
boost their record of innovation because a greater percentage of Canada's
research is done in the universities than is the case in most other
industrialized countries.

   However, it concluded that the Canadian universities lag U.S. ones in
generating economic benefits from their research dollars. If Canadian
universities match U.S. ones in generating returns from their research, they
would have contributed $2.8-billion in economic activity and 17,707 more jobs in
1997, it said.

   Among the shortcomings, the panel found:

    A lack of clear rules covering ownership of intellectual property. It
recommended that Ottawa insist where it provides funding that the universities
adopt transparent rules on intellectual property -- whether it be owned by the
researcher or the university or some combination of the two -- aimed at
promoting commercialization.

    An immature venture capital market.

    A squeeze on funding for post-secondary institutions that has hit technology
commercialization offices particularly hard. The panel recommends more
government funding directly to commercialization offices, which would allow them
to recruit and retain highly qualified personnel.

    A tax structure that does not reward risk-taking. "Uncompetitive business
conditions are also limiting our ability to generate returns from public
investments in research," the panel said.

   Dr. Tsui said the University of Toronto, with which he is affiliated, has a
technology office but that its staff is stretched far too thin. He added that
the pharmaceutical industry in Canada is dominated by multinationals and
domestic generics that are not willing to invest in discoveries that require
risky and patient nurturing to take them to market.

   "For the past five to 10 years, the universities have been working harder to
market our research, but with shrinking dollars and budgets, they are working on
a shoestring," he said.

   Industry Minister John Manley said the Liberal government is aware of the
need to promote innovation from the labs and has been putting more money into
granting councils, Centres for Excellence and the Foundation for Innovation to
boost that effort.

   Mr. Manley has asked Mr. Brzustkowski to follow up on the report by
consulting with universities and researchers themselves and then recommending a
course of action.

   Mr. Manley said the government does not want to insist that any research it
funds have commercial application. Such a requirement would stifle basic,
curiosity-driven research, which in the longer term can foster the most exciting
breakthroughs.

   "But if we are creating an intellectual asset through research, we should
strive to create from it, if possible, a commercial asset. We would rather it be
developed here than by someone else, somewhere else."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              73 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 2, 1999 Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; TYRELL DUECK: 1985-1999; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: Tyrell Dueck loses battle with cancer

BYLINE: Jill Mahoney The Globe and Mail; With a report from CP; STAFF CP

BODY:

    Tyrell Dueck, the 13-year-old Saskatchewan boy who ignited a legal and
ethical firestorm after refusing treatment for his bone cancer, has died.

   The Dueck family said yesterday that Tyrell died Wednesday night in St.
Paul's hospital in Saskatoon.

   The boy's aunt, Becky Hildebrandt, said the family was upset and did not want
to talk to media.

   "We just need some time to deal with this," she said.

   The family's ordeal began in November when doctors at the Saskatoon Cancer
Centre found osteogenic sarcoma above the boy's right knee.

   Wary of invasive chemotherapy and surgery, his parents, Tim and Yvonne, began
to investigate alternative therapies, eventually deciding against conventional
treatments.

   The family is deeply religious and said they put their faith in God.

   The case came to the attention of the provincial Social Services Department,
which was granted authority over Tyrell's health care in December. The order
ignited a legal, ethical and religious debate.
   "I wish it had turned out differently," Social Services spokesman Bill Carney
said yesterday, adding that the news had taken him by surprise.

   "We express our condolences."

   In March, the province took the family to court for a second time, and a
judge ordered the youth to undergo treatment and said he must be isolated from
the presence and influence of his loving yet misguided parents.

   Barred from accompanying him to the hospital, his parents sent him to the
Saskatoon Cancer Centre with his grandparents. The family received, and refused,
offers to take the 13-year-old out of Canada to avoid the court order that he
resume chemotherapy and face amputation of his leg.

   After a series of tests, there was grim news on March 19 when doctors said
that the cancer had spread to Tyrell's lungs and that there was no more they
could do beyond offering palliative care. They said he wouldn't survive for more
than a year.

   Then the family, including sisters Angie, 15, and Stephanie, 9, took him to
the American Biologics Hospital and Medical Center in Tijuana, Mexico, in
mid-March for three weeks of alternative therapy, which costs $6,000 a week.

   He received the initial treatment common to patients at the clinic: a
regimented diet, enzymes and vitamins; laetrile, which is an extract of apricot
pits, and shark cartilage, which officials describe as an immune-system booster.

   He also underwent two rounds of experimental gene therapy for the bone cancer
in his leg.

   Clinic doctors said the tumour was shrinking. The medical centre also
released results from Scripps Memorial Hospital, a respected hospital near San
Diego, that found no cancer in Tyrell's lungs, contradicting the Saskatchewan
hospital.

   At the Mexican clinic, where Tyrell regained a rosy glow in his cheeks, the
teenager thanked Canadians for their outpouring of support and love. More than
$10,000 was raised in a nationwide campaign.

   "Thanks for your support, everybody," the boy from Martensville, Sask., said
from his hospital bed at the time.

   Tyrell was a fan of the Detroit Red Wings, and hoped they would win the
Stanley Cup. His favourite hockey star was the Wings' Steve Yzerman.

   Tyrell returned to Saskatchewan on April 20 to a packed and cheering airport,
with more strength.

   "He's come back feeling better. What am I supposed to say? There is no
explanation," his father said at the time.

   After returning from Tijuana, Yvonne Dueck lashed out at people for trying to
get the family to justify its decision, which was based only on wanting to save
his life.

   "All we're doing is what we believe is best for him. Is that wrong? Have we
committed some big crime by trying to do the best for our son?"

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              74 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 24, 1999 Thursday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS: TECHNOLOGY; Pg. T1

LENGTH: 2627 words

HEADLINE: Heart of darkness  Cardiologists shine light on new territory with a
sensor-tipped catheter that draws three-dimensional maps of the organ

BYLINE: LAWRENCE SURTEES The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

   Cardiologists at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto are charting new territory
inside the heart with a unique catheter that heralds a radical advance in the
treatment of coronary artery disease.

   Equipped with tiny sensors on its tip, the device -- called a Noga catheter
-- enables heart doctors to produce three-dimensional maps of both the
mechanical and electrical functions of the muscle of the heart's main pumping
chamber.

   And soon, the Toronto heart doctors hope to use another version of the
catheter equipped with a needle to provide a dramatic treatment for patients
with blocked arteries, like Dale Woodcock.

   He has already had two bypass operations to restore blood flow to a region of
his heart muscle starved by a blocked coronary artery.

   The 58-year-old says he is easily winded by exertion, and has had to give up
playing his favourite sport, hockey, in favour of golf. Mr. Woodcock, who runs a
small glass company in Oshawa, Ont., was the third Canadian to have the inside
of his heart examined with the experimental Noga catheter.

   Now, Mr. Woodcock is a candidate for an experimental procedure that will use
the Noga catheter to inject genes into damaged heart muscle, spurring the growth
of new blood vessels that will circumvent a potentially lethal blockage.

   He's not expecting to play a pick-up game of hockey anytime soon, but Mr.
Woodcock is hoping that he'll be able to walk a golf course, instead of driving
a cart. "I'm willing to try it, and look forward to any improvement it may
offer."

   Dr. Duncan Stewart, head of the cardiology division at St. Michael's, says
the Noga catheter is the ideal non-surgical way to insert genes into the heart
muscle. The only other method is to cut the patient's chest open.His team plans
to take the Noga technology further by marrying it with a novel gene therapy
technique to enable the heart to repair its own damaged muscle -- all without
major surgery.

   Dr. Stewart expects to obtain permission later this summer to begin the
Canadian portion of a landmark North American-wide trial of the therapy with
Parke-Davis, the pharmaceutical arm of Warner-Lambert Co. They hope to begin the
tests this fall.

   Among those waiting to be one of the first patients to try the new therapy is
Mr. Woodcock. Cardiologists consider this research to be one of the most
promising new developments to treat cardiovascular disease -- the biggest killer
of Canadians.

   "If gene therapy delivered via a non-surgical approach is proven effective,
it will transform the way we treat many patients today," says Dr. Martin Leon,
chairman of the Cardiology Research Foundation at Washington Hospital Center in
Washington, D.C. That centre has done preclinical studies of the new
techniques.The heart of this treatment is the Noga catheter, which takes its
name from the Hebrew word for Venus, which also means "illuminating light."

   The Noga catheter was invented by a group of Israeli researchers led by
cardiologist Dr. Shlomo Ben-Haim. They sold their six-year-old company, Biosense
Inc., to the Cordis Corp. unit of U.S.-based medical equipment giant Johnson &
Johnson of New Brunswick, N.J., in 1997.

   Because it does not use any radioactive dye to produce its images, the Noga
catheter overcomes the shortcomings of angiograms -- a cardiac catherization
technique now widely used.

   Angiography is limited to producing images of the heart's own arteries and a
vague silhouette of the background heart muscle.

   But the Noga method gives cardiologists much more detailed information about
the viability of the heart muscle. Because Noga eliminates the need for X-ray
devices, it is safer for both patient and doctor.

   "It was originally developed to gain data on the physiology, or functioning,
of the heart and produces data that is difficult to obtain from other diagnostic
sources," Dr. Stewart says.

   Instead of dye, the Noga catheter uses a very low-level electromagnetic field
to detect the movement of the catheter tip, which is equipped with several tiny
sensors.

   As the catheter is threaded into the left ventricle, a detector connected to
a powerful computer workstation detects changes in the position of the sensors
on the Noga's tip. And that enables a cardiologist to generate three-dimensional
images of the chamber inside a patient's heart.

   But the Noga catheter measures much more than just position.

   Each time the catheter tip is placed against the wall of the heart chamber,
the sensors measure the electric voltage of the heart muscle cells, recording
the information on a map. If the tip is held in place during a full heart beat,
the Noga system measures the force of the heart muscle at the same point on a
second map.

   It is when those two maps are compared that cardiologists obtain an improved
tool to precisely diagnose the impact of coronary artery disease.

   If an area of heart muscle deprived of blood supply by a blocked artery is
dead -- or infarcted -- then the Noga maps will show no voltage and no movement.
However, an area of muscle that has no movement yet still has electric impulses
is termed ischemic -- damaged by chronic disease -- and reparable, says Dr.
Stewart.

   His team is the first in Canada to use the Noga procedure on humans. So far,
they have made Noga maps of three patients, including Mr. Woodcock. Although the
use of Noga is still in its infancy, Dr. Stewart's team believes it will prove
to be a more reliable tool to identify dormant muscle and to better target their
treatments.

   Besides Dr. Stewart, the team includes Dr. Robert Chisholm, medical director
of the cardiac catheterization lab and Dr. David Fitchett, director of the
coronary care centre. All three cardiologists are associate professors of
medicine at the University of Toronto.

   Coincidentally, the team was visiting a hospital in Boston for a
demonstration of the coveted Noga system early last January when they received
an urgent call from the St. Michael's Hospital Foundation in Toronto. A generous
benefactor, who wishes to remain anonymous, had read their research proposal and
wanted to know how much the system cost so he could buy one for St. Michael's.
(Dr. Stewart says the cost runs into six figures.)

   The impact of a non-invasive and potentially more effective treatment for
blocked heart arteries could be profound.

   Heart disease is the single biggest killer in the country. More than 79,100
Canadians died of heart disease last year, according to statistics from the
Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada and Health Canada.

   And the biggest cause of heart disease is blocked coronary arteries -- the
tiny vessels that nourish the heart's own muscle cells. Coronary artery disease
accounts for 80 per cent of all heart attacks and 23,000 people in Canada died
last year from a sudden heart attack.

   Another 10,000 of those victims are estimated to have died from congestive
heart failure, which develops over a long period when the heart fails to
maintain an adequate blood flow to its tissues. About 300,000 Canadians suffer
from various stages of congestive heart failure and 40,000 patients a year are
diagnosed as having the disease.

   Chronic heart disease alone accounted for 1.5 million patient days in Canada
in 1995 with an average stay lasting 12 days a patient, according to Health
Canada. Of those patients hospitalized with a sudden heart attack, almost 17 per
cent of males and 10 per cent of females had a medical procedure done to improve
the blood supply to the damaged heart muscle.

   There are two common methods to repair blocked coronary arteries. The first,
called angioplasty, uses a catheter with an inflatable balloon to widen the
artery and is done by a cardiologist. The alternative is open heart surgery to
do a coronary bypass in which a vein from the leg is grafted onto the heart to
shunt blood around the blocked artery.

   The rates for both procedures have increased dramatically in the past 15
years. Almost 17,000 angioplasty procedures and 15,816 open heart bypass
operations were done in Canada in 1995 (the last year for which statistics are
available). St. Michael's alone performed 2,524 cardiac catheterizations, 786
angioplasties and 1,010 open heart operations in fiscal 1998.

   However, both treatments offer only temporary relief, as Mr. Woodcock's
medical history shows. Since he began suffering from coronary artery disease 20
years ago, Mr. Woodcock says he has been hospitalized five times: He has had two
bypass operations, a small heart attack, an angiogram and, last month, a Noga
catherization.

   Of the patients treated with angioplasty, about 20 per cent will have their
coronary artery blocked again after six months. And about 50 per cent of
coronary bypasses fail within 10 years, Dr. Fitchett says.

   These failures are one reason why heart specialists are constantly looking
for better treatments.

   Researchers also hope that a more effective treatment will ease the strain
that heart disease places on the health-care system. Heart patients also "use a
disproportionately high amount of health-care resources," says Dr. Stewart,
chiefly because existing drugs and treatments have reduced the fatality rate
from heart disease and significantly extended their lives.

   Dr. Stewart says the secret to a better treatment for coronary heart disease
may lie with a gene found in a tissue that lines blood vessels. An expert in the
biology of the endothelial lining, Dr. Stewart moved to Toronto from Montreal in
1994 because of the U of T's expertise in genetic engineering and molecular
biology of heart disease.

   The gene makes a protein called vegf -- for vascular endothelial growth
factor. When copies of the gene are injected into damaged heart muscle,
endothelial cells secrete the vegf protein which, in turn, causes tiny new blood
vessels to grow and to nourish the blood-deprived heart muscle cells.

   "The vegf protein causes the heart to repair its own blood vessels," Dr.
Stewart says.

   Promising lab results led Dr. James Symes, the Canadian-trained chief of
cardiovascular surgery at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston, to get U.S.
government approval to conduct the first gene therapy experiment with vegf on
human heart disease patients. He has injected the gene into the hearts of 30
patients with untreatable angina -- chronic chest pain -- within the past six
months.

   Gene therapy could have the potential to replace angioplasty if its validity
is proven in larger trials, Dr. Symes told a conference of cardiologists in
Toronto and Montreal that was organized last month by Dr. Stewart.

   The patients each had an average of 56 angina attacks weekly before the gene
therapy treatment. Of the 24 patients who have been followed up for two months
or longer, the average has fallen to 13 attacks. "The majority of patients also
detect a significant reduction in the severity of their clinical symptoms."

   Although Dr. Symes plans further studies of his patients with the Noga
catheter to determine the extent of improvement to their heart muscle, he did
the gene therapy with open heart surgery.

   The St. Michael's team aims to be the first to do the gene therapy by
catheter, which is now only possible because of Noga.

   "The novel ability of Noga is that it allows cardiologists for the first time
to navigate a catheter tip or needle back repeatedly to a precise location on
the heart wall," Dr. Fitchett says.

   And that is why Dr. Stewart believes the value of Noga goes beyond its
usefulness as a diagnostic device. He sees it as an adjunct to a catheter-long
needle also developed by Johnson & Johnson's Biosense unit.

   "These are the tools cardiologists have been waiting for that may make gene
therapy a possible alternative to open heart surgery," Dr. Stewart says.

   For patients, catheter-delivered gene therapy would mean less risk and pain,
reduced complications and a speedier recovery. And it may extend treatment to
many angina sufferers for whom nothing can be done -- a category that two of Mr.
Woodcock's brothers are in. Dr. Stewart estimates that about 80 per cent of all
people with coronary disease suffer from angina pain -- of whom 20 per cent are
untreatable.

   Noga-delivered gene therapy may also prove to result in significant savings
to treat heart disease. The cost of an injection catheter and dose of vegf is
currently estimated at $4,000 per patient -- an amount equal to the heart-lung
bypass machine that is used in an open heart operation. Heart surgery averages
$10,000 an operation.

   But heart disease could be just the beginning of Noga's uses.

   Similar catheters can be used to probe other parts of the body, including the
brain and the gastrointestinal system, Dr. Ben-Haim stated in a research article
in the journal Nature Medicine. Johnson & Johnson's Biosense unit is already
developing a new generation of tools that are minimally invasive and produce
benefits in other medical fields, including neurology.

   And, in the future, predicts Dr. Ben-Haim, those devices will encourage the
growth of telesurgery in which image-guided devices are manipulated by doctors
remotely at another location.

   Site seeing

    http://www.jnj.com
     http://www.cordiswebster.com
     http://www.hsf.ca
    www.smh.toronto.on.ca/cardiac/index.html

   HOW TO READ A HEART

   Noga maps are interpreted with a colour scale that ranks both the degree of
contraction and voltage in areas of heart muscle, ranging from: red for none;
green for diminished function; blue for slightly impaired; and purple for strong
function. A diagnosis of the extent of damage due to coronary artery disease is
yielded by comparing the same point on the pair of images, which are from Dale
Woodcock's heart.

   The map of mechanical function on the right reveals a damaged area -- in red
near the centre -- where the heart muscle is not contracting. But the map on the
left shows that same region has strong voltage -- displayed in purple. And that
means the muscle tissue is not dead and may be repaired by restoring blood flow
from a blocked artery.

   An area of dead muscle with no chance of being repaired would show up as a
red region on both maps.

   NOGA IMAGING

   Having a Noga map made of your heart is just like a routine cardiac
catheterization, which is done under local anesthesia and takes about half an
hour.

   The catheter -- a thin, hollow plastic tube -- is inserted into a small
incision in the groin and fed into the femoral artery, guided up to the aorta
then into the left ventricle of the heart.

   But Noga images are different from angiograms, which use radioactive dyes and
X-ray machines to picture a heart's arteries. Instead, the Noga catheter uses a
low-level electromagnetic field to produce three-dimensional images of the
heart's main pumping chamber.

   The magnetic field is created from three small coils connected to a
triangle-shaped wire placed under the patient's stretcher. The tip of the Noga
catheter contains three tiny metal sensors connected by a thin wire inside the
length of the catheter to a detector.

   As the cardiologist manipulates the Noga catheter to touch the inside of the
left ventricle, the electric field is disrupted by the sensor tip. The detector,
which is tied to a powerful Silicon Graphics computer workstation, records the
position of the sensors in all three dimensions, as well as measure changes in
movement.

   Doctors term manipulating the catheter within the heart as "working in Noga
space."

   A cardiologist needs to guide the Noga catheter tip to over 100 points in the
heart to produce a complete image. And the medical team must keep the Noga tip
on each point during a complete cardiac cycle -- the period when the heart
expands with blood then contracts to pump it out.

   The Noga catheter produces two distinct maps of heart muscle function: One
shows the mechanical function of heart muscle, while a second displays the tiny
electric voltage in the organ.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              78 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 25, 1999 Tuesday
                                National Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 632 words

HEADLINE: Scientists describe gene-therapy approach to prostate cancer  Still
experimental, the work is being tested only in patients with advanced disease
who have the least hope of a cure

BYLINE: Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: Atlanta

BODY:

   Scientists described two experimental but promising approaches to prostate
cancer this week, one involving gene therapy and one using antibodies to rev up
the immune system.

   In the gene-therapy approach, the genes that become mutated in cancer are
replaced, while monoclonal antibodies home in on cancerous cells and flag them
for the immune system to destroy.

   Dr. Nicholas James and colleagues at the University of Birmingham in Britain
used an antibody with two functions. Made by the New Jersey-based Medarex, the
antibody sticks to cancer cells that produce too much of a protein called Her-2.
The antibody also stimulates a cell receptor, or doorway, called CD64.

   Both should stimulate the immune system to attack the cancerous cells, and
they did, Dr. James told the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical
Oncology in Atlanta.

   The James team also gave 111 prostate-cancer patients injections of a drug
called GM-CSF, which stimulates the production of immune cells.

   Only 20 patients have been followed long enough to see a response, but of
them, seven, or 35 per cent, saw levels of prostate-specific antigen, a measure
of prostate cancer, fall by 50 per cent or more. This indicates the cancer was
suppressed, Dr. James told the meeting.

   Another six had their levels fall by between 25 and 50 per cent, and four
patients said their pain decreased.

   Still experimental, the approach is being tested only in patients with
advanced disease who have the least hope of a cure. But researchers said their
work is promising because the gene responsible for Her-2 is commonly overactive
in many types of cancer. For example, it is overactive in about 30 per cent of
women with breast cancer.

   A monoclonal antibody called Herceptin made by Genentech affects Her-2 and
reduces the risk of death in women with certain kinds of breast cancer by 24 per
cent.

   "We may find that there is a role for this in other malignancies as well,"
said Dr. Deborah Kuban, a prostate cancer expert at Eastern Virginia Medical
School.

   Dr. Christopher Logothetis and colleagues at the M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
in Houston took a different approach, using a tumour-suppressing gene, p53.
While Her-2 causes cancer when it is overactive, p53 is supposed to stop cancer.

   But when p53 is mutated, it can cause the disease.

   The Logothetis team used standard gene-therapy methods. They made their drug,
from Introgen Therapeutics of Austin, Tex., by weakening a virus known as an
adenovirus so it would no longer cause disease, adding in the p53 gene and
injecting this into the prostate tumours.

   One day later, they looked at the tumours and found higher levels of p53,
which indicated the gene was active in the cells. Most tumours shrank somewhat,
increasing the viability of surgery, Dr. Logothetis said.

   "The assumption was that by making the cancer smaller, it would make surgery
more curative," he said.

   The tumours could have become inflamed and grown bigger, but they did not,
Dr. Logothetis reported.

   In three of 14 patients the tumours shrank by more than 25 per cent, and all
tolerated the therapy well, he said.

   These 14 and another 16 patients undergoing testing all had drug-resistant
cancer which had spread throughout their bodies.

   Such patients will probably eventually die of their cancer, but it can take
10 to 15 years, and doctors are reluctant to use highly toxic treatments that
will make them sick.

   "There is no evidence yet that we are able to increase the cure rate of such
patients," Dr. Logothetis warned.

   Dr. Kuban agreed.

   "We are just finding out how to do this," she said. "Gene therapy is still in
its infancy."

   Prostate cancer is the second-biggest cancer killer of North American men,
after lung cancer. An estimated 179,000 U.S. men will get prostate cancer this
year and 44,000 will die of it.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              80 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 22, 1999 Saturday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. D6

LENGTH: 713 words

HEADLINE: A cure for diabetes, a lesson for Canada?  Calgary's exciting
'anti-vaccine' is a medical future we can't miss

BODY:

   The future of medicine announced itself last week in the confusing,
incomplete, but potentially thrilling way medical futures often do.

   Scientists at the University of Calgary reported that they had found the
substance in the body that provokes an auto-immune reaction that leads to what
we call Type 1 diabetes. Well, that's probably a little strong, as nature is
really quite perverse.

   They found the protein that causes the body to attack its own pancreas in
most, but not all, people who have the disease. What followed from that was
potentially very, very good news. When they injected the protein into very young
mice bred to be diabetic, "most" animals -- nature really is perverse -- didn't
come down with the sickness.

   The Calgary scientists described this treatment as a "vaccine" against
diabetes, but, more truthfully, it is a sort of "anti-vaccine." Classic
vaccines, such as smallpox, stimulate immune reactions with mild or dead forms
of the microbes that cause the disease. The idea is for the body to arm itself
with smallpox antibodies that are then able to destroy more lethal forms of the
illness. Contrarily, the anti-vaccine tries to keep a diabetes-prone person's
confused immune system from making the antibodies that subsequently attack
organs such as the pancreas.

   While anti-vaccines may be very exciting for a host of auto-immune conditions
-- a similar concept is being developed against multiple sclerosis and
donor-organ rejection -- that is not what was most striking about the Calgary
announcement. In the race to develop a diabetes anti-vaccine, Canadians already
find themselves behind a Swedish company that is completing the first stage of
human trials.

   The Swedish company, however, is administering its anti-vaccine the
old-fashioned way. That is, purified protein is injected into the body. The
Calgary scientists did something quite different: They attached the gene that
naturally produces the protein in the body to a deactivated virus.

   Inside the mouse, the gene turned on and produced the anti-vaccinating
protein. Off the top, there may be a potentially huge economic advantage to this
delivery system. The Calgary scientists say they can produce their anti-vaccine
for $1 a dose; the classic method may cost something like $500 a dose.

   But above and beyond that is the exciting medical future spoken of in the
opening sentence. What the Calgary scientists may have done is produce a living,
breathing example of gene therapy. The general concept is that you put genes in
the body to repair damage caused by the body's defective genes. It is a
momentous idea that, unfortunately, has produced very little in actual results
so far.

   If the Calgary scientists can do what they say they have done, well, hosanna
for them, and hosanna for gene therapy. But there is something much deeper here.

   Gene therapy is exactly the sort of research future in which this country
must become involved. And it is exactly the sort of medical future that we risk
losing with our niggardly funding of health research. In 1997, the Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development reported that Canadian government
spending for medical research was $329-million, while the United States weighed
in at $12.47-billion.

   What this means, on a population basis, is that for every 25 cents a Canadian
researcher received in public funding, his or her U.S. competitor got a dollar.
Not only does this inequity mean we risk losing scientists to the United States,
but those who remain compete with both feet stuck in the funding mud. And if
there is a scientific arena where we want to fight the Americans mano a mano, it
is in genetic medicine.

   Not only is genetically rooted medicine an area of traditional Canadian
excellence, it is clearly a potential hotbed of future industry. If this country
could make the first cheap, effective vaccine to prevent potential Type 1
diabetics from getting the disease in the first place, it would be good for
humankind. But it also would be good for our health-care system, which spends
tens of millions of dollars treating the side effects of diabetes. And, finally,
it would be good for the company that produces it.

   In this light, we are fools if we don't mine our skills to make gene-based
medical research a national priority.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              84 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 18, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Cancer patients' immune systems rebuilt with gene therapy

BYLINE: Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: Atlanta

BODY:

   Researchers said yesterday they had enlisted one of the defences used by
cancer cells to resist chemotherapy and turned it around to help rescue the
immune systems of cancer patients.

   The experimental approach involves two new technologies -- using gene therapy
to bring new genes into the body, and the use of stem cells, which are nursery
cells employed to rebuild a cancer patient's immune system after toxic
chemotherapy.

   Dr. Kenneth Cowan and colleagues at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, Md., said they used gene therapy to help stem cells stand up to the
ravages of chemotherapy.

   Stem cells are often used to treat cancer patients. Such cells give rise to a
range of other cells, and because the stem cells used in cancer come from the
blood, they can produce red blood cells and the range of white blood cells used
by the immune system.They can be used to reconstitute the immune system after
strong doses of chemotherapy or radiation therapy.

   Dr. Cowan's team set out to see whether it would be possible to strengthen
the immune cells' resistance to the drugs. They focused on a gene known as
MDR-1, for multidrug resistance.

   Dr. Cowan's team experimented on 10 breast-cancer patients who were being
given extremely high doses of drugs, which destroyed their bone marrow along
with their tumours.

   As the researchers had hoped, the virus infected the cells and injected the
MDR-1 gene into them. Then the cells were transfused back into the patients.

   "We can reconstruct the patients' [immune systems] with these genetically
modified cells quite easily," Dr. Cowan said.

   Once the patients' immune systems were restored, they were put on lower doses
of chemotherapy. The genetically altered stem cells survived in all six patients
for whom data was available, Dr. Cowan said.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              91 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 20, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 135 words

HEADLINE: Dueck back home after treatment in Mexico for cancer

BYLINE: Canadian Press; CP

DATELINE: Saskatoon

BODY:

   Tyrell Dueck is expected to return home from Mexico today following three
weeks of alternative cancer therapy that his doctors and his family describe as
successful.

   Tyrell, 13, has been receiving treatment at American Biologics Hospital, a
clinic based in Tijuana, Mexico after his parents refused conventional
chemotherapy in Saskatoon.

   "The tumour is still shrinking and there is dead tissue around it, which
indicates it's dying off," Becky Hildebrandt, Tyrell's aunt, said yesterday.

   The family's enthusiasm was matched by a statement released yesterday by the
clinic, which said Tyrell had undergone two rounds of experimental gene therapy
for his bone cancer in his knee.

   Purified, sterilized DNA from his tumour and a fat molecule were injected
into his body to boost the immune response against the cancer.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              103 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 29, 1999 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: Tyrell Dueck says thanks13-year-old is hopeful and feeling better

BYLINE: DAVID ROBERTS The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Tijuana, Mexico

BODY:

   Smiling coyly, his hair reduced by earlier chemotherapy to U.S.-Marine-style
stubble, 13-year-old bone-cancer patient Tyrell Dueck said he's feeling well and
grateful to Canadians for their outpouring of support and love.

   "Thanks for your support, everybody," the Martensville, Sask., teen said with
a grin as he reclined in a $6,000-a-week bed festooned with intravenous tubes
and computerized medical equipment at Tijuana's American Biologics Clinic, a
port of last call for the gravely ill.

   The teenager, who has been at the centre of a legal and ethical cyclone in
Canada over the best course of medical treatment, spoke publicly yesterday for
the first time since arriving in Mexico last week.

   Tyrell did not have the appearance of someone with Stage 4 terminal cancer.

   A healthy glow had returned to his cheeks and he said he was feeling "good"
-- pain-free, filled with hope and comfortable.

   Despite being bedridden for much of his time here, Tyrell has been upbeat,
playing cards with his two sisters, Angie, 15, and Stephanie, 9. A stuffed teddy
bear rests in a corner of his room.
    Wearing a black T-shirt with his swollen right leg raised and lightly
bandaged, he has a laetrile-laden intravenous line feeding into his left arm and
another IV hooked into his leg. He watches Mexican league soccer on television
and the occasional game of NHL hockey, in Spanish.

   Tyrell said he prefers Mexican treatment to the nauseating and debilitating
chemotherapy he quit back home. "I don't get sick with this one," he said.

   He seemed to brim with optimism, saying he hopes his beloved Detroit Red
Wings repeat their run for the Stanley Cup championship this spring. "Chelios is
okay," he said: He had followed the blockbuster trade this week of Chris Chelios
from Chicago to Detroit. Although his favourite hockey star is the Wings' Steve
Yzerman, Tyrell said he's looking forward to taking up an offer from the Ottawa
Senators to fly him to the capital, when he's well enough, to watch a real NHL
game for the first time.

   Officials at the clinic say Tyrell is "full of cancer," but doctors are
hopeful they may be able to "manage" the condition. Positive thinking, many of
the patients here say, is part of the therapy.

   Tyrell has begun experimental gene-manipulation treatment and alternative
therapies for the malignant growth in his right leg, just above the knee. It was
diagnosed as osteogenic sarcoma at the Saskatoon Cancer Centre last November.

   The diagnosis brought the teenager and his family to the attention of
Saskatchewan child-protection authorities, who went to court to force him to
resume conventional cancer treatment: chemotherapy and planned amputation of his
leg. That effort ended 10 days ago when doctors in Saskatoon said that the
cancer had spread and that there was no more they could do beyond offering
palliative care.

   The family then brought Tyrell to the clinic in Tijuana. Tim Dueck, Tyrell's
father, said he's uncertain how the family will pay for the treatment but that
God will provide. Rebecca Hildebrandt, his sister, said $11,000 has been raised
so far in a nationwide campaign.

   He received the initial treatment common to patients at the Tijuana clinic: a
regimented diet, enzymes and vitamins; laetrile, which is an extract of apricot
pits, and shark cartilage, which officials here describe as an immune-system
booster. The gene therapy started Saturday when he was taken by wheelchair into
the small operating theatre at this 32-bed facility.

   Few of the treatments here are approved by Canadian or U.S. doctors. The
dozens of Tijuana clinics that have sprung up in this sprawling border city of
1.2 million have been criticized by such organizations as the American Cancer
Society for offering false hope and false remedies. But thousands of seemingly
hopeless cancer patients are nonetheless taking refuge here.

   American Biologics spokesman Michael Culbert said the gene-manipulation
therapy was pioneered in Korea and involves the use of liposomes (fatty
particles) to carry altered or "pumped-up" genes directly to cells within
Tyrell's body.

   In the United States, according to the American Cancer Society, the first
disease approved for gene therapy has been adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency.

   But clinical trials are under way in several countries to use gene therapy
for genetic disorders such as cystic fibrosis and high-serum cholesterol, and
with cancers such as melanoma, neuroblastoma and brain tumours.

   Although the official Canadian prognosis for his son is not good, Mr. Dueck,
36, a long-distance truck driver, said yesterday he had not seen Tyrell look so
well for some time. Mr. Dueck said he's happy to have left controversy behind in
Canada and wants simply to be left alone to focus on helping his son in any way
he can.

   "He's getting better. It's been a while since I've seen him look this good,"
Mr. Dueck said.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              107 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            March 27, 1999 Saturday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 699 words

HEADLINE: Can shark cartilage save the life of Tyrell Dueck?  Part of a grab bag
of therapy youngster is receiving at Mexican clinic; conventional medicine
skeptical but not entirely dismissive of effort

BYLINE: DAVID ROBERTS and SEAN FINE The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Tijuana, Mexico and Toronto

BODY:

   DAVID ROBERTS
 in Tijuana, Mexico
    SEAN FINE
 in Toronto

   Pale, thin and bald, 13-year-old Tyrell Dueck lay in bed yesterday watching
television while hooked up to a yellow intravenous bag of laetrile, the widely
discredited cancer therapy.

   The youngster from Martensville, Sask., is at a Tijuana cancer clinic
receiving a grab bag of treatment, including shark cartilage, an untried form of
gene therapy, vitamins, enzymes and amino acids.

   The boy attracted national attention when a court ordered him to receive
conventional treatment against the wishes of his parents. Doctors have since
said the cancer has spread to his lungs, and they do not believe they can save
him. (Tyrell's father Timothy said earlier this week that the Mexican clinic,
American Biologics, has found no sign of cancer in the lungs. But a clinic
spokesman said yesterday he believes the cancer is throughout the boy's body.
"Cancer is very tricky, there might be a microscopic colony," Mike Culbert said.
"He has cancer all over his body.")

   Is there anything in the grab bag that could help prolong his life?

   Conventional medicine is skeptical. On the other hand, it has yet to entirely
reject shark cartilage.

   Once seen as promising, shark cartilage is now viewed by some doctors as "the
laetrile of the 1990s" -- virtually worthless as a cancer treatment.

   But not everyone has given up hope. A Quebec biotechnology company, Aeterna
Laboratories, is developing a drug whose main ingredient is a liquid extract of
shark cartilage. It will be tested in phase-3 clinical trials on more than 550
patients at 40 hospitals in the United States and Canada, including the Ottawa
Regional Cancer Centre. The centre's Dr. William Evans is a principal
investigator, along with Dr. Roy Herbst of the world-renowned M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston.

   "It has nothing to do with the shark itself -- it's because it's cartilage
that it works," Jean-Yves Bourgeois, a spokesman for Aeterna, said yesterday.
"The reason that we're using shark cartilage is because it's a convenient and
abundant source of cartilage and it's easier to extract cartilage from a shark
than from any bovine or poultry source." He is hoping Canadian regulatory
authorities will approve the medication as a drug by 2002.

   Shark cartilage's history as a cancer treatment dates from 1982, when
researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology found it helped inhibit
the growth of blood vessels that feed cancerous tumours. That meshed with
important work by Dr. Judah Folkman of Harvard University and Dr. Robert Kerbel
of Toronto's Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, whose theories suggest that
cancer tumours can be killed by preventing the growth of blood vessels.

   A U.S. chemist, Dr. William Lane, seized on this research and spearheaded
research projects in Mexico and Cuba, including one study that purportedly
showed a survival rate of nearly 50 per cent after three years among cancer
patients previously considered terminal.

   But clinical trials so far have found scant effects from the shark cartilage,
said Dr. Simon Sutcliffe of the British Columbia Cancer Agency, which takes an
official position against use of the material until its benefits have been
proven.

   "I think the field has been prepared to believe there is a potentially
important principle in shark cartilage," but the results have been
disappointing, he said.

   One study, published recently in the Journal of Clinical Oncology, found that
the tumours of 16.7 per cent of patients treated remained stable -- they did not
grow -- which is roughly the same effect produced by standard supportive care.

   "It's not a decision I would make for my family. I would want to have the
benefits of what is known, rather than the benefits of what is not known," Dr.
Sutcliffe said.

   At the Centre for Integrated Therapy in Vancouver, a complementary cancer
centre that gives more weight to anecdotal evidence than conventional medicine,
shark cartilage is not offered.

   "So far our experience is that there are other things that seem to be more
valuable to more people," said Dr. Hal Gunn, a spokesman for the centre, which
works alongside traditional treatments of surgery, radiation and chemotherapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              110 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 2, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 1010 words

HEADLINE: Team of monkeys press-ganged across medical frontier  The niceties of
animal etiquette and propriety are observed as simians surrender blood samples
and offer ray of hope in gene-therapy research

BYLINE: NICHOLAS WADE New York Times Service; NYT

DATELINE: Philadelphia

BODY:

   A colony of 54 rhesus monkeys at the University of Pennsylvania was
peacefully watching an episode of the second Star Trek series one recent
afternoon when an alien-looking squad of higher primates, decked out in masks
and white disposable boiler suits and ridiculous booties, marched into their
quarters.

   The invaders politely avoided staring any monkey in the face, a perilous faux
pas in simian society, but there was no disguising their intent: to make one of
the residents surrender a blood sample.

   The monkeys are press-ganged pioneers in a bold medical frontier, the
treatment of disease by reprogramming the body's genetic instructions. Gene
therapy, as it is known, has long been a field of high promise and low
fulfilment.

   The promise is evident: All diseases, even infections, have a genetic
component, and the best possible treatment in many cases would be to repair the
genetic defect that permits the disease.

   But inserting genes into human cells in full working order has proved to be
exasperatingly difficult. More than 230 clinical trials of genetic-engineering
techniques are now in progress, but most are at a preliminary stage and none has
yet led to an approved therapy.

   Along with a batch of recent experiments at other universities, the Penn
monkeys represent one of the few rays of hope in a long series of setbacks. Not
only do six of them now carry a newly inserted gene that makes a therapeutic
protein, but the gene can also be switched on at will simply by giving the
monkey a pill.

   The monkeys belong to the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy,
directed by a youthful-looking veteran of the gene-therapy wars, James Wilson.

   Dr. Wilson has corralled the resources to pursue a broad-based strategy. Not
for him the gamble of going after a single disease, with heavy odds of failure.
He is pursuing a wide range of maladies with a variety of methods.

   Mouse rooms and monkey colonies, where gene-insertion techniques must be
tested before being tried in patients, do not come cheap. Dr. Wilson's virus-
manufacturing centre cost $5-million (U.S.) to build.

   Viruses are both the hope and despair of genetic engineers. Viruses can focus
on specific kinds of cells, penetrate their membranes and insert their genes in
working order into the cell's DNA. Most approaches to gene therapy use viruses
as the vehicle to convey genes to target cells. The idea is to strip the virus
of the genes that make it pathogenic and replace them with a therapeutic gene.

   In the mid-1980s, when Dr. Wilson joined the field, a disabled mouse virus
was everyone's favourite candidate. But the virus infected only cells that were
dividing. The next candidate was adenovirus, a cause of the common cold.

   Adenovirus is a fine vehicle; it inserts new genes into many kinds of human
cell, and the genes produce protein. But only for eight weeks or so. That is how
long it takes for the body's immune system to identify and root out every
Trojan-horse cell where an adenovirus, even a disabled one, is lurking.

   In 1993, Dr. Wilson left the University of Michigan and a Howard Hughes
fellowship -- a munificent but non-transferable kind of research grant -- to
move to Penn. The dean of its medical school, William Kelley, made it a crusade
to get gene therapy off the ground and persuaded Dr. Wilson to head the new
institute.

   Two years later, the whole community of genetic engineers was plunged into a
crisis of confidence. The National Institutes of Health, finding that $200-
million (U.S.), about 2 per cent of its budget, was going into gene-therapy
research, commissioned a critical review of the field. The review's authors
chided gene therapists for promising too much and delivering too little.

   The many exaggerated claims for gene therapy "threaten confidence in the
integrity of the field," the institutes' report said.

   A shakeout followed, but Dr. Wilson escaped damage. "Personally it helped us,
because it eliminated a lot of the hacks," he said. "So we contrived to grow
after that."

   His institute, the largest of its kind, has a staff of 187 people and an
annual budget of $25-million.

   Dr. Wilson is now working with a new gene-delivery system, one based on a
small virus called adeno-associated virus. It has only two genes, both of which
can be removed, leaving just its head and tail as a shell to carry therapeutic
genes into target cells.

   Because it does not provoke the body's immune system nearly as much as does
adenovirus, the genes it inserts can continue to work for a long time.

   Dr. Wilson has also incorporated an important device that genetic engineers
had neglected, a switch for regulating the inserted genes. Cells usually
activate genes by having an agent known as a promoter attach itself to a stretch
of DNA just upstream of a target gene. Once the promoter is in place, the gene's
program is executed.

   TURNING AN INTRUDER INTO AN INSTRUCTOR

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania have succeeded in using genetic
information implanted in a virus to alter the function of blood-making cells in
monkeys. The method may one day help to treat illnesses in which red blood cells
are deficient.
1. The EPO Gene
    Specific genes of an invasive virus are removed and replaced by a gene known
as the erythropoietin or EPO gene, which stimulates production of red blood
cells.
2. The Activating Agent
    The EPO gene is activated by a two-part switch. Genes that make the two
halves of the switch are inserted in a second virus.
3. Both viruses are injected into the muscle cells of a rhesus monkey. Unlike
other cells, the long fibrous muscle cells have many nuclei, giving more targets
for the viruses.
4. The viruses penetrate the cell's nuclei, inserting their altered genes into
the cell's DNA.
5. Inside the nucleus, the two halves of the on-off switch are released into the
cell
6. These two proteins are then linked by a molecule, rapamycin, which is given
as a pill. The resulting combination is capable of activating the EPO gene.
7. Once activated, the gene produces proteins that cause bone marrow to produce
more red blood cells.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              115 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 29, 1999 Friday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A19

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Crippled AIDS virus may help hemophiliacs  Cell invader can deliver
genes that provide controls for blood clotting, Salk Institute researchers say

BYLINE: MAGGIE FOX Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Researchers said yesterday that they have found a possible way to use the
AIDS virus as an effective delivery system for gene therapy.

   Tests in mice show that a crippled version of the human immunodeficiency
virus -- one in which only a single gene is intact -- might be used to deliver
new genes that can help cure hemophiliacs.

   Writing in the journal Science, Inder Verma and a team of colleagues at the
Salk Institute in La Jolla, Calif., said their highly abbreviated HIV
successfully "infected" mice with human blood cells.

   Better yet, they think they hit some of the stem cells -- the so-called
nursery cells that give rise to all other cells. In the blood, such
hematopoietic stem cells create the cells of the immune system, as well as cells
that control clotting.

   "This is the first good example of how such a vector can be used to introduce
genes into hematopoietic stem cells," Dr. Verma said in a telephone interview.

   HIV has only nine genes. Like other viruses, it is much simpler than living
organisms such as bacteria. Most scientists do not consider viruses "alive"
because they cannot exist or reproduce on their own.

   What they do is inject their genetic material -- RNA in the case of HIV and
related viruses -- into a victim cell. This starts the cell pumping out copies
of the virus.

   The Salk Institute group stripped away the "envelope proteins" that coat the
virus and substituted proteins from a cattle virus. HIV specifically attacks
immune-system cells known as CD4 cells. Substituting the cattle virus meant that
the new engineered virus could attack other cells too.

   They also removed the five disease-causing genes, leaving only the gene for
integrase, the enzyme that HIV is believed to use to pump its RNA into its
victim cells.

   They substituted a gene from a human blood cell known as CD34, and injected
the mice. Tests found evidence of the gene in the blood, bone marrow and spleens
of the mice, as well as evidence for other kinds of human blood cells,
indicating that stem cells had indeed been successfully infected.

   Dr. Verma hopes to substitute the human genes that control the production of
two blood-clotting proteins known as Factor 8 and Factor 9, which are often used
to treat hemophilia.

   Gene therapy has not worked very well, except in a few experiments involving
heart-disease patients. Either the new genes are not effectively taken up by the
body, or they do not "express" (or order the production of) the proteins they
are supposed to control for very long.

   But in this case the genes had been expressing for 22 weeks when they killed
the mice to examine them. "That is a quarter of the life of mice," Dr. Verma
said.

   Between 5 and 15 per cent of the cells in the mice tested positive for human
genes.

   If the same level of production could be achieved in humans, that would be
enough to treat hemophilia, Dr. Verma said. "It can definitely produce a
therapeutic amount," he said.

   Next, they will test the procedure on dogs, and then ask the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration for permission to test it on humans.

   This may be easier said than done.

   Tests aimed at using a weakened form of HIV show that the virus, no matter
how badly it is crippled, can manage to put itself back together once inside the
body and become infectious again.

   For this reason, no one has been able to test a virus using a live vaccine in
humans.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              116 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 28, 1999 Thursday

SECTION: TORONTO NEWS; TORONTO LIVE; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 86 words

HEADLINE: Heart-study millions

BYLINE: Compiled by Gay Abbate

BODY:

    The University of Toronto will receive $13-million today for a new
cardiovascular research centre that will allow scientists in Toronto to compete
at the world level. The centre will pursue research initiatives in all areas of
cardiovascular research, including molecular gene therapies, which help in the
diagnosis and treatment of heart failure.

   The foundation donated $6-million of the total amount -- the largest single
donation in the organization's history -- and the Lewar family donated
$7-million to the centre.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              117 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 26, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; THE FUTURE OF FAT; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 1156 words

HEADLINE: Pill power, not will power, again touted in battle of bulge  Two new
kinds of drugs waiting to be approved for use in Canada may play a role in
keeping off weight. FOOD FOR THOUGHT A REVIEW OF DIETS The last in a series of
articles that examine a variety of popular diets.

BYLINE: KRISTA FOSS Health Reporter

BODY:

   When it comes to a quick fix for fat, hope springs eternal. It's just human
nature, after all, to prefer a sweat-and-tofu-free solution to lumpen flesh over
privations and exertion.

   In the future, those hopes may be justified. Everything from
metabolism-hiking proteins to drugs that affect appetite and fat absorption are
on the current menu of obesity research and piquing the interest of those who
are simply overweight.

   Some early results and new therapies suggest pill power may give us an edge
that our willpower won't -- but the magic bullet is still on the horizon. In the
immediate future, there are two new kinds of drugs waiting to be approved for
use in Canada. Where we might prefer hares, these drugs are tortoises in the
fat-busting race, but they may play a part in keeping off weight.

   Orlistat (which will be sold under the name Xenical) interrupts the work of
an enzyme that allows the body to absorb fat. A study released last week showed
lukewarm results: A year of orlistat use resulted in average body-fat reductions
of 10 per cent among obese patients, who also were on a controlled diet. A year
later, the patients who continued to take orlistat, and use weight-maintenance
techniques, gained back less than half of the lost weight against the placebo
patients (also using the techniques), who, on average, gained back all the
weight they had lost.

   The downside of this drug is diarrhea and intestinal gas, side effects that
increase as the dose is increased. There also are some concerns about the drug's
safety in long-term use, and that might hold up its approval.

   Another class of drug is the appetite suppressants that work like
antidepressants.

   Sibutramine (to be sold as Meridia) suppresses appetite and contributes to a
mild increase in a person's metabolism -- and unlike the
fenfluramine-phentermine combination of diet drugs, recalled from the
marketplace amidst controversy, sibutramine is not linked to heart-valve damage.

   A University of Glasgow study found that weight loss in patients taking
sibutramine was greater than placebo-treated patients with the same
calorie-controlled diet -- 68 per cent of patients on sibutramine and 27 per
cent of placebo patients lost at least 5 per cent of their baseline body weight
in a 12-week treatment period with a follow-up of four weeks.

   That weight loss, which in most people equals no more than two pounds a
month, is significant for its impact on the overweight. "It has a very important
effect on blood pressure, blood sugar and lipid levels," says Aubie Angel, an
obesity researcher at the University of Manitoba.

   That's good news for the obese. For those impatient or vain, however, those
results might not be fast or dramatic enough when the countdown to bathing-suit
weather begins. But take heart: Because they work on different mechanisms, Dr.
Angel says the two drugs have the potential to become a combined therapy, thus
reducing appetite and fat absorption at the same time -- and increasing weight
loss.

   The future of staying slim, however, looks like it belongs to leptin.

   Leptin is a naturally occurring human hormone that scientists believe helps
people maintain a genetically predetermined weight, a set point. So over the
long term, leptin supposedly ratchets appetite up or down according to how much
work our body is doing.

   When you lose weight below your set point, your leptin goes down and your
appetite goes up. When you gain weight, your leptin goes up, and supposedly your
appetite goes down.

   But it appears that when your system gets out of kilter -- you sustain an
imbalance of too much food energy and not enough work for a long period -- your
leptin levels increase in tandem with a persistent weight gain, and you
eventually become leptin resistant. Your set point is reset at a higher, more
stubborn weight.

   Scientists are theorizing that most obese people are leptin resistant. (Five
per cent to 10 per cent of obese people produce abnormally low levels of leptin,
which also is linked to their obesity.)

   So at least two main leptin therapies are being hotly pursued.

   The first therapy simply administers a continual dose of leptin to people who
already have lost weight (their leptin levels are thus depressed, and the
therapeutic leptin raises those levels, fooling the body into believing it has
gained weight). Early clinical trials on humans and animal studies suggest it
works -- fatty tissue is lost, and energy levels remain high.

   Another therapy being investigated is a bid to reverse the desensitization,
or the tolerance, to leptin that occurs in obese people. Leptin receptors have
been discovered in the brain, and the trick for researchers is to see how they
can resensitize these receptors or simply increase their numbers.

   Those developments are mere years away.

   In another research corner, meanwhile, work on uncoupling proteins is
attracting some buzz.

   These proteins were first discovered in the brown fat of hibernating bears,
and they have an interesting function: They make the cell's powerhouse, the
mitochondria, leaky and thus less efficient at producing energy from sugar and
fats.

   Fortunately, humans have uncoupling proteins, too, and three varieties have
been identified. Because a cell with uncoupling proteins requires more food to
create energy, these proteins raise a person's resting metabolic rate and help
generate heat.

   How people vary in the production of uncoupling proteins could explain the
differences in individuals' metabolisms -- and their predisposition to putting
on weight.

   Scientists are searching for a mechanism to increase the work of uncoupling
proteins in those with a sluggish metabolism.

   At the same time, other researchers are trying to identify the mutation in
the genes for uncoupling proteins that might explain some people's low metabolic
rates -- suggesting a potential gene therapy to remedy this defect.

   Ultimately, science cannot ignore the environmental factors contributing to
obesity and weight gain. The consensus is clear: In Western society, we eat too
many calorie-dense foods for the amount of physical work we do.

   Though North Americans have been reporting a decline in their intake of fat
(reporting it, of course, is different from doing it), fat, on average, is still
between 30 per cent to 40 per cent of the average diet.

   That's the level most experts recommend for people who are moderately
physically active.

   Most of us don't hit that benchmark. Some public health experts believe that,
for those with sedentary professions, dietary fat needs to be slashed back to 20
per cent to 25 per cent of total energy. And movement needs to increase; at
work, at rest or at play, the impetus should be the monkey bars, not the Mars
bars.

   Medical research may zero in on a miracle for our weight expectations, but we
can help ourselves by eating fewer fatty foods, and moving more. For those who
have been on the diet treadmill, that's probably not the research news they want
to hear.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              120 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 9, 1999 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; GENETICS; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: Fabled fountain of youth firming up

BYLINE: CARL HALL San Francisco Chronicle

BODY:

   Hopes are soaring anew for the so-called immortality enzyme telomerase. New
studies suggest it can be safely used to extend the life span of human cells
without making them cancerous. The findings, published in the latest issue of
the journal Nature Genetics, are based on a year-long study of telomerase in
human skin and retina cells that were transplanted into laboratory mice.

   The results appear to resolve one of the key safety issues that had kept
researchers from testing the anti-aging technology in people. If further tests
succeed, telomerase genes might be used to counteract the normal aging process,
allowing possible treatments for common aging-related conditions, such as
failing eyesight and wrinkled skin.

   A year ago, telomerase was shown in test-tube studies to give cells that
normally wear out and die after a few reproductive cycles a virtually limitless
capacity to divide and multiply.

   The early findings generated considerable fanfare but also raised concerns
that the same enzyme, which is linked to many forms of cancer, might trigger
runaway growth in otherwise benign, albeit tired, cells.

   The latest mouse experiments were designed to address these concerns. The
studies of human cells were done in mice with bioengineered humanlike properties
-- the closest thing to a human trial as could be safely devised at this stage.

   Similar results, reported separately in the same science journal, were
obtained by a team at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
Dallas. Team leader Calvin Harley says the bioengineered "immortal" cells are
still growing in the lab mice and, by all indications, "these cells are behaving
like normal cells."

   The aging process occurs when cells exhaust their supply of telomeres -- bits
of genetic material that give cells the instructions needed to keep dividing
into new copies.

   Like plastic tips on shoelaces, the telomeres are found at the ends of the
long stretches of DNA packed into each cell's nucleus. In essence, the tips of
telomeric DNA wear away each time the cell reproduces, until none is left.

   Except during the fetal stage of development, most cells typically lack the
active gene needed to make new DNA tips. The telomerase enzyme, a protein
expressed by this gene, is what gives cells that ability. It is also one of the
factors in malignancies, where cell growth runs amok. The studies pave the way
for rigorous preclinical experiments -- the final stage before the technology
can be tested. Researchers hope telomerase can play a role in the kind of gene
therapy that requires cells to be kept alive for extended periods of time. Two
of the most promising applications include telomerase in bioengineered cells
from bone marrow and blood. Ultimately, the gene that encodes telomerase might
be inserted into certain cells in humans to reverse the aging process. If all
goes well, the first stage of human testing is two to three years away.

   The studies were sponsored by Geron Corp., a biotech company based in Menlo
Park, California.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              122 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 7, 1999 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: New protein therapy targets HIV infection  Experimental technique
'smuggles' caspase into cells, causing them to self-destruct

BYLINE: MAGGIE FOX Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Scientists say they have harnessed a protein that can force cells infected
with the AIDS virus to commit suicide.

   They smuggled this protein into some infected cells using new technology that
might be used to fight other bugs, such as the viruses that cause hepatitis and
herpes and the parasite that causes malaria.

   "It's absolutely amazing. It's literally a gift from God," said Steven Dowdy
of the Howard Hughes Institute at Washington University in St. Louis. "This is
the first example of protein therapy. It's an example of what you could do that
you never, ever thought you could do," he said in an interview yesterday.

   Dr. Dowdy's team has tried the experiment only in test tubes.

   But they say it can offer a more direct route to gene therapy -- using the
protein product of a gene instead of trying to get a gene into the body.

   Rather than being given as a pill or injection, the protein can be delivered
as an aerosol -- something like a nose spray.

   The idea behind gene therapy is to replace a faulty or missing gene, or to
boost a gene's function. Such approaches should theoretically work against
diseases ranging from cystic fibrosis, caused by a single faulty gene, to
cancer, caused by multiple faulty genes.

   But so far it has not worked very well.

   "You can't get the gene into 100 per cent of the cells," Dr. Dowdy said. "The
cells it does go into, it's not expressed evenly in, and in a lot of them, the
majority of them, it is not expressed at all."

   Until now, it has been impossible to introduce an entire protein because they
are too big. But Dr. Dowdy's team has figured out a way to unfold proteins so
they can slide through the cell wall.

   "If a protein is correctly folded, it is like a fist. It won't go through a
sheet of plastic," he said. But if the protein is "denatured" or unfolded it
looks more like a finger and can easily poke through.

   Once inside the cell, the protein can be refolded.

   Dr. Dowdy's team tried this technique first against the AIDS virus. Writing
in the journal Nature Medicine, the researchers said they used their technique
to smuggle a protein known as caspase into infected cells.

   Caspase exists naturally in all cells and induces cell suicide, or apoptosis
-- a process of natural self-destruction designed to do away with damaged or
aged cells.

   When apoptosis fails, cells become cancerous, or infected cells can be made
to create copy after copy of a virus, as in HIV infection.

   Dr. Dowdy's team created a new protein that contained caspase-3. They
designed it to slip into cells and to become active only when cut into pieces by
an enzyme known as protease produced by the HIV.

   Protease is targeted by several HIV drugs, but these drugs just suppress the
virus -- they do not kill it.

   But when HIV cells were infused with the new protein, their protease cut it
up. The caspase then reformed itself into the deadly form, forcing the infected
cells to commit suicide.

   The next step, Dr. Dowdy said, is to see whether this works in a living
animal.

   The protein does no harm to healthy cells, he said. "It lies there, literally
like a Trojan horse. It stays dormant until cut up by HIV's protease.

   "It's a strategy that the virus has no defence against."

   The technology has been licensed to private company Idun Pharmaceuticals of
La Jolla, Calif., and Dr. Dowdy said academic researchers can get permission to
use the patented technique via another company, Life Technology Inc., based in
Rockville, Md.

   Dr. Dowdy hopes to turn the method against cancer, as well, and predicts that
protein therapy will soon be one of the mainstays of medicine if it works.

   "This is a brave new world of protein therapy. This is something we as
researchers and the pharmaceutical industry have been striving to do for
decades. Now you can bypass the gene and you can directly add the protein."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              125 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 5, 1999 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: Scientists link gene to women's cancers  Genetic therapies seen as 3
years away

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM Medical Reporter

BODY:

   Researchers have discovered an intriguing link between the deadliest forms of
women's cancers and a gene inherited only from fathers.

   Scientists at Houston's MD Anderson Cancer Center, including a prominent
Canadian, predict that the discovery could lead to genetic therapies for breast
and ovarian cancers within three years.

   The tumour-suppressing gene they have identified, called NOEY2, is unlike
most other genes in the human body. Most people inherit two working copies of
every gene they have, one from the mother and another from the father. But NOEY2
is one of just a few known genes in which only one functioning copy is passed
down, from the father.

   The mother's copy of NOEY2 is inactivated before conception.

   Gordon Mills, the former cancer research director at Toronto Hospital and a
co-author of the study, explained that in normal cells, the single copy of the
gene works. But in cancerous cells, the one working copy is missing or
malfunctioning.

   "The hope is to reintroduce a working copy of the gene into the cancerous
cell or somehow find a way to make the maternal gene function," said Dr. Mills,
now chairman of molecular oncology at MD Anderson.

   Researchers have been trying to solve the genetic mysteries involved in
cancers for several years by combing through the genes of normal cells and
comparing them to genes in cancerous ones. They have found about 50
tumour-suppressing genes, and estimate another 50 have yet to be discovered.

   But because most cancers are believed to be caused by an accumulation of
genetic damage, each gene discovery can affect another.

   For example, last May, McGill University geneticist Greg Matlashewski helped
identify a tumour-suppressing gene called p53 that is linked to cervical cancer.
The Montreal-based university co-owns a worldwide patent on the p53 gene and has
licenced it to a U.S. firm to find a diagnostic test that could reveal whether a
woman has a higher than usual risk of developing cervical cancer.

   The p53 gene is now also involved in experiments with NOEY2.

   Dr. Robert Bast, head of the division of medicine at MD Anderson, said half
of ovarian cancers also have an abnormality in p53, but when they introduced
NOEY2 to the human cell cultures of ovarian cancer tissues, "we were able to
suppress tumour growth.

   "We're probably about two to three years away from moving this into the
clinic," Dr. Bast said.

   He said NOEY2 appears to regulate human growth.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              126 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1999 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             January 1, 1999 Friday
                                National Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 321 words

HEADLINE: Scientists high on benefits of new gene therapy

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse; AFP

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

   Using a unique combination of cutting-edge technologies, scientists have
introduced a new gene therapy that will make a number of new treatments
possible, a report in Science magazine said yesterday.

   The novel therapy introduces therapeutic genes into the body and then
controls them with a drug given as a simple pill.

   What the research shows is an entirely new form of drug delivery through a
harmless virus acting as a carrier of a molecular switch that can control the
gene.

   Researchers at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center and ARIAD
Pharmaceuticals in Cambridge, Mass., developed the technique, which has been
successfully tested on monkeys and mice.

   "It's a very precise gene switch, a kind of molecular rheostat," said Dr.
James Wilson of Pennsylvania Medical Center. A common rheostat is the dimmer
switch used in household lights.

   "We're excited about these results, because they create new opportunities for
experimental and then clinical applications of gene therapy that we couldn't
consider before," said Dr. Wilson, director of the Institute for Human Gene
Therapy at Penn and senior author of the Science report.

   The system couples advances at Penn allowing long-term introduction of genes
into the body with ARIAD's patented technology to regulate gene activity.

   "The ability to achieve dosage control of a drug in the context of gene
therapy is going to be critical to making a number of new treatments possible,"
said Michael Gilman, chief scientific officer at ARIAD.

   The new method has distinct advantages over current drug-delivery systems,
Mr. Gilman said.

   With oral or injectable drugs, the patient has peaks and valleys in the
amount of drug in the blood.

   "One of the real advantages of using gene therapy to deliver drugs is that
you can deliver them in a steady trickle that can be adjusted through
administration of a pill," Mr. Gillman said.

   The next step, researchers say, will be clinical trials.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                              127 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 22, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; THE GENE HUNTERS Third in a series; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 2485 words

HEADLINE: Brilliant minds, but no business savvy  Fed up with being merely DNA
collectors, top geneticists take matters into their own hands and start a
gene-hunting firm

BYLINE: CAROLYN ABRAHAM Medical Reporter

BODY:

   The genetic defect first appeared as tangled waves on the computer screen.
Peter St. George-Hyslop thought it was rubbish. He and his lab team at the
University of Toronto had been fooled before.

   But they spotted a defect in the same gene of a second family the next month.
Then a third and a fourth.

   "Perhaps it's not rubbish," Dr. St. George-Hyslop said.

   Everyone in the lab began speaking at once. They had found it: a gene
responsible for one of the most severe forms of Alzheimer's disease.

   Across the continent, five other teams were searching too -- big-time Ivy
League academics and gene-hunting corporations hungry to transform the discovery
of a mutant gene into fat revenues.

   "We were thinking scientifically about we would do next," Dr. St.
George-Hyslop said, "but then someone mentioned this should be protected, that
Canada will have aided this discovery and the benefit will be reaped by some
multinational company."

   So on a Monday afternoon in 1995 he rang the entrepreneurial guardians of
Canadian genetic discoveries.

   David Shindler, then managing director of the Canadian Genetic Diseases
Network in Vancouver, could detect an underlying thrill and tension in his
voice.

   "We've discovered the gene," Dr. St. George-Hyslop told him.

   Were they sure? How long had they known? Who had they told?

   They would have to move quickly, Dr. Shindler said. They would have to apply
for a worldwide patent on the gene within the next 72 hours if they wanted to
control the rights to the discovery in the marketplace.

   He boarded a plane for Toronto that night. As someone who had made a career
in the business of science, he knew researchers could get easily lost along the
unfamiliar path from the lab to the market. Someone had to show them the way.

   Three years later, Canada's gene hunters still need help en route.

   Ever since world-renowned Toronto scientist Lap-Chee Tsui made the monumental
discovery of a gene that causes cystic fibrosis in 1989, Canadian scientists
have believed that this country could be an international leader in the
burgeoning gene-hunting world.

   Canadians have a unique willingness to contribute their DNA to such projects,
the medicare system has made it easy for researchers to collect it and the
ability of Canadian scientists to pinpoint disease-causing genes is uncanny.
Canadians have helped in nearly one-third of all gene discoveries.

   But as gene hunting becomes a race for profits, Canadian scientists are
realizing their shortcomings. Often, they find themselves collecting DNA for
others and the rights to nearly every major genetic discovery have been partly
sold to firms in the United States or other foreign companies: genes associated
with asthma, muscular dystrophy and even that symbolic watershed, cystic
fibrosis.

   "We discover, they exploit and we buy it back," said Mark Poznansky, chief
scientific officer of the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund, which invests in
home-grown biotechnology ventures. "It's like the plastics they make from the
oil they buy from us."

   From the pricey lab equipment needed to decode kilometres of DNA to the
commercial savvy necessary to develop a genetic discovery, gene hunting has
increasingly become the domain of private companies. Many predict that the field
will lead to the cures and treatments of the future and Canada's researchers are
scrambling to scare up the money and business smarts to be part of it.


   Kathy Siminovitch opened the door to her windowless office in Mount Sinai
Hospital and expelled a deep breath. She and her colleague, Noe Zamel, had been
debating in the corridor moments before.

   Dr. Zamel, a respiratory specialist, is collecting DNA for a U.S. firm
hunting genes that cause asthma. Dr. Siminovitch, a geneticist, was originally
part of the project, but has little to do with it any more. The science has been
shipped south along with the DNA samples.

   "DNA doesn't belong to a country," Dr. Zamel had said. "To block it would be
antiscience. [The U.S.] corporation can do this work 10 times faster. We cannot
delay knowledge. It's for the good of humankind."

   "But to just be sending it away is shameful," Dr. Siminovitch had replied.
"We do have the ability here. Just look at the jobs they have created with it."

   Some might suggest that her patriotic perspective is hereditary -- her father
is Louis Siminovitch, an internationally renowned pioneer of genetics who
rejected many offers to join labs in the United States.

   But it is not unique.

   Dr. Tom Hudson, a geneticist at Montreal General Hospital, said Quebec
researchers have tried to make their participation in gene hunting a condition
foreign companies must agree to if they want to use the valuable DNA of Quebec's
distinct populations.

   Paul Neumann, a Bostonian who left Harvard for Halifax in 1993 to study the
genetics of various neurological diseases among the Maritime population, has
himself rejected a request from a U.S. corporation to collect DNA.

   "[Nova Scotia] had this great reputation as being the place to come and
collect DNA and then it was trucked off," said Dr. Neumann, a neuropathologist
with Dalhousie University and the recent founder of his own gene-hunting
company. "I said to people that they should not be sending this stuff out of
Nova Scotia. There was no reason scientists here couldn't do the work."

   Similar thoughts occurred to Dr. Siminovitch not long after the Toronto
asthma project was traded to a California gene-hunting firm in exchange for cash
and a share of future royalties.


   In the fall of 1996, Dr. Siminovitch approached Lap-Chee Tsui at a
geneticists meeting near Barrie, Ont.

   Dr. Tsui had helped craft positional cloning, a method that enabled him to
make the celebrated discovery of the cystic fibrosis gene and a technique that
paved the way for the gene-hunting frenzy that has followed.

   He and Dr. Siminovitch chatted for a while about their common fear, that they
would march into a gene hunt, run out of money and get stuck.

   Dr. Siminovitch did not share her disappointment with the asthma project at
the time. But "everybody had heard rumours about it," she said.

   She told Dr. Tsui that she wanted to form her own gene-hunting corporation
and she wanted him to be part of it.

   He had one condition: "I can participate in the science, but somebody who
knows business has to carry the ball."

   They decided to target diseases where several malfunctioning genes are
believed to be at play -- common, complex ailments such rheumatoid arthritis,
prostate cancer and inflammatory bowel disease.

   Dr. Tsui suggested that another molecular biologist be included in their
venture: Stephen Scherer, a young star from Windsor who trained in his lab. That
year, Dr. Scherer had identified a gene that caused cyclopia, a severe birth
defect in which infants are born with only one eye. He had also become a quick
expert in mapping and cloning genes. This fall, he discovered a gene linked to
one form of epilepsy.

   Dr. Siminovitch thought of another potential partner, a neurologist and
molecular geneticist she had worked with years ago as a resident at St.
Michael's Hospital.


    Peter St. George-Hyslop was not entirely surprised by the invitation.

   "She knew I'd already been through the fire of seeing what industrial-based
science looked like up close and I wasn't frightened of it," he said.

   Within four months of his discovery of one Alzheimer's gene, Dr.
St.George-Hyslop had discovered a second one. With the aid of Dr. Shindler, he
had patched together a sweet deal for himself and the University of Toronto
after a full year of courting bids and conducting interviews.

   Schering Plough Canada, a branch of the U.S. drug company, agreed to
multimillion-dollar payments to support Alzheimer's work in Dr. St.
George-Hyslop's lab, payments to the university for future developments in the
project and a share of royalties from any drug that might be developed.

   Dr. St. George-Hyslop and Dr. Siminovitch had discussed the uneasy mix of
business and science over the years, but when she introduced a serious proposal
to launch their own company, they agonized over it.

   "There's a certain distaste amongst classical scientists about money, about
getting our hands dirty with money," Dr. St. George-Hyslop said. "But it was the
only way."

   In fact, private funding is a necessity. The Canadian Genetic Diseases
Network receives only $4.5-million in federal support for 50 research teams at
18 academic centres. One genetics lab alone can eat $5-million a year and the
government expects the network to be self-sustaining by 2005.

   And so it would be the four of them -- Drs. Tsui, Siminovitch, St.
George-Hyslop and Scherer. They scoured the dictionary for a company title and
settled on Ellipsis Biotherapeutics Corp. in March, 1997, referring to the three
dots at the end of a sentence when there's more to be said.

   But now what?

   They had a name, "scientific credibility in buckets," yet knew virtually
nothing about starting a company. They needed help, someone with the moxie to
rustle up the cash and make the venture fly. But who?

    Paul Starita talks fast.

   His smallish size betrays his voice. It has the confident edge of an Italian
kid who scratched his way from poverty in Brooklyn to wealth in Manhattan.

   A Canadian mutual-fund company headhunted him in the 1970s, and his pluck and
glitz landed him in the toniest circles of Bay Street: an executive
vice-president of the Bank of Montreal, president of the Royal Trust's Investor
Services, chairman of the mutual-fund arm of the Canadian Imperial Bank of
Commerce and now co-owner of his own consulting company.

   In his spare time, he sits on hospital boards and raises funds for U of T,
which is how his brash world came to collide with the conservatism of science.

   A Mount Sinai colleague told Dr. Siminovitch that he was their man and he was
right. "I liked him," she said.

   She introduced Mr. Starita to the rest of the group and his financial
wizardry spoke for itself.

   What did he know about genetics? Not much. But he asked the right questions.

   More important, Mr. Starita pointed out, they knew nothing about money.

   As he hailed a cab outside Mount Sinai one afternoon, his trench coat
flapping in a fierce autumn wind, Mr. Starita was blunt. "Those are brilliant
minds in there, but boy they need help to put this together," he said.

   He recalled the early meetings, where Dr. St. George-Hyslop showed up with
bruises and paint-speckled clothes.

   "You know Peter? You see his cane? You know how he got that cane? He fell off
the ladder painting his house," Mr. Starita said. "That guy discovered genes
involved in Alzheimer's. He could be a Nobel Prize nominee for godsakes and he's
painting his own house.

   "These guys don't profit from their accomplishments."


    Ellipsis members -- who have no office yet -- are gathered at a round table
in a cramped office in Mount Sinai.

   It has been a slow year. Nearly 18 months after they incorporated, they are
still scraping money together.

   "We've been talking to all these investors for venture capital and they would
just rather put their money into very secure things," Dr. Tsui says. "Canadians
are conservative in investing in any kind of risky business and gene hunting is
risky business."

   It will take several years before therapies can be created to fix
disease-causing genes. And would the same fix apply to everyone or will genetic
therapies have to be customized for every patient? No one knows. No one has done
it yet.

   Dr. Shindler, who has since become the CEO for the Royal Bank's Milestone
Medica Corp. -- a new group seeking to invest specifically in biotechnology
ventures such as gene hunting, knows that genetics will not bring short-term
returns.

   "It took at least two decades, around the time of the Second World War,
before antibiotics were readily available," he said.

   Ellipsis needs $5-million to $8-million to start. But so far it has
accumulated little more than $300,000 in seed capital from the Canadian Medical
Discovery Fund.

   The five-year-old brainchild of scientists fed up with Canada's biotechnology
losses, the fund was created "to sniff out worthwhile research ventures" before
they could be sold to foreigners.

   "It hasn't been enough by a long shot," Dr. Poznansky, its chief scientific
officer, lamented. "You should see the projects coming out of the woodwork. . .
. We're getting 20 applications a month. That's up exponentially. But this is a
mutual fund, not a granting agency."

   Dr. Poznansky, along with the Canadian Genetic Diseases Network, suspects
that the country's gene-hunting companies might attract more cash if they merged
to form a single national firm.

   Ellipsis, which has already dispatched researchers to collect DNA from
patients with inflammatory bowel disease in Canada and Israel, has had little
luck lobbying Canadians for money. It's the Americans who are biting.

   Mr. Starita and Dr. Siminovitch were invited to Washington in August, and
they could hardly believe the reception.

   "We thought, 'Holy mackerel! Look at these guys,' " Mr. Starita said. "One
guy from Boston said, 'Why are you screwing around trying to fund this sucker in
Canada? When you are really ready, I'll give you a list of 10 people who will
fund you.' "

   They had intentions of being a wholly Canadian company, fully financed north
of the border. Their conviction is waning. This winter, Mr. Starita plans to
visit the guy from Boston and pick up the list.

Next: The gene bank

   CANADA THE GOOD

     Unique and homogeneous populations, especially in Quebec and the Maritimes,
kept detailed family records.

   The Canadian health system gives rise to doctors and hospitals with
specialties in treating certain illnesses, meaning large patient populations
with a particular illness can be found in one place.

   Canadian patients are more likely to give their blood for a gene hunt because
they are less likely than U.S. patients to be concerned that having a genetic
tendency toward a disease could cost them their health insurance.

   Canadians tend to have a higher rate of participation in research projects
than U.S. patients generally.

   Canadian academics, especially geneticists, tend to have fewer ties with
industry making them more open to collaborations with gene-hunting companies.

   THE FIRMS

   Xenon Bioresearch Inc. (Vancouver) -- Michael Hayden (also chief scientific
officer of the Canadian Genetic Diseases Network), John Kastelein, Michael
Tarnow, Charles Cohen and Don Brooks

Ellipsis Biotherapeutics Corp.(Toronto) -- Lap-Chee Tsui, Kathy Siminovitch,
Peter St. George-Hyslop, Stephen Scherer

Algene Biotechnologies Corp. (Montreal) -- Denis Gauvreau, Henri Harland,
Charles Sirois, Andre Tremblay

RGS Genome Inc. (Montreal) -- Emil Skamene, Guy Rouleau, Philippe Gros

Integrated Genome Technologies and Maritime Institute of Molecular Medicine
(Halifax) -- Paul Neumann; the corporation commercializes genetic information
held in trust by the institute, so no company actually claims ownership of the
DNA

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              130 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 15, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; WORLD REPORT SCIENCE; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 75 words

HEADLINE: Gene may fight aging: study

BYLINE: Sources: AFP, AP and Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Injecting new genes into aging muscles can restore youthful vigour and
strength, according to a laboratory study of mice at the University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center.

   While researchers caution that many safety questions must be resolved before
they can try the therapy on humans, the experimental gene therapy offers the
promise of correcting one of the major problems of aging -- muscle feebleness,
said Dr. H. Lee Sweeney, the study's senior author.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              137 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 17, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. C8

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: Cancer 'vaccine' goes from lab to human tests

BYLINE: Krista Foss Health Reporter

BODY:

    It sounds too good to be true: a vaccine that helps the body dispatch its
immunological Power Rangers to roam the bloodstream with a vendetta against any
cancer cell they can flush out.

   Scientists have been working on such a cancer vaccine for several years and
now they're ready to take it from the bench to the bedside. In the next six
months, a series of small clinical trials on humans will be launched around the
world aimed at some pretty tough customers: melanoma, colorectal cancer, and
bladder and breast cancers.

   Certainly, drug companies are interested in cancer vaccines. Pharmaceutical
powerhouse Pasteur Merieux Connaught enhanced its chance to become a leader in
cancer-vaccine development last week by adding three research teams to its
$290-million, Canadian-led research network and infrastructure.

   Before the turn of the century, they want to be able to show that cancer
vaccines work on people.

   "We are a major vaccine company," said Pierre Meulien, senior vice-president
of research and development at Pasteur Merieux Connaught Canada. "So we know a
lot already about induced immune responses. We want to take that knowledge and
address it to the cancer problem."

   Of course, the leap from making vaccines for diseases such as rubella and
hepatitis A to cancer is more than conceptual. There are some daunting practical
questions.

   Despite what the name suggests, cancer vaccines won't prevent cancer. They
are meant to treat existing cancers in partnership with other therapies, and to
prevent cancer from growing back once it has been wiped out.

   But unlike the shotgun approach of radiation and chemotherapy, these vaccines
put the cancer cell squarely in the cross hairs and, coupled with other such
targetted treatments, they hold out the promise of more effective and less toxic
ways of eradicating cancer.

   "No single thing -- cancer vaccines or gene therapy -- will be the cure for
cancer," said Dr. Jack Gauldie, chairman of McMaster University's Department of
Pathology and Molecular Medicine in Hamilton, Ont., and a cancer-vaccine
researcher.

     "But when we use therapies together -- one to kill the local tumour and a
vaccine to stimulate the immune system to protect against growth of another
tumour -- that makes for more powerful treatment."

   The basics of cancer vaccines work like this. A harmless virus is used to
shuttle the vaccine to the immune system because it gets to the lymph nodes
fast.

   The virus needs something to deliver. Cancer antigens (tiny fragments of
proteins that are unique to specific cancers) are the best cargo. They tell the
tough guys of the immune system, the cytotoxic T-cells lymphocytes, everything
they need to know to recognize and to take out cancer cells.

   Scientists have a few techniques for really winding up the antigens so they
give the best information to the killer T-cells -- and make the T-cells work
better.

   Dr. Gauldie's group puts the melanoma antigen in a dendritic cell -- which
makes antigens more co-operative -- before delivering them via a virus to the
lymph nodes.

   Those strategies work as long as there is an antigen, which are specific to
different kinds of cancer. Researchers have isolated antigens for only a few
cancers such as melanoma -- and nobody knows for sure whether every cancer has a
recognizable antigen.

   Scientists at Harvard Medical School are skipping antigens altogether and are
using viruses to deliver immune stimulants to the cancer. These stimulants are
made more effective by customizing them -- encasing them in dead cancer cells
taken from a person's own tumour. This summer, the Harvard team reported
shrinking advanced melanoma tumours by 80 per cent using this type of vaccine.

   Still other researchers are combining antigens with immune stimulants to pack
a really tough blow against cancer cells in one vaccine.

   There is still a lot unknown about the immune system. One of the goals of the
new vaccine network is to better understand its response to cancer vaccines --
and to make them better.

   In the next year, Dr. David Spaner, an immunologist at Toronto's Sunnybrook
Hospital whose work is being financed by the Pasteur Merieux Connaught -- will
be testing a melanoma vaccine in patients. His group is using modified melanoma
antigens delivered to the lymph nodes by a virus. He will use sophisticated
equipment to get a fix on how the immune system of these patients reacts to the
vaccine.

   "We have the opportunity to ask what is the best way of increasing the killer
cells in the blood."

   Predicting the response of the immune system to cancer vaccines is the key to
figuring out how to make the vaccines work for all cancers -- and even other
deadly diseases.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              139 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 10, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 1288 words

HEADLINE: Science and ethics dance a predictable two-step  GENETICS One voice
emerging from the moral quagmire belongs to the Pope. But scientists and
ethicists say his pronouncements have made little impact. Some bristle at the
suggstion that moral considerations have been overlooked.

BYLINE: MURRAY CAMPBELL The Globe and Mail

BODY:

   It's a very predictable two-step: No sooner does a scientist proclaim some
extraordinary breakthrough than questions are raised about the ethics of the
work.

   Last week, it was the astonishing news that a human cell had been captured
using fertilized human eggs, and the way was clear to an unlimited supply of
made-to-order cells, tissues and organs.

   Last year, it was Dolly, the cloned sheep; the past summer, it was the news
that young women were selling their eggs to prospective parents.

   Next year? Well, the only certainty is that there will be another scientific
breakthrough that will raise troubling questions about the ability of humans to
manipulate life itself.

   One loud voice emerging from the moral quagmire belongs to Pope John Paul II,
who is trying to spark a debate on the issues involved in modern science.

   "Science would thus be poised to dominate all aspects of human life through
technological progress," he wrote in last month's encyclical, Faith and Reason.
"And since it leaves no space for the critique offered by ethical judgment, the
scientistic mentality has succeeded in leading many to think that if something
is technically possible, it is therefore morally admissible."

   The 150-page encyclical, 12 years in the making, represents the Pope's belief
that there is no conflict between religious faith and reason. He argues they
need each other to understand the fundamental mysteries of life.

   But the Pope also denounces the "fateful separation" of faith and reason in
modern times. He laments a world where quick success is well regarded and the
search for ultimate truth is shunned as archaic. He also argues that humanity
has to accept certain truths rather than embrace ethical relativism.

   Governments have been slow to react to this brave new world. The U.S.
government banned federal financing of research on fetal cells, but the work on
stem cells announced last week was financed privately.

   In Canada, legislation arising from the 1993 Royal Commission on New
Reproductive Technologies is still pending, which frustrates commission
chairwoman Patricia Baird's quest for a national advisory body to deal with
controversial scientific research.

   "I think there will be more and more specific instances of why we need such a
thing," Dr. Baird, a University of British Columbia geneticist, said. "We need
to get ahead of it; we need to set up a body looking down the pipe and seeing
what is coming up."

   The Pope identifies the enemies in academic terms: eclecticism, pragmatism,
nihilism and scientism. In attacking what he sees as pernicious postmodern
thought, he argues that humanity has been sucked into "a maelstrom of data and
facts" that has left many people "wondering whether it still makes sense to ask
about meaning."

   The focus for much of his concern are the advancements in research -- gene
therapy, cloning or cell growth -- that, as the Pope says, have fostered the
"illusion" that people can take charge of their destiny.

   Rev. Jean-Marc Laporte, director of the Toronto School of Theology, sees the
encyclical as a scholarly document that summarizes what the Pope has been
studying since he was a young priest in his native Poland.

   "I think what he's concerned about is not so much science, but science that
is turned in on itself and refuses the possibility of any other kind of truth
except that which its own methods are able to arrive at," he said.

   Suzanne Scorsone, director of communications for the Archdiocese of Toronto,
put it more poetically. "Science can't tell you whether there's a God out there
or not. Science can tell you what the stars are made of and whether they're
moving and how fast, and it can tell you how they evolved, but it can't tell you
why. It can tell you the what, but not the why."

   Faith and Reason got a one-day splash of publicity and then sank from sight.
Theologians are not particularly upset by this. They say the Pope's intention
was simply to start a debate.

   "In this particular era, it's kind of a wakeup call," Ms. Scorsone said.

   It's a fair question, then, to ask how many people are paying attention. The
answer would appear to be "not many." Scientists and ethicists said the Pope's
pronouncements have had little impact -- most professed ignorance of anything
beyond news reports -- and they bristled at the suggestion that the moral
considerations of technological advances have been overlooked.

   Still others suggested the Pope got it wrong in seeing no conflict between
faith and reason.

   "Religious faith is different from the scientific method," noted Ian Wilmut,
a British embryologist who shocked the world by creating a lamb using DNA from
an adult sheep. "After all, a faith is something that cannot be assessed by the
scientific method."

   John Polanyi, a Nobel Prize-winning chemist at the University of Toronto,
said he did not read the encyclical as putting any limits on scientific inquiry
but added that he thought it misunderstands science.

   "Science isn't separate and different from other ways of knowing," he said.
"Science is part of all other ways of knowing. In doing science, we're all the
time asking ourselves what sort of world do we think we inhabit; we're asking
ourselves questions of what is fitting, what is beautiful, so we really are a
part of other ways of understanding the world."

   Early indications are that the Pope is having little impact on the debate
that swirls around contentious scientific research.

   "I can't say the debate became more intense around here when this encyclical
came out," said Hugh Gillis, dean of science at St. Francis Xavier University,
an institution with deep roots in the Roman Catholic faith.

   In Uppsala, Sweden, 100 international scientists meeting within days of the
release of the encyclical professed ignorance of it even though they were
discussing an issue at its heart -- the ethical considerations of gene therapy.

   "We had some participants with a Catholic background, but none of them
mentioned the Pope's comments," noted Anders Nordgren, director of the Centre
for Research Ethics at Uppsala University.

   What seems to be working against the Pope are the very elements that ought to
work in his favour -- his authority as a leader and moral arbiter.

   Michael Reiss, a Cambridge University geneticist who sits on a European
advisory group on ethics, said most scientists that he knows, regardless of
whether they have religious faith, are unimpressed with any church leader's
views in their area.

   He described the papal encyclical as too little, too late.

   "In my experience," said Dr. Reiss, who is also a Church of England priest,
"the most that your average scientist would think of those sorts of views is
that at least they're finally beginning to catch up to the real world."

   The Pope's strong views on such issues as birth control and abortion also may
be compromising his ability to reach out to the scientific community.

   "It is a very timely warning, but it has very little credibility coming from
someone who rejects such a beneficial technology as birth control," said Arthur
Schafer, director of the Centre for Professional and Applied Ethics at the
University of Manitoba.

   Bartha Maria Knoppers, chairwoman of the ethics committee of the Human Genome
Organization, said it would be wrong to underestimate the influence of churches,
but she believes the Pope is a little bit out of date.

   The debate has started, and even private firms such as the one that sponsored
the stem-cell research are aware they have to be accountable for their research.

   "Modern scientists are much more critical," said Dr. Knoppers, who teaches
law and genetics at the University of Montreal. "They are appreciative of
bioethical debate and policy discussions, but it's a learning process for
bioethicists as well."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              143 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 9, 1998 Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; FACTS & ARGUMENTS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: SOCIAL STUDIES  A DAILY MISCELLANY OF INFORMATION BY MICHAEL KESTERTON
Significant digits

BODY:

   Eight: The Food Allergy Network reports that eight foods are responsible for
about 90 per cent of the allergic reactions in the United States. Peanuts top
the list of food items that can cause a constricted airway, swollen throat and
tongue, dizziness and rapid heartbeat.

   17: There is no cure for migraine, a disorder that affects 17 per cent of the
Canadian population. The disorder costs the economy approximately $500-million a
year from absenteeism alone, the Migraine Association of Canada reports.

   800: In Utah, The Dallas Morning News says, about 800 girls aged 14 to 17 get
married every year. "The recent forced marriage of a 16-year-old Utah girl to
her father's brother has renewed the debate on whether these marriages are
appropriate."

   Three million: "Some three million Americans still smoke pipes, but you'd
never know it by looking at the media," Mark Feeney writes in the Boston Globe.
An executive with Spec Comm International, the firm that publishes Pipes and
Tobaccos magazine, told Mr. Feeney that celebrities "do not want to be covered
in magazines as pipe smokers because they feel it's not manly."

   More digits

   Fingers: Former gangsters in Japan, who lopped off some of their own fingers
during their criminal careers to prove their loyalty or contrition and are now
living on limited budgets, can purchase cut-rate silicone finger prostheses from
the New Body Institute. The fingers, which were rejected during fitting sessions
with normal clients, enable the ex-gangsters to blend in with society again.

   Toes: In his book Couples, novelist John Updike gave one of the characters
the feet of his first wife, with toes that curled a particular way, according to
Bernard Malamud and Anne Bernays, who have read the book and seen the feet.

   Paws: Black bears in the Pacific Northwest are poached for body parts such as
their gall bladders, The Associated Press reports. Sometimes bear paws end up as
ashtrays.

   Young scientists

    Colin Percival, a 17-year-old math whiz at Simon Fraser University who
calculated the value of pi to five trillion binary digits (News, Aug. 29), is
looking for volunteers with Pentium computers to help him reach the
40-trillionth digit. His Web site is  http://www.cecm.sfu.ca/projects/pihex .

    Kevin Apps, a sophomore at the University of Sussex in England, sent an
E-mail tip to a pair of U.S. astronomers that helped them discover a new planet
orbiting a star like our sun. Dr. Geoffrey Marcy and Dr. R. Paul Butler made a
point of sharing credit for the discovery -- the 12th planet found outside our
solar system -- with the astrophysics student. "He used the latest satellite
data and sifted out stars that would have the best likelihood of harbouring
planets," Dr. Marcy said. "It's great to have him as a colleague."

    Next year, on Nov. 18, high-school students in Rhode Island are scheduled to
launch a suborbital rocket that will capture comet dust from the Leonid meteor
storm. The rocket, which is expected to reach 200,000 feet in altitude, will be
financed by the U.S. space agency's Rockets for Schools program.
Sources: The New York Times, the Providence Journal.

   Drought-proof bureaucrats

     For more than three months this summer, residents of Manuel in the
drought-stricken Mexican state of Tamaulipas turned on their faucets with only
faint hopes of getting anything wet. However, they did receive regular monthly
water bills from the municipality.

   Word watch

   Asthma counsellor: A new kind of health worker in U.S. inner cities, where
many people have low incomes and no health insurance. The counsellors help
patients cope with this disease, which is becoming increasingly prevalent in
cities, the American News Service reports.

   Biological bypass: An experimental procedure in which doctors inject a
gene-loaded solution into a patient's heart, to stimulate growth of new blood
vessels and thus alleviate the pain and heart damage that can result from
blocked coronary arteries. Almost a dozen biotechnology companies have joined
the race to develop gene therapies for heart and vascular diseases.

   Thought du jour

     "The ordinary man only knows one kind of truth, in the ordinary sense of
the word. He cannot imagine what a higher or a highest truth may be. Truth seems
to him no more capable of comparative degrees than death; and he cannot join in
the leap from the beautiful to the true. Perhaps you will think, as I do, that
he is right in this." -- Sigmund Freud.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              144 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 9, 1998 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: Therapy offers hope for heart disease cure  Gene treatment may regrow
blood vessels

BYLINE: MAGGIE FOX Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: Dallas

BODY:

   New techniques, ranging from gene therapy that might help treat blocked
arteries around the heart to sophisticated new surgical methods, are offering
hope in the fight against heart disease, doctors said yesterday.

   But all the new medicine in the world does no good if patients don't stop
smoking, don't lose weight and don't exercise, they said -- and finding ways to
encourage people to do these things remains a big challenge.

   Doctors and scientists, gathered for the annual conference of the American
Heart Association, will hear about experiments to regrow damaged heart cells,
new ways to keep a failed heart beating and drugs that can help improve the
performance of devices that hold open narrowing arteries.

   They will also hear about low-tech approaches, such as ways to persuade their
patients to exercise daily, which is proven to decrease heart disease, stroke,
diabetes and obesity.

   At this week's meeting in Dallas, attended by more than 30,000 people,
scientists will tell of their experiments aimed at getting heart cells -- which
normally do not divide and grow like other cells -- to do just that.

   Now, patients who have heart attacks get permanent scars. But researchers are
looking for ways to make heart cells grow back.

   During a news conference, Dr. Rose Marie Robertson of Vanderbilt University
in Nashville, Tenn., said "understanding the triggers for growth and development
in . . . heart cells will give us the ability to grow new myocardial cells."

   Last year, doctors reported that therapy using a gene called VEGF helped
patients with blocked blood vessels in their legs grow new arteries.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              149 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 6, 1998 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 512 words

HEADLINE: Cell discovery a major step toward cloning of humans  Ethical fears
raised as 'stem' cells grown in lab

BYLINE: KRISTA FOSS With reports from Murray Campbell and Reuters; STAFF REUT

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

   In a stunning scientific breakthrough, researchers have found a way to grow
almost any type of human cell in a laboratory dish, a discovery that could lead
to major advances in transplantation, gene therapy and other fields.

   But the finding involving tissues from embryos raises many ethical questions
because it puts genetic research further along the path of cloning a human being
-- without any regulatory checks and balances to stop it.

   Today's issue of Science magazine reported that a team led by James Thomson,
a developmental biologist at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, grew stem
cells from human blastocysts -- cells of embryos that are about five days old.

   Stem cells, unlike any other cells in the human body, have the ability to
differentiate into any kind of tissue -- be that for the brain or the liver. The
University of Wisconsin group was able to make stem cells grow into muscle,
cartilage and neuron cells.

   The development raises the possibility that human embryos could be used to
grow new cells for any human organ that has been injured or damaged by disease
-- and that transplants of new cells could save people from the ravages of
illnesses ranging from diabetes, to Parkinson's or heart disease.

   "This opens the way to creating human cell lines that will differentiate to
whatever tissue you want," said Dr. Patricia Baird, a professor at the
University of British Columbia.
   Mr. Thomson thinks huge banks of frozen stem cells could be established, each
tissue-typed in the same way that organ donors now are.

   But while the discovery raises exciting possibilities for disease therapies,
it also reignites troubling ethical issues. For instance, human embryos could be
raided to grow tissue for specific organs to be used to test new drugs.

   "It can lead to turning the embryo into a commodity," she said. "You start to
create human embryos as a means to an end -- and I think that cells that have
the potential to create a whole human life have to be treated with different
ethics than just any other regular cell."

   Dr. Baird also notes that the ability to grow a certain kind of human tissue
from an embryo-derived stem cell, is only a step removed from transplanting the
nucleus of a human body cell in an embryo and growing a whole human being.

   "It is technically possible," said Ron Carter, head of the Cytogenetics
Laboratory at the Hamilton Health Sciences Centre. "But most scientists wouldn't
want to do it."

   However, with no clear rules on how human embryos are used does raise the
concern the unused embryos of couples who go to fertility clinics could be used
for experimental purposes without their knowledge, Dr. Baird said.

   Dr. Baird, who chaired the 1993 Royal Commission on New Reproductive
Technologies, said the ability to grow different human tissue lines from embryos
is a "clarion call" that Canada needs a body to evaluate scientific innovations.

   Dr. Baird said she has been given no indication by Ottawa when legislation
based on her commission's recommendations would be introduced. An earlier bill
died with the last Parliament.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              156 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 13, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. D8

LENGTH: 2141 words

HEADLINE: In search of the cure  Even the whisper of an effective cancer
treatment can make desperate patients beg to become guinea pigs in research
projects

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR Health Editor

BODY:

   Cancer researcher Robert Kerbel was rushing to get some paperwork done when a
middle-aged woman appeared unannounced at his office door.

   Her father was dying of colon cancer, and she wanted to know whether Dr.
Kerbel had access to two experimental drugs that, she had learned from news
reports, had worked wonders in laboratory mice.

   At first, Dr. Kerbel was mildly annoyed by the interruption, but his tone
quickly softened as he heard the desperation in the woman's voice.

   "We will do anything," the woman told Dr. Kerbel, who is head of the Cancer
Biology Research Group at the Sunnybrook & Women's College Health Sciences
Centre in Toronto.

   "He will be a guinea pig; it doesn't matter what it costs."

   Dr. Kerbel tried to explain in the gentlest way possible that "these drugs
are not available, no matter how much money you have."

   The drugs she was seeking -- angiostatin and endostatin -- are brand new and
researchers aren't able to produce them in large amounts. What's more, they
haven't even been tried on people. The initial human tests -- possibly involving
a handful of terminally ill patients -- won't likely begin for another year.

   With that said, the woman shook Dr. Kerbel's hand and told him to keep up the
good work. "She then just started to cry and walked out of my office," the
doctor recalled.

   It was not the first time Dr. Kerbel had delivered such heart-breaking news.
Nor will it be the last.

   A steady stream of new cancer therapies are emerging from the research labs,
and every time they make headlines or pop up on the Internet, they have the
power to launch cancer patients and their families on an emotional roller-
coaster ride.

   Many cancer specialists believe they are at the dawn of a promising new era
in cancer treatment. It has been brought about by decades of painstaking work
that is finally shedding light on how cancer starts, spreads and eventually
kills. Armed with this new knowledge, scientists are devising a slew of weapons
intended to halt cancer in its tracks.

   But it will still take many years before their basic research is transformed
into widely available treatments. That means many of the people now stricken
with advanced cancer are not likely to live long enough to reap the benefits.

   Even so, a lot of them are willing to go anywhere, do anything or pay any
price for a chance at a few more years -- even months -- of life.

   Despite the promise of new treatments, most doctors must still rely on rather
limited weapons to beat back cancer. If it has already spread beyond the stage
at which it can be removed with a surgical knife, the cancer is either blasted
with radiation or attacked with toxic chemicals, a process known as
chemotherapy.

   The traditional strategy has been to design drugs that seek out and destroy
rapidly dividing cells, the hallmark of cancer. Without doubt, many lives have
been saved through advances in chemotherapy. Hodgkin's disease, childhood
leukemia, testicular cancer and some breast cancers can be successfully treated
if caught early enough.

   Still, conventional therapy fails for half of all patients. To make matters
worse, patients must endure ghastly side effects of the drugs. Not only does
chemotherapy kill rapidly dividing cancer cells, it also knocks out normal cells
that divide frequently, such as those found in the bone marrow, the gut and hair
follicles.

   "Doctors are faced with trying to give just enough dose [of the drugs] to
kill a cancer cell without killing the patient," said Christopher Paige,
vice-president of research at the Toronto Hospital, the Princess Margaret
Hospital and the Ontario Cancer Institute.

   But researchers hope that their growing understanding of genetics -- now
considered to lie at the root of cancer -- will lead to new treatments that zero
in on the cancerous cells without the usual collateral damage.

   In total, 70,000 to 80,000 genes are arranged along 23 pairs of chromosomes
located within the nucleus of each cell in the body. They regulate all aspects
of life, and do so by instructing cells to produce proteins that carry out
various functions or bestow cells with certain properties.

   Several hundred genes are involved in normal cell division. When errors or
mutations occur in these growth-regulating genes, cancer can arise.
   Some people are born with genetic defects that put them at increased risk of
developing cancer. Other mutations may be acquired through exposure to such
things as environmental pollutants, sunlight and cigarette smoke. Or tiny errors
can creep into genes during normal cell division.

   Over time, enough of these errors accumulate so that a defective cell can
reproduce itself without limit. For instance, the genes that tell a cell to
divide get stuck in the "on" position, much like a gas pedal pushed to the
floor. At the same time, genes that act as "brakes" are on the fritz, while the
genes that play the role of traffic cops are out taking a snooze. The net result
is runaway cellular division.

   This is a rather simplified version of reality. What makes cancer complex is
that the faulty genes that lead to breast cancer are not necessarily the same
ones that trigger prostate or lung cancer. Even within specific types of cancer,
genetic variations can be at work.

   In this respect, cancer is not really a single disease, but many. That is
part of the reason why so much seems to be going on in cancer research.
Different teams are looking at the many links in the cancer chain, hoping that
they can find the weak ones.

   One promising gene-based anticancer weapon is being developed by the
California firm Genentech. It is targeting a gene called HER2, found in 30 per
cent of breast-cancer tumours. The gene carries the instructions for a protein
that protrudes from the surface of the cell and acts like an antenna that picks
up external hormonal messages to divide.

   In some faulty cells, the HER2 gene is overactive so that too many
antenna-like proteins are produced. As a result, the cell is overloaded with
"divide" messages.

   Genentech hopes to block the messages with a genetically engineered weapon
called a monoclonal antibody, which latches on to the antennae and renders them
inactive. So far, Genentech's studies look promising.

   Other researchers are using different approaches, including strategies to
boost the body's own disease-fighting immune system to recognize cancer as a
threat and attack it.

   And yet, for all this feverish activity, researchers are not about to declare
that the cancer war is even close to being won. Dr. Kerbel noted that cancer
tumours have demonstrated an uncanny knack for developing resistance to almost
any weapon hurled at them.

   Some cancer cells can spit out poisons that are pumped into them. Others come
equipped with the genetic machinery to repair any damage inflicted upon them.

   Cancer cells, after all, have the weight of numbers on their side. They are
dividing at such a fast clip that, sooner or later, a new mutant version arises
that can resist a particular cancer drug.

   With this in mind, some researchers have decided to attack cancer in an
indirect fashion by trying to undermine a tumour's support system.

   For instance, Dr. Judah Folkman of Children's Hospital in Boston is trying to
choke the life out of tumours by denying them the blood supply they need to
thrive. Tumours can grow to only about the size of a pea before their own
internal cells die from a lack of nourishment. So tumours must entice
surrounding blood vessels to sprout shoots that will bring them a steady supply
of blood.

   By using two drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, Dr. Folkman has shown that he
can thwart the budding blood vessels in laboratory mice. Other compounds,
currently being tested, might work in a similar fashion.

   But it is unlikely that any one treatment will be found to cure all types of
cancer.

   "There will not be one giant step to a cure," insisted Gerald Batist,
director of the McGill Centre for Translational Research in Cancer, based at the
Jewish General Hospital in Montreal.

   "That's not the nature of the disease, and it's not the nature of science."

   New treatments will probably be used in combination with existing ones. In
fact, no one is expecting that dreaded chemotherapy will be removed from the
medical arsenal any time soon. Hopefully, though, more and more innovative
therapies will eventually reduce the reliance on it.

   For patients, the new treatments may not seem like much of a change from the
old stuff. But they do have the potential to revolutionize the way cancer is
handled.

   Right now, the goal of medical treatment is to completely eradicate cancer
from the body. In the future, the approach may be simply to contain the cancer,
keep the tumour small and prevent it from spreading. The new therapies may work
to this end by gumming up all the biological mechanisms that allow cancer to
grow and spread.

   Cancer might be transformed into a manageable disease in the same way that a
form of diabetescan now be kept in check with regular insulin injections.

   "So the patients may be walking around with cancer, and they know it, but the
disease is under control," Dr. Kerbel said.

   That's the dream. But, as Dr. Paige said: "In mice, these things can look
very good, and the next time I have a sick mouse I know what to do, but until .
. . it's done in humans, a million things can go wrong."

   PHASES OF INVESTIGATION

     When experimental drugs are first tested on people, researchers normally
follow three distinct phases of scientific investigation.

    Phase 1: The initial studies involve only a few patients who have failed to
get better with conventional therapy. For ethical reasons, untried drugs are not
given to people who might benefit from existing treatments. Researches try to
determine whether people can even tolerate the new compound, look for side
effects and figure out what the best dose might be. These tests can take up to a
year and a half to complete. If the compound seems too risky, the whole study
can be abandoned at this point.

    Phase 2: For promising compounds the study is expanded to include between
100 and 300 patients who have different types of cancer. The main goal is to
determine whether the drug has any effect on the tumor. In general, researchers
look for shrinkage in the tumor size. The average time to complete this stage is
about two years. If there is noticeable improvement, the drug is deemed worthy
of further study.

    Phase 3: Many medical centres, sometimes in different countries, take part
in recruiting more volunteers. Some large trials, lasting several years, can
involve between 1,000 and 3,000 patients. The patients are randomly divided into
different groups. One group will be given the experimental agents plus
conventional treatment. Another will get a placebo, or inactive pill, along with
conventional treatment. The researchers then compare the results.

   If the a pharmaceutical company thinks it has a winner it will apply for drug
marketing approval from the government, a process that varies from country to
country.

   Yet even after a drug reaches the market, the studies don't necessarily end.
Some rare side effects may not become apparent until a drugs has been used by
tens of thousands of patients, so monitoring of a drug can continue for years.

   GENE THERAPY

     Genes are the instruction manuals of cells. When they are mutated or
damaged, a cell can reproduce itself without limit, producing a cancerous
tumuor. Scientists hope they can repair or replace them with properly working
ones.

   PREVENTION

     A major study showed the drug Tamoxifen, which blocks the action of
estrogen, can decrease breast-cancer rates in high-risk women by almost 50 per
cent. However, it can also boost cervical cancer rates. But preliminary evidence
suggests Raloxifene may prevent breast cancer without the unwanted side effects.

   ANTI-ANGIOGENESIS

     Growing tumors must entice surrounding blood vessels to sprout shoots that
will provide a steady supply of nutrients - a process known as angiogenesis. By
using two drugs, angiostatin and endostatin, researchers can thwart the budding
blood vessels in laboratory mice. Other compounds, including thalidomide, might
also work.

   VACCINES

     Cancer tumors have a nack for evading the body's disease fighting immune
system. By using bits of tumor proteins as part of a vaccine, researchers hope
to teach the immune system to recognize cancer and attack it.

   RADIATION THERAPIES

     New computer equipment allows radiation to be more accurately targeted on
tumors, producing less damage to surrounding tissue. New radiation seed implants
can also permit directed, mini-doses of therapy.

   MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES

     Like cruise missiles, these genetically engineered weapons seek out tumors
while avoiding other cells. Once attached to the tumor surface, they might
interfere with its ability to grow. They could also carry a deadly payload of
toxins directly to the tumor.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              157 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 12, 1998 Monday

SECTION: COLUMN; FACTS & ARGUMENTS Lives Lived; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: EMILY CATHERINE AINSWORTH

BYLINE: Claire Poratto

BODY:

   Daughter, sister, granddaughter, crafter, Girl Guide. Born in Sudbury on Feb.
23, 1988; died of a cancerous brain tumour in Sault Ste. Marie, Ont., on Aug.
27, 1998, aged 10.
   Emily bounced through her too-short life, happy, smiling and interested in
everything.

   Emily was artistic and imaginative. She liked many things, especially school,
teddy bears, all stuffed animals, hearts, butterflies, pussy willows, stickers,
rainbows and angels. She made all kinds of crafts, decorations and drawings. Her
Easter drawing in 1996 was published in The Sault Star.

   Also called Em or Emmy by her family and friends, she was her grandpa's
"awesome dude." At 6, her response to information or answered questions was
"awesome, dude." Thereafter, her grandpa called her their special name, which
made her giggle.

   In the summer of 1994, Em and her older brother Brad came for a two-week
visit to her grandparents in Thornhill, Ont. Each weekday morning, we rode the
subway and LRT to Queen's Quay in Toronto, got muffins and milk to eat while
watching the boats and planes. We walked to the playground until it was time for
Brad to check in to computer camp. Em and I then explored downtown Toronto,
shopping, sightseeing, Centre Island, lunch at the top of the CN Tower. We
walked miles and loved every minute.

   Less than six months later, in January, 1995, a malignant brain tumour was
diagnosed and removed in Toronto. The prescribed chemotherapy and radiation
regimen began. Emily stayed with us during the six weeks of radiation therapy.
She was lonely for her home, mom, dad and brother, but never complained. She
skipped into the hospital each day with her big smile and shining brown eyes.
The highlight of her week was her family's arrival for the weekend.

   By the summer of 1996, the tumour showed no growth. Emily and Brad came for
two weeks, but with a difference. We had retired and moved to Wasaga Beach, Ont.
We had picnics on the beach, swam, built sand castles and went to the zoo and
go-karting, where Em had a few crashes. They painted stencils on T-shirts, made
sand-art ornaments. They painstakingly constructed schooners from plastic
bottles cut in half, Popsicle sticks, pipe cleaners, string, scraps of material
for sails and tonnes of glue. Proudly they entered their boats in the annual
Nancy Island shipbuilding contest; Emily and Brad won second and third prizes
respectively. Emily made two heart faces out of coloured construction paper and
hung them on our refrigerator. She said that they were filled with kisses from
her so that we wouldn't be lonesome when she was gone. On each subsequent visit,
Emily took the heart faces and refilled them with kisses.

   In April, 1997, the tumour returned, with the prognosis of less than a year
to live. Her parents, John and Lu Ann, never gave up their search for a cure. An
experimental gene therapy at the Children's National Medical Center in
Washington, D.C., cost $44,000 and required more than 12 further visits to
Washington. Collection jars, dances and car washes organized by family and
friends raised more than $50,000. Despite all their efforts, despite the
operations and drug trials, the tumour continued to grow. Emily gradually lost
her physical and mental abilities, beginning early in 1998. She accepted and
coped with the difficulties with her usual strength and happy attitude until she
was bedridden for the final five weeks of her life. She died peacefully in her
sleep, at home with her family.

   Emily is buried in a beautiful place she would have loved. Just up the road
from her home, across from her school, it is a small section cut off from the
rest of the cemetery by a curving ravine filled with tall trees and grass.

   Her drawing of butterflies, which hung over her bed for years, is being
copied in stained glass. It will be hung in Greenwood Public School in her
memory by her classmates.

   Emily affected us all and leaves us with many wonderful memories even in our
sorrow. She often said to her mother, "You're always in my heart, Mom." So will
she always be in ours.

   Claire Poratto was Emily Ainsworth's grandmother.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              162 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 15, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: ROB-WSJ; Pg. B12

LENGTH: 855 words

HEADLINE: Novartis recharts gene-therapy strategy  Industry giant twins many
management tasks, pledges autonomy in basic research

BYLINE: STEPHEN D. MOORE The Wall Street Journal; WSJ

DATELINE: Zurich

BODY:

   During the 1990s, Novartis AG has frequently forged partnerships with
fledgling biotechnology firms and, along the way, learned a few valuable
management lessons.

   In the area of gene therapy, Swiss-based Novartis has worked closely with a
pair of U.S. firms, Systemix Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif., and Genetic Therapy Inc.
of Gaithersburg, Md. After initial, trial collaborations, Novartis gobbled up
both allies in transactions valued at $843-million (U.S.).

   Now, Novartis will usher in a new phase of managing its gene-therapy strategy
by announcing today plans to combine most of the units' operations under a
single management team headed by Systemix's chief executive officer, Michael
Perry. Eliminating duplication of administration and other corporate overheads
is expected to shave 90 jobs, or 20 per cent of the companies' combined payroll.

   In an interview, Novartis research czar Paul Herrling emphasizes that the
overhaul stops short of a merger. Each company will continue to run its basic
research autonomously -- under its own name and at its current location. (In
fact, GTI scientists soon will move into a new building at the Gaithersburg
site.)

   "They need to maintain their biotech identity; I don't want to make Swiss
scientists out of them," Dr. Herrling quips. "GTI is deeply rooted in the
scientific community of the U.S. East Coast while Systemix is part of the
biotech scene in California. We want to keep our antennae out in both places."

   Separate but equal labs epitomize a fact of life in cutting-edge biotech
research: As in other businesses that depend on a handful of star performers, a
biotech company's most valuable assets walk out the door every night.

   Sandoz AG, the Swiss drug maker that merged with Ciba-Geigy AG to form
Novartis two years ago, scrambled to head off a staff exodus at Systemix after
acquiring a 60-per-cent stake for $392-million in late 1991. That initial
transaction limited possibilities for Sandoz to boost its stake, leaving the
unit's future in question. At the same time, prickly relations with minority
shareholders thwarted attempts to wield effective management control at the
unit, though Sandoz appointed a majority of Systemix directors.

   "There was a difficult management situation because it wasn't clear what was
going to happen -- and we couldn't declare our intentions, for obvious reasons,"
Dr. Herrling recalls. The result was boardroom turmoil -- Dr. Perry is the third
chief executive at Systemix in seven years -- and staff turnover that approached
10 per cent a year during a couple of tense years during the mid-1990s.

   Novartis finally gained full control of Systemix last year by paying
$76-million, or $19.50 a share, for the 27 per cent it didn't already own by
then. That price was a far cry from the $70 a share that Sandoz paid for its
initial 60-per-cent holding. However, Sandoz avoided the same mistake at GTI by
moving in a single step from research collaboration to full control in a
$295-million takeover in 1995.

   Over the past 18 months, Dr. Herrling and other Novartis research executives
conducted a sweeping review of the gene-therapy programs -- culminating in the
overhaul to be unveiled today. Apart from the obvious duplication of corporate
overheads, Dr. Herrling says, the biggest worry was the high proportion of
scarce research funds that both units were spending on clinical tests of
first-generation products that aren't likely to be big commercial successes.

   "These studies were tremendously important as a proof of concept, and we're
convinced from the data we've seen so far that gene therapy will work. But we
need more basic research to build further on the knowledge accumulated so far,"
Dr. Herrling adds.

   "So GTI and Systemix will focus more on basic research in the future, rather
than more clinical testing of these initial products, which doesn't really make
sense until we crack some of the remaining scientific hurdles."

   In gene therapy, researchers hope to cure diseases by replacing missing or
malfunctioning genes with new copies. The potential payoff could be enormous:
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission predicted two years ago that gene therapy will
become a $45-billion-a-year business by the year 2010. Novartis has such a big
lead in the global gene-therapy race that the FTC forced the Swiss giant to
cross-licence certain technology to competitors to avert a potential monopoly
position -- though it will be several more years, if ever, before the technique
makes it to market.

   Novartis's strategic about-face with Systemix and GTI is nothing new for a
company that invests 10 to 12 years and an estimated $350-million for every new
drug that makes it from the lab to market.

   "This gene-therapy work started in earnest in 1992 -- and six years is
nothing for breaking in a completely new technology," Dr. Herrling says. "But if
GTI or Systemix had remained independent companies, they wouldn't have been able
to afford this step. How many investors or venture capitalists would have been
willing to follow them if they had said their products aren't ready after all --
and they would have to go back to the drawing board?"

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              163 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 15, 1998 Tuesday

SECTION: ROBDEX; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: COMPANIES INDEX

BODY:

   ABN-Amro
   B12
   AES Corp.
   B12
   AEterna
   B11
   AMP Inc.
   B12
   Abitibi-Consolidated
   B11
   Albatronics Co.
   B11
   Alberta Energy
   B16
   Alberta Treasury Branches
   B7


      Alcan Aluminium
   B18
   AlliedSignal Inc.
   B12
   American Express
   B18
   Arcis Corp.
   B16
   Armstrong World
   B11
   Art Shoppe
   B11
   Autodesk Inc.
   B11
   BCE
   B18
   Banco Bilbao Vizcaya
   B12
   Banco Itau
   B12
   Banco Santander
   B12
   Bandeirante SA
   B12
   Bank of Montreal
   B3,18
   Bank of Nova Scotia
   B3
   Barbican Properties
   B7
   Bay Networks
   B2
   BioChem Pharma
   B18
   Richard C. Blum & As.
   B12
   Bracknell Corp.
   B22
   Brick Brewing Co.
   B22
   Brinkley King
   B11
   British Petroleum
   B17
   CIBC
   B3
   Canadian Pacific
   B22
   Canal Plus
   B17
   CanCap Preferred
   B22
   CanWest Global
   B1,2
   Ciena Corp.
   B12
   Citicorp
   B18
   Cominco Ltd.
   B16
   Commercial Bank Korea
   B12
   Cott Corp.
   B2
   Dana Corp.
   B5
   Deere
   B18
   Dia Met Minerals
   B16
   Discreet Logic
   B11
   Walt Disney
   B18
   Diversified Monthly Inc.
   B22
   Diversinet
   B18
   Domco Inc.
   B11
   EMI PLC
   B17
   ESPN
   B2
   Echlin Inc.
   B5
   Electricite de France
   B12
   Eli Lilly
   B18
   Empire Co.
   B22
   Euro-Nevada
   B18
   FPT Astra International
   B12
   FirstService Corp.
   B16
   Forzani Group
   B22
   Future Shop
   B18
   Gaming Lottery
   B22
   General Motors
   B10
   Genetic Therapy
   B12
   Gentra Inc.
   B7
   Gerasul SA
   B12
   Hanil Bank
   B12
   Heidrick & Struggles
   B12
   Hilton Hotels
   B12
   Inco Ltd.
   B2
   Inmet Mining
   B2
   IBM
   B10
   Intrawest Corp.
   B3,22
   Kinross
   B18
   Korn/Ferry International
   B12
   Lions Gate Entertain.
   B16
   Loewen Group
   B17,22
   MCI Communications
   B12
   MGI Software
   B22
   Magna International
   B1
   Major Drilling Group
   B22
   Maple Leaf Foods
   B11
   Merck
   B18
   Merrill Lynch
   B18
   Nam Tai Electronics
   B11
   NetStar Comm.
   B2
   Nevada Bob's Canada
   B22
   Newbridge Asia
   B12
   Newcourt Credit
   B18
   News Corp.
   B12,17
   Northern Telecom
   B2,18
   Novartis AG
   B12
   Pacific & Western Credit
   B16
   Placer Dome
   B18
   Plains Energy Services
   B22
   PolyGram
   B17
   Public Storage Canadian
   B22
   Queenstake Resources
   B16
   Quest Ventures
   B11
   Rayrock Resources
   B11
   Royal Bank
   B3,7,18
   Seagram
   B11,17
   Shaw Communications
   B1,2
   Sommer Allibert
   B11
   Systemix Inc.
   B12
   Tarkett AG
   B11
   Tellabs Inc.
   B12
   Texas Pacific Group
   B12
   Thomson Corp.
   B11,18
   Thomson Travel
   B10
   TD Bank
   B3,18
   Tractabel
   B12
   Tritech Precision
   B22
   TrizecHahn Corp.
   B1
   US Franchise Systems
   B11
   Veritas DGC
   B22
   Vinings Franchise
   B11
   Vivendi SA
   B17
   West Edmonton Mall
   B7
   Westcoast Energy
   B22
   WIC Western Int'l
   B1,2
   WorldCom Inc.
   B12

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              178 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 18, 1998 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; THE POLITICS OF HOPE: Defying Cancer Part four; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 3182 words

HEADLINE: Parents use new weapons to fight for their children's lives  Medical
consumers challenge doctors, shop for treatment

BYLINE: SEAN FINE The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Halifax

BODY:

   Jay Perry is the King of Six North.

   At seven, he has lived for 4½ years with cancer, long enough that his impish
smile is famous on the sixth floor's clinic for cancer outpatients at the Izaak
Walton Killam-Grace Health Centre for Children, Women and Families.

   The King, as small as a five-year-old, with sparse brown hair and a bald
patch at the crown, sits up in his hospital bed awaiting chemotherapy and a
transfusion of platelets. He takes a marker in hand and draws three happy faces.
Nurses pop in to vote for their favourite drawing.

   They ooh and aah at the horrible reddish-purple welts tattooing his elbow
from a fall off his bicycle. For another child, it would have meant only a small
bruise, but Jay's platelet level is so low that his blood takes forever to clot.

   Four hours of treatment and he's done.

   "I'm going right out when I get home," he proclaims.

   "To ride his bike!" nurse Holly Richardson cries.

   Today, there is hope for Jay. It wasn't always this way. Three years ago, his
parents felt that the IWK was giving up. They turned to the Internet. Ian Perry
sketched his son's medical history and asked for information about a radical
treatment -- MIBG, a form of radiation therapy nicknamed "the magic bullet."

   Within hours, a senior doctor from the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
responded, and asked Mr. Perry to send further details of his son's case. Yes,
he said, MIBG might help Jay.

   Ian and Suzanne Perry kept asking questions. MIBG, it turned out, was
available at the University of Alberta Hospital in Edmonton. They flew Jay out.
The Nova Scotia government paid for the treatment, but not the plane fares;
Ronald McDonald Children's Charities stepped in and anted up.

   For a long time, Jay thrived. Then he became sick, and his parents dug some
more.

   Scientists were pouring thousands of hours into researching Jay's disease.
Known as neuroblastoma, a cancer of the nervous system, it is the second most
common malignancy in children. Only 25 to 30 per cent of children survive five
years or more.
   In Jay, it has penetrated to his very marrow.

   Other parents told the Perrys about a promising but experimental vaccine
available at a hospital in Memphis. The hospital will pay their costs, even the
plane fares for one parent and Jay. They plan to fly down this summer.

   "There is nowhere I wouldn't take this child," Mrs. Perry said, beginning to
cry. She is a tiny, soft-spoken 43-year-old with a formidable will. "I would
never see him suffer, but he's well and he's happy, and as long as we've got
that, we've got fight. What are we going to do? Take our child home to die?"

   The Perry family exemplifies the rise of a U.S.-style cancer-treatment
"consumer" in Canada.

   Cancer patients increasingly are shopping for care. That was once the
preserve of the rich and well-connected. It wasn't unusual to hear about a
politician -- say, former Quebec premier Robert Bourassa -- heading off to top
U.S. centres for experimental care or a second opinion. But it was far less
common to hear that of people like Suzanne and Ian Perry, a casual postal
employee and her musician husband.

   Borders are falling in health care, and information is becoming a vital
currency.

   Cancer patients and their families now have access to truckloads of it --
through the Internet, new support groups and information services such as a
national toll-free line. Instead of simply heeding the advice of their doctors,
they come waving printouts of research studies mined from the Internet.

   As patients grew more aggressive, staff at the IWK reeled. The Perry family
was not the only juggernaut they faced. There were Bryson and Linde Brown of
Lethbridge, Alta., with their 14-year-old son, Kalen, and there was Nora
Campbell, a single mother of eight-year-old Hunter Blackmore from just outside
Charlottetown.

   Skeptical, tough-minded, drawing on an arsenal of information, they brought
well-honed questions rather than blind fight.

   "When your child is diagnosed with cancer, it's like you're parachuted behind
enemy lines into a country where you don't know the language, you don't know the
terrain," said Ms. Campbell, whose son was also diagnosed with neuroblastoma in
March, 1994.

   This is the story of three families who found themselves behind those enemy
lines and flung themselves into a desperate study of the language and terrain of
cancer care.

   It is also the story of the practical and philosophical challenges they posed
to the IWK, the children's hospital for the Maritimes.

   "Families have taught us a lot about that concept of hope," said Jill
Ceccolini, a social worker with the cancer team at the hospital.
Jay Perry

    No one knew what was wrong with Jay, a healthy toddler suddenly
deteriorating, not eating, lackadaisical, having trouble turning his head or
walking a straight line.

   There were months of increasingly desperate medical visits, of being treated
"like an overreactive idiot," Mrs. Perry said, until she found a pediatrician at
the IWK who said, "He doesn't look that unwell, but you're his mom, and if you
say there's something wrong with your child, there's something wrong with your
child."

   Two days later, the tests ordered by this doctor, Yasmine David, uncovered
the horrible truth.

   Mrs. Perry was holding her sleeping three-year-old son in her arms, standing
in an IWK hallway among pregnant women and their children while waiting for an
ultrasound for Jay, when another doctor broke the news to her. "You won't need
an ultrasound. They've found a tumour."

   She was devastated to find out in such a manner.

   Even if the Perrys had been predisposed to accept the word of medical
authorities, their experiences pushed them toward skepticism.

   No standard treatment would cure neuroblastoma. Jay enrolled in experimental
drug therapy. Within three days, his improvement was remarkable. "We had our
child back," Mrs. Perry said over tea at the dining-room table in her family's
ranch-style house in Lantz, a bedroom community a half-hour's drive north of
Halifax.

   He had a busy year of treatment: five rounds of chemotherapy (a different
drug each day for five days, a cycle repeated each month for five months), then
surgery, then three more rounds of chemotherapy (more intensive this time: all
five drugs given each day for four days and nights, repeated every six weeks or
so), then more surgery. Doctors cut out more than 90 per cent of the tumour; the
remainder appeared to be dead tissue.

   Then Jay was enrolled in a study and was treated with highly purified
proteins to get his immune system fighting harder.

   But when that first year of treatment was finished, the CT scans were
disturbing. The disease still had a foothold. And the hospital had little to
offer, in the Perrys' view. "It felt like we were left to fly on our own: 'We've
done all we can do, you're out the door.' " Mrs. Perry said.

   "That's when we felt, 'If this is not the end, where do we go from here?' "
Kalen Brown

    Kalen, a level-headed 14-year-old, a gifted painter, soccer player and
sprinter, wanted his life to come first, the cancer second. Kalen had Ewing's
sarcoma, a nasty bone cancer. He took up golf and fishing; he did not attend
hospital events for children with cancer.

   His family came east because Halifax was home. And his father, who teaches
courses in the philosophy of science at the University of Lethbridge, had a
sabbatical year in 1994-95.

   "At the IWK, we were the new breed of parent," Prof. Brown said. "There
weren't any like us before. We were the parents who wanted to know everything.
We asked questions and made demands that no one had ever made before."

   It was a marvellous year that stretched into 17 months. Kalen flourished.

   "The IWK has a wonderful, amazing way of reaching out," Mrs. Brown said. "The
Maritimes is quite a different place to be. There's a warmth there that you
don't find anywhere else. There's no condescension: 'We know everything, you
know nothing.' "

   In the fall of 1995, they returned to Lethbridge. Dr. Max Coppes, an
oncologist at Alberta Children's Hospital in Calgary, offered to perform a
bone-marrow transplant. It would be an autologous transplant -- that is, Kalen's
own blood would be taken and his stem cells (immature cells that can produce new
cells) removed and placed in cold storage, then injected back into him.

   "We thought we had done enough research, Bryson and I, and we had really good
advice, and Dr. Coppes went to other centres in North America [such as New
York's Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center] and asked if this was the thing
to do, and they all said, 'Nothing ventured, nothing gained.' Because everyone
was sure that his cancer would come back."

   It was a mistake. They should have taken a donor transplant instead. Although
scans showed no cancer in Kalen's marrow, it was there. "When they gave him an
autologous transplant, they injected his cancer cells back into him and they
went right to his spine."

   The Browns asked Dr. Coppes what else they might try. He suggested St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital in Memphis. It was doing ground-breaking work with
a cancer vaccine, a form of gene therapy meant to replace a defective
tumour-suppressing gene with a gene in good working order.

   Kalen was too ill to board a regular flight. His family had to charter a
plane. It cost them $12,000. "We begged, borrowed and did everything we could,"
Mrs. Brown said.

   Alberta would not pay for the $260 ambulance ride to the airport: The
treatment is experimental, and therefore not covered by provincial insurance.
Nothing connected to the treatment was covered.

   Kalen had no illusions. "Mom, this could kill me," he said of the treatment.
But he was an altruist. He felt good knowing that scientists might learn
something that could help other children some day.
Hunter Blackmore

    One day after Hunter, 8, was diagnosed with neuroblastoma, Nora Campbell, a
single mother who teaches independent-living skills to people with disabilities,
parked herself in front of the computer in the IWK's medical library. "Knowledge
gave me a sense of some control."

   But if, as Mrs. Brown says, the IWK's doctors did not assert that they knew
everything, neither did they instill a sense that they were making all the
latest treatments available to the families.

   "Never once did they come to me and say, 'We could try this, Nora.' "

   Hunter was not doing well. The chemotherapy helped for a few months, but then
he relapsed. Afterward, he enrolled in the same study as Jay Perry, receiving
proteins to jolt his immune system. He improved, but fell back again. He was too
sick for the MIBG treatment in Edmonton. Then other families told Ms. Campbell
about St. Jude.

   She fought with the IWK. Some of its staff thought that she was chasing a
dream. "I had quite a battle."

   For three hours, she met with the hospital's informal ethics committee, which
includes theologians, social workers, nurses and doctors. The issue was whether
to continue treating Hunter. The drug treatment wasn't going to cure him, but
Ms. Campbell believed that it would stabilize him so that he could travel down
to St. Jude for a vaccine created from her son's own cancer.

   "I was told by nurses that my son was going to die. I said, 'You're not God.
I won't let you play God.' "

   In the end, she impressed on the committee that Hunter had been thoroughly
consulted. The treatment continued.

   And the IWK has not forgotten that meeting.

   "The result of Nora's articulate and poignant comments was that the treatment
team learned to walk a little behind parents on the journey," said Ms.
Ceccolini, the social worker.
Kalen Brown

    After the begging and borrowing, the shelling out of $12,000, the long
flight to Tennessee, St. Jude could not treat Kalen. His platelet level had
declined suddenly; now, it was too low, a sign he would not be able to withstand
the treatment. After three weeks, he returned home.

   He died two months later on Nov. 23, 1996. "He lost his grace," Mrs. Brown
said. "He wasn't able to walk any more. And the indignity of being catheterized
when you're 16 years old. But it was just something that he dealt with.

   "We never closed the door of hope on Kalen. We never ever said, 'Kay, you're
just not going to make it.' Because, you know, we didn't believe it ourselves.
We always thought there might be hope. And when he said, 'What about my not
being able to walk, Mom?' Bryson would say, 'They're doing incredible things
with spinal-cord research, Kay. We're not closing any doors.'

   "Kalen died feeling the next day he was going to get up and get on with it. I
think that's okay."
Hunter Blackmore

    Hunter's life expectancy when he was diagnosed was one year; he lived three
and died on March 26, 1997. In his mother's view, he helped pave the way for
other sick children by participating in experimental treatments.

   Ms. Campbell raves about St. Jude, even though its doctors could not save her
boy.

   "I found it wonderful that we had options. The day before my son died, we
were in touch with St. Jude's. St. Jude's was still talking options. But his
body had just had enough. His lungs and liver were invaded at that point.

   "Of all the parents I've talked to who are bereaved, it's those who felt they
had options and explored every one who find it easiest to deal with the
bereavement. The ones I really feel badly for are the parents who find out after
their child's death that there were options that they didn't explore. They've
got a lot of guilt, and a lot of anger towards the medical establishment."
Jay Perry

    Ian Perry turned to the Internet in a time of frustration. IWK doctors were
suggesting that they could remove a piece of Jay's tumour for analysis to see
whether the cancer cells were growing. But Jay had been through so much and Mr.
Perry didn't want his son opened up again.

   "I want them to be aggressive," Mrs. Perry said of the doctors. "I'm not
talking therapy, I'm talking about finding out what's available. I'm tired of
them taking a back seat. I want them to say, 'We'll check that out, we'll call
those people.' I want somebody fighting as if Jay were their child."

   But she knows how busy the doctors are. Three oncologists serve 250 ongoing
cases, including 50 new cases a year; the IWK serves the entire Maritimes.

   Ms. Ceccolini said the medical staff initially was defensive with families
asking about articles mined from the Internet.

   "We as a team were wondering, 'What do we do with all this information people
have? How can we possibly be on top of every article written about pediatric
oncology? And how can we help people to know what is good information and bad
information?' "

   But the team changed. Now, it makes copies, reads the articles and tries to
educate families about the choices the doctors have made, Ms. Ceccolini said.
And the cancer units have several computers with Internet access for families.

   "It's a little like a marriage," Ms. Ceccolini said of the relationship
between families and the treatment team. "Sometimes there are different
philosophies that you need to work out; things kind of grind and go bump."

   So when the Perrys say they were left to fly on their own after the first
year of Jay's treatment, "it's hard to know how much those kinds of things
happen because of the way that the personalities involved come together and how
much of that really was on the tide of change for the team."

   Jay received three MIBG treatments in Edmonton over the next two years. MIBG,
whose full name is metaiodobenzylguanidine, is a chemical that homes in on
neuroblastoma cells; doctors piggyback radioactive iodine onto the MIBG to kill
the cells.

   The treatments made Jay so radioactive they had to be done over the weekend
when few people were around. He was kept in an isolation room with
lead-reinforced walls, and his parents wore a radioactivity warning device that
beeped when they came close to him.

   When he returned for a fourth treatment in March of 1997, his platelet level
was too low. He returned home.

   That June, the scans showed that he was getting worse. On the recommendation
of a Newfoundland mother of a boy with neuroblastoma, they turned to St. Jude,
named for the patron saint of desperate causes. The Perrys, home from Alberta,
asked doctors to extract some of Jay's bone marrow and send it to St. Jude so
his cancer cells could be harvested as the raw stuff of a vaccine. The doctors
said yes. They have been open-minded and accommodating, although Mrs. Perry said
that at times she has had to cry and scream.

   "They actually grew more disease in a lab," Mrs. Perry said of St. Jude.
Scientists attached Interleukin-2 genes to Jay's tumour cells. Once injected,
the cells are supposed to secrete small amounts of IL-2, an immune substance the
body makes. The point is to teach the body's immune system to recognize the
tumour cells as foreign and destroy them.

   "It's kind of a scary thought. We needed the disease to make the vaccine. The
thought of giving it back to him is quite scary."

    Jay parks on the floor in front of the television set playing Nintendo with
his two older brothers, aged 16 and 19. One day after Jay's chemotherapy, the
top of his head is already bald.

   Jay's 82-year-old grandmother relaxes in an armchair. She has flown in from
St. John's, bearing a jar of raw moose meat. Laughter and conversation ebb and
flow, as they do in the most ordinary Canadian household.

   "Death to Jay is not even something that's mentioned," Mrs. Perry says
quietly at the table in the same room. "He talks about angels and what he's
going to do when he gets to heaven, but Jay has never said, 'Am I going to die
from this?' Because as far as Ian and I are concerned, that's not even an
option."

   Jay jumps up and asks whether he can show a visitor how he rides his bike. It
has been only two weeks since he mastered it. He didn't learn before because his
mother wouldn't let go of the bicycle. Finally, his 16-year-old brother took
over the lessons.

   It is a windy, overcast afternoon. Out on his little yellow-and-black
two-wheeler at the end of their street, Jay pumps his knees and flies around in
happy circles.

   WHERE TO GET CANCER INFORMATION

   Families of Children with Cancer, a registered charity based in Toronto, has
an excellent Web site (ww.interlog.com/-fcc/) that provides a gateway to many
very useful sites, including:
   CancerGuide Tour: Tells how to do your own research, has links to important
sites.
   Oncolink: From the University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center.  A wealth of
information.
   Cancer News on the Net: Latest news reports on breakthroughs.
   CancerHelp: Links to other cancer resources on the Internet.
   Bone Marrow Transplant Links, University of Oklahoma: From basic information
on the risks and benefits of bone-marrow transplants to a list of bone-marrow
registries around the world.
   St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis: The FCC Web site provides
links to several other U.S. treatment and research centres.  What the hospital
offers and how to take advantage of it.
   CancerNet: A service of the U.S. National Cancer Institute.
   Internet Support Realtime Chat Resource: Tells how to join chat lines for
caner patients and families.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              179 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 16, 1998 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: Organ recipients must be activists, scientists urge  With one of the
world's worst donation rates, Canada needs to take a more 'proactive stand' if
patients are to survive

BYLINE: ANDRÉ PICARD Quebec Bureau

DATELINE: Montreal

BODY:

   People awaiting organ transplants need to take a lesson from those with
HIV-AIDS and become activists if they want the world to take the issue of
chronic shortages seriously, say scientists and administrators of transplant
organizations.

   And, as with AIDS, scientist-patient co-operation is essential and social
issues must be treated as seriously as medical ones, they say.

   They were commenting on a new report showing that Canada has one of the worst
organ-donation rates in the Western world and that shortages have reached
alarming levels.

   "We have to take a much more proactive stand if we're going to deal with this
crisis, and it really is a crisis," Marcia Bell, president of the Kidney
Foundation of Canada, said in an interview from her Vancouver home.

   "Patients make excellent advocates and we have to make more of an effort to
speak up," she said. Ms. Bell had a kidney transplant 11 years ago.

   The Kidney Foundation has set a target of increasing organ donations by 50
per cent by 2005. The cornerstone of the strategy is to improve co-ordination to
ensure that every available organ is harvested, and to increase public
awareness.

   "Human organs are such a precious commodity that we can't afford to lose even
one," Ms. Bell said.

   Celia Wight, manager of Donor Action Foundation, an international initiative
to increase donations, said the shortages must be tackled as a public-health
issue, not strictly a medical one.

   "We could improve the donation rate by 30 to 40 per cent simply by
identifying potential donors in intensive-care units. That is a tremendous waste
of resources, both human and financial," she said.

   At the 17th World Congress of the Transplantation Society, being held in
Montreal this week, the international shortage of organs has been a
pre-occupation of scientists, and Canada has been singled out repeatedly as a
country that is not meeting its potential.

   Canada's donation rate is 14.1 donors per million population. By comparison,
the rate is 26.8 per million in Spain.

   "But don't forget that Spain went from zero to the best in the world in no
time," Ms. Wight said. "They showed that, with a little effort, you can really
improve the situation."

   The secret of Spain's success is that "it gives hospitals ownership of
organ-donor programs," Ms. Wight said. Each hospital also has a co-ordinator who
is responsible for identifying all potential donors and ensuring that no organ
is wasted.

   Research presented at the conference concluded that a policy aimed at
eliminating waiting lists for transplants is cost-effective because keeping
patients on waiting lists is about five times more expensive than transplanting.

   Jim Warren, editor and publisher of Transplant News, an international
newsletter for transplantation specialists, said that although it is true that
much can be done to increase the number of organ donors, there has to be a
recognition of the limitations.

   For example, he noted that laws requiring motorcycle helmets and car seat
belts and air bags have dramatically reduced the number of brain-dead patients
from traffic accidents, the principal source of organs. Further, blood-borne
diseases such as hepatitis and HIV rule out huge numbers of potential donors.

   Mr. Warren said the most striking aspect of transplantation today is that the
"science is so far ahead of the social aspects. We can do amazing things in the
laboratory, but we're still shy about asking families about donating the organs
of a loved one."

   For those reasons, combined with ever-growing demand, he believes that
shortages will grow worse in the years to come and that the ultimate solution
will come through developments such as xenotransplantation (using animal
organs), gene therapy and cloning.

   That is why consumer groups such as the Kidney Foundation back their activism
with money. The Canadian charity has spent more than $50-million on kidney
research, much of it transplant-related. The Heart and Stroke Foundation, the
Liver Foundation and the Lung Association have spent similarly large amounts.

   Yesterday, pharmaceutical giant F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. said it will give
almost $25-million to create a charitable foundation that will promote research
in the organ-transplant field.

   The chairman of the new charity will be Professor Phillip Halloran, medical
director of the transplantation program at the University of Alberta.

   Prof. Halloran said finding ways to ensure long-time survival of transplant
recipients will be a funding priority. Less than half of transplanted kidneys
last more than a decade.

   One of the principal reasons that waiting lists are so long is that many
recipients need a second transplant after the body rejects the first organ.

   In Canada, the number of patients awaiting transplants has soared by 68 per
cent in the past decade, but the number of transplants has increased by only 40
per cent, according to data compiled by the Canadian Institute for Health
Information.

   TRANSPLANT FACTS

   - Number of organ transplants in Canada in 1996: -1557
   - Number of people on waiting lists, Canada: 3,072
   - Number of transplants worldwide last year: 37,693
   - Number of people on waiting lists, worldwide: 150,000
   - Rate at which demand for organs is growing: 15 per cent annually
   - Rate at which supply is growing: 0 per cent
   - Number of transplants performed to date: 544,313
   - Firs human transplant: 1954, a kidney, Boston
   - First transplant in Canada: 1958 a kidney
   - Longest surviving kidney transplant patient: 34 years.
   - First pancreas transplant: 1966, Minneapolis.
   - First liver transplant: 1967, Pittsburgh
   - Longest surviving liver transplant patient: 27 years
   - First heart transplant: 1967, Cape Town
   - Longest surviving heart transplant patient: 22 years
   - First lung transplant: 1983, Toronto
   - Longest surviving lung transplant patient: 12 years

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              180 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 5, 1998 Friday
                                National Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: Swiss may ban genetic engineering  Citizens vote Sunday on forbidding
study

BYLINE: BY GREG CALHOUN Reuters News Agency; REUT

DATELINE: ZURICH

BODY:

   Swiss citizens will vote in a referendum Sunday that illustrates the deep and
sometimes emotional divide in the country over scientific research.

   A closer look suggests that the vote is, at least in part, a grassroots
attempt to take on the Switzerland's powerful pharmaceutical industry.

   Voters will decide whether more stringent restrictions should be placed on
genetic engineering, which opponents say will have far-reaching implications for
the country's future as a biomedical research centre.

   If approved, the referendum would forbid the breeding of transgenic animals
and the release of genetically altered plants or animals into the environment.
It would also ban patents for genetically altered plants or animals.

   Transgenic technology is the science of transplanting a specific gene or
genes from one living organism into another.

   In accordance with Switzerland's system of direct democracy, any group can
force a popular vote on just about any issue if it can gather 100,000 signatures
on a petition.

   For the gene measure to become law, a double majority is required, meaning
both a majority of individual voters and a majority of Swiss cantons must decide
in its favour.

   Recent polls show that about 32 per cent of those questioned will vote
against the measure and 16 per cent in favour. About half say they don't know
how they will vote.

   Swiss drug companies, led by global leaders Novartis and Roche, are among the
key opponents of the measure.

   They have been joined by the Swiss government, much of the scientific
community and Nobel-prize-winning researchers.

   "If the bill is adopted, its rigorous bans will severely handicap and in
certain key areas even totally cripple biomedical research in the country," said
Fritz Gerber, chairman of pharmaceuticals giant Roche, in a recent speech.

   "We assume that researchers directly affected number between 4,500 and 5,000
people who are working on projects that would be ended," said Conrad Engler,
spokesman for Interpharma, a group set up by the drug industry.

   Mr. Engler said the 5,000 figure should be tripled to take in related
professions, such as suppliers and communications-technology specialists, who
would be affected.

   "When extrapolated to 2005, this would mean some 40,000 jobs would be lost,"
he added.

   Supporters of the referendum say the ban would not prevent research in the
areas of medicine, genetic therapies and diagnostics and in the production of
genetic medicines.

   "The only point [of the referendum] is that research with transgenic animals
is forbidden. . . . That's only 5 per cent of genetic research," said Florianne
Koechlin, one of the referendum's organizers.

   She sees a certain hypocrisy in the industry's warning in view of the fact
that thousands of jobs have been lost to rationalization programs in the past
three years.

   Ms. Koechlin, herself a biologist, believes that the outcome of the vote in
the final analysis will be of little importance to the big Swiss companies.

   "They [Roche and Novartis] are not going to invest much money in Switzerland
whatever the result. . . . They decided long ago that the U.S. was the country
where they wanted to invest in genetic engineering," Ms. Koechlin said.

   Drawing parallels to the 1960s debate over nuclear energy, supporters evoke
memories of man-made environmental disasters such as the explosion at the
Chernobyl nuclear reactor, while calling for alternatives.

   "Is the future . . . and progress only defined by research and science or is
the time over when they can define what progress in research is?" Ms. Koechlin
asked.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              182 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 28, 1998 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 23 words

HEADLINE: Today  The day's events

BODY:

   STOCKHOLM: Parliament votes on proposal to ban purchase of sexual services.
SEATTLE: First meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              183 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 25, 1998 Monday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; TORONTO HOSPITAL ARTHRITIS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: New Centre of Excellence will maximize research potential

BODY:

   THIS HAS been a watershed year for arthritis research in Canada. As a result
of hospital restructuring in Ontario, Canada's two top arthritis research
programs -- those at The Wellesley Hospital and The Toronto Hospital -- were
joined.

   The result of that union is the Wellesley-Toronto Arthritis and Immune
Disorder Research Centre, the largest arthritis research and treatment centre in
Canada and already an internationally recognized resource in the field of
arthritis. In the same year, the arthritis program was designated The Arthritis
Centre of Excellence, or ACE, by The Arthritis Society of Ontario. ACE is a
partnership of The Toronto Hospital Foundation, The Arthritis Society, The
University of Toronto and The Conn Smythe Foundation. With the establishment of
ACE, The Toronto Hospital is positioned to lead the country in the investigation
of a disease that affects more than four million Canadians.

   "The Arthritis Centre of Excellence is a unique opportunity to maximize the
research potential of the largest concentration of arthritis researchers in
Canada," says Dr. Robert Inman, director of the centre and also the University
of Toronto's Rheumatic Disease Unit.

   The centre will be committed to studying the underlying causes of arthritis
and seeking new methods of treatment and prevention, with experts in
rheumatology, orthopedic surgery and immunology working together.

   "This has created an environment that is at once very stimulating and also
holds tremendous potential for breakthroughs," Dr. Inman declares. "If you had
visited us at the Division of Rheumatology 20 or 30 years ago, research would
have been largely descriptive, categorizing patients," he continues. "We are now
doing experiments that would have been inconceivable, such as looking for a
single gene missing in the whole DNA repertoire. We also lacked the tools to
begin to develop preventative and curative treatments, but we're really getting
there. We have much more specific ways of intervention."

   It is research that paves the way for such intervention, and the
cost-effectiveness of such research is self-evident. Human suffering aside, the
various forms of arthritis cost Canadians $18-billion a year. "It is a huge
problem," Dr. Inman notes. "In the case of osteoarthritis, 1 in 10 Canadians
suffers from it. It affects an elderly population, which is going to be a larger
and larger population over time. We believe this work will pay a huge benefit in
the future."

   Osteoarthritis, which breaks down the cartilage in weight-bearing joints such
as hips, knees, feet and the spine, is today the single most common cause of
lost time from work and leisure activity in Canada. Toronto Hospital researchers
Dr. Wayne Marshall and Dr. Paul Doherty seek to affect the condition at its
origin. Their effort pivots on the chondrocyte cells, which become ineffective
in saving the cartilage under the impact of osteoarthritis. "By using gene
therapy," explains Dr. Marshall, "we are hoping to modify the chondrocytes so
that they turn on the healing process and begin to repair the cartilage tissue."

   Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease in which the body's immune
system fails to recognize its own body tissues as normal and so attacks the
tissues of the joints. One of the mechanisms involved in this degeneration is
the proliferation of synovial cells in the lining of the joints.

   "The goal of our research is to eliminate the overactive and autonomous
synovial cells," says Dr. Inman, who is collaborating with Dr. Doherty on this
study. "We hope to knock out the population of bad cells and protect the joint
from further damage."

   A potentially devastating form of arthritis that largely affects young women
is lupus, an inflammatory connective-tissue disease which is, "again, an example
of where the immune system has somehow gone awry," Dr. Inman explains.

   The Toronto Hospital's Dr. Joan Wither is investigating the basic immunology
that underlies lupus, seeking to find the genes that dictate this response. Her
finding will be another important piece in a vital effort. "Arthritis has been
called the sleeping giant of the Canadian health-care system," Dr. Inman says.
"Yet the public awareness of arthritis lags behind many other health problems in
Canada. We think this is a very important opportunity. We believe the time is
right to really make a difference."

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              184 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 25, 1998 Monday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; TORONTO HOSPITAL ONCOLOGY; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: Hospital at the forefront of new frontier in cancer investigation

BODY:

   TREATMENTS FOR cancer have traditionally been invasive and inexact. Surgery
cuts out tumours and surrounding tissues while radiotherapy burns away a general
zone of affected tissues, and chemotherapy floods the body with toxins.

   Today, a new frontier is opening up in the treatment of cancer, and it is
galvanizing the research community. Gene therapy seeks to contain cancer with a
previously unimagined degree of efficacy. It involves the replacement of either
defective or missing genes with properly working ones, or the addition of genes
that render the cancerous tumor cells vulnerable.

   "When gene therapy was envisioned as a modality of molecular medicine, it
wasn't appreciated that so many cancer patients would be among the first to be
treated," remarks Dr. Robert Hawley, Scientific Director of the Oncology Gene
Therapy Program at The Toronto Hospital.

   One of the foremost Canadian programs of its kind, gene-therapy research at
The Toronto Hospital is now receiving an invaluable infusion of intellectual
resources through its merger with the Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret
Hospital.

   "Research in my laboratory is focused on the molecular and cellular biology
of normal blood cell development and leukemia formation," Dr. Hawley explains.
"All blood cells originate from a pool of ancestral cells in the bone marrow
called stem cells. It is these primitive cells from which new blood cells arise
in the patient following bone marrow transplantation after chemotherapy or
radiation therapy. On the other hand, genetic mutations in these cells result in
leukemia Accordingly, much of our effort is concentrated on stem cells."

   Leukemia became a natural focus of gene therapy, Dr. Hawley adds, because the
crux of the problem in cancer is the ability of the cancer cells to get into the
bloodstream and disseminate or metastasize. In leukemia, a cancer of the blood,
this dissemination has already occurred.

   Dr. Hawley and his team are part of an international effort "to develop the
technology that would allow us to ultimately correct the genes that are
defective in such inherited diseases," he says. "Those are long-term goals. The
more immediate problem is the necessity to develop a technique to permit the
clinically relevant expression of a therapeutic gene, if only temporarily."

   The remarkable potential here, in one scenario, would be for scientists to
modify the cells in a tumour that has been surgically extracted so that the
cells express a protein they normally wouldn't, boosting the body's immune
response to the cancer.

   Skin cancer such as melanoma offers one of the most accessible routes to
further such research as it requires less invasion to reach and "is more
amenable to manipulation," notes Dr. Hawley.

   Dr. Keith Stewart, Medical Director of the Gene Therapy Program, has been
engaged in two groundbreaking gene-therapy trials -- a gene-marking trial of
patients with multiple tumours of the bone marrow, and an immunotherapy trial of
patients with skin or breast cancer.

   "This is one of the fields where a very close relationship between basic
science and the clinic is essential," Dr. Stewart says. "It's a very short step
from the lab mice into the clinic. We [researchers and clinicians in the
program] meet every day and talk things through."

   In the early going, explains Dr. Stewart, he and his colleagues began
clinical trials in gene therapy based on the work of others.

   "We realized immediately," he says, "that there was so much work to be done
in this field that we needed to be doing our own, and from that created
treatments which were unique to Toronto and Canada. We work very closely
together to take the basic science and use it in the clinic."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              185 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 25, 1998 Monday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; TORONTO HOSPITAL IMMUNOLOGY; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: A world leader in immune system research

BODY:

   CONTINUOUS ADVANCES are expected in the health-care industry, but even
scientists are impressed by the speed and extent of those advances in the
dynamic field of immune system research.

   The Toronto Hospital is quickly becoming the most extensive centre for immune
system research in the country, since the immune system plays a key role in many
of the diseases characteristic of the hospital's priority programs, including
organ transplantation, arthritis and autoimmune disorders, oncology, neurology,
cardiology and inflammation and infectious diseases.

   "It is only since the eighties that we have known how T cells recognize
antigens - how blood and lymph cells responsible for triggering the body's
immune response recognize a foreign micro-organism," explains Dr. Christopher
Paige, Vice-President of Research at The Toronto Hospital. "The failure of the
body's immune system to recognize as foreign and control such microorganisms or,
for the immune system to wrongly attack healthy cells, are physiological
reactions implicated in many major diseases."

   From rheumatoid arthritis to diabetes to the body's rejection of a
transplanted organ, immune response presents an underlying research theme. AIDS,
aquired immunodeficiency syndrome, for example, signals the acute impairment of
the body's immune response capability, which is why we say a person dies of
AIDS-related causes rather than AIDS itself. Some cancers also appear to
represent a failure of the immune response, while some of the newest treatments
seek to combat cancerous growth by bolstering the body's own defence mechanisms.

   "Only now has enough basic information come together to predict therapeutic
approaches in some areas," Dr. Paige says. "The Toronto Hospital has incredible
clinical strength in a number of areas influenced by immunology. The bedside
supplies our research materials while research questions arise from clinical
observation."

   "The theme now," he continues, "is to find research synergies that will
increase the chance of understanding diseases and finding ways to improve
outcome. We target disease outcomes very specifically, of course, yet we look
for similarities among the various conditions." Finding similarities between
different diseases may help scientists devise new treatments for a disease based
on treatments that have already proved successful with other similar diseases.

   While researchers do seek particular approaches to treatment for each
distinct condition, all researchers in immune disorders, especially at the basic
science level, have a great deal to share with one another. "Despite our strong
base of knowledge," Dr. Paige says, "we know that much, much more needs to be
learned and that this basic knowledge is critical for developing the next set of
treatments."

   The Toronto Hospital's merger with Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret
Hospital has greatly strengthened some of these possibilities. "There is a lot
of synergy on the oncology side," Dr. Paige says. "Especially in the area of
gene therapy, this is very obvious since most [gene-therapy work] has been
developed to treat cancer," and can now be tested with other conditions.

   Synergies exist outside the hospital as well. All Toronto Hospital
researchers are cross-appointed to the University of Toronto with which the
hospital works very closely. The Toronto Hospital also maintains a series of
important partnerships with other distinguished University Avenue hospitals. Dr.
Paige surveys all this and concludes: "The scope is very wide for The Toronto
Hospital."

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              186 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 25, 1998 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; The week; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 96 words

HEADLINE: Coming world events

BODY:

   TODAY: North-South Conference for Sustainable Development in Bern.
TOMORROW: Japanese Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko pay state visit to
Britain.
WEDNESDAY: Tokyo high court rules on Korean war criminals and bereaved families
seeking compensation from Japanese government.
THURSDAY: First meeting of American Society of Gene Therapy in Seattle, expected
to draw more than 1,500 scientists from around the world.
FRIDAY: Presidential and congressional elections in Ecuador.
SATURDAY: French President Jacques Chirac visits Lebanon.
SUNDAY: Presidential election in Colombia.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              193 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 2, 1998 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Mind & Matter; Pg. D5

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: So is it nature or nurture?

BYLINE: Adriel Bettleheim

BODY:

   LABORATORY mice are usually attentive parents, constantly herding their pups
into nests and crouching over to nurse and protect them. So why would mice
mothers at a lab at the University of Washington start neglecting their young?

   It's because neurobiologist Steven Thomas and molecular biologist Richard
Palmiter inactivated a gene in the female parents that plays a key role in
preparing the brain for motherhood. The gene creates a protein needed to
manufacture the brain chemical norepinephrine, which is believed to promote
nurturing. When the mice with the altered gene gave birth, they left their pups
scattered around the cage. Nearly three of four of the pups died of neglect.
When the surviving pups were given to foster mothers with the normal gene, 85
per cent survived.

   The researchers' work is part of a fast-growing field that is trying to
answer the age-old nature-nurture question: What plays a greater role in
determining behaviour -- biology or the environment?

   More than 130 years after Austrian monk Gregor Mendel formulated the laws of
heredity while studying pea plants, researchers continue to disagree over how
much genes control destiny and what genetic influence means for public policy.

   Research in behavioural genetics is different, but no less controversial,
than the burst of cloning research that has dominated news recently. Though both
come under the rubric of "barnyard biotech," the developmental research does not
involve the creation of new organisms. Instead, it explores how genes carry
chemical messages that may influence traits.

   Scientists have known since the mid-1930s that certain mutant genes, acting
alone or in combination with one another, can cause hereditary diseases.
Nowadays, technology can identify the precise genetic code for conditions such
as cystic fibrosis, Huntington's chorea and Tay-Sachs disease. In limited cases,
physicians are applying gene therapy to treat symptoms.

   But in the past two decades, researchers have found ways to isolate and
characterize DNA sequences. With these new tools, they are searching for
biological explanations for far more complex phenomena, such as sexuality,
risk-taking and violence.

   Popular attention to the field was sparked by the publication of the
controversial 1994 book The Bell Curve, in which authors Richard Herrnstein and
Charles Murray said IQ is largely hereditary and that poverty is a function of
inherited low intelligence. Biologists, psychologists and others drawn to the
field say they are concerned about drawing similar broad conclusions from
studies that could have weaknesses in methodology. But their work is nonetheless
presenting evidence that genes may account for previously unexplainable but
commonplace behaviours.

   Possibly the most controversial connection between genes and actions concerns
suspected links to crime and violence. Researchers studying a dysfunctional
Dutch family said in 1993 that aggressive behaviour may be linked to a single
faulty gene that causes a shortage of enzymes needed to break down serotonin
(the same neurotransmitter targeted by Prozac and other antidepressants). Since
then, scientists and policy-makers have engaged in a stormy debate over the
roots of crime and possible solutions.

   Proponents of research say that, while the concept of a single "criminal
gene" may be the stuff of science fiction, biological markers exist that could
make a person more likely to commit crimes or provide clues about populations
that are more at risk. Gene therapy to correct inborn problems also could make
an alternative to incarceration, they argue.

   But critics say labelling a group as predisposed to violence recalls the
early 20th-century eugenics movement that led to the sterilization of convicts
and some mental patients in the hope of reducing crime among future generations.
Many social scientists say researchers, in a rush to "biologize" behaviour, are
ignoring environmental influences, such as poverty, broken families and racism.

   "We tend to seek quick and easy technological conclusions that aren't always
for the public good," says Dorothy Nelkin, a New York University sociologist.
"Clearly, there are some genetic factors that contribute to behaviour. [But]
it's easier to blame the individual than take up what's wrong with the social
system."

   Many researchers in the pro-gene camp are uncomfortable with such criticisms
and take pains to note they are only seeking to study specific biological
systems, not prescribing broad solutions.

   "When you study how a biological pathway works, you know the details, but
you're not always able to see the forest for the trees," says Judith Greenberg,
director of the division of genetics and development biology at the U.S.
National Institute of General Medical Sciences.

   University of Colorado psychologist Gregory Carey says talk about genetic
advances is oversimplified and contributes to a misunderstanding of DNA's power,
especially when it comes to predicting individual traits. "We may be able to say
a certain percentage of the population is predisposed to a condition, but I
doubt we'll ever be able to identify whether Joe Smith will develop it or not."


  This article originally appeared in Congressional Quarterly.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              195 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 13, 1998 Monday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; MANAGING Venture capitalist of the month; Pg. B13

LENGTH: 1285 words

HEADLINE: Medical fund searches for cash cure  Since tax breaks for
labour-sponsored funds were reduced in 1996, Canadian Medical Discoveries has
had a tough time bringing investors into the fold.

BYLINE: JOHN HEINZL The Globe and Mail

BODY:

   CALVIN Stiller faced matters of life and death daily when he treated organ
transplant patients. Now, as head of Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund Inc.,
he's grappling with a different kind of health care problem.

   Dr. Stiller's venture capital fund, which was set up in 1994 to provide
financing for entrepreneurs in the medical field, is spending money faster than
it can raise it. There simply aren't enough donors to replenish the cash
reserves.

   "All of a sudden, we're in a situation where . . . that tap has largely been
turned off," says the chairman of CMDF, who used to run the multiorgan
transplant unit at University Hospital in London, Ont.

   You don't need a medical degree to understand the problem. Like other
labour-sponsored funds, CMDF raised buckets of money from small investors who
eagerly took advantage of generous tax incentives. But when the tax breaks were
reduced in 1996, as part of a package of changes that made labour-sponsored
funds less attractive, investors took their money elsewhere.

   For the year ended March 31, London-based CMDF brought in just $24-million,
but it deployed four times that amount -- $102-million -- into budding health
care companies. Dr. Stiller attributes the shortfall to a "very poor" RRSP
season, which generally accounts for 75 per cent of annual sales.

   The $270-million fund has only $30-million of uncommitted cash left, and that
will be fully invested by September, he says.

   Still, there's no need to panic, he adds. CMDF can always raise money by
liquidating mature investments. And if Dr. Stiller gets his way, the fund will
soon have an easier time selling units to the public.

   He is part of a group of labour-sponsored funds lobbying the federal
government to reverse some of the 1996 changes, and the signals are "very
positive," he says.

   Dr. Stiller is hoping to see the maximum tax credit increased from the
current 30 per cent and the maximum investment raised from $3,500, which he says
is too low to interest most brokers. Formerly, the maximum tax credit was 40 per
cent and the maximum investment was $5,000. The minimum holding period was
raised to eight years from five.

   "I don't look forward to the next six months with any sense of foreboding at
all . . . I think we're going to see renewed interest in the labour-sponsored
fund vehicle and I expect government to aid and abet that."

   Patience is a virtue in venture capital investing, and CMDF has plenty.

   The fund, which is co-managed by MDS Capital Corp. of Toronto and is a
strategic partner with Ottawa-based Medical Research Council of Canada, invests
primarily in early stage Canadian companies in the health sciences sector. It
also controls University Medical Discoveries Inc., a $15-million venture capital
fund that targets promising technologies developed at universities.

   CMDF applies a strict set of criteria to potential investee companies and
research projects. Among other things, they must do the following:

    Address an important human health problem.

    Show strong commercial potential.

    Be globally competitive.

    Promise a healthy profit margin.

   Dr. Gordon Rosenblatt, president of Morphometrix Technologies Inc. of
Toronto, says the company "would be out of business" if it weren't for the
$4-million in funding it has received from CMDF since 1995.

   Morphometrix is developing an automated instrument to visually analyze Pap
smear tests used in cancer screening. Automation eliminates the need for a
technician to examine each specimen, reducing cost and increasing accuracy. The
company expects to begin clinical trials this fall.

   Another beneficiary of CMDF funding is NeuroMotion Inc. The Edmonton-based
company is developing high-tech products to assist people with motion impairment
caused by such things as strokes and spinal cord injuries. NeuroMotion received
about $3.5-million in funding from CMDF, and the investment is about to bear
fruit.

   In the next week or two, it expects to go to market with its first product,
the WalkAide, which treats a condition known as "foot drop." The device
stimulates a nerve that controls muscles in the ankle, helping restore a normal
gait to stroke patients who would otherwise drag one foot.

   "[CMDF] put in some serious dollars and [the research] has taken serious
dollars," says Tom Rice, NeuroMotion's chief executive officer.

   NeuroMotion, whose technology grew out of research at the University of
Alberta, plans to introduce two other products this year. It has set up a
marketing and sales office in Minneapolis as it tries to crack the potentially
lucrative U.S. market.

   It's stories such as NeuroMotion's that make Dr. Stiller proud. As his fund's
cash reserves shrink, his challenge is to ensure money will available for
medical breakthroughs that are still sitting in the Petri dish.

   "I believe it's in the interests of the companies that we've invested in, and
our universities and small businesses, to do something."

   Fund snapshot

    Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund Inc.

    Labour-sponsored venture capital fund based in London, Ont.

    Total assets: $270-million

    Number of investee companies: 38

    Co-manager: MDS Capital Corp.

    Targets early stage companies in health sciences field.

   Where Medical Discoveries puts its cash

   Here are the largest total investments by Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund
Inc. (1995 to 1998)
   Total investments of at least $4-million are listed
   COMPANY:          AnorMed Inc., Vancouver
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $5.05
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Therapeutics with inorganic compounds
   COMPANY:          BeaconEye Centre Inc., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $4.26
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Laser vision
   COMPANY:          Diabetogen Inc., London, Ontario
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $5.05
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Diabetes diagnosis, treatment
   COMPANY:          Drug Royalty Corp., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $8.36
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Royalty rights on drug sales
   COMPANY:          GenSci Regeneration Sciences Inc., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $9.89
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Bone and tissue regeneration products
   COMPANY:          GlycoDesign Inc., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $7.75
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Small molecule therapeutics
   COMPANY:          Life Imaging Systems Inc., London, Ontario
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $4.72
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  3-D ultrasound imaging
   COMPANY:          Medtech Partners Inc., Ottawa
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $10.05
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Early stage technologies in Quebec
   COMPANY:          Morphometrix Technologies Inc., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $4.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Automated analysis of Pap smear tests
   COMPANY:          Phytogen Life Sciences Inc., Vancouver
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $4.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Produces anti-cancer compound
   COMPANY:          StressGen/Genzyme LLC, Victoria
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $10.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Gene therapy to treat cancer
   COMPANY:          Systems Xcellence Inc., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $5.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Health Business software
   COMPANY:          TM Bioscience Corp., Vancouver
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $5.75
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  DNA diagnostic system
   COMPANY:          UltraVison Inc., Calgary
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $4.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Contact lenses and lens care
   COMPANY:          University Medical Discoveries Inc., Toronto
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $15.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Health-related intellectual property
   COMPANY:          Xillix Technologies Inc., Richmond, B.C.
   TOTAL INVESTMENT ($million):  $5.00
   CORE TECHNOLOGY:  Medical imaging for cancer detection
   Source: Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              196 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 30, 1998 Monday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; MANAGING SMALL BUSINESS BRIEFS; Pg. B11

LENGTH: 82 words

HEADLINE: Fund fills up

BODY:

    MDS Capital Corp. says it has closed funding at $187-million for its newest
fund, the MDS Life Sciences Technology Fund. Investors include U.S.-based
Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association, Mitsui & Co. Ltd. of Japan, and a
syndicate of Taiwanese investors. The venture capital fund, one of six managed
by MDS Capital, targets emerging areas such as gene therapy. MDS Capital is
38-per-cent owned by MDS Inc. of Toronto.
Compiled by reporters John Heinzl and Elizabeth Church, with wires.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              211 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 30, 1998 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 604 words

HEADLINE: Pesky gene to blame for receding hairlines  Baldness cure possible,
scientists say

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN STRAUSS Science Reporter

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   While there is still no recipe to guarantee a bushy head of hair from birth
until death, scientists have come a step closer to understanding the mystery of
hair growth and loss with the discovery of the first human gene defect for
baldness.

   The "hairless gene," as it is called, was isolated in a group of Pakistani
villagers who were bald in an absolute way. Afflicted with what is known as
alopecia universalis (alopecia being the scientific word for baldness), these
people have no hair anywhere -- eyebrows, eyelashes, heads, pubic regions and so
on.

   Four men and seven women thus afflicted from birth were studied by Pakistani,
U.S., Canadian and British scientists. In findings being reported today in the
journal Science, the researchers report having isolated a gene defect unique to
those with alopecia universalis. Moreover, they were able to show that the gene
is quite similar to a gene known to create a strain of hairless mice.

   The gene in mice is known to produce a protein that turns on and off other
genes. Thus, said paper co-author Dr. Martha Peacocke, a Montreal native, the
cause of alopecia universalis is likely "a flaw in a master switch for hair
follicle growth." Using the recent electrical troubles in her home province as a
further analogy, she added: "It is like the big power outage which occurs when
the major power line going into Montreal comes down."

   If alopecia universalis is the consequence of the extremely rare situation
when the master gene for hair growth ceases to function entirely, the
researchers believe the gene is also implicated in more common hair loss,
including male pattern baldness, which afflicts upward of 80 per cent of people
some time during their lifetimes.

   The model for these conditions, said Dr. Peacocke, who is a geneticist
associated with the Columbia University Medical School, is a partial shutdown of
genes located farther downstream in the body chemistry that eventually results
in hair growth. Already having a mouse model, as well as new technologies that
will allow scientists to look for gene activation and deactivation in hair
follicle growth cells, should allow scientists to swiftly uncover the other
genes that are part of this cascade.

   The question of how quickly and to what end is a matter of debate. Lead
author Angela Christiano rapsodizes in a statement explaining the paper that
this "new gene gives us endless possibilities that may allow us to effectively
treat hair loss and possibly baldness within five years."

   She goes on to say that in place of today's antibaldness hormonal creams, in
the future "it may be possible, for instance, to treat hair loss through gene
therapy administered directly to the hair follicles."

   Theoretically, the therapy would be in the form of a rich cream laden with
fully functioning hair growth genes. The genes would be directly absorbed into
the skin.

   However, Dr. Peacocke is more cautious about both the time frame of
application and the use of gene therapy, which to date has not been successfully
applied to any gene-related disease.

   She thinks that the true significance of the work is that it is a beginning.
"This is a really important basic advance in learning how hairs fall out and
stay out," she said.

   Nonetheless, to people with alopecia universalis, today's announcement is
clearly hope for something better in a condition to which they have been forced
to become resigned.

   "In a sense, I would rather they come up with a cure for cancer . . . but I
have always had the feeling I might get my hair to grow back," said Martha
Randall, a 41-year-old Toronto woman whose hair all fell out when she was 26.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              213 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 3, 1998 Saturday

SECTION: SCIENCE; Mind & Matter; Pg. D5

LENGTH: 807 words

HEADLINE: Medical experts foresee burst of breakthroughs

BYLINE: Carolyn Poirot

BODY:

    WE are living longer and better than ever. Deaths from heart attacks,
strokes and AIDS are down. The infant-mortality rate is at a record low 7.2
deaths per 1,000 live births and life expectancy is heading toward 80. Tissue
engineering, DNA cloning, gene therapy and robots that perform delicate surgical
procedures all broke through to scientific reality in 1997.

   But will there ever be a magic bullet to slay cancer, a sure-fire way to
stave off heart attacks, a time when all the world's children are immunized
against preventable diseases -- or even a cure for the common cold?

   Medical experts aren't making any promises, but they are willing to offer a
few predictions.

   An Alzheimer's arsenal: Aricept, the second drug approved for the treatment
of Alzheimer's disease, became widely available in 1997, and an additional 17
Alzheimer's drugs are now being tested in human clinical trials.

   Pharmaceutical companies are currently developing 178 medicines for the
debilitating diseases of aging.

   "The whole pharmaceutical picture is very positive," says Dr. Janice Knebl,
chief of geriatrics at the University of North Texas Health Science Center in
Fort Worth. "Alzheimer's was defined in the early 1900s, and it has taken almost
100 years to have some hope. I don't think we are looking at a cure in the near
future, but if we can manage to delay progression of the disease so that people
can maintain independence five or 10 years longer, that's very positive."

   A cancer vaccine: A vaccine against recurrent melanoma, the deadly form of
skin cancer, is ready for final clinical trials. The vaccine uses a patient's
sensitized immune cells to track down and destroy melanoma cells before they can
multiply. In early trials, two of the vaccines being tested dramatically reduce
a recurrence of melanoma. Researchers say if results hold, they could be
expanded to develop vaccines for people who have never had melanoma, as well as
for other forms of cancer.

   Also, expect to see gene therapy -- replacing defective genes and promoting
the growth of good ones -- joining the battle against cancer as well as other
illnesses caused by abnormal genes, and to see further elucidation of the role
of viruses in cancer.

   More women taking estrogen: The first in a new family of drugs known as
selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) have most of the good qualities
of estrogen and none of the bad, says Dr. Bernard Rubin, chief of rheumatology
at University of North Texas Health Science Center. Raloxifene should be
available for sale in the U.S. this month.

   SERMs increase bone density and decrease the risk of osteoporosis and heart
attacks without posing an increased risk of breast cancer or uterine bleeding,
although they do nothing for hot flashes.

   If you can take estrogen, you should, but only about one in five women who
could benefit from it is on estrogen, and fewer than 10 per cent of those who
start taking it are still on it after five years.

   Redefining "normal" cholesterol: Treating people whose cholesterol is "almost
normal" can significantly lower the risk of heart disease, a fact that will
likely change the definition of normal in the near future, says Dr. Michael
Clearfield, chief of internal medicine at the center.

   "Normal is probably still too high," Dr. Clearfield says. Preliminary results
of his study of lovastatin in people with no history of coronary-artery disease
suggest that cholesterol-lowering drugs could prevent heart attacks in about
eight million Americans whose low-density lipoprotein (LDL or "bad cholesterol")
is about 150 -- average by current standards.

   Regrowing injured tissue Tissue engineering -- growing human cells in the lab
-- will be used in the near future in conjunction with gene therapy to improve
healing in coronary arteries opened with angioplasty, says Dr. Robert Eberhart,
director of the biomedical engineering program at the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School at Dallas.

   Dr. Eberhart is working with "bioresorbable" plastic stents that supply the
traumatized blood-vessel walls with concentrated cells and special nutrients as
well as keep the vessels open while they heal. The stents degrade into carbon
dioxide and water and are reabsorbed by the body in a couple of months, when
they are no longer needed.

   Research is just beginning on using similar stents to repair spinal-cord
lesions. It is hoped that the stents will induce neurons to grow in the damaged
area of the spinal cord and re-establish signals to the brain so that people
with spinal-cord injuries can relearn to use their limbs.

   "It's such a hopeful time in history to provide real improvement for medical
care," Dr. Eberhart says. "I foresee real improvements for quality of life for
people afflicted with a wide variety of diseases."

   Carolyn Poirot covers health issues for the Fort Worth Star-Telegram.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              214 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1998 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 3, 1998 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 1970 words

HEADLINE: Medical miracle has potential dark side  Animal-organ transplants may
soon become commonplace, but experts warn bacteria may be carried over as well.
And once a microbial stowaway enters the human population, there's no knowing
what harm it could do.

BYLINE: BY PAUL TAYLOR Medical Reporter

BODY:

    HEART transplants are a modern medical miracle. But for every life saved,
someone must die to donate the vital organ. And there are far more potential
recipients than available parts.

   That grim reality is forcing researchers to consider more dependable organ
sources -- animals, and in particular, pigs.

   Previous attempts to transplant animal organs into people have met with
failure because the tissue is so alien to the human body it's rejected almost
immediately.

   But recent advances in genetic engineering put such transplants within grasp.
Human genes can now be inserted into animals to minimize organ rejection.

   In just a few years, experts say, transplants of "humanized" pig hearts and
other organs could become commonplace. No one would need to die while waiting
for a transplant.

   There is, however, a potential dark side to this unfolding medical
revolution: Unknown pathogens may be transplanted along with the organs. Some
virologists warn that once a microbial stowaway enters the human population,
there's no predicting what harm it might do.

   These worries, as well as other ethical concerns, have prompted governments
to consider ways of regulating the research. In Britain, a moratorium has been
slapped on further studies until the government reviews the matter. In the
United States, the Food and Drug Administration is drafting transplant
guidelines, which should be completed by next summer.

   And in Canada, the federal Health Department held a forum in Ottawa in
November to seek the advice of medical experts, ethicists and animal-rights
activists. Many experts who attended said there is an urgent need for some kind
of international co-operation to ensure public safety.

   "Viruses don't carry passports," explained Peter Ganz, acting chief of Health
Canada's blood and tissues division. Even if one country banned the practice,
its citizens might still travel abroad for the operation and then return home.

   "We can't really deal with a technology like this in isolation or in a vacuum
and we really must co-operate internationally."

   And yet there is tremendous pressure to quickly push forward with the
transplants: from the patients in need of organs; the scientists who want to be
first with a major breakthrough; the biotech companies that could reap big
profits from the sale of animal organs.

   "Managing those forces is a major challenge," said Daniel Salomon, a
transplant immunologist at the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, Calif.

   Xenotransplantation -- putting the organs of one species into another -- has
a long and varied history. Scientists were dabbling in the area well before the
first successful human-to- human transplants.

   In 1905, a French surgeon tried unsuccessfully to transplant a rabbit kidney
into a young girl, and medical history books are sprinkled with even earlier
failed operations.

   As a general rule, baboons were considered the best animals to use for the
transplants because of their similarity to humans.

   Organs from other animals would be swiftly rejected -- sometime even before
the transplant operation was completed.

   As soon as human blood starts coursing through the animal organ, the immune
system begins a process known as hyper-acute rejection. Antibodies latch onto
the surface molecules of the blood vessels within the transplanted organ. Then
other immune cells, known collectively as complement, zero in for the kill and
poke holes in the blood vessels. Blood clots form, starving the organ of oxygen.
The transplanted organ can literally turn black and die in the surgeon's hand.

   Baboons organs don't face hyper- acute rejection but they eventually fall
prey to other weapons of the human immune system.

   In 1984, one such experiment captured world attention. Surgeons at Loma Linda
University Medical Centre in California put a young baboon heart into a 14-day
old-girl known as Baby Fae, who was born with a fatal heart defect. The child
lived for only 20 days after the surgery.

   Other experiments in xenotransplantation also showed little prospect of
long-term success, until two years ago, when researchers figured out a way
around hyper-acute rejection by using the latest techniques of genetic
engineering.

   They inserted a few very specific human genes into the fertilized egg cells
of pigs. The blood vessels of the resulting piglets contained human molecules
that can turn off the initial immune attack. Indeed, it's as though the pig
organs have been disguised to look like human ones for the immune system.

   This remarkable feat was achieved at about the same time by researchers at
two biotechnology companies, Imutran P.L.C. of Cambridge, England, and Nextran
Inc. of Princeton, N.J.

   Since then, several firms have gotten in the business of breeding
"transgenic" pigs. Just as important, other scientific teams are working on new
and improved methods to overcome the problems of long-term organ rejection. It
seems there will soon be many different ways to make a go of
xenotransplantation.

   For instance, BioTransplant Inc. of Charlestown, Mass., hopes to minimize
organ rejection by actually giving people a pig's immune system. Before the
transplant, the patient would receive an injection of pig bone-marrow cells to
produce the animal's immune cells.

   It's hoped the patient would end up with a combined immune system -- part
pig, part human. So when the patient received the actual transplant, the immune
system would be less likely to consider it foreign and immediately reject it.

   Studies involving transplants between different animal species are already
showing some promise, said Elliot Lebowitz, BioTransplant's president.

   Scientists are eager to try out all their new techniques on human subjects.
But as these trials move a step closer to reality, the potential risks of such
procedures also seem more real.

   "There are a lot of unknowns," said Jonathan Allan, a virologist at the
Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research in San Antonio, Tex. He has been
one of the most persistent critics of xenotransplants, warning that
disease-causing pathogens could be hidden inside the transplanted organs.

   Although the biotech firms have been breeding their transgenic pigs in
isolated, sterile environments, that still won't rid the organs of all viruses,
he noted.

   Of particular concern are so-called retroviruses, which integrate their own
genetic material in the cells of the infected animal (or human). If the virus
infects the egg or sperm cells, the pathogen can pass undetected from one animal
generation to the next.

   Over successive generations, it may be reduced to little more than a viral
fragment and causes no harm to the animal. But that doesn't mean the virus would
remain so tame if it suddenly finds itself in a brand new host -- such as
someone who has just received an organ transplant.

   To add to the uncertainty, transplant patients would be on powerful immune-
suppressing drugs to prevent organ rejection. That could make the patients even
more vulnerable to a new virus lurking inside them.

   Dr. Allan believes it would be foolhardy to use primates as a sources of
transplant organs because "any viruses that a baboon carries are more likely to
be infectious in humans -- and potentially cause disease."

   Scientists are already well aware of several primate viruses that are deadly
in humans. The AIDS virus, for one, is believed to have jumped to humans from
African monkeys, he noted.

   But fear of disease is not the only reason to preclude the use of primates.
The public might not tolerate them being sacrificed for their organs. After all,
they do swing from the same family tree as humans.

   There are practical considerations as well: baboons are expensive to raise
and slow to bread in captivity.

   Pigs, by contrast, seem the ideal organ source -- from both a scientific and
public relations point of view. As Tim Lee, director of transplantation research
at Dalhousie University in Halifax, put it: "If you can accept that we are
raising pigs for pork chops and bacon, then you should be able to accept that we
are raising pigs for organ transplants into humans."

   As well, humans have been raising, butchering and eating pigs for thousands
of years and, with the exception of some flu strains, few other serious swine
viruses capable of infecting people have emerged in all that time.

   What's more, doctors are already using selected pig tissues on humans,
apparently without ill effects, noted Dr. Gary Levy, director of the multi-
organ transplant program at The Toronto Hospital. Pig skin has been used for
graph purposes on serious burns "and there has been no evidence of
transmissibility of any . . . organism," Dr. Levy said.

   Lorne Babiuk, director of the Veterinary Infectious Disease Organization in
Saskatoon, said: "In my personal opinion, the risks of pig transplantation are
quite low."

   But no one is saying it's risk free.

   Despite the long-time contact between people and pigs, "the rules of the game
change when you're putting animal tissues [directly] into a person -- and you
are immunosuppressing that person," said Amy Patterson, deputy director of the
division of cellular and gene therapy at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
in Bethesda, Md.

   Researchers at the Institute of Cancer Research in London, England, recently
announced they've discovered that at least two pig retroviruses can, indeed,
infect human cells in laboratory Petri dishes. What's unknown is whether these
infections would actually lead to some type of disease in a living human being.

   If there is one thing the experts can agree upon, it's that the real risks
won't be known until animal organs are actually transplanted into people on a
regular basis.

   Those in favour of xenotransplants believe these risks -- however big or
small -- can be safely managed by careful monitoring.

   "We will only proceed when all the appropriate safeguards are in place," said
David Grant, a transplant researcher and professor of surgery at the University
of Western Ontario in London, Ont.

   The U.S. FDA's draft guidelines for xenotransplantion spell out the need for
transplant recipients to undergo long-term study and evaluation, possibly for
the rest of their lives. And they will likely become part of an international
registry on xenotransplants.

   Dr. Patterson noted that an infectious agent could remain dormant for years.
If transplant recipients are stricken with any mystery disease, they might have
to be quarantined until the cause of the illness is determined.

   Even without any sign of ailment, they would have to live as though their
bodily tissues and fluids contain contagious agents. They would be need to
taught infection control measures and expected to follow them, according to the
FDA guidelines. That means, for example, a husband and wife would have to use
condoms for sex.

   "Needless to say, all these things are significant behavioural
modifications," Dr. Patterson said.

   "There is going to be a tremendous onus on the individual patient to co-
operate with ongoing treatment and ongoing assessment because there is an
element of risk," agreed Michael Gross, chairman of a group that's drafting
xenotransplant standards for Health Canada. "And the element of risk is not just
for the patient, it's also for society as a whole."

   Right now, for people who are waiting for organ transplants, such constraints
might not seem so onerous.

   Suzanne Cicchini, a 37-year-old single mother of two, has been on a waiting
list for a liver transplant for more than a year. Every time the phone rings at
her home in Sarnia, Ont., she can't help but hope that maybe this is the call
she's been waiting for.

   "It's a terrible feeling," she said. "It's like waiting for your life to
begin."

   There's little doubt in her mind what she would do if offered a pig organ.

   "I definitely would do it. I've got to make it for my kids because there's
nobody else to look after them."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              224 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 15, 1997 Monday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; MANAGING; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 1591 words

HEADLINE: MDS Capital puts cash and clout on the table  BIOTECH FUNDING / The
venture capital firm considers its health sciences experience its best asset.

BYLINE: BY IJEOMA ROSS The Globe and Mail

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

   DON McAdam can't contain his enthusiasm for MDS Capital Corp.

   The venture capital firm not only recruited him as president of TM BioScience
Corp. of Toronto, it gave his new DNA-product company $4-million in funding.

   "They've been invaluable," says Mr. McAdam, who joined TM almost a year ago
after taking another young company, CRS Robotics Corp., public in 1995.

   "People that haven't done this a few times don't understand what you need to
make a business successful. You need more than money."

   MDS Capital, an arm of health and life sciences giant MDS Inc. of Etobicoke,
Ont., has the money -- $600-million to invest through six funds. But the company
sees its health sciences experience as its greatest asset.

   "We look at venture capital as more than money," president Edward Rygiel
says. "It's nurturing, not just providing [companies] with capital."

   Entrepreneurs, he says, need backers who are experienced in their sector and
who bring credibility.

   With its major shareholder behind it, MDS Capital provides instant
credibility to companies it backs. It has the scientists and researchers to
evaluate projects, the contacts to sit on boards, and the clout to bring in
other backers.

   "Many venture capitalists are in it for the rush of the deal," says Jim
Leech, vice-chairman of Etobicoke-based Kasten Chase Applied Research Ltd. and
former chief executive officer of MDS Capital investee company Disys Corp. "MDS
is much more deliberate and focused. They don't and won't be rushed."

   Mr. Leech, who was looking for an entrepreneurial investment after serving as
president of Unicorp Energy Corp., says MDS Capital sticks to its health
sciences expertise. As it became clear Disys wasn't going to succeed in selling
radio-frequency monitoring systems to medical institutions, MDS Capital stayed
out of any decision making, Mr. Leech says.

   "I had high regard for them going in and I have higher regard going out."

   MDS Capital is interested in companies that have a distinct or proprietary
product, a potential to develop an export market and the possibility of
sustained profitability. Initial investments are usually between $1-million and
$3-million.

   "We don't subscribe to the theory you make a bunch of $500,000 investments
and [hope] a few will stick to the wall," says Richard Lockie, MDS Capital's
senior vice-president.

   Most of its investments pay back about eight times the original capital, and
the funds' annual return averages 30 per cent, Mr. Lockie says.

   Its first fund, MDS Health Ventures Inc., was launched in 1988, with
$23.5-million raised by MDS Capital and seven institutional investors. From
there, the number of funds has multiplied and the capital pool has deepened.

   "When we got the first fund going we were faced with the reality that no one
else was investing in health science and people wanted us to invest at every
stage," Mr. Rygiel says.

   To broaden the mix, the institutional funds are complemented by two funds
sold to retail investors -- the Health Care and Biotechnology Venture Fund and
the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund. Last week, MDS Capital created the
$135-million MDS Life Sciences Technology Fund, the largest institutional
seed-money fund in the sector.

   Although these are distinct funds, the 28-person management team at MDS
Capital uses them as a single source of capital that can fund new technology
from its development and patenting stage, through the creation of a firm, to an
initial public offering.

   MDS Capital is one of the biggest health and biotech investors in North
America, and it is also interested in expanding into Europe. The $13.5-million
invested in vaccine producer Biostar Inc. of Saskatoon was one of the top three
seed-financing deals in North America in 1993.

   "We're not right for everybody, but if it's in the health and life sciences,
we should be considered," Mr. Rygiel says.

   Mr. McAdam of TM Bioscience is more assertive: "If you're going into
biotechnology in Canada, you should be dealing with MDS."

   He explains that other investors will likely piggyback on MDS Capital's due
diligence. In fact, Mr. Rygiel says for every dollar his funds invest, another
$5 is attracted to a company.

   MDS Capital sees the funds as a way to introduce both institutional and
retail investors to a risky and somewhat mysterious field with the hope that
some will go on to invest in the sector on their own.

   Despite its Midas-touch reputation among other investors, not all of MDS
Capital's investments have been golden.

   ISG Technologies Inc., a Mississauga-based medical software company, had four
straight quarters of losses, including a $1.2-million write down from legal
costs in a proxy battle for control of the board.

   In that case, MDS Capital found itself locked in a battle with another
venture capital fund, Quorum Growth Inc. When Quorum couldn't get the backing of
enough shareholders, it sold its ISG shares, amounting to a 7-per-cent stake.

   With the fight behind it, ISG signed a multiyear, multimillion-dollar deal
with Sterling Diagnostic Imaging Inc. and MDS Capital expects to take away a
300- to 500-per-cent profit on its 1989 investment.

   Disys was another investment that did not unfold as its backers had hoped.
Mr. Leech sold its core smoke-alarm business to fund the development of
radio-frequency technology for hospital tags that emit a signal if anyone other
than the parents try to take a baby from its nursery.

   The technology was extended for use with Alzheimer patients, but ultimately
the market was too small to sustain the company and it merged with Kasten Chase
18 months ago.

   Despite the outcome, MDS Capital was always ready with constructive
suggestions, Mr. Leech says. "When I called upon them for help, they were always
there and had good ideas."

   For its support, MDS Capital still expects to recoup six to seven times its
original investment in Disys.

   "I think it's been shown that we're a patient investor and we'll stick with
companies through tough times," Mr. Lockie says.

   Fund snapshot

   MDS Capital Corp. of Etobicoke, Ont.
Ownership: 38-per-cent owned by MDS Inc., with the rest held by institutional
investors and management.
Institutional funds: MDS Health Ventures Inc., Neuroscience Partners Ltd.,
British Columbia Life Sciences Fund and MDS Life Sciences Technology Fund.
Retail funds: Health Care and Biotechnology Venture Fund, and Canadian Medical
Discoveries Fund.
Capital: About $600-million
Deals: Receives more than 450 proposals a year and invests about $100-million in
around 35 companies.

   Where MDS Capital puts its cash

   Investments from Nov.f 1, 1996 to Oct. 31, 1997
   INVESTEE COMPANY

CITY               Business

   Allelix Biopharmaceuticals Inc.

Toronto            Protein therapeutics and neuropharmaceuticals

   ApoptoGen Inc.

Ottawa             Genetic research focusing on apoptosis

   Apolio Genetics Inc.

Cambridge, Mass    Biotechnology

   BeaconEye Inc.

Mississauga        Laser vision correction facilities and services

   Biostar Inc.

Saskatoon          Protein immunizing agents for humans and animals

   Centaur Pharmaceuticals Inc.
   Sunnyvale, Calif...Pharmaceuticals
   Drug Royalty Corp.

Toronto            Pharmaceutical royalty company

   Exogen Neurosciences Inc.

Montreal           Products for neuronal protection and cancer

   GenSci Regeneration Sciences Inc.

Vancouver          Bone and tissue regeneration products and bio-implants

   GeminX Biotechnologies Inc.

Montreal           New medications for cancer and viral infections

   HRG Health Resources Group Inc.

Calgary            Health care facility providing short-term procedures

   Life Imaging Systems Inc.

London, Ont        3-D ultrasound imaging systems

   Microbix Biosystems Inc.

Toronto            Genetic biotechnology products

   Micrologix Biotech Inc.

Vancouver          Anti-infective compounds

   MitoKor Inc.

San Diego          Diagnostic products for human brain diseases

   Morphometrix Technologies Inc.

Toronto            Automated system for analysis of pap smear tests

   Nanogen Inc.

San Diego          Clinical diagnostics

   Neuromotion Inc.

Edmonton           Therapeutic and functional devices for disables

   Nova Molecular Inc.

Montreal           Biopharmaceutical and netriceutical research

   PageTech Inc.

Montreal           Novel antimicrobial therapeutics

   Phytogen Life Sciences Inc.

Vancouver          Producer of paclitaxel (anti cancer compound)

   Prolinx Inc.

Seattle            Medical diagnostic and therapeutic products

   Signal Pharmaceuticals Inc.

San Diego          Gene regulating molecule drugs and disease causing proteins

   StressGen/Genzyme LLC

Victoria, B.C      Gene therapy using stress genes to treat cancer

   Synapse Technology Inc.

Vancouver          Alzheimer's disease diagnostics

   Synaptic Pharmaceuticals Corp.

Paramus, N.J       Biopharmaceuticals - modulating central nerve system

   Systems Xcellence Inc.

Milton, Ont        Software-transaction processing for health care industries

   TerraGen Diversity Inc.

Vancouver          Identifying the biochemistry of unculturable microbes

   TM BioScience Corp.

Toronto            DNA Diagnostics systems

   UltraVision Inc.

Calgary            Contact lenses and related products

   University Medical Discoveries Inc.

London, Ont        Biootech and medical commercialization fund

   UV Systems Technology Inc.

Burnaby, B.C       Ultraviolet waste water treatment

   Xillix Technologies Corp.

Richmond, B.C      Medical equipment (detection of early stage cancer)

   Includes investment activity by British Columbia Life Sciences Fund, Canadian
Medical Discoveries Fund, Health Care and Biotechnology Venture Fund, MDS Health
Ventures Inc. and Neuroscience Partners LP
   Source: Macdonald & Associates Ltd., Toronto

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              225 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          December 10, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; The Middle Kingdom How and why things happen Body Works: Health
and Fitness; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: New thinking in the battle against cancer

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

BODY:

    WHAT if there were a way to fend off cancer even if, genetically, you were
highly susceptible to it? And if the disease does take hold, what if there were
a way to have cancerous cells revert to normal?

   Mission Impossible scenarios are closer than you think.

   "The notion that cancer is reversible was heresy five years ago," said Dr.
Harvey Schipper of the University of Manitoba, but it's rapidly becoming an
article of faith. Rather than killing rogue cells, and many healthy ones in the
process, he suggests that new tactics currently being researched may allow
cancer to be prevented or at least controlled by the body's own defences.

   Consider this new evidence:

    Dr. Mina Bissell and colleagues at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
in California recently discovered that when cancer cells are removed from the
body and grown in laboratory dishes, they no longer behave any differently from
normal cells.

   The research found that life at the cellular level has its own form of mob
behaviour. Rogue cells send out messages telling other cells to grow
uncontrollably. However, if these messages are not received, the cancerous
growth is averted. Researchers now hope to find just the right antibodies that,
when injected into tumours, will block the surface receptors that cells rely on
to communicate.

   In one test, they injected laboratory mice with breast-cancer cells that had
been treated with receptor-blocking antibodies. The mice were genetically prone
to developing breast tumours but only half of them did so. A second group was
given untreated cancer cells, and all but one animal developed tumours.

    Other researchers have focused on what is known as the extracellular matrix.
This is the space around cancer cells that once was believed to be just packing
material. However, it turns out that the matrix contains proteins and enzymes
that are the key to deciding which of a cell's genes are active and whether a
cell multiplies, migrates or dies.

   According to Dr. Bissell, this means that a cell's surroundings could be more
important than the genes it contains. "That is 180 degrees different from
current dogma, which says that 'once a tumour cell, always a tumour cell.' "

   With this knowledge, researchers can develop drugs to help the cell defend
itself against bad influences, which will be necessary because researchers are
coming to the conclusion that virtually everyone has at least one gap somewhere
in his or her genetic lineup.

   For instance, recent studies of colon tissue by Gordon Kirby of the
University of Guelph and Dr. Lesley Alpert of the Jewish General Hospital in
Montreal calculated that fully 50 per cent of Canada's Caucasian population lack
a gene known as GST. Rather than taxing the body, glutathione S transferase
enzymes actually defend it. They guard the intestines against polycyclic
aromatics, the cancer-promoting chemicals in smoke and charred meat.

   That is a striking finding, because the colon ranks third in cancer's global
list of favoured target areas, and because diets high in meats and
charcoal-broiled foods are known to increase the risk.

   What's more, some of the same missing genes are being implicated in lung
cancer. A Japanese study of smokers showed a much greater risk in people who
lack the GST gene in addition to one called cytochrome P450. Researchers at
Shinshu University's school of medicine say that the two should work together,
with P450 starting the breakdown of hydrocarbons in tobacco smoke and GST lining
the walls of the lungs and finishing the detoxification.

   Dr. Kirby suspects that even if people have a full contingent of protective
genes, an inflammation can suppress their production of defensive enzymes.
Colitis, a chronic bowel disorder, frequently accompanies colorectal cancer, and
he wants to test whether it causes enzyme levels to drop.

   Research results now suggest there is a hierarchy of genetic cancer risk, and
it depends on how many defenders are missing. Someone who is without such
footsoldier genes as P450s and GSTs and those that repair DNA may be at many
times the risk of someone with a gene that's functioning poorly. Dr. Kirby
predicts the future probably holds genetic screening to determine all this.

   At the moment, abnormal genes can be identified but only by removing a tissue
sample in a biopsy -- and the dawn of genetic therapy to repair the damage is
still a long way off.

   What to do in the meantime? All this research suggests it's wise to bolster
your natural defences and avoid anything that can turn cells cancerous.
"Prevention certainly seems to be the critical factor," Dr. Kirby said. "Try to
minimize the exposure by reducing the amount of broiled meat you eat, and enrich
your diet with foods known to inhibit the carcinogens."

   In other words, easy on the burgers and heavy on such proven defenders as
dark-green vegetables. Broccoli and cabbage aren't exactly a culinary delight,
but they don't require a prescription.
Body Works appears on alternate Wednesdays. You may respond by telephone
1-800-461-3298 (toll-free), 1-416-585-5168 (local) and 1-416-585-5085 (fax).
Letters should be sent c/o The Globe and Mail, 444 Front St. W., Toronto, Ont.,
M5V 2S9, and our E-mail address is
 MidKing@GlobeAndMail.ca .

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              228 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 8, 1997 Monday

SECTION: COLUMN; THE LEARNING BEAT; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: Universities strive for brand recognition  Western, Concordia
acknowledge need for marketing as education costs rise

BYLINE: Jennifer Lewington

BODY:

      ALL universities want to put their best face forward. A few now do it in
places that are new for them -- subways, bus shelters and billboards.

   The University of Western Ontario is the most recent entrant into brand-name
marketing, a field first sampled several years ago by Montreal's Concordia
University.

   In Western's case, the London institution is mounting a brief advertising
campaign that will run until January, timed for when students make their
decisions about a university for next fall. The $150,000 advertising campaign,
targeted solely at the Toronto market, is running in subways, bus shelters and
youth-oriented media.

   Anxious to shed its image as a party school, Western is running a poster
campaign that features top-achieving scholarship students who send a serious
message that Western attracts its share of the best and the brightest.

   The ads have a dash of humour too. In another ad, fourth-year biochemistry
student Chris Heyn says that his "master plan" is to "develop gene therapies
that will cure cystic fibrosis. Or create cold fusion in a coffee cup." The ad
also explains he is at Western, because it is close -- but not too close -- to
Toronto.

   Greg Moran, academic vice-president at Western, said institutions like his
can't afford to be shut out of Toronto. "We are a relatively large university in
a relatively small population area compared to Toronto," he said. "We have to
reach out and make sure students know we are here and interested in them."

   As well, said Mr. Moran, universities now have to compete for top students.
"We've been somewhat complacent," he said. "Students are more selective and
critical about where they are going to spend their time as undergraduates. We
need to be thinking about new ways to make sure they are giving us a chance."

   In contrast to Western's short, targeted advertising, Concordia University
has run year-round ad campaigns in Quebec and Ontario (ads in Toronto subways
and Ottawa bus shelters) for seven years, featuring well-known graduates.
Recently, other Quebec universities have entered the field, including the
University of Quebec at Montreal with a set of billboard ads.

   For Concordia, overshadowed by McGill University, the other English-speaking
university in a shrinking anglophone market in Montreal, the challenge is to be
heard -- and recognized -- for its academic success.

   When Concordia held its first meeting to plan a marketing strategy in the
late 1980s, recalls arts and science vice-dean Dennis Murphy, one student
crystallized the issue when he complained he was tired of replying "No,
Concordia," to the question "Oh, you go to McGill?"

   The Concordia campaign, first launched in 1990, was designed to strengthen
the university's position in the competitive market for Quebec high-school
students. A second phase of ads in 1993 focused on graduate studies and a more
recent series of poster ads featured students and professors. Now the
university, which spends about $220,000 a year on its campaign, is reviewing its
strategy for a new round of advertising.

   Mr. Murphy concedes that it is difficult to measure the impact of the ads.
However, five years after Concordia professor Valery Fabrikant murdered several
colleagues in 1992, dealing a devastating blow to the university's reputation,
Mr. Murphy said Concordia has completed a successful capital campaign,
maintained enrolment and restored pride within the campus community.

   As a professor of media studies, Mr. Murphy said universities are latecomers
to advertising and marketing but they have to do it now. "We have to go on
another level and advertise. We are dealing with information and this is how
people in this society get to know what's going on.

   "I don't buy that this is corporate consumerism, with the student instead of
a can of soup," he added, quoting one of his students that "brand recognition is
important for academia too." Western's Mr. Moran sees the foray into advertising
as one facet of a larger trend looming for all universities. "What lies ahead is
a more intensive effort to provide students with more relevant information about
each program and university," he said. "This [advertising] is only the front end
of that."

   The Learning Beat may be reached at  jlewington@GlobeAndMail.ca  by E-mail.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              229 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 1, 1997 Monday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; WORLD AIDS DAY; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 1313 words

HEADLINE: Clinicial trials pave way for new treatments

BODY:

   THERE ARE few other areas in medicine where the patient population has been
more intently concerned with what is being offered at the stage of clinical
trials for a new drug or treatment approach.

   Because HIV/AIDS is such a recently identified problem -- less than two
decades -- each effort in the field has effectively taken place at a new
frontier. Until very recently, only a single medication (AZT) was being used to
combat the human immunodeficiency virus, so HIV patients were consumed by hopes
for the development of other drugs.

   A great deal can be learned about specific clinical trials in the HIV/AIDS
field by contacting the Community AIDS Treatment Information Exchange in Toronto
toll-free at 1-800-263-1638 or by perusing CATIE's excellent web site at
www.catie.ca/catie.html. Also, the Canadian HIV Trials Network (CTN) offers a
toll-free information line at 1-800-661-4664.

   But how exactly do clinical trials work and how can interested HIV/AIDS
patients seek to be involved in one? The answers are given through publications
of the Canadian AIDS Society in Ottawa and the CTN, including the jointly
produced manual Clinical Trials: What You Need to Know (contact the CAS at
1-800-884-1058 or visit its Internet site at  http://www.cdnaids.ca  to learn
more).

   Clinical trials, explain CAS and the Trials Network, are carefully designed
experiments that allow scientists to test newly developed drugs on a small group
of people. They provide a structured way to answer questions about how to
control HIV, and how to prevent and cure many infections associated with AIDS.
They are also the most effective way for scientists to assess whether the
benefits of using a drug outweigh any risks and whether the drug will improve
life for people living with HIV.

   Over the last decade, clinical research into HIV has led to treatments for
many opportunistic infections and treatments against HIV itself, which have
helped people live longer and with a better quality of life than was possible
even a couple of years ago.

   HOW THE TRIALS WORK:

   ¤ They begin with in vitro studies, which are lab experiments to find out if
a new drug works on human cells in test tubes. For example, the new drug may be
mixed with some healthy cells and some HIV-infected cells to see if it will kill
the infected cells without damaging healthy ones. In vitro studies are repeated
many times to ensure the results are dependable and not just due to chance. If
the drug shows promise, researchers then go to the animal studies stage;

   ¤ The new drug is now given to animals to see how it works in a living
creature. Some animal studies are toxicology studies designed to find out if a
drug is dangerous to the body or to some of its organs or systems. Sometimes
drugs can cause illnesses or reactions that don't show up unless they are used
for a long time. Other drugs may be fine for the people taking them but cause
birth defects in the next generations. Because animals such as mice and rats
have short life spans and reproduce quickly, they are used to study both these
problems;

   ¤ If after the pre-clinical studies the drug seems to be useful and safe in
animals, the drug company asks the federal government through the Health
Protection Branch for permission to test the drug in people. Once approved, a
clinical trial goes through four phases:

   1. Researchers give the drug to a small number of people to see what dose is
safe.

   2. A larger number of participants are then given the appropriate dose over a
longer period of time to see if the drug is working and whether it has any
long-term side effects.

   3. Researchers then give the drug to a much larger group of people over
several months or years to see whether the drug remains useful or has problems
that show up after extended treatment.

   4. Researchers continue to study the drug even after it has been approved in
what are called post-marketing trials.

   WHAT TREATMENTS ARE EXPLORED?

   Most treatments tested on people living with HIV fall into any of six
categories:

   ¤ Drugs that fight the virus, called antiretrovirals (HIV is a retrovirus);

   ¤ Treatments that prevent or treat HIV-related illnesses;

   ¤ Drugs that treat cancers;

   ¤ Treatments that reinforce the immune system, known as immunostimulators or
immunomodulators;

   ¤ Vaccines that could prevent or cure HIV infection;

   ¤ Gene therapies.

   PARTICIPATING IN CLINICAL TRIALS

   People living with HIV who are interested in participating in a clinical
trial can talk to their doctors or local AIDS organization about treatments they
are interested in and trials going on in their area. They can be referred
through their family doctor to the trial site investigator or they can call the
research institution directly. A telephone interview with the trials nurse or
other member of the trials staff will provide information for them to decide
whether to participate. Also:

   ¤ The Canadian HIV Trials Network is a federally funded organization whose
mandate is to develop treatments, vaccines and a cure for HIV disease and AIDS.
The CTN publishes an annual directory of approved trials as well as updates
every two or three months and operates an information line at 1-800-661-4664;

   ¤ As previously mentioned, the Community AIDS Treatment Information Exchange
can be contacted at 1-800-263-1638;

   ¤ To qualify for a trial, participants must be assessed against strict
requirements called inclusion and exclusion criteria. Inclusion criteria make
sure that a fairly similar group of people take part in a trial and allow
researchers to make reliable comparisons about the way the drug works. Exclusion
criteria protect people who might be harmed by the study drug. For instance,
pregnant women are almost never allowed to enter drug trials in case the drug
harms the unborn child.

   WEIGHING BENEFITS AND RISKS

   Benefits:

   ¤ Helping other people living with HIV/AIDS by being part of a process that
develops new treatments;

   ¤ Being one of the first to benefit if an experimental therapy turns out to
be effective;

   ¤ Receiving the regular health monitoring that is part of the trial.

   Risks:

   ¤ Having no guarantee of a personal benefit from the trial;

   ¤ Having side effects that could be dangerous or make health worse;

   ¤ Having to stop taking their medications that are working well;

   ¤ Not being eligible for other trials;

   ¤ Not knowing who is receiving the experimental drug and who the placebo.

   DURING THE TRIAL

   ¤ Participants can leave a trial at any time, for any reason;

   ¤ The time when people enter and leave trials is often staggered. For
example, a person who enters a two-year trial when it first begins will complete
the trial while others who have started later will be continuing. A two-year
trial means that participants are involved for that duration; the trial itself
may go on several years;

   ¤ When the participants' time in the trial ends, they are given an exit
interview in which they may be told what drug they were taking if they didn't
already know, although sometimes this information is held back longer;

   ¤ While provincial health insurance and pharmaceutical manufacturers usually
cover the cost of drugs and lab tests, costs to the participants include time
off work, transportation costs and daycare, although some trials do help cover
such costs.

   ALTERNATIVES TO CLINICAL TRIALS

   ¤ Compassionate access or open label trials. Here, the drug manufacturer may
make a limited amount of the drug available through one of these less
restrictive type of trials. People must still meet certain requirements such as
being intolerant to the usual treatments to receive the drug;

   ¤ Emergency Drug Release Program may allow a manufacturer to release a drug
that is not yet marketable, including drugs in clinical trials, on an emergency
basis. To receive a drug that is not yet licenced but is listed in the program,
a person with HIV must have his or her doctor contact the Health Canada Bureau
of Human Prescription Drugs.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              235 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 22, 1997 Saturday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 1755 words

HEADLINE: WE'RE ALL RELATED BY BLOOD  How to build a blood system for next
century

BODY:

    BY THE end of the two days, there was an amazing amount of agreement among
the 186 participants gathered for the first-ever symposium, Building a Blood
System for the 21st century. It was the first multidisciplinary conference of
its kind in Canada and perhaps the first in the world.

    The Canadian Hemophilia Society recognized the need for such a conference
just five months ago and put together the funding and a multidisciplinary
steering committee. They identified two co-chairs to represent the consumer
communities: physicians and patients. Dr. Jean-François Hardy is an anesthetist
at the Montreal Heart Institute and associate professor at the University of
Montreal and Durhane Wong-Rieger is president of the Canadian Hemophilia Society
and associate professor of psychology at the University of Windsor.

    The symposium was designed to be different from previous scientific
conferences on new blood technologies and safety standards. The goal was to have
participants arrive at recommendations for building a new blood system that were
both visionary and achievable. The timing was ideal. Ministers of Health had
already announced the intention to create a new blood agency to replace the
Canadian Red Cross Society and the Canadian Blood Agency. The final report of
the Krever Blood Inquiry was due in the fall, and it was expected that Justice
Krever would build upon his interim report in urging further reforms.

     The premise for the symposium was simple. Bring together committed
individuals representing all stakeholders in the blood system, including
health-care professionals, consumers, blood-system providers, industry, and
governments. Challenge them with state-of-the-art information in relevant areas
outside of their regular sphere of knowledge. Guide them through a
problem-solving process and create an atmosphere that would stimulate
out-of-the-box thinking. Their challenge was to generate recommendations that
were mindful of, but not limited to, the current realities of the health-care
and blood systems.

     The first day was devoted to presentations from national and international
experts. One of the first speakers, Dr. Harvey Klein of the United States
National Institute of Health, dazzled participants with research in new
technologies in transfusion medicine that bordered, as he acknowledged, on the
verge of science fiction. According to Dr. Klein, Science has not yet achieved
the ideal blood component substitute, that is, one that is compatible to all
blood types, free of disease transmission, stable during prolonged storage, and
inexpensive; however, there are many replacements for blood components that are
currently available or in the latter stages of clinical trials. Some of these
include substitute oxygen carriers that can be used instead of red blood cells
in some transfusions. Another group are the growth factors that stimulate the
body's production of specific blood components, including red cells, platelets,
and stem cells. Not only can these be given to patients to minimize or avoid the
need for transfusions, they can also be given to donors to produce a higher
yield of the desired blood component.

    There are also surgical strategies which can minimize the loss of blood, and
these were presented by Dr. James Robblee, director of the Division of Cardiac
Anesthesia at the University of Ottawa Heart Institute. Many of these techniques
have been available for a long time; some were pioneered in surgery with
Jehovah's Witnesses patients. However, they are still relatively unknown and not
practiced by many surgeons and anesthetists in Canada.

     Indeed, the lack of physician knowledge appears to be a universal factor in
the overuse of blood. Dr. Sue Knowles of the National Blood Services in London,
England presented research that demonstrated the decline in blood utilization
after physician education. In Britain, the Blood Centre has taken the lead role
in implementing programs to monitor blood use, develop standards and clinical
guidelines, and provide education to hospitals and clinicians.

     Bernie Doyle, the transition director for the newly announced Canadian
Blood Services, presented the proposed national structure and timeline for
implementation. Yet to be developed are the regional and provincial structures
and, in this respect, participants were intrigued by the community-based model
of blood centres described by Jim MacPherson, executive director of Americas
Blood Centers (ABC). Less well known outside of the USA than the American Red
Cross, ABC is a network of 70 independent, voluntary, community-based blood
centres that collects about 46 per cent of the whole blood in the United States.
Another 45 per cent is collected by the American Red Cross, which is organized
much like the Canadian Red Cross, a national organization often criticized for
its bureaucratic nature and slowness to respond. The ABCs, the largest of which
span several states and collect more blood than all of Canada, are nevertheless
rooted in their communities, with community boards and close relationships
between the local blood centres and their hospitals.

     Jim Dauer, dean emeritus and professor of law at the University of Denver,
presented compelling arguments on the inability of a liability system for
deterring risks in the blood system. Indeed, using examples from other areas, he
demonstrated that the adversary system that makes judgments about individual
blame rather than organizational responsibility, results in individuals being
less willing to make useful information readily available. Individuals are
motivated to limit the liability (fault and damages) rather than increase
efforts to limit the risks to safety. He argued for the establishment of a
no-fault compensation scheme that would support an environment for quality
improvement.

    The responsibility of physicians, hospitals, and health-care systems to
provide recipients with a standard of care was discussed from several
perspectives: ethical, legal, and political. While it is expected that Justice
Krever will have a great deal to say on this issue in his final report, the
message conveyed by Bonnie Tough, a litigation lawyer, was that physicians had a
duty of care not only to provide informed consent for transfusions but to inform
patients of the alternatives in sufficient time to allow them to make an
informed choice.

    The final set of speakers on the first day presented a variety of regulatory
initiatives to address issues of monitoring and surveillance in the United
States, France, Germany and Canada. In the United States, said Mark Weinstein of
the Food and Drug Administration, limits are being imposed on the size of plasma
pools, that is, the number of donations that can be combined for fractionation
into blood products thus reducing the risks of contamination by a single
donation. Dr. Jean-François Baron described the hemovigilance network in France,
which tracks all adverse reactions to blood products. Hannelore Willkommen of
the Paul-Ehrich-Institute in Germany provided insights into the European mutual
recognition approach to drug approval, which allows blood products approved in a
member country to be placed on the market throughout the European Union.
Finally, Keith Bailey of Canada's Bureau of Biologics and Radiopharmaceuticals
discussed the new standards-based regulatory framework as a more flexible,
inclusive, consensus-building approach to dealing with future areas of blood,
transplantation, and gene therapy.

     Three brief presentations on current Canadian initiatives were provided at
the beginning of the second day to set the stage for generating recommendations.
Dr. Graham Sher described a pilot program at the Toronto Hospital designed to
rationalize blood utilization and their alternatives. In British Columbia, the
Ministry of Health has taken the lead to co-ordinate the blood program among all
stakeholders. Initiatives such as the Hepatitis C Notification Program, a pilot
project on informed consent, and the creation of a central transfusion registry
were described by Dr. David Pi. Finally, Durhane Wong-Rieger of the Canadian
Hemophilia Society discussed the new role for consumers in the blood system,
including consumer representation on the Board of Directors of the Canadian
Blood Services and membership on various advisory councils.

   Recommendations

    Participants spent the morning of the second day in nine small,
problem-solving sessions, aimed at developing recommendations which would
address the future needs for Canada in terms of adequate supply, safety, and
standards for blood, blood products, and alternatives. In the afternoon, the top
six recommendations from each of the workshops were presented to all
participants and a voting process was used to select the top overall
recommendations. There was strong agreement. The following represent the
consensus on key steps required to ensure that Canada will achieve a blood
system which is able to meet the needs of the future.

    ¤ There must be national standards and guidelines for utilization of blood,
blood products, and alternatives that are communicated to health-care
professionals, consumers, donors, and the public. Professional education must be
provided through all phases of training and as part of continuing education
through the College of Physicians and Surgeons, the CBS, hospitals, medical
associations and consumer organizations.

   ¤ Safety is a top priority and must be specified within a framework that
considers science, ethics, cost, and needs of the whole health-care system.

    ¤ Alternatives to blood must be provided within the same budget as blood.
Modifications to the budgeting process must be undertaken to provide for
itemized costing of blood, blood products, and alternatives, and the tracking of
their utilization and outcomes.

    ¤ A no-fault insurance program for transfusion-related adverse outcomes must
be established within a non-punitive environment in such a way as to not
interfere with reporting and risk reduction.

    ¤ There must be comprehensive information management systems in place that
link hospitals, blood centres and Health Canada. These must be able to track
utilization (and provide feedback), track blood from vein to vein, track known
and emerging threats to the blood system, and provide information throughout the
system.

    ¤ There must be security of the blood supply, including adequacy of a
voluntary, unpaid supply of whole blood (red cells) and plasma self-sufficiency,
through a voluntary or paid donor system.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              236 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 22, 1997 Saturday

SECTION: ADVERTISING SPECIAL REPORT; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 2115 words

HEADLINE: WE'RE ALL RELATED BY BLOOD  The Canadian Hemophilia Society: Profiles
of caring KAREN CREIGHTON, Mississauga

BODY:

    As a mother of five children, Karen Creighton has her work cut out for her
at the best of times.

    And the fact that three of the boys are hemophiliacs adds to the workload.

    But the busy Mississauga parent is remarkably upbeat. That's because, as
hemophiliacs born in the 1990s, the prospect of her boys having long and health
lives is virtually assured, a remarkable turnaround from the generation before
them.

    "By virtue of a few years we have a dramatically different future awaiting
us,"  Creighton says. "This really puts your situation into perspective."

    Between 1980 and 1990, more than half the hemophiliacs in Canada contracted
the AIDS virus and/or hepatitis C. But better testing and heat-treatment to kill
viruses greatly improved blood safety. And, in recent years, recombinant factor
concentrates (made by cloning clotting factors) have made products even safer.

    When  Creighton went looking for answers -- and like most cases of
hemophilia, there was no known family history of the hereditary blood disorder
-- she turned first to Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children.

    Like many families, she needed not so much medical advice, but support. At
the time, the Canadian Hemophilia Society was in turmoil, dealing with the
fallout from the tainted blood tragedy.

    "When we first approached them, there was quite a void in dealing with new
families. At the first meeting I attended, it was totally overwhelming because I
met all these infected people that I was reading about in the news," she says.

    Later,  Creighton attended a lecture by Laureen Kelly, the author of Raising
A Kid With Hemophilia. There, she met another mother with a couple of
hemophiliac boys.

    "We just talked about the kids, what sports they played and how the dealt
with school and that made an incredible difference," she says.

    Meanwhile, the family moved their treatment to Credit Valley Hospital, where
the care was superb. They were assigned home-care nurses to treat the boys and
do important preventive work like vein care.

     Creighton got involved in the local chapter of the CHS, the hemophilia
services committee at the national level and helped establish the Families In
Touch group, precisely to ensure the kind of help she was once looking for.

    "The young families are now dealing with things like education and
lifestyle, not AIDS and hepatitis. In a lot of ways, the parents of deceased
hemophiliacs are glad to see this happening. It puts hopeful faces to the future
of a community that was devastated," she says.

   DURHANE WONG-RIEGER, Windsor

    As the outspoken president of the Canadian Hemophilia Society, Durhane
Wong-Rieger has become a recognizable public figure and one of the leading
voices of consumers determined to make Canada's blood system safer.

    What few people know is how the University of Windsor professor with no
blood disorder herself came to head a hemophilia group at a time when the
community was being devastated by the effects of tainted blood.

    An expert in conflict resolution and a veteran of numerous charitable
groups,  Wong-Rieger was hired as a consultant in 1990 to work with the CHS
board, which was being torn apart by the stress of dealing with the crisis. She
also took over the group's fund-raising.

    After a couple of years, she was asked to join the CHS board, "to do all the
things I was doing and more for free." Wong-Rieger soon became president of the
group because, in large part because she was not aligned with any faction as
different members in the group pushed for their issue -- AIDS, hepatitis C or
hemophilia -- to take precedence.

    "My mandate was really to bring the different factions together, but a lot
of people needed to be convinced about my interest in the community," she says.

    After almost eight years of dedicated volunteer work,  Wong-Rieger's
commitment is not in doubt.

    What she rarely talks about, however, is that there is an intensely personal
aspect to her involvement. Her daughter, Hilary, has a blood disorder called
thalassemia minor and her son Gabriel has a congenital heart defect that will
likely require surgery.

    "The reason we have really invested our time and resources in improving the
blood system is that we realize that it affects not only our members, but
everyone," Wong-Rieger says.

    In recent years, most hemophiliacs have begun using blood products that are
not made from human blood, but with recombinant DNA technology. Canada became
the first country to make these products available to all hemophiliacs.

    Still, one of the principal goals of the CHS during the reform process has
been to instill the notion that consumer representation is mandatory, an
approach that cold ultimately have a profound influence on the health-care
system.

    Aside from a presence in the blood system,  Wong-Rieger is looking to a
future where gene therapy becomes a reality and when the issue of women with
bleeding disorders is taken seriously.

    "We're at a crossroads. We're moving away from a strong focus on HIV and
hepatitis C. The CHS is seting itself firmly on the path of the issues of the
future," she says.

   KEN LITTLE, Calgary

    Like many parents, Ken and Lisa Little discovered their son was a
hemophiliac when he was a few days old and underwent a circumcision procedure.

    Hemophilia is inherited when the is a defective gene on one of the female X
chromosones. In Lisa Little's case she was a carrier but did not know it, a
common occurrence.

    "Like many new parents dealing with a new issue, we were ferociously eager
for information," Ken Little says.

    As a history buff, he knew more about hemophilia than the average person,
but was still looking for more. (The British and Russian royal families were
devastated by hemophilia over the years, and some even believe that the czar's
illness contributed to the Russian Revolution.)

     Little turned to the Canadian Hemophilia Society, at both the local,
provincial and national level. "The biggest thing was just talking to other
parents, hearing about their practical experiences," he says.

    About one in 5,000 males in Canada has the bleeding disorder, though it
affects them to varying degrees.

    Alexander Little is a severe type A hemophiliac, meaning his body produces
virtually none of the clotting factor known as Factor VIII. (Type B hemophiliacs
do not produce Factor IX.)

    Because the boy was born in 1987, he has never received blood products that
were not heat-treated and today uses artificial blood products, which are
virtually ensured of being disease-free.

    Alexander infuses products two to three times a week as a preventive
measure. That allows him to lead a normal life, including playing soccer,
swimming and downhill skiing.

    "There's no reason anyone would ever know he was a hemophiliac," Little
says. "The only practical difference in his life is that his dad pokes him with
a needle a few times a week."

    He says the CHS has "been very helpful in getting us and other parents to
this point" and the couple has giving back by becoming very involved.

    Ken, a lawyer, has been a member of the society's board of directors since
1989, where today he is the secretary. Lisa, a psychologist, helps organizes
conferences and counsels other parents.

    "What we've become over the years is advocates for a better health-care
system in general. I think many people can learn from our experience as
consumers," Ken says.

   RENETTA SMITH, Renforth, N.B.

    It took 26 years before Renetta Smith's blood disorder was diagnosed. That
despite the fact that she suffered for years with severe nosebleeds, gum
bleeding and menstrual periods so heavy that she would pass out from blood loss.

    "There's an assumption among doctors that if you're a woman that heavy
bleeding is just something that happens. In men, they look for a blood disorder.
In women, they just shrug their shoulders," she says.

     Smith, an Air Canada ticket agent, learned she had von Willebrand disease
only after her daughter Samantha, at age two, was found to have inherited the
same condition.

    "I'm determined that she's not going to put up with the same stuff I had to
live with," she says in explaining why she has become an activist.

    Von Willebrand's disease, which affects about 1 in every 100 people (women
and men alike) is actually far more common than hemophilia (which affects almost
exclusively boys).

    People with von Willebrand''s produce an insufficient amount of a blood
protein by the same name, which interferes with the ability of platelets to
stick together and prevents proper blood clotting.

    Many people can go through years with mild symptoms, unaware they have a
treatable blood disorder, but suffering nose bleeds, easy bruising and heavy
bleeding during surgery or tooth extraction. For women, the first menses is
often marked by excessive bleeding.

    Unlike hemophiliacs, most von Willebrand's sufferers can treat the condition
without injections of blood products. They use instead a number of
pharmacological products.

    These include thrombin, a clotting agent that comes in powder form and which
is useful in treating nosebleeds and cuts; Tranexamic acid, which stabilizes
blood clotting and can be ingested before surgery or before menstruation; for
children, the drug can also be administered orally, usually in popsicle form;
some patients use desmopressin (DDAVP), a drug that releases the von Willebrand
factor or Factor VIII in the blood. Finally, when bleeding is particularly bad
or other methods are unsuccessful, people can be infused with von Willebrand
factor concentrate.

     "We were lucky to stumble upon the local hemophilia clinic by accident,"
says  Smith, who now heads a CHS outreach committee for women.

    "Now I want to make sure people know that women do suffer from blood
disorders. It's just terrible to think that a lot of women are going untreated
because of ignorance," she says.

   JAMES KREPPNER, Toronto

    At the still-young age of 35, James Kreppner has lived through generations
of treatment for hemophiliacs. He has also felt the exhilaration of new products
and the devastation of learning that those miracle products were contaminated
with deadly viruses.

    "I've really seen it all, so maybe that's why I'm so involved," he says.

    As a boy,  Kreppner's hemophilia was treated with plasma, a painful,
cumbersome procedure. He then moved on to cryoprecipitate, a crude method of
extracting factor concentrates from blood, and in the early 1980s, to the
miracle product Factor VIII.

    By 1985, however, the law school student knew that he was infected with the
AIDS virus, and he would later learn he had also contracted hepatitis C.

    He was not alone. Between 1980 and 1985, more than 1,200 Canadian
hemophiliacs contracted the AIDS virus. Between 1980 and 1990, hundreds more
contracted the hepatitis C virus. More than half of the community of 2,300 was
directly affected by a potentially-fatal disease.

    "I really didn't get involved until I learned I was infected," Kreppner
says. "At the time, there was a committee trying to make a case for provincial
compensation and, as a law student, they thought I could be helpful. From there,
my involvement just grew and grew."

    As he became ill with the immune system problems that are a byproduct of
infection with HIV -- Kreppner has had three bouts of pneumonia, Crohn's
disease, Reiter syndrome and a host of other ailments -- being an activist
became an anchor and a way of staying alive.

    "I couldn't work because my health was so up-and-down, so the hemophilia
society became my outlet," he says.

     Kreppner was chairperson of the AIDS committee of Hemophilia Ontario and a
board member of the national group. He says there were some "long, torturous
battles" because of the divisions on the board between those with HIV and/or HCV
and those without.

    "There were some hard times but I think now the mix of infected and new
families works well. In the end, we have common issues by virtue of the fact
that we're all hemophiliacs," he says.

    "The Krever report will be important for all of us because it will provide
some closure and allowing us with getting on with the business of cleaning up
the blood system once and for all,"  Kreppner says.

   KEY CHALLENGES for 1998

    ¤ Compensation for those infected with hepatitis C through the blood supply.

    ¤ Identification, education, and support for women with bleeding disorders.

    ¤ Identification, education, and support for other inherited bleeding
disorders, in particular, von Willebrand Disease.

    ¤ Ensuring that the hemophilia comprehensive care clinics remain a vital
link in preventive care.

    ¤ Research into a cure, with hope centered around gene therapy.  Better,
safer treatments.  More family support and counselling.  And continued advocacy
for a safer blood system.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              239 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 10, 1997 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1417 words

HEADLINE: Blood vessels grown in patients  Gene therapy avoids leg loss

BYLINE: BY GINA KOLATA New York Times Service; NYT REUT

BODY:

   With a report from Reuters News Agency.
   Gene therapy has enabled patients facing leg amputations because of blocked
vessels to grow their own bypasses, U.S. scientists reported yesterday. And
another kind of gene therapy has kept heart-bypass vessels from clogging.

    As well, new gene therapy holds the promise of patients growing their own
heart bypasses instead of undergoing surgery, the head of the American Heart
Association said at the association's scientific meeting in Orlando, Fla.

    The leg-artery gene therapy was reported by Dr. Jeffrey Isner of St.
Elizabeth's Hospital and the Tufts University School of Medicine near Boston.
Although only 10 patients were used in the study, some experts commented that
the study is a rare demonstration of a clinical benefit from gene therapy and
may be pivotal.

    Dr. Isner and his colleagues injected genes into legs, eliciting the growth
of a web of hairlike blood vessels that rerouted blood around the blockages. The
vessels could be seen with X-ray and magnetic-resonance imaging.

    As a result, he reported, three patients who had been scheduled for
amputations avoided them because their blood flow improved so markedly. For six
other patients, severe and unrelenting pain lessened; two of them, who had been
scheduled to lose legs, lost only one toe each to amputation. In some cases,
gangrene cleared up. Only one of the 10 patients failed to respond.

    A paper describing the results has been accepted for publication in the
journal Circulation, Dr. Isner said.

    In addition to using a small number of patients, the study lacked a group
that received a placebo for purposes of comparison. Medical experts urged that
the work be repeated in a large study with such controls.

    Until then, said Dr. R. Sanford Williams, chief of cardiology at the
University of Texas Southwestern School of Medicine in Dallas, "we have to be
extremely cautious and avoid giving false hope."

    Nonetheless, some experts said, the results are compelling. The patients,
after all, were in the final stages of a devastating disease. There was
essentially no chance that their conditions would improve on their own. And
never before, some experts said, has gene therapy actually resulted in the
clinical improvement of a disease.

    "This could be a pivotal study," said Dr. James Wilson, director of the
Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

    Dr. Stuart Orkin, a professor of pediatric medicine at the Harvard Medical
School, said: "It is one of the first, if not the first, times that gene therapy
has resulted in a clinical improvement."

    Dr. Orkin is co-chairman of a committee convened by Dr. Harold Varmus,
director of the U.S. National Institutes of Health, to advise him on gene
therapy research.

    And despite his trepidation about giving false hope, Dr. Williams said, he
found the results thrilling. In fact, he added, when some of the patients'
histories are described, "you have to say, 'Wow.' "

    Each year 30,000 to 40,000 Americans develop such severe blockages in their
leg arteries that they have excruciating pain or ulcers on their legs that do
not heal. Those patients, unlike people with blocked coronary arteries, cannot
be treated with drugs, because none are effective for their condition.

    Instead, they face eventual amputations, as the lack of blood flow leads to
infections and gangrene. But amputations are very risky.

    Dr. Isner said that 20 per cent of those patients died in the hospital and
40 per cent died within a year of the surgery. His patients, Dr. Isner said, had
the most to gain and the least to lose from gene therapy.

    The study exploited the remarkable properties of a gene known as the
vascular endothelial growth factor, or vegF, that is thought to be the body's
signal to grow new blood vessels.

    The idea was to inject vegF genes directly into muscle cells near the
blockage and allow the muscles to take up the gene and use it to make vegF
protein. About 5 per cent of the billions of genes that Dr. Isner injected
actually went into muscle cells and were used by them.

    Upon taking up the genes, the muscle cells secreted the vegF protein, which
made its way to nearby blood vessels.

    Normally, vegF would not avidly attach itself to cells that line the
blood-vessel walls. But when a vessel is blocked, the cells just beyond the
blockage, which are starved for blood, become very sticky for vegF. And so the
vegF proteins presumably attached themselves to the exact sections of the blood
vessels where they were needed.

    With vegF stuck to their surfaces, the cells started to sprout a network of
threadlike blood vessels. When that happens, for reasons that are still
mysterious to researchers, the new vessels wind their way around the blockage
and form an alternative pathway for blood.

    Dr. Isner said he got lucky with the first patient who had the genes
injected into her leg muscle. In September, 1996, Nancy Perez, 33, a teacher
from New York City, went to see him. Ms. Perez said in an interview that her
problems had begun several years earlier, when she noticed a cramp in her left
calf. The pain, sporadic at first, became worse until, she said, "I couldn't
walk more than 10 feet."

    It turned out Ms. Perez had severe obstructions in the blood vessels of her
leg. As is often the case with this condition, no one knew why the blockages
occurred. And there was little that medicine could do for her. She had seven
bypass operations to try to increase blood flow to her leg, to no avail.

    By the time she went to see Dr. Isner, she had gangrene in a toe and a large
sore on the front of the calf that would not heal, and she was in a wheelchair
and in constant pain.

    "I couldn't sleep and I couldn't walk," Ms. Perez said.

    Despite powerful pain-killing drugs, Ms. Perez said, the pain was
unrelenting. Worst of all, her doctor had said he needed to amputate the leg.

    When Dr. Isner considered Ms. Perez for gene therapy, he found that her
blood vessels were so deteriorated that he could not place a catheter in them to
insert the genes. He decided to inject the genes into the muscle of her leg
instead.

    About a month after Ms. Perez had been injected, she noticed that she needed
less pain medication. When Dr. Isner examined her with X-rays and
magnetic-resonance imaging, he found that she was growing new vessels and that
more blood was passing through her leg.

    A year later, Ms. Perez is back at work and is no longer taking pain
medications. The sore on the leg has healed, and the gangrene has disappeared.
She walks more than a kilometre a day.

    Could that have occurred by chance? Dr. Valentin Fuster, president-elect of
the American Heart Association and director of the cardiovascular institute at
the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan, said it was extremely unlikely that
the patients would have improved on their own.

    Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, chief of the cardiology division at the University of
Michigan School of Medicine, said: "The chance of spontaneously having a
recovery like this is next to none."

    Dr. Fuster is looking toward the future. The "spectacular aspect of the
study," he said, is that it provides great hope that vegF injections may also
allow people with blocked coronary arteries to grow bypasses.

    That is exactly what Dr. Isner wants to do next. He is applying to the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration to treat patients with heart disease with vegF. He
would inject the genes directly into the heart.

     A second study presented yesterday found gene therapy worked to prevent new
blockages in patients who have received heart bypass surgery.

    Dr. Michael Mann of Harvard Medical School and Dr. Victor Dzau of Brigham
and Women's Hospital at Harvard treated the grafts with genetic material meant
to prevent the buildup of plaque that clogs arteries.

    They found it worked in four people.

    "It only takes 10 minutes to treat the graft, so there is no major delay in
the surgery," Dr. Mann said.

    Bypass surgery involves taking a vein, usually a leg vein, from a person
with heart disease and using it to literally bypass the blocked part of an
artery leading to the heart.

    But these grafts often become clogged, too. Dr. Mann's team bathed the
grafts in a solution containing DNA that prevents the growth of new cells lining
the vein, which in turn helps prevent fat from sticking to them.

    Dr. Mann predicted that his technique would be tested in heart patients
within a year, once clinical trials on 2,000 patients have been approved by the
Food and Drug Administration.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              244 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 28, 1997 Tuesday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS SPECIAL REPORT; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: REPORT ON HEALTH AND PHARMACEUTICALS  How to find worthy investments
Few sectors are so research-dependent -- and so potentially profitable. Some
picks from a top pro.

BYLINE: BY ANDREW ALLENTUCK ; SPCL

BODY:

   In this sector, returns are based on the odds of a patented formulation
becoming the drug of choice for treating widespread diseases and how strongly
they can maintain their market positions as new drugs and devices pass clinical
trials. Diseases can become resistant to previously effective drugs and formerly
profitable devices -- think of silicone breast implants -- sending their makers
into bankruptcy.

   But Jim Young approaches the task of finding promising investments in the
sector with a combination of science and management insight. And he's been
rewarded: the $346-million Royal Life Science and Technology Fund that he runs
earned 41.6 per cent for the year ended Sept. 30, beating every other fund
targeting the same field.

   Mr. Young views the sector as having several distinctive strata of risk and
return. At the top end of the industry are pharmaceutical companies -- large-
cap firms with worldwide distribution of proven drugs, annual returns on equity
of more than 30 per cent, large cash flows and deep scientific resources in many
fields.

   "These firms' market prices are driven by earnings per share and by the
number of drugs they have in their pipelines," Mr. Young says. "If the pipeline
is deep enough, the firms will have a chance to be more profitable than other
firms with fewer major drugs on the market and in development."

   Investors in major pharmaceutical firms face a variety of risks including
patent expiry and pressure by governments and health-care management firms to
force down prices. The research required to buy into a drug firm is substantial,
Mr. Young says.

   "You want a firm with several established drugs, each with worldwide sales of
at least $1-billion (U.S.) per year and an equal number of blockbuster drugs in
the pipelines close to being marketed. Then you have a long-term hold."

   One major drug firm Mr. Young likes is New York-based Pfizer Inc. (PFE -
NYSE, P/E 43.3, recently trading at $71.50). The firm has many drugs already on
the market and many more in development. Its leading drugs are protected by
durable patents around the world.

   Mr. Young also likes Britain's Smithkline Beecham Inc. (SBH-NYSE, P/E 28,
recently at $8), a firm that curently produces three leading drugs -- Paxil, an
anti-depressant; Augmentin, an antibiotic; and Famvir, an antiviral compound. It
also has other drugs in development or recently approved, including Coreg for
congestive heart failure, Teveten, which treats hypertension, and Memric,
awaiting approval to help those with Alzheimer's Disease.

   Among firms that make medical devices -- products ranging from needles and
insulin injection systems to catheters, surgical instruments and implantable
pacemakers -- price-earnings ratios tend to be in the 30s. That's not as high as
pharmaceuticals but firms tend to have a steadier progression of products, Mr.
Young says.

   Product prices are being forced down along with drug prices, he says, but the
aging population is increasing the market and potential sales. "You don't get
many home runs in this field, but it's steady and profitable," he says.

   Mr. Young likes firms with many products. A top pick is Becton Dickinson and
Co. of Franklin Lakes, N.J. (BDX-NYSE, P/E 20.7, recently $47), a maker of
infusion systems and diagnostic systems. Diagnostics is a growing area and this
firm is a leader in such fields as immunological testing.

   He also likes Memphis, Tenn.-based Sofamor Danek Group Inc. (SDG-NYSE, P/E
10.7, recently $67), a firm that makes equipment related to spinal surgery.
Spinal surgery is a field using a lot of major medical devices and Sofamor
dominates it, He sees rapid growth ahead as the ageing population has more back
problems.

   Biotech, potentially the most profitable area of the market, is also the
riskiest, Mr. Young says.

   "The trouble with a lot of these companies is that they have no earnings, no
P/E at all," he says. "The odds of payback rise with the stage of development.
If the firm is just doing discovery, odds are about one in five you'll get your
money back. If they are in phase I (human safety), phase II (efficacy) or phase
III (large-scale testing on people), then the odds for profit are a lot better."

   Mr. Young judges firms by the quality of their scientists, the stature of the
major drug firms that back them and by how far along their products are in
development.

   Among the companies he favours are BioChem Pharma Inc. of Laval,
Que.(BCH-TOR, P/E 112.5, recently $40.50 (Canadian), a firm with a promising
AIDS drug, and Centocor Inc. of Malvern, Pa. (CNTO-NASDAQ, P/E 308.6, recently
$49.38 (U.S.), which makes a drug that inhibits blood clotting in stroke and
heart patients and an auto-immune product for Krohn's disease and rheumatoid
arthritis.

   Mr. Young also likes Cambridge, Mass. firm Vertex Pharmaceutical Inc.(VRTX -
NASDAQ, no earnings, recently at $34), a firm that makes a promising protease
inhibitor for use in treating AIDS that is now in phase III trials. The firm has
other drugs in development, including a compound that renews the reponsiveness
of cancer cells to chemotherapy, and further out in development, products to
treat hepatitis C and autoimmune diseases.

   Another pick: Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge, Mass. (MLNN -
NASDAQ, no earnings, recently $20), a gene-therapy company. Gene therapy offers
new approaches to treating illnesses, Mr. Young says, and Millennium is a
leading firm in the field.

   If you're going to consider investing in this market, a key factor to
consider is its potential. One measure: how many people suffer from the disease
that the drug company is targeting. The market winners will be the firms that
focus on such widespread diseases as Alzheimer's, cancer, heart problems and the
many other illnesses of aging, Mr. Young says.

   Few fields of investing are so research-dependent -- and few so potentially
profitable. "If a firm comes up with a major drug, it can sell a billion dollars
worth at high margins," Mr. Young says. That does wonders for the bottom line.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              245 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 23, 1997 Thursday

SECTION: COLUMN; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 1090 words

HEADLINE: COMPASS The bright idea with a checkers past  With provincial help, a
computer game has graduated into a tool for medical research

BYLINE: BY Brian Laghi

DATELINE: in Edmonton

BODY:

   HAD it been left to Professor Jonathan Schaeffer, his world-renowned computer
program for the game of checkers -- the one he used to defeat the world's best
player a few years back -- would probably be available free. After all, Prof.
Schaeffer says, academics can be notorious for not exploiting the market with
their best developments.

    But thanks to a helping hand from a government foundation, his computer
games soon may be known for more than simply winning international competitions.

    Starting this week, he, some fellow academics and business partners will
offer for sale ground-breaking software that will make life much easier for
thousands of scientists doing DNA research around the world. It is a project,
they say, that never would have got off the ground without the help of the
government-established Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research, which
is keeping researchers at home and has turned Alberta from a minor participant
to a national force in health research.

    "This company wouldn't be here without this foundation," Prof. Schaeffer
said from his office on the University of Alberta campus. "We had a good idea,
we had the people, we didn't have the money."

    The foundation, which has contributed $571,000 to Prof. Schaeffer's company,
BioTools, is one legacy of the massive oil revenues generated during the
administration of former premier Peter Lougheed. Established in 1980 with an
endowment of $300-million from the Alberta Heritage Trust Fund, it was formed to
spark research and help diversify the economy away from the volatile and finite
oil industry. It is also an idea many industries would like to see extended to
other technologies now that the provincial government again has money to spend.

    "It is the one legacy of the Lougheed government that has served Alberta
well," said Howard Sapers, the opposition Liberal Party's critic for science and
technology. He notes that the program has attracted a number of world-class
scientists, who have come to Alberta because of the opportunity to work in their
specific fields.

    Now worth more than $800-million, the fund will grant $37-million this year.
Of that amount, about $2-million will be spent on commercial ventures such as
Prof. Schaeffer's project. The rest will go to attract and support top-flight
research at Alberta's universities, hospitals and within the community. The
foundation has helped to recruit 142 senior researchers from Alberta and around
the world, and 251 others are in training.

    "It's the main reason why I decided to remain here," said David Wishart, a
Yale-trained biochemist and colleague of Prof. Schaeffer who has been courted by
many U.S. universities. "We were able to finagle and wheel and deal and come up
with a package . . . It has provided a number of things the U.S. schools were
offering."

    Prof. Wishart explained that two years ago the AHFMR came through with a
grant of $75,000, which he and Prof. Schaeffer used to help create the new
software program. Another $496,000 has since gone into establishing the company,
and Prof. Wishart also benefited from a grant of $222,000 to set up a lab and
hire students to help in his research.

    In the case of BioTools, Prof. Schaeffer's world-beating checkers program
has combined with Prof. Wishart's expertise in biochemistry to attract
foundation support.

    In the mid-1980s, Prof. Schaeffer also developed a top-flight chess program
that won a number of international competitions. However, when IBM's Deep Blue
began, he shifted to checkers in the belief that his chess program would be left
in the dust. Of course, this spring Deep Blue defeated reigning international
champion Garry Kasparov in an exhibition match.

    Three years earlier, and with somewhat less fanfare, Prof. Schaeffer's
program, Chinook, won the world checkers championship. It became so dominant
that this year he retired the program.

    All along, however, he has argued that his programs were more than just
games. Two years ago he hooked up with Prof. Wishart and other colleagues to
launch a commercial venture.

    The new software he is developing will make it easier to store massive
amounts of genetic information, a boon to scientific researchers. His work flows
out of a problem he faced with the huge number of permutations involved in
playing a game of checkers.

    In the past, computer programs for checkers had tended to operate slowly
because of the massive amounts of information they had to store. Essentially,
Prof. Schaeffer was able to compress the information and speed up the play.

    He has applied the same principle to DNA storage, and the company's new
software will allow scientists easier access to the colossal amounts of genetic
data currently being held in central data banks in the United States and
Switzerland.

    The DNA work is not the only ground-breaking research being moved along by
the foundation. Its successes have included developing a special mask to prevent
life-threatening sleep apnea, brain-imaging technology, antiviral agents, dental
lasers and heart monitors. International acclaim has been earned in areas such
as nerve regeneration, electrical therapy for paralysis victims and heart-attack
therapy.

    Another high-profile project is a drug to treat hepatitis B. Developed by U
of A infectious-disease specialist Lorne Tyrell, it will give hope to the
100,000 Canadians and millions more around the world who carry the virus, which
creates a risk for cirrhosis and liver cancer. The work has culminated in a
collaboration with the pharmaceutical company Glaxo Canada, and the drug is
being approved for licencing.

    As a result, according to officials such as foundation president Matt
Spence, the province has become nationally renowned in several fields, such as
diabetes research and biomedical engineering.

    Perhaps more important, the government has managed to branch out into fields
that are not related to oil and gas. This is why many would like to see it
capitalize on its current energy windfall by creating similar programs for other
fields.

    "If Alberta wants to continue its current level of prosperity into the 21st
century," said Bob Fessenden, president of the Alberta Science and Research
Authority, "we cannot dwell solely on the resource sector."
Brian Laghi is Edmonton correspondent of The Globe and Mail.

   Checkers mate

   Jonathan Schaeffer's Chinook program has retired from official competition
but is still looking for victims. Think you have the right stuff? Lock horns on
the World Wide Web (and good luck):
   www.cs.ualberta.ca/~chinook.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              246 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 22, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. A22

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: FACTS & ARGUMENTS SOCIAL STUDIES  A daily miscellany of information by
Michael Kesterton Laser worries

BODY:

    Some tattoo parlours offer laser tattoo removal for customers who later
change their minds, but multi-coloured skin art may be impossible to remove,
says Dr. Harvey Lui of Vancouver. He told the recent World Congress of
Dermatology in Sydney, Australia, that in fact some light-coloured tattoos with
yellow and white pigments may actually become darker when hit with laser light.

    In Britain, a hand-held laser pointer that can throw a red dot of blinding
light on a target 60 metres away is becoming a nuisance. Andrew Diprose, a
nightclub regular, told The London Observer: "I've seen deejays infuriated
because the beams are on their faces all night long. It drives them mad." At a
recent Oasis concert, performer Liam Gallagher threatened to walk off stage
because he was the target of laser rays. Maggie Richards of London said: "Guys
go round pubs with these lasers pointing at your chest. They think it's a laugh.
You feel like you're being molested."
Other source: The Medical Post, The London Observer.

   Butterflies

     About $1-billion (U.S.) is spent annually worldwide to purchase
butterflies, according to butterfly farmer Rick Mikula of Pennsylvania. North
American butterfly growers are dwarfed by about two dozen large suppliers in
Malaysia, Taiwan, Costa Rica and other foreign countries.
Source: The Associated Press.

   Gene therapy

     In an article on cosmetic gene therapy, Rick Weiss of the Washington Post
writes: "As a medical researcher, Scott McIvor [of the University of Minnesota]
never suspected that his efforts to develop new cures would lead him to the edge
of a brewing bioethical storm. Then, a few months ago, he got an E-mail message
from a doctor who wanted McIvor to help him change a patient's skin colour."

   High-tech babe

     On Aug. 31, the 1940s motion-picture star Hedy Lamarr was honoured for her
role in helping to make communications satellites, cellular phones and fax
machines possible. In 1942, "the most beautiful girl in the world" and her
inventing partner, a musician, patented a communications system that involved
split-second changes in radio frequency, to foil jamming and eavesdropping. They
applied a variation of the concept to a torpedo-guidance system, for which they
were granted a patent. The technology (they suggested a clockwork mechanism
controlled by paper tape)  was considered too cumbersome to be implemented at
the time. However, with the invention of the transistor, the concept became
workable. In 1962, three years after their idea entered the public domain, U.S.
ships blockading Cuba were using the concept in their communications systems.
Ms. Lamarr never received so much as an official thank-you. Los Angeles
phone-store owner Anthony Loder accepted the 1997 Bulbie Gnass Spirit of
Achievement Award on behalf of his mother, for her work on frequency hopping.
Ms. Lamarr, 85 and living in seclusion in Florida, said: "It's about time."
Source: The Internet.

   High-tech dating

     California businessman Jerry Noble has developed a Web site where women can
log their plans before going on a date, reports the Chicago Tribune. The aim:
Authorities will know where to look if they turn up missing. Mr. Noble, who has
three daughters, offers his service for $12 (U.S.) a year. Information given to
Smart Date is encrypted and is released only if a woman fails to return and only
if law-enforcement officials have a missing-person report or a criminal case
number.

   High-tech football

     "Some football stars look to God for athletic inspiration. Green Bay
Packers quarterback Brett Favre puts his faith in fibre optics," says USA Today.
"With his team battling the Minnesota Vikings late last month, the laser-armed
quarterback scanned a series of photo-faxes on the sideline. The pictures, taken
moments earlier, showed a hole in the Vikings' defensive secondary. Favre
quickly processed the data and zapped a pass to his receiver on the cutting edge
of the end zone."

   Injected alcohol

     In their desire to get drunk instantly, people in Britain as young as 14
are injecting hard liquor and even lager and cider directly into the
bloodstream, reports The Sunday Times of London. Medical experts say the
practice can introduce air bubbles into the body, blocking blood flow to the
brain and causing a stroke. It is also easy to miscalculate and administer a
heavy or lethal dose. "Frank, 29, a [financial] trader from London, injected
12-year-old Glenfiddich malt whisky after taking cocaine and drinking heavily to
celebrate a large bonus. He collapsed and awoke to find the needle still
sticking out of his arm."

   Both sides now

     An academic from Ghana has surprised a world population conference in
Beijing by presenting research on family planning based partly on interviews
with the dead. Using soothsayers, Philip Adongo quizzed village ancestors about
the ideal size of a family. He explained: "If I only heard from the living, I
wouldn't get a very good balance."
Source: Reuters.

   Every bit helps

     Networks of wireless transceivers that can collect and relay small amounts
of "low-value data" from gadgets such as gas meters and vending machines are
being developed by several U.S. companies, reports The Boston Globe. Even small
bursts of mundane information can eventually prove useful. For instance, "it
costs just as much to put 20 Snickers bars in a [vending] machine as it does to
put 40 Snickers bars in," says Lawrence Levine of Woburn Vending. "If my man
doesn't need to be there every day, that's a bonus. If we could improve
efficiency 10 or 15 per cent, that would be a boon, not just to me but to the
industry."

   Thought du jour

     "Fifty per cent or more of marriages go bust because most of us no longer
have extended families. When you marry someone now, all you get is one person. I
say that when couples fight, it isn't about sex or power. What they're really
saying is, 'You're not enough people!' Sigmund Freud said he didn't know what
women wanted. I know what women want. They want a whole lot of people to talk
to." -- Kurt Vonnegut in Timequake.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              251 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 25, 1997 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; MIDDLE KINGDOM HOW AND WHY THINGS HAPPEN; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 1061 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH IN DEVELOPMENT  The race to put genes in their place

BODY:

    IF someone were to tell you with great excitement that a secretive Vancouver
firm is at the forefront of a revolution in which MACS and HACS are threatening
to outdo YACS, you could be forgiven for muttering something about scientific
QWAKS.

      The problem is that spelling things out -- Mammalian Artificial
Chromosomes and Human Artificial Chromosomes are displacing Yeast Artificial
Chromosomes -- doesn't make the picture much clearer.  It's all very technical,
and lay people have a hard time appreciating the fact that in genetics, as with
many areas of science, a triumph over a technical difficulty can be incredibly
significant.

     Before plunging into the cutting-edge work of Vancouver's Chromos Molecular
Systems, let's explain why genetic researchers want artificial chromosomes in
the first place.  It's because, despite all evidence to the contrary, genetic
engineering really doesn't work.

     Okay, that's overstating the case. It works, but only in fits and starts.
As Robert Church, former associate dean of medicine at the University of
Calgary, puts it, success "is simply a random event."

    The essential difficulty is the fact that the mechanisms used to transfer
genetic material are crude beyond measure. The process is often as basic as
filling a tiny pipette with the material of choice and injecting it into an
embryo. With plants, some people actually shoot the stuff into a potential host
using a tiny gun.

    So, getting the genes to the right spot in the right chromosome and hooking
everything up in the right manner and then turning it on is still largely an act
of God. And worse, if things don't work out, you really don't know which part of
the process failed. At present the basic strategy for success is to keep
hammering away until the gene fits itself in and turns itself on.

     Which brings us back to artificial chromosomes. In nature, chromosomes are
self-contained, fully functional units that are replicated every time a cell
reproduces itself. Humans ordinarily have 46 of them, but instances of people
with anywhere from 45 to 49 have been recorded in the medical literature.

     Given this latitude, it seems possible that an ailing body might have room
for an extra chromosome. What if scientists could manufacture one and graft to
it only beneficial genes that they'd otherwise be pumping and then hoping for
the best? Perhaps you could circumvent the hit-and-miss delivery altogether.

    The artificial chromosome is not a brand-new concept. The yeast variety
(YAC) has been around since 1980, and proved useful as a medium in which
scientists could insert newly discovered genes to verify their identities.
Unfortunately, YACs are not stable when inserted into the cells of humans and
other living creatures, so they're not of much use as delivery vehicles for
genetic engineering.

     Therefore, there was great excitement this spring when Huntington Willard
and his colleagues at Case Western Reserve University published a paper in the
journal Nature Genetics describing their creation of the HAC.

      They took bits of natural and manufactured DNA and injected them into
cells growing in laboratory dishes. The cells assembled the DNA into an
artificial chromosome that was one-fifth to one-tenth the size of a normal human
one.

    The U.S. researchers allowed the cells to divide 240 times, and each time a
fully functional artificial chromosome appeared. They said their next step was
to put such a chromosome into an animal to see how it reacted. What they had in
mind was to provide a supply vehicle to be used in human gene therapy -- an
arena in which immense promise has turned into immense jaundice. "At present,"
said Dr. Willard, "there is not a single instance where gene transfer has had a
positive therapeutic effect on people."

     This news from Cleveland immediately prompted Chromos, a privately held
company, to declare that it is much further along in this field, even though it
has yet to publish its work.

     Its model is a mammal, rather than specifically human, chromosome (MAC
versus HAC), Chromos president Henry Geraedts explained in a telephone
interview. Using a technology developed by Hungarian scientist Gyula Hadlaczky,
he said, the group has put artificial chromosomes into both mice and birds --
and shown that they function.

    If that's so, Chromos has overcome what Dr. Willard views as perhaps the
major stumbling block to capitalizing on the artificial chromosome.

    The problem is that at this point the company's claims are not easy to
verify.  "We know we are underpublished," said Mr. Geraedts, but added that
Chromos has a slew of scientific papers in the pipeline, already holds two
patents and is applying for 12 more.

     The company's factory in Vancouver, he said, can turn out millions of
artificial chromosomes a day, and investors have begun to twig to the glittering
possibilities. Chromos says it has raised about $12-million in venture capital
from various sources and has a host of prominent Canadian scientists on its
advisory board.

    As well, the company recently announced that it has joined forces with
Pharming Health Care Products of the Netherlands. Which seems to make sense,
given that "pharming" is a word newly coined to describe the genetic engineering
of plants or animals so that they will exude useful substances. For example, the
Dutch group is trying to produce the enzyme in rabbit's milk that is lacking in
people who suffer from Pompe's disease, a protein disorder that leads to heart
failure.

    What's the upshot from all? A big "if."

      If Chromos has done what it claims, and if it can do it over and over
again easily, genetically engineered products may start to streak into your
lives. But in situations like this, it's always wise to to remember Yeats's
counsel relating to research in development:

     It is certain there is no fine thing

    Since Adam's fall but needs much labouring.
Research in Development appears every Thursday and may be reached via  the
Middle Kingdom by telephone 1-800-461-3298 (toll-free), 1-416-585-5168 (local)
and 1-416-585-5085 (fax), or writing to us c/o The Globe and Mail, 444 Front St.
W., Toronto, Ont., M5V 2S9 or to  MidKing@GlobeAndMail.ca  on the Internet.

   CLARIFICATION

   Note: We failed to point out yesterday that science reporter Stephen Strauss
wrote the Research in Development piece.
   (Friday, September 26, 1997)
   (Page A10)

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              255 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 25, 1997 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: Protein delays onset of ALS  Therapy offers hope, not a cure

BYLINE: Associated Press; AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scientists have delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's disease by giving
genetically engineered mice a protein that prevents cell death, suggesting a new
approach to fighting the killer disease.

       The gene therapy did not cure the disease known officially as amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis, said the study in today's edition of the journal Science.

       But the protein delayed the inherited form of ALS from striking mice who
carried the disease, suggesting this type of therapy might one day prove
"beneficial to ALS patients in whom treatment can be started before the onset of
symptoms," wrote co-author Dr. Serge Przedborski of Columbia University.

       Most Lou Gehrig's disease is not inherited but arises sporadically.
Still, Dr. Przedborski wrote, cell death can be similar in both inherited and
noninherited ALS, suggesting cell-protective therapies be investigated for both
types.

       ALS experts cautioned that the work needs confirmation.

       "This is a new avenue to pursue," said National Institutes of Health
neuroscientist Al Kerza-Kwiatecki. Still, "They were slowing down the onset [of
ALS]. But when you get it, the disease is progressing. There is no stopping it."

       "But it's very, very interesting that the disease is postponed. This is
encouraging," said Dr. Teepu Siddique of Northwestern University, who created
the ALS-carrying mouse breed that Columbia used.

       The human proto-oncogene called Bcl-2 produces a protein that regulates
cell death. Dr. Przedborski crossbred ALS mice with mice who produced high
levels of human Bcl-2, to see if it would postpone this new generation's
illness.

       Bcl-2 delayed the onset of Lou Gehrig's by 19 per cent. The Bcl-2 mice
also had more and healthier motor neurons, the cells ALS kills, than mice
without the protein, suggesting the Bcl-2 mice may have had a better quality of
life during their illness.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              269 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              July 1, 1997 Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: Order your molecular computer by 2010  VERBATIM / Embrace change.
There's plenty of it on the way.

BYLINE: BY ARTHUR CARTY

DATELINE: Ottawa

BODY:

   From the convocation speech delivered on June 14 by the president of the
National Research Council, on being given an honorary doctorate by Carleton
University:

     SELECTING the 10 most important advances in the 20th century . . . is not
easy. Here are my personal top six:

   1. The structure of the atom, quantum theory and relativity, which have
provided the foundation for our understanding of atomic fission and fusion, the
atomic and hydrogen bombs, the peaceful uses of atomic energy and our
understanding of the nature of the universe.

   2. The discovery of penicillin, antibiotics and the structure of DNA, which
have revolutionized medicine, helped create the new field of genetic engineering
and are poised to provide humankind with solutions to many of its health and
food problems.

   3. The discovery of the transistor and the development of semiconductor
technology.This has driven the information technology age.

   4. The discovery of the laser and the amazing impact it has had on our lives,
from eye surgery to "star wars" to the supermarket.

   5. The materials revolution -- not attributable to a single scientific
advance but encompassing the design and assembly of everything from plastics (we
are in the plastics age -- when it is foreseeable to have an automobile entirely
made out of plastic) to superconductors.

   6. Last but not least, and closely related to the invention of the transistor
and laser, is the impact of the computer. Computers do not yet dominate our
lives -- or do they? -- but they are an omnipresence, and our society is utterly
dependent on them.

    So: Were these discoveries recognized by people as breakthroughs? Just
listen to what some people said; these are in many cases famous last words.

    Robert Millikan (Nobel Prize in physics, 1923): "There is no likelihood man
an ever tap the power of the atom."

    Lord Kelvin (after whose name the scale of temperature degrees Kelvin is
named): "Heavier-than-air flying machines are impossible."

    Popular Mechanics: "Where a calculator on the ENIAC computer [one of the
original computers] is equipped with 18,000 vacuum tubes and weighs 30 tons,
computers in the future may have only 1,000 vacuum tubes and perhaps weigh only
1½ tons."

    Ernest Rutherford (nuclear physicist and Nobel Prize winner, who did
pioneering work on the structure of the atom and radioactivity at McGill
University): "We cannot control atomic energy to an extent which would be of any
use commercially, and I believe we are not likely ever to be able to do so."
(1933)

    IBM chairman Thomas Watson in 1943: "I think there is a world market for
maybe five computers."

    Microsoft president and CEO Bill Gates, now the $22-billion man, in 1981:
"640K should be enough for anybody."

    And DEC (Digital) chairman Ken Olson in 1977: "There is no reason anyone
would want a computer in their home."

    Given statements such as these, who would be foolish enough to predict where
technology will have taken us by 2010. Yet current knowledge (as opposed to
entirely new discoveries) will produce "miracles" that we can foresee. Here are
a few I would bet on:

   1. Gene therapy will revolutionize medicine. Almost every disease is due in
part to defective or not-functioning genes. By the year 2005 scientists will
have mapped the DNA code in perhaps 99 per cent of human genes. It will be
possible for physicians to deliver corrected genes to replace damaged cells, not
only curing disease but actually preventing it where susceptibility is known,
for example to breast cancer.

   2. We will by 2010 have clean cars which emit no harmful pollutants. These
cars will either be electric or powered by fuel cells, and you will simply plug
in overnight to refuel.

   3. In the next 10 years we will see the emergence of micromachines and
entirely new materials via a process known as self-assembly -- essentially,
manufacturing without human intervention. Because we now understand the
chemistry and physics of self-assembly -- how molecules aggregate into orderly
functioning entities -- scientists can custom-design new materials for drug
delivery, light-based communications devices etc.

   4. In information technology we will see molecular computers -- biological
molecules functioning as optical storage-and-retrieval devices. Also, if
microprocessor performance continues to double every 18 months, by 2010 one
desktop computer will be as powerful as all computers together in Ottawa today.

   5. My last prediction is that by 2010 we will not only have confirmed the
existence of primitive life forms elsewhere in our solar system, but also have
good evidence that we are not the only intelligent beings in the universe. . . .

    My concluding advice is: Challenge your intellect; keep on learning; embrace
change; be innovative, and look ahead, not behind.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              270 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 28, 1997 Saturday

SECTION: LETTER TO THE EDITOR; Pg. D7

LENGTH: 185 words

HEADLINE: Fat gene

BYLINE: David Crowe

DATELINE: Calgary

BODY:

   Re Study Uncovers Evidence Of Human Fat Gene (June 24):

   If most obesity was due to a "human fat gene," most people would be
physically unable to lose weight. This would be good news for pharmaceutical and
gene therapy researchers and manufacturers, as well as for people looking for an
external reason for their inability to lose weight.

   While there may very well be a small fraction of people with a genetic
mutation that causes obesity through a malfunctioning metabolism, the theory
that people get fat through a combination of too much food (specifically too
much fat and sugar) and not enough exercise is still more logical and convincing
for the majority.

   The most interesting problem with this article, along with most articles on
genetic disorders, is the apparent desire for researchers, the media and victims
of the disorder to find an exotic explanation that is fixable with modern
technology. The problem with resolving obesity through better diet, less food
and more exercise, apparently is that people would then consume less (in an
economic sense) and thus reduce the GNP, along with their waistline.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              276 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 28, 1997 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 825 words

HEADLINE: THE MIDDLE KINGDOM HOW AND WHY THINGS HAPPEN  BODY WORKS Health and
Fitness How patching genes could reduce disease

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

BODY:

     IF only fixing a defective gene were as simple as changing a spark plug, we
could use our growing knowledge about inherited genetic risks to head off
disease.

    It may eventually come to that, but don't hold your breath. Despite
enthusiastic predictions, gene therapy today is at about the level of a medieval
barrage: Everything is thrown at the target, in this case bits of genetic
material at a cell, in the hope that something will hit the spot. Meanwhile, a
healthy lifestyle is still the best defence.

    That said, the spinoffs from research on how things go wrong with genes are
providing insights into the many ways the body has to keep things going right.
So even if you've been dealt a bad hand in gene rummy, there may be ways to head
off your risk of developing a particular disease.

    There are a few well-publicized hereditary genes that by themselves make a
small part of the population vulnerable to breast cancer or Huntington's
disease. But in many cases, it is not the aberrant gene but the disorder it
allows to happen in the body that brings on the disease.

    While genes are often called the body's blueprints, they're hardly static
line drawings. They're more like contractors who organize the body's building
and repair or managers who oversee production and maintenance within cells.

    The spiral arrangement of genes at the centre of each cell makes sure the
specific genes that define what a cell does are switched on while the rest are
switched off. This makes the cell act in very specific ways. But if the switches
aren't working or are improperly turned on, the result is a cell out of control.

    There are many places where things can go wrong. So far, about 42,000 genes
have been identified in the human code and researchers have estimated that there
could be between 60,000 and 150,000. Fortunately, we're learning that a single
bad gene may only marginally increase the risk of conditions such as high blood
pressure, asthma or cancer.

    However, the combined effect of a number of very small genetic abnormalities
can lead to a serious susceptibility to a disease, according to Dr. Robert
Hegele, an endocrine researcher at St. Michael's Hospital in Toronto.

    For instance, when studying high cholesterol levels among Alberta's
Hutterites, he found eight inherited genes that increase cholesterol levels in
members of the religious sect. Almost everyone in the close-knit community
inherits one of the genes, which on its own raises cholesterol production a mere
3 or 4 per cent above average. But some people inherit several, and the
cumulative effect is a cholesterol level as much as 25 per cent above normal.
This poses a definite risk of heart disease.

    Fortunately, genes appear to work in the other direction as well. Even if
several genes are operating abnormally, others that can perform similar
functions will keep things running.

    A gene known as APOE-2 reduces cholesterol even as other factors raise it.
Dr. Hegele suggests this may explain why a few lucky people can avoid heart
disease even though they are overweight, smoke and never exercise.

    One day, doctors may be able to administer such a cholestrol-lowering gene
to someone developing heart disease, or switch on an anti-cancer gene to
counteract one that's promoting a tumour. But don't count on it soon. The task
of screening and repairing is huge. Dr. Hegele believes genetic screening tests
for predisposition to heart disease may have to look at 40 or 50 genes to get
the total picture.

    The good news is there's no need to wait for such technology. For instance,
Dr. Hegele estimates that genes contribute no more than 40 per cent of our
cholesterol production. So even if you have this genetic predisposition, you can
still greatly reduce your risk of heart disease by altering your lifestyle --
stopping smoking and lowering fat in the diet.

    Lifestyle factors can also increase a predisposition toward cancer. A
recently announced long-term study by the U.S. National Cancer Institute found
that people with the highest genetic risk -- those with an extensive family
history of colon cancer -- could dramatically reduce their likelihood of
developing tumours by lowering their intake of beef and alcohol while keeping
their weight under control and not smoking. Genetically prone people who ate a
lot of meat were as much as five times more likely to develop cancer as those
who ate little meat. Meanwhile, the people who ate the highest amount of fruit
had fewer tumours than people who ate very little meat but also little fruit.

    So we don't have to be victims of our genes. If you can see a collision
coming, it makes sense to try to avoid it.

   Wallace Immen contributes to Body Works every other Wednesday. If you have a
comment or a query for Body Works Interactive, call 1-800-461-3298 (toll-free)
or 416-585-5168, fax 416-585-5085, write c/o The Globe and Mail, 444 Front St.
W., Toronto, Ont., M5V 2S9, or send E-mail to  MidKing@GlobeAndMail.ca .

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              281 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 25, 1997 Friday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS MAGAZINE; Pg. 119

LENGTH: 1591 words

HEADLINE: MONEY WATCH TECH TRAUMAS  Part of the unpleasant volatility of
high-tech stocks - vividly on display this spring - is due to a basic lack of
understanding of the technology by the average investor

BYLINE: By Barbara Wade Rose

BODY:

   Love tech stocks? Pay attention to a tale about Thornhill, Ont.-based ATI
Technologies Inc., a $467-million hardware company. ATI makes graphics
acceleration hardware for computers, the hardware that generates those pretty
pictures on the screen. Graphics accelerators used to require an entire board
within the nerve centre of the computer, separate from the computer's
motherboard. Half of ATI's business was retailers, who bought boards for sale to
thousands of potential customers. Demand was so great when ATI went public in
1993 that for a while it had trouble filling orders.

    Times change fast in technology, and technology itself changes everything.
Almost all the components for a graphics accelerator now fit onto a computer
chip. Now, nearly 90% of ATI's customer base are a dozen or so computer
manufacturers. The company has had to totally revamp its selling approach to
reflect this change in customer focus.

    ATI has managed nicely to adapt its business to its new situation. But the
challenge that it faced happens all the time in the hothouse climate of high
technology. It's one of the reasons that technology stocks are alternately
alluring and repelling--that they move, as The New York Times observed at the
outset of this spring's sudden price weakness in the sector, from heroes to bums
within a season. A decade ago, for example, Cisco Systems Inc. in San Jose,
Calif., foresaw the future of computer networking, and coupled its foresight
with aggressive acquisitions. If you'd rounded up some U.S. dollars and bought
$1,000 of Cisco shares in 1990, that spare change would be worth around $50,000
today. Cisco's stock has split more often than last season's pants.

    This year, however, Cisco has lost more than 20% of its value due to
perceptions that it was overvalued. It may have been, probably due to the same
hype that meant its results were unlikely to meet exaggerated expectations. "The
same guys who were buying irrationally on the way up," says Roger McNamee,
general partner at Integral Capital Partners in Menlo, Calif., "are now selling
irrationally on the way down."

    That's why, if you're interested in investing in high-technology
stocks--electronics technology, computer technology and biotechnology--you need
to adapt your thinking as an investor. "Wall Street doesn't understand Silicon
Valley," says Michael Murphy, editor of the Half Moon Bay, Calif.-based
California Technology Stock Letter. "We've been changing from a World War II
economy, an industrial economy, to a technology-based economy. Wall Street lags
behind. They understand takeovers, mergers, spin-offs--the investment banking
business." Murphy contends that the ratio of investment bankers to high-tech
types is 100 to one on Wall Street, the reverse of the ratio in Silicon Valley.

    Brian Piccioni, a Montreal-based financial analyst for Marleau, Lemire
Securities Inc., is a specialist in high-tech investments who toiled for 13
years as an electronics designer. He thinks that part of the volatility of the
technology sector can be attributed to this lack of understanding of technology.
"Investors generally overreact to an innovation," Piccioni says. "Then, when the
technology doesn't perform [up] to the overreaction, they overreact the other
way." That's fine for analysts like Piccioni, because that means there are
always potential bargains available, suffering temporarily from the hangover of
hype.

    If you want to find the bargains, you've got to look at the industry from
the point of view of a technology specialist as well as a financial wizard--a
geek as well as a guru. Technologically, the industry is being driven by three
factors: power, networking and convergence. Ever-increasing computer power is
the reason that your car probably has more computing ability than was in NASA's
Apollo 11. Developments in putting more power into less space on a
microprocessor are expected to continue until at least 2008. Greater power means
greater options and applications almost across the board.

    Networking is the ability of computers to communicate with one another,
which gave rise to the Information Super Hypeway and the astounding success of
Cisco. Networking is expected to grow as greater bandwidth increases the speed
with which computers can talk to one another and as more computers connect
around the world.

    Convergence is the merging of data, video and voice signals into a common
digital format. It, too, will continue growing for at least the next decade.
"We're still in the early stages of the computer revolution," says Murphy.

    Still want in? Remember that the high-tech area is not for the timid. If
you're at all risk-averse, pick one of the many mutual funds that specialize in
technology businesses. If you're bold enough to pick your own, diversify or you
could get clobbered. Keep a minimum of eight stocks in your high-tech portfolio,
preferably split between large-cap and small-cap companies. There are only 100
or so reasonably sized technology companies in Canada and around 10 of them are
mid- to large-cap, with more than $500 million in capitalization: JDS Fitel
Inc., Northern Telecom Ltd., Mitel Corp., Cognos Inc. and Newbridge Networks
Corp. are a few examples.

    Diversify among sectors such as broadband data communications, wireless
communications and broadband microwave technology--which may sound similar but
which are driven by different customer needs. Diversify among software and
hardware companies, remembering that, generally, the software industry
traditionally underperforms its projections, while the hardware industry
traditionally outperforms its projections. Hardware, therefore, can boost your
returns a little. MOSAID Technologies Inc. is one hardware company that, despite
current doldrums, has shown good growth over the nearly four years since it went
public, moving from $6 a share at its initial public offering to around $14.

    If you're diversifying further, the hottest of high-technology areas now is
biotech. "We're in the dawn of the biotechnology revolution," says Murphy, who
points out that, during the decade from 1984 to 1994, an average of three U.S.
biotech drug approvals were awarded per year. In 1995, there were six, in 1996,
15, and, this year, 30 are expected. He recommends Chiron Corp., a company with
a $4-billion (U.S.) capitalization that has 24 drugs in clinical development.
"It's like a biotech mutual fund," says Murphy. He also suggests the gene
therapy company Vical Inc., which has done ground-breaking work with skin-cancer
patients.

    Keep in mind when buying that technology stocks don't have a cycle based on
the economy, although Michael Gianturco, author of How to Buy Technology Stocks
(Little, Brown), advises that there is something of a yearly cycle, which
bottoms out around U.S. Thanksgiving and climbs through the winter. And expect
high price-earnings ratios, due to investor hype.

    Choosing emergent technologies maximizes your potential for portfolio
growth. One example is in the field of fibre optics. The technology is exciting,
particularly fibre component technology, which deals with finding more efficient
ways to use the light in fibre optic cable. Canada is a leader in the field. JDS
Fitel of Ottawa is the only Canadian pure-play fibre optic company currently
public, but Piccioni knows of at least five others that will become public over
the next few years. You can keep abreast of emergent technologies by reading
industry publications such as the Electronics Engineering Times.

    Keep an eye out for maturing technologies. As soon you hear the phrase
"market share," or read about companies battling for it, you know you're
shifting into a business competition, not a leading-edge technology investment,
and while there may still be growth, the returns likely won't be as dramatic. A
good example is the David versus Goliath battle of Ottawa-based software maker
Corel Corp., manufacturers of WordPerfect, against Seattle-based Microsoft
Corp.'s office software. Maybe one works a little faster and the other has more
options, but both products are variants of the same thing. The investor should
apply the guidelines of other industries: who has better service, a better
product, or a more efficiently run business. One caveat: With technology,
remember new capabilities can occasionally change one player's product
innovations and hence, market-share potential.

    And don't forget that an investment can mature for business reasons as well
as technological ones. Piccioni believes, for example, that the era of
prosperity for small data communications equipment companies such as Eicon
Technology Corp., Gandalf Technologies Inc., Memotech Data Inc. and Plaintree
Systems Inc., which served technologically savvy customers, is coming to an end.
"Customers don't want to know the issues in data communications," says Piccioni.
"They want the equipment to work. They want one supplier to meet all their
needs."

    You're in good company if you think the rate of change in high technology is
too fast for you to cope. Even Bill Gates didn't foresee the popularity of the
Internet. Silicon Valley pioneer Bill Hewlett of Hewlett-Packard Co. confessed
to a reporter in February: "I don't know anything about nets. I hate to say it,
but I just don't." To paraphrase Dilbert cartoonist Scott Adams, technological
change has the delightful side effect of enabling all of us, even the smartest,
to look like idiots at least some of the time. But the reward of finding this
decade's Cisco Systems is, for some, worth the risk.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              282 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 22, 1997 Tuesday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS SPECIAL REPORT; Pg. B25

LENGTH: 1276 words

HEADLINE: REPORT ON VENTURE CAPITAL  Putting the money to work How venture
capital has helped three companies.

BYLINE: BY RANDY RAY ; SPCL

BODY:

    So how do companies use the money? Here's what venture funding has done for
a trio of Canadian firms.

   Company: Prologic Corp., Vancouver.
Business: Develops computer software for the banking industry.
Venture capital investors: Business Development Bank of Canada; Ventures West
Management Inc.; Battery Ventures Ltd. (Boston); Bank of Boston.
Total received: $9-million.

     Sixteen months ago, Prologic had no marketing focus, stagnant sales and its
banker was about to come calling for a $2-million loan.

    But after two rounds of venture capital financing in 1996, the Vancouver
software developer has almost doubled its revenues to $11.5-million and is about
to go after business in the huge U.S. market.

       With one foot in the grave in January 1996, the company received $2.5-
million in venture capital funding from the Vancouver office of the Business
Development Bank of Canada and Ventures West Management Inc. It was a vital cash
infusion for the 12-year-old company, whose banking industry software links
client server computer systems to improve customer service and help financial
institutions cross-market their products.

     "The first round of capital was almost survival financing," says Prologic
president Robert Wilband. "We had $2-million in debt coming due and no way to
pay it off. We had tremendous technology but we were dabbling in banking,
insurance companies and securities firms.  We were not focused."

     The cash allowed Mr. Wilband to set Prologic's sights on the banking
industry, in particular mid-sized financial institutions, which number about
10,000 worldwide.

    Once the loan was paid off, a sales and marketing team was assembled and
staff was trimmed to 58 from 70.  Shortly after, the company landed several
deals, including an order with Capital City Savings in Edmonton, Alberta's
largest credit union.

         In October 1996, with a marketing strategy in place for U.S. financial
institutions, Prologic negotiated another $6.5 million (U.S.) in venture
capital, this time from two Boston venture capitalists, Battery Ventures Ltd.
and the Bank of Boston, and used the money to open a sales office in Hartford,
Conn., hire a sales director and a West Coast salesperson and visit trade shows.

     And recognizing the tough competition south of the border, the company used
its venture capital to increase research and development spending by 40 per cent
to keep Prologic's technology ahead of its competitors.

       After struggling through its first decade in business, venture capital
has paid off big time.  Banks in 23 countries now use the company's software,
twice as many as in 1995; staff has increased to 115 employees; sales were
$11.5-million in 1996 and are projected at $20-million in 1997.

    With its sales now booming, the decision to invest in Prologic has proved to
be a good one for venture capital investors:  All have retained their shares in
the company and the initial two have seen their investments triple in value, Mr.
Wilband says.


Company: StressGen Biotechnologies Corp., Victoria.
Business: Development of vaccines to prevent disease.
Venture capital investors: Trian Equities; Discovery Enterprises; Canadian
Medical Discoveries Fund; MDS Health Ventures; Ventures West Management Inc.;
Working Opportunities Fund; B.C. Life Sciences Fund.
Total received: $18.7-million

     In 1990, StressGen saw the potential fpr commercializing vaccines to
prevent infectious diseases and treat cancer.  But the company faced a major
hurdle: There wasn't money in the bank to recruit staff and advance its
research.

       Three venture capital investments totalling nearly $19-million between
1990 and 1997 changed that.  With cash in hand, StressGen was able to expand its
research base to the point where clinical trials for its cancer therapy are to
take place within the next 18 months.

    The funding has helped StressGen's staff grow from three in 1990 to a
current 55 and it attracted key personnel, including Marvin Siegel, its new
vice-president of research and development, who developed the allergy drug
Claritin into a $1-billion-a-year product for U.S.-based drug manufacturer
Schering-Plough Corp.

      The capital was also used to acquire rights to promising technologies the
company hopes to commercialize in the future and the latest round -- a
$10-million infusion from the Canadian Medical Discoveries Fund  -- was pivotal
in helping to finalize a joint venture announced just last month with Cambridge,
Mass.-based Genzyme Corp. to develop StressGen's cancer-fighting technology.

    By tapping into Genzyme's gene therapy expertise and using its specialized
manufacturing facilities, StressGen will commercialize its product more quickly
and at less expense, says StressGen president Richard Glickman.

      "The capital allows us to be a full partner with a multi-national company
and, at the same time, lets us continue with our research without dipping into
our own capital," he says.

     The payoff? While all of the original venture capital investors are still
on board, the value of their investment has skyrocketed. The company, which went
public in 1993 at an initial $1.25 a share, is now trading at around $4.


Company: Architel Systems Corp., Toronto.
Business: Computer software developer for the telecommunications industry.
Venture capital investors: Helix Investments Canada Inc.
Total received: $1.6-million

     When president and chief executive Tony van Marken needed capital in 1994
to pull his foundering telecommunications software company out of debt, he was
given the cold shoulder by every bank he called. The reception was much warmer
at Helix Investments Canada Inc., the Toronto venture capitalist.

       After listening to Architel's plans to reorganize operations and expand
the market for its software, which enables telephone companies to quickly
activate customer services, Helix agreed in 1994 to invest $600,000 in Architel.
That was on top of the $1-million Helix had provided to get the company off the
ground 10 years earlier.

      The financing enabled Architel to expand from a two-person operation with
revenues in the $250,000 range in the mid-1980s to 180 employees with sales
forecast at $30-million in 1997, Mr. van Marken says.

      Its customer base has broadened to include telephone companies around the
world, among them Nynex Corp. and MCI Metro in the United States, Telecom New
Zealand Ltd., Energis Communications Ltd. in Britain and SaskTel and the
Newfoundland Telephone Co. in Canada.

       The venture capital was spent on everything from office desks and
computers to staff recruitment and research and development, Mr. van Marken
says.

     Architel was also able to tap Helix's expertise and reputation. Donald
Webster, Helix's well-connected chairman who also chairs Architel's board of
directors, is often actively involved in negotiations with new customers, such
as Nynex, which eventually signed a multi-million-dollar million contract with
Architel.

       Having Helix on side also beefed up Architel's reputation when the
company went public, says Mr. van Marken, mostly by giving the company the
credibility needed to put together a first-rate syndicate to market its stock.
When the company went public a year ago, shares were snapped up quickly, many by
large institutional buyers.

    Thirteen years after making its initial investment, Helix continues to hold
a 30-per-cent ownership in Architel; its $1.6-million stake is now worth more
than $30-million, Mr. van Marken says. "In many cases, venture capitalists take
advantage of an exit strategy but Helix has not sold any of its shares," he
says.  "That tells you something about where they feel this company is going."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              285 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1997 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 8, 1997 Tuesday

SECTION: ROB COLUMN; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 801 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS WEST  Biomira builds on 'Egghead Alley'

BYLINE: Mathew Ingram

DATELINE: EDMONTON

BODY:

   ON the southeastern outskirts of Edmonton lies a cluster of buildings known
as Edmonton Research Park. One of the most noteworthy residents of this complex
is Biomira Inc., a company many feel is in the forefront of cancer research in
Canada, and perhaps even the world. Edmonton may seem like an odd place to find
the headquarters of a biomedical research company, but to Biomira CEO Dr. Alex
McPherson, it makes perfect sense.

   That's because Biomira was founded in 1985 by two members of the faculty at
the University of Alberta in Edmonton, Dr. Michael Longenecker and Dr. Antoine
Noujaim. Dr. Longenecker still works at Biomira as the vice-president of
research -- running what staff refer to as "Egghead Alley" -- while Dr. Noujaim
left last year to head a new spinoff called Altarex.

    Dr. McPherson also has ties to the University of Alberta: He got his medical
training there, before becoming the director of medicine at Edmonton's renowned
Cross Cancer Institute. He left in 1985 to become Alberta's deputy minister of
health, and became Biomira's chief executive officer in 1991.

    "I'm really a designer CEO for this company in a lot of ways," Dr. McPherson
says with a laugh, sitting in his unassuming second-floor office. "I have my PhD
in immunology and a background in immuno-oncology, and so helping to grow this
company has really been a fascinating experience."

    From a total of five employees and a budget in the hundreds of thousands of
dollars, Biomira has become the fourth-largest biomedical company in Canada,
with 250 employees and an annual budget of $19-million. Two-thirds of the
company's staff work in two buildings at Edmonton Research Park, with most of
the rest working in Toronto at Biomira Diagnostics.

    In a nutshell, Biomira's business is what Dr. McPherson refers to as "cancer
management from discovery to recovery." The company began by using its founders'
expertise to develop a blood test that would detect common cancers such as
ovarian, gastro-intestinal and breast cancer. As it developed those tests --
which are now starting to come on the market -- the company also started working
on a more precise detection method.

    Dr. McPherson says Biomira's research has focused on isolating an antibody
specific to a cancer antigen and then combining it with a radioactive isotope,
allowing doctors to pinpoint the location of a tumour. Products based on that
research are undergoing clinical trials in the United States.

    For the past few years, the company has also been working on the so-called
"magic bullet" of cancer research: a cancer vaccine. "The idea is total cancer
management," Dr. McPherson says. "The blood test tells you you have it, the
X-rays tell you where it is, and the vaccine helps cure it."

    This is not to say that even Biomira feels its vaccine will cure cancer.
However, Dr. McPherson believes the kinds of treatments being developed now
could help cancer patients live longer, when combined with more traditional
methods such as chemotherapy and radiation.

    And, says the Biomira CEO, "in terms of cancer vaccines, we are probably the
most advanced company in the world." This is not just the usual corporate
bravado. Industry experts such as Wayne Schnarr of Yorkton Securities in Toronto
are long-time fans of Biomira and feel that it is one of the closest to hitting
the market with a cancer vaccine.

    The company does have its critics. Not only do many feel the cancer
management industry is likely to be dominated by multinational giants, but some
also feel Biomira's focus on a synthetic vaccine is misplaced. Other companies
are using gene therapy or extracts from existing human cells.

    "We're working outside the box of conventional research," Dr. McPherson
agrees. Most specialists, he explains, like to see the tumour respond in some
way to treatment -- by getting smaller, for example. "Our treatment produces no
response," the Biomira CEO admits. However, what it does produce, at least in
clinical trials, is patients who manage to live a lot longer.

    Most cancer patients, Dr. McPherson says, "die with cancer, they don't die
of cancer." If a patient can live longer, why does it matter what happens to the
tumour? Biomira's treatment is also less toxic than either chemotherapy or
radiation, Dr. McPherson says, which often reduce a patient's life expectancy
even as they kill the tumour.

    In sum, the Biomira CEO says, one of the company's blood tests is approved
and being sold -- the first of its kind -- and more are on the way. The X-ray
and vaccine products are making their way through the regulatory process. And to
top it all off, the company is sitting on about $90-million in cash. No wonder
Dr. McPherson is smiling.

   Business West readers can reach Mathew Ingram  by fax at (403) 244-9809 or by
E-mail at  mingram@globeandmail.ca

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                              298 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 21, 1996 Saturday

SECTION: FOCUS COLUMN; Pg. D5

LENGTH: 374 words

HEADLINE: Spurious sponsorships  The Challenge

BYLINE: Warren Clements

BODY:

    THE challenge was to suggest dubious sponsorships. Many offered the idea of
a tobacco company underwriting a marathon. The winner is Gordon Findlay of
Etobicoke:

   The Clan Campbell gathering, sponsored by McDonald's.

   Other awkward agents:

   The Internet sponsoring a penmanship competition. (Charles Crockford,
Waterloo)

   A tourism promotion of the tranquillity of Canadian lakes, sponsored by the
Personal Watercraft Manufacturers Association. (Andrzej Derkowski, Oakville)

   A mother-and-son picnic sponsored by King Herod. A wet T-shirt fund-raiser
for the National Action Committee on the Status of Women. (Bonnie Beresford and
Alan Mellors, Guelph)

   Steroids 'R' We, official pharmacologists to the Olympic Games. (Barrie
Collins, Courtenay, B.C.)

   A sleeping-pill company sponsoring a chess tournament. (Tom Forbes,
Baysville, Ont.)

   The Bahamian Alliance for safety in downhill skiing. (Andrew Weeks, Thunder
Bay)

   Central air conditioning, by Lucifer. (Colin Eyssen, Toronto)

   Greenpeace hosting an Exxon Valdez crew reunion. Anne Rice sponsoring a
blood-donor drive. Mensa presenting a Three Stooges film festival. Martha
Stewart hosting a food fight. (Peter Marucci, Fergus, Ont.)

   The RCMP sponsoring an Inuit art exhibition. (Jane Staunton, Westmount, Que.)

   A seminar on maintaining decorum in public, sponsored by Roberto Alomar.
(Arthur Loughton, Vittoria, Ont.)

   The Women's Christian Temperance Union pub crawl. (F. D. Likely, Stellarton,
N.S.)

   The Royal Family financing gene-therapy research. Danielle Steel sponsoring
the Massey Lectures. (Dianne Kennedy and Cliff Ridley, Victoria)

   Xerox holding a conference on the many uses of carbon paper. (Leslie and Iris
Andrews, Vancouver)

   A day-care centre funded by Henry Morgentaler. (Jim Feasby, Winnipeg)

   The Susan Powter Serenity Symposium. (Janet Pole, Hamilton)

   The Italian Tourist Agency invites you to a showing of Death in Venice. (Jim
Parr, Toronto)

   The Promise Keepers rally, sponsored by the Liberal Party of Canada. Exotic
Dining, a seminar sponsored by the Metro Toronto Zoo. (Paul Davy, Parry Sound,
Ont.)

   This week: No challenge. There will be no column on Dec. 28. The next new
challenge will be set on Jan. 4, and the best of previously unused entries will
appear on Jan. 4 and 11. Happy holidays.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              299 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          December 18, 1996 Wednesday

SECTION: ROB-WSJ; Pg. B11

LENGTH: 1140 words

HEADLINE: Novartis leaps last regulatory hurdle  U.S. agency clears way for
Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz to merge into world's No. 2 drug company.

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN D. MOORE The Wall Street Journal; WSJ

BODY:

      THE U.S. Federal Trade Commission gave the long-awaited green light to the
planned merger of Ciba-Geigy AG and Sandoz AG,removing the final hurdle to the
creation of a global power in pharmaceuticals and agrochemicals.

    On Friday, Ciba and Sandoz directors will submit paperwork to Swiss
corporate registrars combining the former rivals into a single company, renamed
Novartis AG. On Monday, Novartis stock will begin trading on the Stockholm Stock
Exchange.

    European Union competition authorities approved the proposed $27-billion
(U.S.) corporate merger in mid-July -- and Ciba and Sandoz have been ready to
begin the actual integration process since September. Even if the partners are
Swiss, however, it's obvious why U.S. antitrust watchdogs gave Novartis such
detailed scrutiny.

    With estimated annual sales of 36 billion Swiss francs ($27.3-billion U.S.),
the new concern will be the world's number No. 2 pharmaceutical company, the
global leader in crop protection and a powerful competitor in other businesses
ranging from seeds and veterinary medicine to baby food. On another politically
sensitive front, Ciba and Sandoz have shelled out billions of dollars to snap up
some of the most highly regarded firms in the U.S. biotechnology and genetic
research sectors.

    In an interview, Novartis president-designate Daniel Vasella was relieved at
the terms of the FTC's consent decree. Novartis will divest certain corn
herbicide and animal-health businesses in North America with combined annual
sales of $390-million. Most of those corn-herbicide operations already have been
sold to Germany's BASF AG for $695-million, and Dr. Vasella said a preliminary
agreement for divestment of the animal-health business also has been reached.

    The consent decree also obliges the Swiss giant to provide access to several
key genetic research discoveries made by its own labs or those of U.S.-based
units and affiliates. The discoveries include a gene therapy against brain
cancer under development at U.S. unit Genetic Therapy Inc. as well as a broad
GTI patent covering gene transfers performed outside the body. Novartis retains
royalty rights to the discoveries, however, and can exercise a cross-licencing
option toward potential licencees of the brain cancer gene therapy -- as well as
rights to several so-called cytokines used in certain gene therapy procedures.

    Sandoz already had announced plans to offer sublicences to GTI's broad,
ex-vivo gene therapy patent. According to Dr. Vasella, "the important fact is
that there's no divestment of products or development projects under the decree.
It opens the field a little more to potential competitors, but our leadership
positions remain intact."

    A key benefit of the merger will be an estimated two billion Swiss francs in
cost savings, roughly 8 per cent of total overhead, to be achieved by 1999.
Novartis executives said a net onetime restructuring charge of two billion Swiss
francs will be included in this year's accounts. Analysts estimated that charge
would halve projected full-year net income of roughly four billion Swiss francs
-- excluding Ciba's specialty-chemicals division, which is to be spun off.

    Ciba chairman Alex Krauer, who will inherit the same post at Novartis,
acknowledged that the initial stage of the integration process "has focused on
cost synergies. But it's essential that we leave that phase behind and focus on
the real purpose of the merger: sustainable growth," Dr. Krauer added.

    Most analysts expect an acceleration of sales at Novartis's flagship
pharmaceutical division next year. Sandoz's drug division posted a 10-per-cent
sales rise during this year's third quarter, reflecting buoyant growth of
several new medicines still at an early phase of their worldwide rollouts. Ciba,
by contrast, reported a 5-per-cent decline in drug-division revenue during the
latest period, as generic competition in the United States slashed sales of its
best-selling antiarthritic medicine, Voltaren.

    However, combining the Ciba and Sandoz sales forces should provide an
injection and squeeze more sales out of the combined company's drugs, said
Stewart Adkins, a London-based pharmaceutical analyst with Lehman Brothers.
Several of Sandoz's new drugs are targeted at general practitioners -- a
category in which Sandoz traditionally is weak, but Ciba's sales force is highly
regarded, the analyst added.

    "Judging from results of the big 1989 pharmaceutical mergers, you're likely
to see sharply higher sales growth for promotion-responsive medicines next year,
and from there more normal growth rates, but from a higher base level," Mr.
Adkins predicted.

    Dr. Krauer, the Novartis chairman, added that Voltaren's sales drop in the
United States is expected to culminate this year. So burgeoning sales of several
new drugs, including a touted new hypertension drug called Diovan, will have a
full effect on revenue growth from the former Ciba drug division.

    The Swiss companies' recent acquisition sprees in the U.S. biotech and
genomic industries remain at early stages of development -- and aren't likely to
contribute to sales until well into the next decade, at the earliest. In the
meantime, analysts expect Dr. Vasella to try to boost organic growth with
acquisitions.

    Money won't be a problem: Novartis is expected to generate free cash flow of
three billion Swiss francs a year. Indeed, Sandoz went on the prowl two months
ago, paying 640 million marks ($414-million U.S.) for German generic drug maker
Azupharma GmbH, though the FTC's antitrust review was still in progress. That
transaction plugged strategic gaps in European markets and made Novartis the
world's biggest generic drug maker.

    Another area cited by analysts as a likely expansion target is
non-prescription, or over-the-counter, medicines, where Novartis currently ranks
seventh worldwide. The OTC sector is expected to grow rapidly in coming years as
cost-conscious governments and private insurers try to shift more of the
health-care tab to consumers.

    Meanwhile, scientists will be brewing new experiments to unleash the
potential of genetic and biotechnology prowess piled up by Ciba and Sandoz in
recent years. Genetic research, and particularly automated analysis of DNA, is
one area where bigger could be better.

   Novartis's two dominant divisions

   Pro forma sales results: January to September, 1996
   Health care: Total Sales 11.863 billion Swiss francs
   Health care
   Self-medication (Growth: 2%*)
   Generics (Growth: 12%*)
   Vision Care (Growth: 6%*)
   Pharmaceuticals (Growth: 7%*)
   -*Sales growth in the Jan.-Sept. period
   Agribusiness: Total Sales 6.27 billion Swiss francs
   6.27 billion Swiss francs
   Agribusiness
   Crop protection (Growth: 8%*)
   Seeds (Growth: 2%*)
   Animal Health (Growth: 8%*)

   -*Sales growth in the Jan.-Sept. period
Source: Company

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              302 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 3, 1996 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 676 words

HEADLINE: Researchers find blood-cell makers  Discovery could improve gene
therapy, Canadian team leader says

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   Laboratory mice with human immune systems have helped a Canadian-led team
finally identify the elusive parent of all blood cells.

    The discovery of stem cells opens the way to more effective gene therapy for
blood diseases, said research leader Dr. John Dick of the Hospital for Sick
Children.

    "By pinpointing stem cells, we can test how they can go wrong and find a way
to target them," he said as one of the pink-eyed white mice balanced on his
thumb.

    Even though stem cells are one in a million in the bone marrow, they are the
creators of cells that make all the types of blood cells, including the immune
defences. Correcting a bad gene in a stem cell would multiply the correction and
pass it along to all future generations of cells, Dr. Dick explained as the
mouse, unruffled by all the attention, tried to nibble on his finger.

    Immediately, the finding could lead to more effective gene therapy for
inherited blood diseases such as leukemia, thallassemia and sickle cell anemia.
But Dr. Dick expects it will also be important in chemotherapy for tumours
anywhere in the body. The results appear today in the journal Nature Medicine.

     While scientists have known for years that stem cells exist, Dr. Dick said,
"they look like other cells, so there was no way of identifying them." Attempts
at gene therapy have had to aim at millions of cells, hoping to affect enough
stem cells in the process to make the change permanent.

    Dr. Dick and his colleagues André LaRochelle and Josef Vormoor identified
stem cells by watching which cells created blood and immune functions in a
strain of laboratory mice specially bred to be born without an immune system.

     They found that stem cells have identifying features that include a surface
structure known as CD38. By using an antibody that attaches to that structure,
stem cells can now be easily "fished out of the sea of other marrow cells." The
most effective gene therapy would treat just these stem cells, said Dr. Dick, a
professor of medical genetics at the University of Toronto. He explained that
gene therapy done to date has been disappointing because current methods don't
reach many stem cells.

    However, tests in the mice show that the gene transfer methods now being
used in human trials are ineffective on stem cells. The next step in research
will be to test methods in mice to overcome the block. Gene transfer is
generally done using an inactivated virus that can invade a cell and permanently
alter its structure but not cause a disease.

    "The mice will allow us to evaluate treatment on a small scale before doing
it on humans," Dr. Dick noted as he put the mouse, one of about 50 in the
current trial, back into its cage.

    "If we have an idea of a chemotherapy drug that will work on leukemia, you
can't just put it in people. It would take 10 years of approvals and millions of
dollars worth of research to test what we could test easily on mice."

     He estimates the effect of drugs and therapy can be tested on mice in as
short as a two-month trial.

    The mice are kept in sterile conditions to avoid infection until they are
injected with human cells, which find their way to the bone marrow. From then
on, their bodies produce human cells.

    In cancers that cause tumours, bone marrow -- which is sensitive to
radiation -- is removed before treatment. If all the marrow is reinjected after
treatment, it may include cancerous cells. This could be avoided if only stem
cells were reinjected, which would then reproduce the blood system without the
cancer, Dr. Dick explained.

    In a mouse, only a single stem cell is needed to recreate the blood system.
In humans, only a few of the tens of thousands in the marrow could restore the
system. The process happens quickly because cells that carry oxygen and the
white cells that are involved in immune defences have short lives and must be
continually reproduced.

    In 1994, Dr. Dick's team also identified a leukemia stem cell. With the
ability to compare it with a normal stem cell, he said, it may be possible to
determine how leukemia develops.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              304 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 26, 1996 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 423 words

HEADLINE: Cell-builder linked to curbing cancer spread  Tumour growth in mice
spurred by elevated levels of protein found in genetic material

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

BODY:

     Controlling a substance that builds cells may be the key to preventing the
spread of cancers through the body, a Manitoba research team reports.

    The protein, known as R2, is normally produced by cells to form the genetic
material DNA. The researchers found that when too much is being produced tumour
cells become malignant, aggressively growing and beginning to spread to other
parts of the body.

    More than 50,000 Canadians die of malignant cancers each year.

    "The practical part is R2 gives us a focus for zeroing in with gene therapy
or drugs that interfere with the process," said Dr. Jim Wright, senior
investigator at the Cancer Treatment and Research Foundation of the University
of Manitoba.

    In co-operation with a drug-research company, he is now working on designing
a chemotherapy drug that will act against R2. This could keep abnormal cells at
a precancerous stage or in a localized, slow-growing tumour where they can be
more effectively treated.

    "In about 90 per cent of cancers, the cause of death is not the tumour
itself but the spread of cells to other parts of the body," Dr. Wright
explained.

     The finding is reported in today's issue of Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science.

     The research was done on skin cancers in mice. Infected cells that were
mutated by a cancer gene known as H-ras produced more tumour-like colonies and
had faster tumour growth under the effects of high levels of R2.

      Although it is not clear precisely why cells begin to produce R2 in large
amounts, it is the factor that begins to push along genetic factors that are
causing cancer, Dr. Wright reported.  R2 is normally involved in repair of
genetic material.

     Abnormal R2 production could be caused by environmental factors, or it
could be that some people are genetically programmed to express more, Dr. Wright
said.

   He is confident that the pattern seen in mice applies to most human malignant
tumours. A characteristic of colon and breast cancer cells is elevated levels of
R2, he noted.

    Control of R2 may also help in fighting viral diseases such as herpes, Dr.
Wright said. R2 is a ribonucleotide reductase, a material that regulates the
ability of some viral diseases to spread, he noted.  While the AIDS virus does
not have R2 in its gene, its spread involves the R2 in the cells it infects.

    The research was done in association with postdoctoral fellow Huizhou Fan
and technician Cristy Villegas. It was financed by the National Cancer Institute
of Canada and the federal Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              305 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 25, 1996 Monday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C10

LENGTH: 1620 words

HEADLINE: Alomar's fury sparked replay of umpire's hell  TORMENT / Family's pain
figures in the ugly moment that raised questions about the state of baseball.

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LIPSYTE New York Times Service; NYT

DATELINE: Poland, Ohio

BODY:

   ON the 52-inch television set in John Hirschbeck's living room, the moving
images seem unreal, a parody of Norman Rockwell's America. Almost nose to nose,
an umpire, a manager and a star baseball player are screaming as they jostle for
position near home plate. Suddenly, the player spits at the umpire, a hurricane
spray on this large screen.

    Two months ago, that picture became a symbol for many people of a nation and
its pastime losing civility, discipline and respect for authority. For the
umpire, Hirschbeck, being spat upon was also the beginning of a wrenching replay
of the past five years of emotional torment as an incurable disease attacked his
children.

    "I was shocked when he spit on me, and when he wasn't suspended immediately
I was very disappointed," said Hirschbeck, watching that video clip yet again
last week. "But I could deal with all that. It's when he dragged my family in,
when he stripped away my private life and talked about John, that he ripped my
heart out."

    It was after the game on Sept. 27 in Toronto that the player, Roberto Alomar
of the Baltimore Orioles, declared that the reason Hirschbeck had called him out
on a third strike that looked wide and then ejected him for complaining had to
do with the umpire's turning "bitter" after the death of his young son three
years ago. The next day, when Hirschbeck first learned about the player's
comments from reporters asking for a response, he charged into the Orioles'
locker room. He was restrained from Alomar by a fellow umpire.

    Alomar was later reported as saying that he spat because Hirschbeck called
him "names," including, in some accounts, an ethnic slur. The umpire denies
this, although he admits to using expletives of a more general nature right
after the spitting and during the locker-room episodes. The third man at the
plate, Orioles manager Davey Johnson, has refused to offer his version. Last
week, Johnson said: "Anything I say would just accelerate this thing. It does no
good to talk about umpires in the papers." He would not elaborate when he said:
"I think they're both guilty."

    There have been apologies and acceptances, mostly as statements delivered
through the news media. Because the Orioles didn't make the World Series and
Hirschbeck was not scheduled to work postseason games, that ugly moment in
Toronto was soon obscured by a thrilling Yankee victory and Frank Torre's
transplanted heart.

    The Hirschbecks gratefully retreated into the protective cave of this small
town. They needed to conserve their strength; the rare brain disorder --
adrenoleukodystrophy -- that killed John at age 8 also affects his younger
brother, Michael, 10. Their sisters, Erin, 8, and Megan, 5, are genetic
carriers, like their mother.

    In ALD, a faulty gene is unable to produce the enzymes that clear away
toxins that destroy nerve cells in the brain.

    In the summer of 1991, when John was 6, his symptoms first appeared. He
seemed a little vague, unusually timid; there were brief brownouts of energy and
attention. Hirschbeck was away on his ninth season as an American League umpire
and Denise was pregnant, and busy with three preschoolers and a large house on
10 wooded acres. It would be the last time that she thought of herself living a
"charmed life, almost too perfect," in which a flight attendant and an umpire
fell in love on a Puerto Rican beach in 1980, and went on to "have it all."

    "John was such a bright, lively boy, beyond his years," said Denise, sitting
at the kitchen table. "At the age of 1, he spoke in complete sentences. At
restaurants he pretended he could read the menu. He was very adventuresome and
outgoing.

    "And then he changed. He was afraid to go trick-or-treating on Halloween. He
forgot how old he was. He had reading problems in first grade."

    One doctor diagnosed attention-deficit disorder and prescribed Ritalin, then
other drugs when the symptoms persisted. At spring training, a usually happy
family holiday, John became terrified of a dead bee. Always athletic, he was now
afraid to swim in the pool. The Hirschbecks quickly moved up the medical chain
and onto an emotional roller coaster of hope and dread and guilt.

    On April 7, 1992, just before he worked the season opener in Seattle,
Hirschbeck called home for the results of the magnetic resonance imaging test of
John's brain. Although there would have to be a second MRI, there did seem to be
suspicious grey spots on the fatty white myelin sheath. Hirschbeck flew home
after the game.

    He was in Akron, Ohio, two days later when the diagnosis was made, then on
to the Kennedy Krieger Institute in Baltimore, a leading research centre and
hospital for children with brain disorders. Hugo Moser, the ALD expert featured
in the film Lorenzo's Oil,about another family struggling with the disease,
studied John and Michael and sent them on to William Krivit at the University of
Minnesota Hospital and Clinic for bone-marrow transplants. The only hope of
halting the progress of the disease was to introduce a healthy gene that could
produce enzymes to stop the toxins before they tore though the sheath to the
axons that connect nerve cells to the rest of the body.

    For most of that summer, the Hirschbecks commuted to Minneapolis, often
living in a hotel for weeks at a time as the boys were prepared for their
transplants. Decisions were made over which the Hirschbecks still agonize.
Should they have opted for a shunt instead of steroids for John? Did they pick
the right donor for Michael? Were the girls getting enough attention?

    At the last moment, John's donor turned out to be infected with hepatitis.
No transplant. Megan, then 10 months old, became Michael's donor.

    During this time, baseball allowed Hirschbeck to attend to his family
without worrying about salary or job. When medical bills overwhelmed their
insurance, friends in the game led by managers Tony LaRussa and Gene Lamont
raised $250,000 at a celebrity dinner and auction.

    On March 7, 1993, during spring training in Florida, John died in his
parents' arms. They visit his grave almost every day and speak to his etched
likeness on the light grey stone.

    "We believe he is in Heaven, listening," Hirschbeck said. "We wouldn't want
him to think he's out of our lives."

    John's bronzed Nike sneakers are on a shelf in the living room. He mugs and
grins out of family pictures on the refrigerator door.

    "I miss him a lot," said Michael, a friendly boy who describes himself as an
"awesome mathematician," but who has trouble reading because of ALD's effect on
his visual processing. "He was a good brother, but he was always busy following
Dad around."

    Dad, at the kitchen table with Megan on his lap, smiled. It was the family
"happy hour," Erin doing homework on the floor, Denise preparing dinner.

    "John had this thing for John Deere tractors," Hirschbeck said. "He could
tell you the model number from a distance."

    He waited for his voice to clear, then pointed out the window at the barn.
"We spoiled him, I guess, got him a lawn tractor for his last Christmas," he
said. "It's in there."

    The spoiling goes on. Last Christmas, Michael got a regulation Las
Vegas-style slot machine and more quarters than most third-graders need.
Hirschbeck bought himself a beeper, in case Michael had another seizure at
school. Michael's prognosis is not clear. According to Gary Goldstein, president
of the Kennedy Krieger Institute, the bone-marrow transplant cannot reverse the
effects of the disease; how well Michael does depends on exactly how much damage
has already occurred. The disease was recognized only in the 1980s, and research
is in an early stage. Any hope for a cure, Dr. Goldstein said, rests with gene
therapy.

    For Hirschbeck, it was only between the white lines that he could escape
such medical history and frail hope. At 42, in his 14th major-league season, he
is an intense and aggressive umpire who likes to take early control of a game,
to make the hitters swing by calling strikes. It could be a reason for
misjudging that first-inning call on Alomar, which he admits is possible.

    "You're killing me with that pitch," yelled Alomar, according to Hirschbeck.
Alomar kept complaining from the dugout, after three warnings and even after the
next batter had taken a pitch.

    "That's when I ran him," recalled Hirschbeck, back in front of his
big-screen TV. "And Dave Johnson ran out with him, yelling, 'This is a big
game,' and I told Davey, 'You tell him that.' "

    After Alomar spit, Hirschbeck roared, "He spit in my face," but the umpire
managed to restrain himself as Johnson dragged his player off the field.

    That image of a young, cocky, million-dollar ballplayer spitting on a
$150,000-a-year, middle-aged monitor was briefly the talk of the airwaves. Was
this how low the game had sunk? Was it excusable in the heat of a pennant race?
Could the umpire have been as much perpetrator as victim? The questions are
still unanswered, long after the image faded into Yankee pinstripes. Except for
Alomar, the three men at home plate have mostly avoided discussing their
confrontation.

    Alomar has pledged $50,000 to the institute, which the Orioles have offered
to match. Asked to attend a news conference announcing the donation, Denise
Hirschbeck refused, saying it was not "appropriate."

    Hirschbeck agreed with her decision; out of his own sense of rightfulness,
he turned down $50,000 for a motel commercial right after the spitting incident.
It didn't seem appropriate to profit from the indignity. But he does think that
good can come from bad.

    "If that $100,000 is the research funding that finds a cure that saves
Michael," he said, with the intimidating bravado of an umpire, "yeah, sure, what
the hell, Alomar can spit on me again."

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              309 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 22, 1996 Tuesday

SECTION: LETTER TO THE EDITOR; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 123 words

HEADLINE: Chair in neonatology

BYLINE: Anne MacInnis

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

   We were pleased that The Globe and Mail chose to cover the story on the
neonatal unit at the Hospital for Sick Children but regret that the article
included some incorrect information (Gene Therapy Studied For Premature Babies
-- Oct. 10).

   Dr. Keith Tanswell was the first recipient of the first chair ever
established at the Hospital for Sick Children, the Women's Auxiliary of the
Hospital for Sick Children/University of Toronto Chair in Neonatology. However,
this $2-million endowment is being funded exclusively by the Women's Auxiliary
of the Hospital for Sick Children. Although the chair is held jointly by the
hospital and U of T, the university had no part in its funding.

   President, Women's Auxiliary
   Hospital for Sick Children

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              311 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 10, 1996 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy studied for premature babies  Doctors researching
problems of newborns study ways of preventing the  abnormal development of cells
at a critical stage of infancy.

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

DATELINE: Toronto

BODY:

   JANELLE is a miracle of modern medicine.

     Born 15 weeks prematurely, she is so tiny that her mother can cradle her in
two hands. While Judy and Wendell Boyce of Toronto visit their daughter every
day, her world is an incubator at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children.

    Twenty years ago, chances for survival of a baby who weighed less than a
kilogram were slim, but today Janelle -- who at birth weighed 780 grams (less
than two pounds) -- is gaining weight and has a good chance of developing
normally.

    "The technology has completely changed," said Dr. Keith Tanswell, a senior
scientist in the neonatal intensive-care unit.

      A baby as premature as Janelle isn't strong enough to take effective
breaths and clear fluid out of the lungs.

     After birth, Janelle was immediately put into an incubator, which keeps her
warm and was fitted with a tube to provide air under pressure to her lungs. New
techniques can tailor the volume to match her different breathing when awake or
asleep.

     But such tiny lungs face risks from being on ventilation equipment. Changes
in cells caused by the stretching and the oxygen can leave the lungs permanently
scarred.

    Yesterday, Dr. Tanswell was appointed to the chair of a newborn-research
program that will help pursue ideas on avoiding the risks. The chair was
established by a $2-million endowment from the women's auxiliary of the hospital
and the University of Toronto.

    "The technology is there for us to do it, we just have to learn how to do it
safely," Dr. Tanswell said.

      One focus of the research will be to use a form of gene therapy to help
lungs avoid damage as the babies develop.  "If we can prevent abnormal gene
functioning in ventilated and oxygen-exposed lungs, we will significantly reduce
the risk of permanent lung injury," he said.

    Dr. Tanswell explained that there are dozens of different types of cells in
the lungs, and some can become overabundant in the oxygen-rich, pressurized
environment created by ventilation. This proliferation of cells can cause
permanent scar tissue that interferes with breathing later in life.

     "Gene therapy uses tiny packages of fat that holds DNA that can be taken up
by lung cells," Dr. Tanswell said. The fat droplets containing strands of
synthetic DNA would be given as an aerosol through the nose.

     Research has shown that the droplets are able to fuse with lung-cell
membranes and that the DNA diffuses into the cell and is capable of regulating a
cell that has become overactive.  After treatment, the effect lasts for a few
days or weeks, then the DNA degrades, leaving the cell unchanged.

     The technique has not yet been done in humans and would have to be tested
on adults before it could be used on children or infants, Dr. Tanswell said.
"We know it's do-able, but [we] have to be able to do it safely."

      There are hundreds of possible types of cells in the lungs that could be
targeted, but Dr. Tanswell believes that there are only two or three that lead
to scarring.

      "There may be a public-acceptance issue," Dr. Tanswell noted, because this
would act on genes that are healthy. But unlike gene therapy to change
underlying defects, the treatment would be a temporary measure that would help
avoid abnormal development of certain cells during a few critical weeks.

     While things are happening quickly, he expects it will be several years
before gene therapy has been proved.

     In her first six weeks, Janelle has already gained 300 grams of weight and
her body is functioning normally. A girl so premature has a slightly better
chance than a boy because lungs develop faster in a female fetus than in a male.

     Inside the incubator, Janelle, wearing a knit dress and a pink cap, looked
as though she were ready to go home yesterday. But it will be many weeks before
she has gained enough weight and strength to get by on her own.

     "I'm hoping and praying she'll be home for Christmas," Ms. Boyce said.

    Her nurses said there is an excellent chance her prayers will be answered.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              313 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 8, 1996 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 632 words

HEADLINE: Implant could free diabetics  Cell-laden capsules being studied as
replacement for daily injections

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   An implant of insulin-producing cells could free diabetics from the need for
daily injections, a New York researcher said yesterday.

    A capsule no larger than a cold pill could contain millions of replacement
cells and deliver normal levels of insulin to the body for as long as a year,
Dr. Shimon Efrat, a researcher at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, told
the Research Symposium on Diabetes here.

    "This could provide the precise amount of insulin to the body minute by
minute," Dr. Efrat said. "It would be a tremendous advance over a daily
injection of insulin, which can't be precisely controlled."

    Because their bodies aren't producing insulin, diabetics lose their ability
to control sugar. An injection of insulin makes up the lack but if a person's
meal sizes vary, the amount in circulation may be too much or too little.

    A much better solution would be to have cells in the body producing insulin,
but replacement beta cells are quickly destroyed by the immune system.

    Sealing implanted cells in a capsule avoids the problem by creating a
barrier of plastic with pores too small to allow immune cells through but large
enough for nutrients to pass in and insulin to flow out. The implant would need
to be replaced every year or so through a small incision.

    So far, the method has been tested only in laboratory animals, but Dr. Efrat
sees no reason it wouldn't work for humans. Capsules of cells that produce
natural pain killers are already being tested in humans in Switzerland.

    The cells would be cultured in the laboratory from cells taken from healthy
human pancreases. "Eventually, though, we may get by with animal cells," Dr.
Efrat said. "A pig, for instance, makes very similar insulin. . . .

    "We're not talking science fiction," he added, although he expects it will
be at least 10 years before all the questions about the technique can be
answered and implants are approved for human use.

    The four-day symposium, which ends tomorrow, marks the 75th anniversary of
the discovery in Toronto of insulin by Dr. Frederick Banting and  Dr. Charles
Best.

    Dr. Efrat was one of many researchers at the conference who are proposing
alternatives to insulin injection. While insulin works well to control diabetes,
doctors consider it an imperfect solution because it can be difficult to
determine the correct dosage and it can have long-term side effects.

    Other sessions are discussing what factors cause some infants to be born
diabetic, what influences the development of diabetes in young people and the
growing problem of how to head off an expected epidemic of late onset diabetes
in an aging population.

    Research now under way promises not only replacement of cells but genetic
therapy for both early-  and late-onset diabetes, said Dr. Don Steiner of the
University of Chicago.

    But he noted that insulin will continue to be central to treatment, so
research is continuing on improved versions as well as substitutes.

    While diabetes can run in families, continuing study is showing that a
single change in a gene is not sufficient to produce diabetes, said Dr. Daniel
Porte of the University of Washington.

     For the early-onset, or Type 1, diabetes, "some other factors -- infection
perhaps or something in the environment -- plays a role," Dr. Porte said.

    Late-onset (Type 2) diabetes now appears to include a reduced function of
the cells due to buildup of waste materials.

    "We presume a high-fat diet is producing the changes," Dr. Porte said.
Researchers at the University of Washington found progressive loss of
insulin-cell functions in mice fed high-fat diets.

    It is possible to normalize cell function with drug treatment, suggested Dr.
Kenneth Polonsky of the University of Chicago, who described research on
overweight people with impaired glucose tolerance.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              316 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            September 2, 1996 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 1028 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients may grow own bypasses  Preliminary research shows gene
therapy can develop new blood vessels to overcome clogged arteries

BYLINE: BY GINA KOLATA New York Times Service; NYT

BODY:

     Researchers are reporting the first tantalizing evidence that gene therapy
can be used to grow new blood vessels -- a development that could revolutionize
the treatment of cardiovascular disease.

    In the experimental therapy, genes are added to clogged arteries in the hope
of getting patients to grow their own bypasses. The first study, carried out
last year, was characterized by great promise and little proof of success.

    Now there's reason to believe it does indeed work. A 70-year-old U.S. woman,
whose artery in her leg was so clogged that she was developing gangrene in her
foot, was given gene therapy and grew new vessels that increased the blood flow
by 82 per cent.

    The researchers caution that the blood-vessel growth was not a cure. The new
blood vessels were not sufficient to reverse the course of the gangrene that had
set in, and the woman had to have her leg amputated below the knee. The
importance of the finding, researchers say, is that it shows that the
fundamental process involved in the gene therapy works.

    Jeffrey Isner of St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and Tufts University School
of Medicine near Boston did the research, publishing his results in the Aug. 10
issue of the Lancet, a British medical journal. The work was part of a clinical
trial he is conducting with a gene that can stimulate blood-vessel growth.

    Other doctors involved in cardiology research were intrigued by the report.
"This is really monumentally important," said Steven Nissen, vice-chairman of
the cardiology division at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation.

    But Judith Swain, a professor and the chief of cardiovascular medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania Health System, was more wary. "This is an
interesting anecdotal experience, and I think it is suggestive that this
technology might really work," she said. "But you have to be cautious about a
study with one patient."

    Stuart Orkin, a Harvard Medical School pediatrics professor and co-chairman
of a committee convened to advise Harold Varmus, director of the National
Institutes of Health, on gene-therapy research, said that he was encouraged by
the results.

    "They obviously didn't cure the patient, that may be asking for too much"
because she was so severely ill. The finding leaves him with "cautious
optimism."

    The research leading up to the clinical trial began several years ago when
investigators discovered a substance, called vascular endothelial growth factor,
or vegF, that appears to be the body's signal to grow new blood vessels. Dr.
Isner reasoned that vegF genes might allow patients with clogged arteries to
grow vessels to bypass blockages.

    The system seemed almost too good to be true. In other sorts of gene therapy
, researchers wrestle with the vexing problem of how to get genes into cells and
how to avoid adding genes to cells that do not need them. Most cells will not
take up genes unless they are packed in a virus or wrapped in a membrane. But
smooth muscle cells, like those lining an artery wall, will take up and use
so-called naked DNA, the raw genes themselves. Any naked DNA that does not enter
the muscle cells is degraded in the blood stream, so it is not swept away to
places where it is not wanted.

    Moreover, the added genes stay active in the muscle cells for several weeks,
just long enough for vegF genes to coax new blood vessels to sprout but not long
enough to cause lingering and unwanted side effects.

    Experiments in rabbits showed that vegF worked; the animals grew vessels to
direct blood around blockages within three weeks.

    The ensuing clinical trial involved patients who had clogged arteries in
their legs and who could not be treated with bypass surgery or balloon
angioplasty. Each year, as many as 30,000 to 40,000 Americans have blockages so
severe that they have unrelenting pain or sores that will not heal. They face
amputations, a risky operation. About 20 per cent of the patients die in the
hospital and 40 per cent are dead within a year of their surgery.

    The first few patients were treated with 100 micrograms of vegF, roughly
equivalent to 16 trillion genes, then the dose was increased to 500 micrograms,
with no results.

    Then three patients with unrelenting pain each got 1,000 micrograms of the
genes. All three had marked improvement in the blood flow in their leg and
remained free of pain a year, Dr. Isner said. But angiograms, which are X-rays
of the arteries, did not show new blood vessels. That may be because vessels
grew but were too small to be detected with this method, Dr. Isner said.

    Angiograms can show only vessels that are at least a half-millimetre in
diameter, but animal studies have indicated that most of the vessels that grow
after vegF treatment are less than a fifth of a millimetre in diameter.

    On the other hand, Dr. Isner said, it is possible that the experiment did
not succeed and that the patients were free of pain because of a placebo effect.

    The first direct evidence that new blood vessels grew after vegF treatment
came with the eighth patient treated; she was the first person to receive 2,000
micrograms of vegF. The patient is the 70-year-old woman who had first sought
medical attention a year earlier because her right foot hurt with a sort of
cramping pain. Her doctors removed several corns from her foot, gave her
anti-inflammatory drugs and fit her with inserts for her shoes. But the pain got
worse; finally, gangrene developed in her right toe. Tests showed that the
arteries to her leg were occluded.

    A month after the vegF treatment, angiograms showed new blood vessels
growing at the woman's knee, halfway down her calf and at her ankle. Blood flow
in her leg increased by 82 per cent.

    At first, Dr. Isner hoped that the treatment would allow the woman to avoid
an amputation. Her gangrene stabilized for about two months after the gene
therapy. "We would not have expected that, but gangrene can be fairly
unpredictable," he said. After two months, the gangrene began to worsen, and the
leg was amputated below the knee.

    Now Dr. Isner is awaiting results from three other patients who had the
2,000-microgram dose, and he is planning a better gene-delivery method for
future patients.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              322 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 30, 1996 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: Canadians uncover MS genes' road map  Treatment far off, scientist
warns

BYLINE: BY WALLACE IMMEN Medical Reporter

DATELINE: TORONTO

BODY:

   A Canadian researcher believes a new road map of multiple-sclerosis genes
will make it easier to prevent the development of autoimmune diseases.

    A finding reported today based on a study of 800 Canadian families, has
narrowed the search for the factors that make people susceptible to MS, a
disease in which the immune system begins to attack the nervous system.

    "It is like reducing a hay stack to a few straws from millions before you
start searching for the pins," said Dr. George Ebers, who co-ordinated the study
at University Hospital in London, Ont.

    On the face of it, the cross-Canada study of genetic links to multiple
sclerosis confirmed what many researchers have feared: auto-immune diseases,
which include lupus, diabetes and rheumatoid arthritis, will be difficult to
screen for and treat with gene therapy because they are influenced by several
genetic factors.

    But Dr. Ebers, a professor of neurological sciences at the University of
Western Ontario, suggests that identifying the role of all the genes involved
should make it easier to identify and prevent changes that allow the disease to
develop.

    "I think it will play out that there is a way to prevent multiple sclerosis
and other autoimmune diseases early in life," Dr. Ebers predicted. "Identifying
what the genes in these areas do will very likely tell you what the mechanisms
are that lead to the disease."

    There is something very peculiar about autoimmune diseases, Dr. Ebers said.
Even though identical twins both inherit the genetic factors, often only one
develops MS. It is known that viral infections and environmental factors, such
as growing up in a cold climate, can increase risk.

    Dr. Ebers and more than two dozen collaborators across the country looked at
DNA in the genes of pairs of brothers and sisters with MS, and found areas on
five of the 23 chromosomes in the DNA code that appear to increase genetic
susceptibility to MS. The areas aren't specific genes, but include strings of
genetic information that may include several genes.

    It is too early to talk about screening or possible treatment, Dr. Ebers
said. The researchers have just begun to comb through the genes in these areas.
Of particular interest will be genes involved in the development of the nervous
system or production of myelin, the insulating material around nerves that
breaks down in multiple sclerosis.

    In someone who inherits the genetic factors, even small changes might tip
the balance and lead to disease, Dr. Ebers said. Normally, the nervous system
tells the soldiers of the immune system, "I'm part of you -- don't throw any
spears my way." If something blocks this signal -- this might include the
effects of hormones in development -- immune defenders assume nerves are foreign
material that should be persistently attacked.

    The finding of this study -- which was financed by the Multiple Sclerosis
Society of Canada -- was reported today in next month's issue of the journal
Nature Genetics. The issue also reports studies by British, Finnish and
U.S.-French collaborators that point to Chromosome 5 and 6 as particular targets
for future study. The region on Chromosome 6 has previously been implicated in
rheumatoid arthritis and Type 1 diabetes, both autoimmune diseases.

    MS is the most common neurological disease among young adults in Canada,
affecting about one in 800 people. It tends to most often affect people of
Northern European descent. Few drug treatments have shown much promise in
altering its development.

    Canada has one of the world's largest data bases on MS, based on work that
began in the 1980s with studies on twins, which has now been expanded to include
people who are adopted and half brothers and half sisters.

    The finding that MS is determined by multiple genes is in a sense reassuring
to people who have the disease and might be concerned about their children
developing it, Dr. Ebers said. The chances of offspring getting all the
susceptibility genes from an affected parent and then developing the disease is
only about 3 per cent. That's a low risk in absolute terms, he said.

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              323 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 27, 1996 Saturday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B3

LENGTH: 162 words

HEADLINE: STORYLINE  The biotech bazaar

BYLINE: ACCOMPANYING STORY ON B1

BODY:

     STORIES AND DREAMS
   The odds of finding the one, great blockbuster drug -- and of backing the
company that will make millions -- are not particularly good. For investors,
that means taking strong stomach medicine and preparing for a roller-coaster
ride through the stock markets as they gamble on a story and a dream.


      GLOBAL POWERHOUSES
   The drug industry is controlled by a handful of pharmaceutical giants who
have a finger in almost every research pie. If there's a hot field, they're in
for a piece of it. But investors looking for the big discovery -- and dramatic
stock action -- are frequently looking elsewhere.
   THE CANADIAN EDGE
   Some of the cutting-edge research is done in smaller firms that can focus on
specific fields of research and offer investors a chance to profit from a
handful of biotechnology developments. Canadian companies offer a unique
perspective, from Theratechnologies in the field of gene therapy to Biomira in
cancer vaccines.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              324 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 27, 1996 Saturday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 3062 words

HEADLINE: The biotech bazaar RESEARCH / Pharmaceutical firms are racing  to cash
in on a huge international market for new drugs to battle AIDS, cancer and
killer microbes.

BYLINE: BY KONRAD YAKABUSKI, STEPHEN NORTHFIELD BY KONRAD YAKABUSKI,

DATELINE: Montreal, Toronto

BODY:

   Montreal
   STEPHEN NORTHFIELD,
   Toronto
   The Globe and Mail
   ACCOMPANYING STORYLINE ON PAGE B3
   HIGH risk, high reward is the name of the game in biotechnology. Thousands of
hopeful companies begin the race but only a handful make it to the finish line
with a viable, money-making drug or treatment. Some estimates have placed the
odds of a new compound becoming a commercial success at one in 35,000.

    Even the rare success stories experience dark moments on the climb to the
top.

    Just ask BioChem Pharma Inc., Canada's largest and most successful homegrown
biotechnology company. The Laval, Que.-based company, which should be basking in
the success of its launch of 3TC, a blockbuster AIDS treatment, has found itself
at the centre of controversy.

    Last week, an Atlanta university was awarded a U.S. patent for 3TC and
launched a suit seeking damages. BioChem says the patent is invalid and plans to
fight hard to defend its flagship drug. The market has been juggling the odds,
sending BioChem's shares on a roller-coaster ride this week.

    BioChem stock closed at $41.25 yesterday, down $5.75 on the week and well
off a high of $71.50 set earlier this year. The company's stock also has been
dogged by concerns over the threat of increasing competition for 3TC from new
AIDS treatments.

    It takes strong nerves to play biotechnology stocks. It is a market that can
trade up or down sharply on a whiff of news or, often, on rumours. The Canadian
biotechnology sector, after enjoying a strong rally through the first half of
the year, has been caught in the grip of a vicious correction. The Toronto Stock
Exchange's biotechnology and pharmaceuticals index has plunged more than 34 per
cent since its peak in late May.

    Often, investors aren't getting much when they buy stock in a biotechnology
company -- a smattering of patents, some researchers and maybe a lab.

    What people are really investing in is a story. If the story has a happy
ending, the returns can be mind boggling. If the story turns sour -- a far more
likely outcome -- investors can often kiss their money goodbye.

    The market for drugs is enormous. The most successful drug in history,
Zantac, an ulcer drug developed by Glaxo Wellcome PLC, has generated $27-billion
(U.S.) in sales since introduced in 1981.

    But successes like Zantac are critical for the continued health of the
industry, analysts say. Profit margins above 30 per cent are considered
necessary to recoup the billions that pharmaceutical companies spend bringing
new drugs to market.

     The world market for anti-AIDS drugs was estimated at less than
$500-million in 1995. But analysts predict that figure could easily double this
year with the approval of BioChem Pharma Inc.'s drug 3TC, Bristol-Myers Squibb
Corp.'s d4T and three drugs known as protease inhibitors, each of which could
fetch $100-million to $300-million in revenues.

    While the proliferation of treatments may give new hope to those infected
with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, it also will mean intense competition for
pharmaceutical companies that spend hundreds of millions of dollars to develop
them.

    "The market is going to be very fragmented," said Ezra Lwowski, an analyst
at Yorkton Securities Inc.

    There is evidence already that competition will pare profit margins. When
Merck & Co. Inc. introduced its new protease inhibitor Crixivan in March, it
slashed the price to suppliers by up to a third compared with the price of
competing treatments from Hoffman-La Roche Inc. and Abbott Laboratories Ltd.

    The powerful U.S. AIDS lobby and activists have stepped up charges of price
gouging -- one group has taken to plastering pharmacy doors with posters reading
"Profiteers!" They are pressuring drug companies to shave margins, which by
extension means it will take the companies longer to recoup drug development
costs.

     "The other risk," Mr. Lwowski pointed out, "is that even if a drug works,
it may not work for long. HIV is a very tough virus."

    With its rapid rates of reproduction and mutation, he added, "HIV is no
sitting duck." Sooner or later, it outsmarts drugs by changing form and
developing a resistance to them.

    Still, the trend toward therapies that combine three drugs -- normally
Glaxo's AZT, 3TC and a protease inhibitor -- has elevated expectations that
resistance to the drugs can be held in check for several years, if not
permanently.

    Several studies presented at the 11th International Conference on AIDS, held
this month in Vancouver, showed that such combination therapies succeeded in
reducing to undetectable levels the viral load in patients.

    For pharmaceutical companies, that could turn out to be a double-edged
sword, noted Dr. Éric Cohen, head of the Laboratory of Human Retrovirology at
the Université de Montréal.

    With the emergence of combination therapies, experts have come to see HIV
infection evolving into a chronic, but no longer fatal, condition. If so, the
life span of anti-AIDS drugs could number several years, even decades.

    Or maybe not. Dr. Cohen pointed out that, within the next 18 months, the
latest research results on combination therapies will be released. Several
groups of patients whose viral load has fallen to undetectable levels will end
treatment to determine whether the virus has been eradicated. Such a finding
would be tantamount to a cure.

    Dr. Cohen conceded that the possibility of that happening remains small but
added: "Nevertheless, for the first time the possibility is there. If you had
told me that six months ago, I would have laughed."

    Still, for all its success, combination therapy also has its downside, Dr.
Cohen said. Not only is it expensive -- about $14,000 a year for a three-drug
regime -- but it often carries debilitating side effects.

    Current drugs therefore risk being ousted by new treatments. And there are
plenty in the works.

    U.S.-based Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc. and Agouron Pharmaceuticals Inc. have
developed protease inhibitors that are absorbed more easily than current
versions. Like BioChem's 3TC, Vertex's VX-114 has been licenced to Glaxo
Wellcome PLC.

    It is not the only AIDS drug Glaxo has in the pipeline. The pharmaceutical
giant is also developing 1592, although the drug is farther away from coming to
market than VX-114.

    German multinational Boehringer Ingelheim recently received U.S. regulatory
approval for Viramune, the first of yet another class of AIDS therapies.

    In Canada, Montreal-based Theratechnologies Inc. is pursuing gene therapy as
a solution to HIV infection. The company has staked its claim on a discovery
made by Dr. Cohen, a gene that seems to neutralize the virus and prevent it from
reproducing. By injecting this gene into cells targeted by HIV, the company
hopes to render them resistant to the virus.

    Meanwhile, Allelix Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Mississauga is awaiting the
results of clinical trials on its anti-AIDS compound 4C.

    In addition, there are dozens of drugs on the market or about to hit it that
are aimed at treating AIDS-related conditions, such as the countless
opportunistic infections that afflict those infected with HIV. For instance,
Hoffman-LaRoche recently launched Cytovene, a drug to combat CMV retinitis, a
virus that causes loss of eyesight in as many as half of AIDS sufferers.

    Yorkton's Mr. Lwowski is nonplussed by all this competition crowding into a
relatively small market -- at least in developed countries, where the drugs are
sold.

    "If I were an executive of a pharmaceutical company, I would stay away from
this area," he said. Eli Lilly and Co. seems to have come to the same conclusion
and has shunned the AIDS market.

   Bacterial infections

   With 160 antibiotics on the market, it would seem the world's medicine
cabinets are well stocked to combat almost any bacterial infection. Not quite.

    Current medications increasingly are failing, as bacterial resistance to
antibiotics robs drugs of their potency. Once-powerful therapies have become or
risk becoming useless, turning common throat and ear infections into deadly
afflictions.

    Even vancomycin, long considered the antibiotic of last resort for its
ability to kill any bacterial strain, recently has proven no match for the
mighty enterococcus bacterium common to many gastrointestinal ailments.

    "Your chances of getting a drug-resistant bacteria are becoming as good as
getting a drug-sensitive bacteria," said Ezra Lwowski of Yorkton Securities Inc.

     Public health officials' biggest fear is that so-called VREs --
vancomycin-resistant enterococci -- may transfer their ability to outsmart drugs
to other bacteria. That could spell disaster in crowded urban hospitals, where
patients admitted to mend broken bones end up contracting a deadly,
drug-resistant bacterial infection.

    It is no wonder that, after exiting what they considered a crowded market in
the 1980s, pharmaceutical companies have rushed back to the laboratory to come
up with new classes of antibiotics to outsmart the clever bugs.

    While such research remains a public health imperative, it also may turn out
to be a pharmaceutical bonanza for the companies that bring the new drugs to
market.

    "The next big antibiotic could be a billion-dollar product," said Ed Pykon,
an analyst at NatWest Securities in New York.

    With global sales of $23-billion in 1995, the antibiotics market is
"hopelessly large," Mr. Lwowski mused.

    Almost every major multinational drug company is working on new products to
kill new or resistant bugs. But because most companies have been late getting
out of the gate, it could be several years before their shareholders begin
earning a return on research efforts.

    French giant Rhône-Poulenc Rorer Inc. has a head start. It is the only major
player with a new antibiotic -- an updated version of a fungus-derived class of
drugs called streptogramins -- in advanced human clinical trials.

    U.S. giant Eli Lilly & Co., which last year racked up sales of more than
$460-million from vancomycin alone, is developing a new version of that drug
that kills VRE and is considered 100 times more potent than the existing
version. The compound, known as LY333328, has shown positive results against all
bacteria in test-tube and animal studies. Eli Lilly could begin human clinical
trials as early as this fall, spokeswoman Amy Magan said.

    Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc., Pfizer Inc., Parke-Davis and Co., Bristol-Myers
Squibb Corp. and Abbott Laboratories Ltd. are also working on new antibiotics.

    Most of the research, however, focuses on reformulating existing drugs by
altering their chemical structure to make them unrecognizable to bacteria.
Inevitably, though, they too risk being outsmarted as bacteria they are designed
to target mutate.

    "Those are not new classes of antibiotics. So they may work for a while, but
they are still going to be subject to resistance. It doesn't solve the problem
in the long term," Mr. Lwowski said.

    Dr. Éric Cohen of the Laboratory of Human Retrovirology in Montreal agreed.
Entirely new approaches are needed if science hopes to regain its lead over
bacteria, he said.

    One of the most promising among them, Dr. Cohen added, is gene sequencing.
By identifying the genetic structure of bacteria, researchers can then work on
developing treatments to attack genes that are essential to the bugs' survival.

    Human Genome Sciences Inc. has linked up with SmithKline Beecham PLC to
develop drugs based on this approach. Pfizer this year struck an alliance with
Microcide Pharmaceuticals Inc., a company active in genomics research, for the
same reason.

    Before long, "practically every multinational will have allied itself with a
genomics company," Dr. Cohen predicted.

    But genomics is not the sole area of innovation. Vancouver-based Micrologix
Biotech Inc. has earned attention in scientific and investment circles for its
development of genetically engineered antibacterial peptides. Called
"enhancers," they improve the effectiveness of existing drugs by disrupting the
bacterial membrane to allow penetration by conventional antibiotics.

    Micrologix is on the hunt for a deep-pocketed partner to help bring its
technology to market.

    "There is no question in my mind that they are going to find one," Mr.
Lwowski said.

    Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. has developed products to inhibit cell function
in drug-resistant strains of bacteria and fungi. It has cut separate marketing
deals with Bristol-Myers, Merck & Co. and Pfizer Inc.

    Another thrust of the current research efforts focuses on vaccines to prime
the body's immune system against bacterial infections before they occur. BioChem
Pharma Inc. is working on a single vaccine that it maintains is effective
against all types of meningitis and another that would prevent all strains of
streptococcus pneumoniae.

    The Laval, Que.-based company faces competition, however, from both Merck
and American Home Products Corp., which also are jointly developing a
streptococcus vaccine.

   Cancer

   A cure for cancer? In our lifetime? Maybe, maybe not. But if it doesn't
happen, it won't be for lack of cash or effort.

    According to the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, of
284 new biotechnology products in clinical trials in the United States -- the
world's most important incubator for new drugs -- a staggering 40 per cent are
aimed at fighting the deadly disease in its 100-plus forms. And in Canada,
numerous biotechnology companies are at the cutting edge of new research.

    Why all the activity? With one in three people expected to develop some form
of cancer over their lifetime, it's not surprising that pharmaceutical companies
are in hot pursuit of advances in treatment of the disease.

    The market is enormous. It's estimated that $35-billion is spent annually on
treatment in the United States and about $3.5-billion (Canadian) in Canada.

    Despite years of efforts and some success in extending the life span of
cancer patients, the Holy Grail of cancer research -- a cure -- has eluded
scientists. Surgery, radiation and chemotherapy continue to be the core
treatment.

    But that will change if the dozens of biotechnology companies taking bold
new approaches strike pay dirt. While a cure is always at the back of every
researcher's mind, many efforts are now aimed at merely controlling the disease,
increasing life expectancy and searching for more benign forms of treatment.

    "There is now a growing awareness and acceptance by cancer specialists that
we need something more than chemotherapy," said Dr. Grant MacLean,
vice-president of clinical and regulatory affairs for Edmonton-based Biomira
Inc., a leading player in efforts to develop a cancer vaccine.

    Gene therapy is seen as having enormous potential in treating cancer. By
isolating genes linked with certain types of cancers and finding out what makes
them tick, researchers hope eventually to develop effective treatments. But
progress has been slow and practical applications are years away, analysts say.

    Some analysts believe the next big breakthrough in cancer research will be
made by companies such as Biomira that are trying to figure out ways to harness
the body's own powers to fight disease. Considered a fringe element in cancer
research just a decade ago, so-called immune-based treatments have emerged in
the 1990s to form the thrust of many research efforts.

    The concept is simple. For a variety of reasons, cancer cells grow
undetected by the body's immune system. Figuring out why and finding a way to
"kick start" the immune system into action lies at the heart of much cancer
research.

    "Immunology is probably the next biggest advance in the treatment of
cancer," said Wayne Schnarr, an analyst with Yorkton Securities Inc. in Toronto.

    Biomira is in the middle of a quest that has eluded many researchers --
developing an effective cancer vaccine. Despite some mixed results by companies
in the early 1990s, research into a vaccine is now booming. Of 62 vaccines now
in registered clinical trials in the United States, about a third of them are
cancer vaccines. The U.S.-government backed National Cancer Institute alone has
more than 10 cancer vaccines in clinical trials.

    Some of the largest drug companies -- including Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.,
the world's biggest seller of cancer drugs -- have been reported to be gearing
up research in the area. The bulk of the trials into cancer vaccines are in the
very early stages of research and are aimed at relatively easier-to-treat
conditions such as skin cancer.

    In some cases, early results have not been too encouraging. Most recently,
New York-based ImClone Systems Inc. shares fell in May after the release of
clinical results from its lung cancer vaccine. ImClone has an alliance with
Merck.

    Biomira's flagship product Theratope, a synthetic vaccine designed to boost
the immune system and control cancer, is one of the cancer vaccines farthest
down the regulatory pipeline. Theratope is being tested as a potential treatment
for breast, colon and ovarian cancer. The drug is on the cusp of Phase III
clinical trials -- the final stage of testing prior to applying for final
approval -- and could be ready for approval some time in 1999.

     Mr. Schnarr estimates the potential market at $2-billion (U.S.) a year.
Based on a market share of 10 per cent and royalties of 15 per cent under a
marketing deal, the vaccine, could be worth $30-million annually to Biomira.

    Firms like Biomira aren't actually aiming for a cure, at least not yet.
Containing the disease and extending the life expectancy of cancer patients
would be a major step forward.

    Other Canadian companies working on various immune-based treatments that
could form future cancer therapies include Bioniche Inc., Imutec Corp.,
Novopharm Biotech Inc. and StressGen Biotechnologies Corp.

   Allelix
   Daily close on the TSE
   Friday's close: $19.40, unchanged
   Vertex
   Daily close on Nasdaq
   Friday's close: U.S. $26.75, unchanged
   Theratech
   Daily close on the ME
   Friday's close: $2.90, down 10¢
   Human Genome
   Daily close on Nasdaq
   Friday's close: U.S. $33.20, down $2
   Eli Lilly
   Daily close on NYSE
   Friday's close: U.S. $56.25, down 12¢
   Micrologix
   Daily close on the TSE
   Friday's close: $3.10, down 20¢
   Biomira
   Daily close on the TSE
   Friday's close: $7, down 10¢
   StressGen
   Daily close on the TSE
   Friday's close: $3.09, up 9¢
   Bioniche
   Daily close on the TSE
   Friday's close: $1.01, down 3¢

GRAPHIC: Illustration

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              325 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 25, 1996 Thursday

SECTION: REPORT ON BUSINESS; Pg. B12

LENGTH: 871 words

HEADLINE: Strategies for biotech investing  Choose lesser-known companies on the
verge of launching new products, advisers say

BYLINE: BY ANN GIBBON British Columbia Bureau

DATELINE: VANCOUVER

BODY:

   Investors in the mercurial world of biotechnology stocks have always required
nerves of steel. They're dealing with companies heavy on complex science and
hype, and often light on actual products, revenues and profits.

    In recent days, the volatility has been more heightened than ever.

    No company better embodies those swings than BioChem Pharma Inc.,the
Montreal maker of HIV and hepatitis therapeutics. At one point yesterday,
investors knocked almost $8 off its stock amid questions about whether an
American university has U.S. patent rights on its famous AIDS treatment 3TC. (It
recovered to close at $43.25, down $2.45.)

    There has been a big selloff in the sector since it peaked in late May.
"There was no specific reason but the longer a bull market, in any sector, the
more people think there are undeserved valuations for companies," Ezra Lowowski,
an analyst at Yorkton Securities in Toronto, said. "People get their fill and
say, 'Whoa, what am I buying here?' "

    Yorkton's 39-stock life sciences index has dropped almost 22 per cent from
late May to now, although it's still 26.9 per cent higher than it was at the
beginning of January.

    It's a tough, speculative sector. "Basically, you're buying a vision," Mr.
Lowowski said. But if investors find a strategy to spread out their risk, they
stand to reap big rewards later on, analysts say.

    What is the right way to play this business -- and what stocks should be
bought to win at it?

    Michael Jams, of Montreal-based Dlouhy Investments Inc., has two rules for
investors riding the current roller-coaster biotech sector: First, steer clear
of the big-name, high-profile drug companies that make headlines or are often
talked about by analysts, such as BioChem or Vancouver-based QLT
PhotoTherapeutics Inc.,formerly Quadra Logic Technologies Inc.

    Instead, choose the companies that have had less publicity and as a result,
less price volatility. In that category he would place Montreal-based Ibex
Technologies,which is developing a drug to restore the blood's clotting ability
after heart surgery. (The drug, Neutralase, counters the effects of the
anti-coagulant that patients are given during surgery.)

    Another such stock is little-known Salix Holdings Inc., based in Palo Alto,
Calif., but listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange. No analysts cover the company,
whose lead drug is a gastrointestinal therapeutic called Colizide. Mr. Jams
notes the selloff in the biotech sector has pushed its stock $1 below its
initial public offering price of $7.

    Second, he advises, pick companies that are close to launching their
products or have already launched them. That will give investors tangible things
such as sales and earnings to better enable them to value the stock. Again,
Salix is in this category: it is preparing a new drug application for Colizide
to be submitted in the last quarter of the year and says it expects the drug to
be approved and launched a year after that.

    Along those same lines, Mr. Lowowski of Yorkton Securities suggests
Toronto-based Draxis Health Inc. (formerly Morton Shulman's Deprenyl Research
Ltd.), which is awaiting approval on its Anipryl veterinary product, used to
treat neurological problems in dogs.

    If investors follow these steps and have the stomach for slightly
higher-risk companies, they might want to include Victoria-based StressGen
Biotechnologics Corp.,Mr. Jams said. He believes the stock, listed on the
Vancouver Stock Exchange and the TSE, is headed higher but could suffer a little
turbulence on the way, given that StressGen's gene therapies are still in
preclinical trials and have a long way to go.

    If they want to buy a company that automatically brings them some diversity
in the sector, he suggests Drug Royalty Corp. of Toronto. The cash-rich company
kicks in research and development and marketing money to companies so they can
develop new drugs. In return, it gets a set percentage of the companies'
royalties.

    Whatever biotech stocks investors pick, they are always faced with the
problem of attaching a value to companies that often haven't brought products to
market, and therefore lack significant revenues and earnings.

    Mr. Lowowski suggests estimating the potential market size for the company's
products, then forecasting its sales and earnings based on the market and
applying a discount that reflects the rate of risk involved.

    Another approach is to look at companies that are comparable in terms of
their products' stage of development, the size of their target market and the
number of drugs they have in the pipeline. Calculate the market value of the
company and stack it up with the other companies it is being compared to. It is
then possible to determine whether the price of the company is reasonable or too
expensive.

   TSE BIOTECH STOCKS TO WATCH

                           Yesterday's           52-week
                            close      Change     high      low
Ibex technoloogies - IBT*    $6.00     -$0.10     $16.75    $1.90
Salix Holdings - SLX.S        6.00       -          7.50     6.00
Draxis Health - DAX           4.45      +0.55       6.55     2.03
QLT Phototherapeutics - QLT  19.00      -2.00      32.30     7.75

   * price and change for July 23
Source: Star Data Systems

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2007


                              327 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 25, 1996 Saturday

LENGTH: 1306 words

HEADLINE: Web sites   How one species' deformity is another's evolution
Researchers find that altering biochemical signals   called BMPs can change a
chicken's toes into   duck-like aquatic paddles

BYLINE: GEORGE JOHNSON; NYT

BODY:

   BY GEORGE JOHNSON
New York Times Service
AS scientists piece together the complex biochemistry that impels
undifferentiated cells to become a fully developed creature, they are
learning a striking lesson: Context is everything. What counts as a
deformity in one organism can be one of evolution's gifts for another.

       Take the case of syndactyly, the webbing of the fingers and toes. What
is seen as a mild deformity in people expands the duck's domain to include
the water as well as the sky.

   How is it that the ends of some creatures' limbs blossom into hands and
feet, with well-defined fingers and toes, while others sprout aquatic
paddles? In a report published in the May 3 issue of the journal Science,
researchers at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan say
they have found an important part of the answer: a biochemical signal that
seems to control the appearance, or absence, of webbing.

   In an exquisitely clearcut experiment, Dr. Hongyan Zou and Dr. Lee
Niswander blocked the signal and found that chickens developed duck feet.
"The effect is really quite dramatic," says Dr. Niswander. In her paper,
she notes that blocking the molecular signal - produced by bone
morphogenetic proteins, or BMPs - caused the deformity in "essentially 100
per cent" of the experimental limbs.

   Other laboratories have found that BMPs are important elsewhere in the
developing body, telling a cluster of cells to form a thumb or little
finger, for example, and orchestrating the development of kidneys, eyes
and other tissues. BMPs were originally of interest mostly to
biotechnology companies hoping to cash in on drugs that stimulate bone
growth, but they are turning out to be so ubiquitous in embryonic
development that some researchers wish they could give them a jazzier
name.

   "They are really a fascinating group of molecules," says Dr. Brigid
Hogan, a developmental biologist at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at
Vanderbilt University in Nashville. "They are probably important for the
development of every organ."

   Last year, Dr. Hogan's lab discovered that if the gene that codes for a
certain type of BMP molecule is deleted from a developing embryo, the
organism will die without forming the middle layer of cells, called the
mesoderm, that gives rise to a variety of tissues, such as muscle, kidney,
cartilage and bone. More recently, in work yet to be published, her lab
found that knocking out the gene responsible for another kind of BMP keeps
mice from developing sperm.

   Another researcher, Dr. Elizabeth Robertson, a Harvard University
biologist, discovered that cancelling BMP genes led to eye and kidney
deformities as well as misshapen feet.

   "The question is how does one kind of molecule play all these different
roles?" asks Dr. Cheryll Tickle, a professor of developmental biology at
University College in London. She says Dr. Niswander's study will be
important in untangling the chemical pathways through which BMPs guide the
transformation of an egg into a newborn. "It could be quite a complicated
balance," she says. In some stages of development, BMPs are involved in
programmed cell death, the pruning away of unwanted tissue. And they have
other roles as well.

   As if the work of BMPs were not complex enough, researchers have found
that other genes are also involved in limb development. In the April 26
issue of Science, Drs. Yasuteru Muragaki, Stefan Mundlos, Joseph Upton and
Bjorn R. Olsen of Harvard Medical School describe how they traced a human
deformity called synpolydactyly - webbing accompanied by extra digits - to
a mutation of a so-called homeobox gene.

   Homeobox genes were first found to control development in the fruit
fly: A mutation in one such gene can cause limbs to sprout from the head
at the place where antennae should be. Since the discovery of homeobox
genes, corresponding genes have been found throughout the animal kingdom.

   Dr. Mundlos says his group's research might help answer some puzzling
questions about the different ways in which limbs develop. "Why do fish
have fins, while chicken have feet with three digits in front and one in
back, while we have five digits?" he asks. "We believe that the mutation
we found might shed light on that question."

   Homeobox genes produce molecules called transcription factors that turn
other genes on and off. The extra fingers and toes of synpolydactyly seem
to arise when a mutation causes the homeobox gene to insert too many
copies of an amino acid, alanine, into the transcription factor involved
with growing digits. Mice - and people, with their five-digit paws - have
a stretch of 15 alanines in the homeobox protein. Chickens have nine;
zebra fish have none.

   Dr. Mundlos says it is not clear how his group's results on limb
development are connected to the recent findings about BMPs. "All these
molecules are closely related to each other," he says. "We have pretty
good evidence that they all have something to do with very early
patterning."

   Scientists suspect that in most animals, BMP molecules keep webs from
forming by unleashing programmed cell death. When signalled by BMPs, the
cells between the digits commit mass suicide, allowing independent digits
to develop. In ducks, and apparently in people with syndactyly, this does
not happen.

   Dr. Niswander decided to see what would happen if she blocked the
cellular suicide signal. Molecules like BMPs deliver their message by
binding to a receptor molecule sticking out from the outer membrane of a
cell. When a BMP binds to the receptor, a cascade of internal chemical
reactions begins, which ultimately tells the nucleus to make the enzymes
needed to carry out some specific task.

   To cut off the BMP signal, Dr. Niswander and her colleagues used a kind
of reverse gene therapy. First, they caused a mutation in the gene that
makes BMP receptors. They inserted the mutated gene into a retrovirus,
which smuggled the altered gene into the cells of chick embryos. The
embryos with the mutated gene produced defective BMP receptors, which were
deaf to the suicide signal. Sure enough, the chicks developed ducklike
webs between their toes.

   Then, using the hybridization technique to find out where the BMP genes
were active, the scientists looked at ducks and found that while the genes
had been turned on in other parts of the body, they had not been in the
tissues between the digits.

   The scientists also discovered that the lack of BMPs led to another
change in the chicks: They tended to develop feathers on their feet
instead of scales. Scientists believe that during development, certain
cells are capable of taking on different identities. If left alone, they
become feathers. If nudged by BMPs, they become scales.

   Scientists assume that the signaling system uncovered in chicks is also
active in people. When nature stumbles upon a useful trick, it tends to
conserve it.

   The details of just how programmed cell death shapes the limbs remain a
mystery, says Dr. Matthew P. Scott, a professor of developmental biology
and genetics at Stanford University and a Howard Hughes Medical Institute
investigator. "We now need to know how BMP signals are produced in just
the right places . . . but we could not ask that question without Zou and
Niswander's work."

   The implications of the experiment may reach beyond the domain of
embryology. Programmed cell death is also important in the sculpturing of
other parts of the body, including the brain, where a profusion of neurons
in the fetus and newborn is whittled away to leave the neural circuitry.
There have been suggestions that BMPs are involved in that process as
well.

   The molecules also play roles that seem to have no connection with
cellular suicide. "The interesting thing about BMPs is that they can do
different things at different stages of embryonic development," says Dr.
Hogan of Vanderbilt. "In some contexts, they promote cell death - in
others, cell survival, depending on where and when they are expressed."

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              328 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 4, 1996 Saturday

LENGTH: 796 words

HEADLINE: Psychiatrists to launch phone line for depression sufferers
Toll-free service aimed at dispelling some of the   stigma around mental
illness, will offer expert   information to patients, doctors

BYLINE: JANE GADD; GAM

BODY:

   BY JANE GADD
The Globe and Mail
Two leading Canadian psychiatrists are launching a toll-free telephone
line with 200 recorded messages about clinical depression and manic-
depressive illness in an effort to improve what they consider inadequate
detection and treatment of these common disorders.

       The phone line will differ from other mental-health information lines
that already exist in British Columbia and Ontario, for example, in that
it will give detailed expert information on treatment to both doctors and
patients.

   Surveys conducted in Canada and the United States indicate one in four
people suffers from depression or manic-depressive illness serious enough
to require medical treatment at some point, Dr. Anthony Levitt, director
of the mood-disorders program at Hamilton Psychiatric Hospital, said in an
interview yesterday.

   Yet two-thirds of sufferers do not go to a doctor. Of the one-third who
do, half are told to buck up or do more exercise, or are given other
unhelpful advice.

   Of the remaining half who receive treatment, half are undertreated,
said Dr. Levitt, who is launching the line on Monday with Russell Joffe,
chairman of the psychiatry department at McMaster University in Hamilton.

   Three-quarters of the $1-million startup cost for the line was provided
by five major drug companies, while the rest is coming from the Ontario
Ministry of Health and McMaster University.

   Dr. Levitt said sharing the drug industry's contribution among five
companies ensures that no single drug will be promoted.

   Here's how the line works:
   The first message the caller hears says they can choose physician
information, which is quite technical, or patient information, which is
simpler.

   If the caller fears he or she is clinically depressed, the first step
is a 10-question test that takes about three minutes to complete and
involves recorded questions answered by pushing numbers on the phone. The
caller will be asked, for example, if she or he has been having difficulty
concentrating, suffering from insomnia, or had a period of unexplained
weight gain or loss.

   At the end of the test, the recorded voice of Dr. Levitt, Dr. Joffe or
one of three other psychiatric team members seeks to reassure the caller
by saying that depression is highly treatable and that more information on
where to go for help can be obtained by pushing more buttons.

   Step 2 provides taped information about the course of depressive
illnesses, the symptoms, the genetics and the subtypes.

   Step 3 outlines four main types of treatment: psychotherapy,
medication, light therapy and electro-convulsive therapy.

   Step 4 offers tips on how to cope with the illness.

   At any point the caller can press 0 and be provided with the number of
a crisis line by an operator.

   Callers following the physician route will first find detailed
explanations of the prevalence and course of depressive illnesses, their
genetics and associated conditions. The next stage lays out treatment
options including psychotherapeutic methods, lists of drugs with their
pharmacology, safety record and side effects, and warnings about any
potential drug interactions.

   "At no stage do we tell them how a person should be treated or what
drug to prescribe," Dr. Levitt said.

   Dr. Levitt says most family doctors learned a dose schedule for
antidepressants in medical school that is too conservative and out of
date. They also tend to overreact when patients complain about side
effects, and withdraw the medication too soon, he said.

   As for the patients, he said, they are hypersensitive to the social
stigma that continues to be attached to depression.

   Despite saturation-level coverage of new antidepressant drugs in
newspapers, magazines and books, and the growth of joke books abouit
Prozac and humorous references to the drug in advertising, people
suffering from depression continue to feel that they are to blame and that
they caused it.

   Their friends and many doctors tell them they have to just get over it,
and this adds to the sense of shame that is one of the symptoms of
depression in itself, Dr. Levitt said.

   "As an example, a physician came to see me (for depression) and said,
'Look, I'm a physician, I shouldn't have any reservations, I know it's an
illness; but please don't tell anyone, and is there any way we could meet
at a different place?' "
   The two psychiatrists got the idea for the line when they were both
practicing at the Clarke Institute of Psychiatry in Toronto a few years
ago and were receiving calls from family doctors wanting advice on how to
prescribe antidepressants correctly.

   "We realized there was a need and they couldn't always reach us."

   Ideally, the line would have 24 operators answering all of the calls
personally, Dr. Levitt said. "This is expert information on a shoestring."

   The number, toll free in Ontario, is: 1-888-557-5051, extension 8000.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              334 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 9, 1996 Tuesday

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Monsanto to acquire Grace unit assets   'Gene-gun' pioneer in biotech
deal

BYLINE: PETER FRITSCH; WSJ

BODY:

   BY PETER FRITSCH
The Wall Street Journal
Monsanto Co., further sharpening its focus on genetically engineered
agricultural products, said it agreed to pay $150-million (U.S.) to
acquire the plant biotechnology assets of W.R. Grace & Co.'s Agracetus
Inc. unit.

       St. Louis-based Monsanto said the purchase includes related
intellectual property rights for technologies that help genetically
transform plants, immunizing crops to herbicides and enabling them to
fight off viruses and insects. The sale doesn't include Agracetus's human
gene therapy business, known as Auragen Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Agracetus, of Middleton, Wis., is known as a pioneer in the use of
"gene gun" technology, which shoots genetically engineered material into
plants. The company has also developed technologies to strengthen cotton
fibre.

   The purchase gives Monsanto the biotechnology equivalent of new
manufacturing capacity. Monsanto already has regulatory approval for
genetically engineered plant products that do everything from protect
cotton from insects to immunize soybeans to the company's flagship Roundup
herbicide.

   Last month, Monsanto received a broad patent for a class of genes that
helps crops attack insects. At that time, the company sued Mycogen Corp.
and Ciba-Geigy Corp., claiming their products use Monsanto's newly
patented genes. So eager is Monsanto to concentrate on plant biotechnology
that it sold its North American and European styrenics plastics businesses
late last year to Bayer AG of Germany for $580-million (U.S.).

   Agracetus has licenced technologies for producing genetically altered
crops to Monsanto since 1991. The purchase of the Agracetus assets will
preclude Monsanto from paying further royalties for those technologies as
well as having to negotiate licencing fees for future applications.
Agracetus also licences its technologies to Monsanto competitors.

   The spokesman said the acquisition will also resolve two patent
disputes between Monsanto and Grace. Monsanto has challenged Agracetus's
U.S. patents for virus resistance in potatoes as well as patents for
genetically engineered soybeans in Europe. Seven other companies are
challenging Agracetus's European soybean patent claims.

   For Grace, of Boca Raton, Fla., the sale represents the latest in a
flurry of moves by chairman Albert Costello to shed non-core assets. Mr.
Costello has said he wants Grace to focus on the company's packaging and
specialty-chemicals businesses. Within the past two months, Grace has
announced the sale of its National Medical Care unit to Fresenius AG of
Germany - a deal valued at $4-billion - and its Dearborn water-treatment
business to Betz Laboratories Inc. for $632-million.

   In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Grace's shares
fell 75 cents to $77.37. Monsanto's shares lost $1.25 to $152.25.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              338 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             March 7, 1996 Thursday

LENGTH: 138 words

HEADLINE: Health   Synthetic genes implanted in children

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: Auckland NEW ZEALAND

BODY:

   AUCKLAND
 Two American children with a rare brain disorder were implanted with
synthetic genetic material yesterday in what New Zealand medical officials
said was a world first.

       They said the operations may help delay the progression of their
condition, Canavan disease, which stops them from walking or talking.

   The form of gene therapy, where a small amount of the genetic material
DNA is administered to the brain, was a world first, they said.

   "There has not been a gene intervention of this kind for any child
before," Professor Matthew During, head of molecular medicine at the
Auckland School of Medicine, said. The operation, which was conducted by
Edward Mee, had previously been applied only to terminally ill adult
cancer patients and to animals.

   "It gives them a glimmer of hope where they had no glimmer before," he
said. Reuters

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              341 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1996 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 25, 1996 Thursday

LENGTH: 437 words

HEADLINE: Genes isolated that keep cells from dying   Researchers hope discovery
will open   new treatments for AIDS, cancer and Alzheimer's

BYLINE: STEPHEN STRAUSS; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   BY STEPHEN STRAUSS
Science Reporter
  TORONTO
 It may not quite be a fountain of youth, but Canadian and Japanese
researchers are reporting today that they have isolated four genes that
keep cells in the body from dying.

       While the new findings are still very much on the level of basic
research, researchers at the University of Ottawa hope that their work
will open up new treatments for illnesses as different - and devastating -
as Alzheimer's, AIDS and cancer.

   In research published in the British journal Nature, the Ottawa group
and their Japanese collaborators describe how the four genes significantly
reduced cell death in ovarian, skin, and cervical cells. The scientists
also believe the genes anti-death proteins work on cells generally
distributed through-out the body.

   Normal cell death, which is known scientifically as apoptosis, occurs
millions of times every day and is necessary if the body is to have room
for the new cells it just as regularly creates. A breakdown in the orderly
procession of cell birth and death has been linked to a number of
diseases.

   In particular, the change from HIV-infected to full blown AIDS is often
heralded by a precipitous die-off of certain white blood cells. On the
other hand, the "immortality" of cancer cells has been linked to a
breakdown in cell death chemistry.

   Last year the Ottawa group, headed by molecular geneticists Alex
MacKenzie, and Robert Korneluk, found one of the two genes whose mutated
form produces spinal muscular atrophy, a degenerative muscle disease. It
affects about 100 children in Canada each year and kills most before the
age of two.

   Today's result shows that a non-mutated form of the muscular atrophy
gene, as well as three related genes, prevent cell death. While several
dozen genes that trigger apoptosis have been reported, the new finding
raises the number which inhibit it to 10 from six.

   The clinical potential of the work, which has been funded by a variety
of private and public sources, is in so-called gene therapy. In this still
experimental treatment, non-mutated copies of the gene are put into the
body and produce normal proteins.

   "If gene therapy gets up and running, and that is an open question at
the moment, these are the kind of genes we would use on SMA, Lou Gehrig's
disease, potentially Alzheimer's, post stroke cases, and AIDS," said Dr.
MacKenzie, about the potential of today's report.

   However, he stressed treatment based on turning cell death on or off
has its own perils. "The large caveat is when put them in, you had better
be damn sure you are putting in tissues you want, and not initiating
cancers in tissues you haven't targeted," he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2007


                              345 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          December 13, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 56 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   Schering-Plough Corp. of Madison, N.J., said yesterday it will acquire all
outstanding shares of the gene therapy company Canji Inc. it does not
already own for $54.5-million. Schering-Plough already holds an 8.5-per-
cent stake in San Diego, Calif.-based Canji and is developing new cancer
treatments based on Canji's scientific discoveries.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              346 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 7, 1995 Thursday

LENGTH: 1092 words

HEADLINE: Scientists track down body's AIDS blockers   Suppressor factors
prevent virus from replicating

BYLINE: STEPHEN STRAUSS; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   BY STEPHEN STRAUSS
Science Reporter
  TORONTO
 In what is being described as a breakthrough in AIDS research, chemicals
produced by the human immune system have been shown to stop the spread of
the virus.

       The discovery may lead to "natural" anti-AIDS drugs and to tests that
explain why some people with the virus can live disease-free as long as 15
years and others become sick in a year or two.

   Scientists from Germany, the United States and Italy are reporting in
two separate studies that they have isolated four HIV-suppressor factors
that prevent the human immunodeficiency virus from replicating. The
suppressor factors are produced by a type of white cell called CD8.

   "There is no question this is door-opening time," said Anthony Faucci,
chief of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   A major reason for the scientists' excitement is the absolute
suppression of virus growth that one of the groups found.

   In tomorrow's issue of the journal Science, Robert Gallo of the U.S.
National Institutes of Health and Paolo Lusso of the San Raffaele
Scientific Institute in Milan and their associates report that a
combination of very small amounts of three biochemicals essentially
stopped cold the spread of six varieties of the acquired immune deficiency
syndrome virus.

   Interestingly, there was little or no effect when each of the
substances, RANTES, MIP-1alpha and MIP-1beta, was applied separately.

   The three substances are chemokines, members of a class of biochemicals
whose principal purpose had been previously seen as attracting white blood
cells to areas of infection.

   Less dramatic viral suppression was reported for the chemokine
interleukin-16 in a paper published in Nature magazine today by Reinhard
Kurth and his associates at the Paul Ehrlich Institute in Langen, Germany.

   The findings also show the substances blocking the ability of HIV-
infected cells to produce additional HIV but not killing the infected
cells.

   "This is the first time that we have had a natural, biological approach
to treat the virus," Dr. Gallo said in an interview, adding that he
believes that other HIV-suppressive substances created by other parts of
the immune system will be discovered in the next year or two.

   On one level, some researchers find the new findings exciting because
they represent a reversal in the traditional route many laboratories have
taken in trying to combat a virus that eventually completely disables the
immune system.

   As Kenneth Rosenthal, an immunovirologist at McMaster University in
Hamilton, put it, "We have spent too much time looking at the virus and
not enough looking at the immunology."

   Much research has been directed at trying to understand how the AIDS
virus destroys the immune system, but the new work focuses on how the
immune system attacks the virus and prevents full-blown AIDS from
developing. In this regard, it builds on epidemiological data showing that
the body's natural AIDS-fighting mechanisms are strong enough to stop AIDS
from developing for 10 years or more in half the people infected.

   The new findings are also a vindication of a much-disputed discovery in
1986 by Canadian immunologist Christopher Walker, who was working in the
laboratory of Jay Levy at the University of California at San Francisco.
Dr. Walker and Prof. Levy showed that CD8 cells were able to suppress the
virus's ability to replicate itself in infected cells. Later research
showed that the cells did this through a chemical or chemicals that were
unidentified at the time.

   However, Dr. Walker, who now works with Chiron, a biotechnology company
in San Francisco, said that for a certain period of time his results were
ignored because they were difficult to replicate and because researchers
thought that the HIV suppressors killed cells.

   The belief that a window has opened on a number of previously obscure
questions has caught the attention of many scientists. At the very least,
the identification of the chemokines should help unravel some of the
developmental mysteries that surround AIDS.

   Why are a few infants apparently free of the virus several years after
they were infected? Why does a small group of homosexual men in San
Francisco appear to be completely disease-free more than 15 years after
they were infected? Why do some groups of African prostitutes appear to be
immune to the disease? And perhaps most important, why do the natural
protective qualities of the CD8 cells break down over time?

   In this regard, Dr. Rosenthal said it is not clear whether the CD8
cells stop producing the protective substances or whether the virus
figures out a way to circumvent the immune system's initially very
effective chemical defence mechanisms.

   The amount of the substances in the body may play a role. Studies of
the infected San Francisco men who so far have not developed AIDS symptoms
show that they have naturally high levels of CD8 cells.

   Dr. Gallo said the new findings may potentially provide a diagnostic
tool for doctors. A blood test measuring a fall in chemokines could
indicate early when a patient's condition is beginning to deteriorate.

   An initial measurement of chemokine activity might allow physicians to
advise people more accurately what the course of the disease may be for
them.

   Direct clinical application is not possible before a number of
intermediate questions are resolved. The new results came from tests on
cells grown in test tubes. And although Dr. Gallo and Dr. Lusso will soon
begin tests to see what dosages of the substances are safe for laboratory
animals, dangers are already seen.

   "We have (chemokines) naturally in our body all the time, so we know
they are safe from that perspective, but you can also kill yourself from
insulin if you overdose," Dr. Gallo said.

   The delivery system of the substances is also an issue on another level
because the body naturally breaks down the chemokines. It is possible that
the various amounts of individual anti-HIV chemokines may change over
time.

   One of the largest potential pitfalls is that the chemokines are part
of a normal immune response in which swelling, fever and pain are often
also evident. "It is difficult to understand how we would deliver high
dosages to patients without having very negative side effects," Dr.
Rosenthal said.

   Dr. Mark Wainberg, director of the McGill AIDS Centre at the Jewish
General Hospital in Montreal, suggested that one solution to the problem
may be gene therapy with CD8 cells. He explained that cells could be taken
from a patient, genetically manipulated to allow them to produce higher
levels of the chemokines and then injected back into the patient's blood
system.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              353 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 2, 1995 Saturday

LENGTH: 131 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST   TUMOURS SHRINK

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   A researcher at the University of Arizona in Tucson is reporting success
with an experimental gene-therapy technique that causes the body to reject
a malignant tumour the same way it often rejects a transplanted organ. Dr.

    Evan Unger says computer tomography - a technique that sends X-rays into
the body at different angles - was used to inject a modified gene into
tumours of patients suffering a deadly form of skin cancer. The genes have
been altered to carry antigens that activate the body's immune system.
"The theory is when the (antigen) gene is expressed on the surface of the
cancer cells, the body's natural immune system - recognizing the foreign
antigen - mounts a defence to destroy it," he says. The test involved 10
patients, one of whom has now been disease-free for 30 months.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              354 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          November 29, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: Swiss drug titans bet on biotech   Race to create gene-based drugs
focuses on U.S. investments

BYLINE: RALPH T. KING JR. and STEPHEN D. MOORE; WSJ

DATELINE: BASEL, Switzerland

BODY:

   BY RALPH T. KING JR. and STEPHEN D. MOORE
The Wall Street Journal
  BASEL, Switzerland
 To the industrial repertory of this tiny nation renowned for its banking,
watchmaking and chocolate, add this: biotechnology.

       In just six years and almost unnoticed, the pharmaceutical titans
huddled here on the banks of the Rhine - Roche Holding Ltd., Ciba-Geigy
Ltd., and Sandoz Ltd. - have spent at least $7-billion (U.S.) to amass a
breathtaking amount of biotechnology firepower. That's more than half of
the entire drug industry's investment in biotechnology since 1990, giving
the Swiss trio a potentially decisive edge in the global race to create a
new generation of gene-based drugs.

   Yet the arsenal isn't Swiss-made, much less situated in Switzerland. It
is in the United States, where the biotechnology industry began and, for
the most part, remains. With direct or indirect stakes in more than 100
companies such as Genentech Inc. and Chiron Corp., plus near-exclusive
access to research centres such as the Scripps Research Institute, the
octopus-like Swiss have stealthily captured what may be the biggest
foreign share to date of an emerging U.S. technology.

   "They really have their tentacles all over the place," says Samuel
Isaly, an analyst at the New York stock-research firm of Mehta & Isaly.
"They are buying biotech from top to bottom."

   Drug giants besides the Swiss have joined in the recent biotech buying
spree, but their deals are far fewer and typically small. Others, such as
SmithKline Beecham PLC, are buying access to gene-fragment data bases to
guide their research in-house. But more important to many companies is the
need to bolster market share, with purchases of generic-drug makers and
pharmacy-distribution firms. In the Swiss view, this is a short-term
strategy that "will go down in history as being a very colossal blunder,"
says Max Link, who wagered more than $1-billion in the biotech field
during his tenure as head of Sandoz's pharmaceutical division.

   The biotech bet is unusual for the Swiss, who tend to be risk-averse,
and for pharmaceutical companies, which traditionally do most research in-
house. But it is an unusual time in the drug business. Generic competition
and managed-care cost control have upset drug makers' profit-making
formula, which for years was heavy on marketing and light on laboratory
breakthroughs. The only real cure for the industry's long-term ills, some
believe, is a renaissance in research.

   Thus, the determined, deep-pocketed Swiss have set a course to conquer
intractable gene-related diseases like breast cancer, diabetes and obesity
with major new therapies. It is in the highly productive, entrepreneurial
setting of U.S. biotech firms that they hope to find them. Today, in fact,
two-thirds of the roughly 3,000 drug compounds currently under development
were engineered in biotech labs, Mr. Isaly says. Just as important, they
were created at half the average cost of those at pharmaceutical firms.

   "Our basic strategy is innovation," says Franz Humer, pharmaceutical
chief at Roche, which gave the world Valium. "We clearly see biotechnology
and gene technology as major areas of science that will create the major
new products in the next century."

   But some skeptics think the Swiss are overly futuristic. They say the
"three sisters" are true believers in technology that has delivered fewer
than a dozen major drugs in 15 years. Like Japanese buyers of U.S. real
estate, they say, the Swiss will one day regret having spent billions on
the dreams of smooth-talking biologists and genetic engineers.

   "It's a blind alley," contends Hemant Shah, an independent drug analyst
in Warren, N.J., noting that U.S. companies such as Eli Lilly & Co. and
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. suffered near-total losses from splashy biotech
acquisitions a decade ago.

   The outcome of the Swiss gamble won't be known for five years or more,
at which point skeptical rivals could find themselves unable to catch up
in an area such as gene therapy, where the Swiss have already gained a
commanding lead.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              357 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 17, 1995 Friday

LENGTH: 910 words

HEADLINE: NEW ATTITUDES: The changing lives of people with disabilities
Medical research promises new hope on numerous fronts

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   HOW CLOSE is the 21st century and what will it mean for the prevention or
rehabilitation of disabilities? Consider the following examples of current
medical research:
     Every gene in the human body is currently being mapped by researchers
around the world, and their task may be completed within a decade;
     As genetic knowledge expands exponentially, researchers are
increasingly able to target the origins of some of our most elusive and
devastating conditions affecting motor skills and nervous-system
responses;
     Living tissues are being blended with synthetic materials with the
prospect of restoring function where the body cannot itself do so.

       Dr. David Logan, associate dean of science at York University and past
president of the Ontario March of Dimes, says scientific advancement is
moving "at an absolutely lightning pace. If I went away for six months to
study and came back, it would be, 'Wow, look at all the new stuff.' "
   In the realm of gene therapy, "the potential is almost unlimited,"
believes Dr. Logan. If you have, say, cystic fibrosis or muscular
dystrophy, scientists are now taking the approach that "when the genetic
cards were dealt, you got the wrong card - and we have to repair it."

   On another frontier, "the idea of spinal-cord regeneration was science
fiction 10 or 15 years ago," notes Dr. Logan, "and now there is a
tremendous amount of work in this area."

   To get an inkling of the kind of impact neurological advance could
eventually have, check these figures from the Neuroscience Network in
Montreal, a linkage of 18 universities and research institutions across
Canada that supports cutting-edge investigation into central nervous
system disorders.

   In North America, four million people suffer from Alzheimer's disease,
2-1/2 million from epilepsy, two million from schizophrenia, one million
from traumatic head injury and hundreds of thousands each from Parkinson's
disease, multiple sclerosis and traumatic spinal-cord injury.

   And while there's plenty to hope for from the researchers, there is a
great deal of administrative and policy work that needs doing now.

   Certainly, Kathleen Haswell would welcome further medical advances. But
the executive director of the Association for the Neurologically Disabled
of Canada (AND) says there is much improvement that must be sought today
for her constituents in the way treatment is made available.

   "I think that a lot of the major issues for the families we deal with
are questions of empowerment, the opportunity to purchase the services
they feel they want," Haswell says. As things stand now, "they get locked
into systems where they don't have options."

   For example, in an independent living situation, a patient may want to
increase their attendant aid, even at the cost of diminishing their access
to, say, counselling or recreation. As it now stands, patients are tied to
agency formulas, "and you have to comply with their model of delivery."

   Ongoing care is central in these disorders. Next-century techniques may
offer the repair of neurological damage, but AND meanwhile takes the
position that stimulation and continuous daily therapy, including sensory
motor stimulation and language and visual therapy, can play an important
role in improving patients' condition.

   Ironically, it has been certain advances in care that have actually
caused the burgeoning of the population needing the Ontario Brain Injury
Association in St. Catharines.

   Executive director Richard Guinan explains that such developments as
roadside helicopters to whisk away motor-vehicle casualties, along with
state-of-the-art trauma centres, mean more people are alive today after
sustaining serious head injuries.

   Advance has created, indeed, "a whole proliferation of brain-injured
survivors," says Guinan, adding that a former U.S. surgeon-general
referred to this as "the silent epidemic."

   Once again, the numbers tell a quick story of urgency, with some 50,000
people a year sustaining brain injury in Canada. Of these, 73 per cent are
unemployed and a further 11 per cent work only part time; perhaps 20 per
cent are unable to return to work at all.

   "There are very few residential programs and the long-term care needs
have to be addressed," Guinan says. "Warehousing people in chronic-care
nursing homes is no longer acceptable."

   Tragically, too, when lacking other social support, a portion of this
population simply winds up in our penitentiaries, hardly a cost-effective
result for society.

   For the shorter-term picture of rehabilitation, Guinan says the advent
of no-fault auto insurance has been a boon to many of these patients (54
per cent of these injuries are sustained in road accidents), opening up
new access to aid.

   The insurance situation "has resulted in the development of the
private-sector health-care system," notes Guinan. While that concept is
politically troubling to some, the fast growth of private "injury clinics"
for rehabilitation increases the options for those whose injuries are
covered.

   But that's the trick, for other kinds of accidents are not covered and
so "it becomes an accessibility issue," Guinan says.

   Haswell at AND is plainly worried about those disparities: "If you're
going to have an accident," she says, "have it in a car because if you
fall down the stairs, you won't get anything."

   It's all a reminder that while we are outstripping science fiction and
challenging the miraculous on the research front, plenty of mundane but
crucial matters require our attention in the workaday spheres of public
policy.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              358 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 10, 1995 Friday

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: FDA loosens regulations for biotech drug makers

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   Associated Press
  WASHINGTON
 Just because a drug is made from the new and evolving science of
biotechnology doesn't mean it needs stricter regulating than regular
medicines, the Clinton administration announced yesterday.

       The Food and Drug Administration is eliminating restrictions on
biotechnology that could save the industry hundreds of millions of dollars
and speed the development of biotech drugs. The moves are part of an
administration package of regulatory reforms.

   "We're wiping away the cobwebs . . . and bringing our partnership with
the biotech industry into the 21st century where it belongs," said Health
and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala.

   Biotechnology uses living organisms to create everything from slow-
ripening tomatoes to complex gene therapy. When the field took off in the
early 1980s, the FDA regulated biotech drugs more strictly than
traditional ones because doctors knew so little about how these medicines
would act inside people.

   That has changed. The FDA has approved 32 biotech drugs and vaccines
and more than 450 are now being tested in Americans. So the agency decided
it's time to treat them the same as their traditional competitors.

   Among the changes:
.The 1,311 U.S. biotech companies will no longer have to get special
licences to operate manufacturing plants, sparing them thousands of pages
of applications and months awaiting licencing inspections.
.Now that companies have refined biotech manufacturing, the FDA will no
longer examine each lot of a drug before it can be sold, significantly
decreasing the time it takes a drug to get to market.
.The FDA will respond within 30 days to new information submitted after it
stops a clinical trial for safety questions, meaning testing of new drugs
could be speeded up by several months.
.The 21 different application forms companies now must wade through will
be consolidated into one that is simpler.

   "It is a significant step forward," said Carl Feldbaum, president of
the Biotechnology Industry Organization.

   The plan comes as Congress prepares to overhaul the FDA, prompted by
criticisms that the agency takes too long to approve new therapies. Some
critics want private companies to do the FDA's work, while others suggest
letting the FDA certify only drugs' safety while individual doctors
determine whether they actually work.

   Democrats and moderate Republicans are working toward smaller changes,
and a plan by Senator Nancy Kassebaum, a Kansas Republican, incorporates
many of the reforms the FDA announced yesterday.

   "These reform measures strike the right balance between creating jobs
and saving lives," said Senator Barbara Mikulski, a Maryland Democrat.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              359 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 31, 1995 Tuesday

LENGTH: 1367 words

HEADLINE: REPORT ON HEALTH AND PHARMACEUTICALS   A prescription for health
TOWARD 2000 / Medical wonders await us as we   approach the next millenium but
on our backs   we're still carrying some intractable diseases.

BYLINE: ANN KERR; SPCL

BODY:

   BY ANN KERR
Special to The Globe and Mail
 CUSTOM-DESIGNED DNA that fixes your faulty genes and extends your life.

       Laser wrinkle removal, hormone infusions and second-skin plastic
replacement parts to keep us nimble and nubile into our 90s.

   Cracking the secrets of the mind's control over stress and fatal
illness.

   These are some of the medical wonders that await us on our journey into
the next century.

   But on our backs we're still carrying intractable diseases such as
cancer and AIDS, with no imminent cures in sight. And at our heels,
bacterial and viral scourges - warnings about old enemies and their virile
descendants gaining ground against increasingly ineffective drugs.

   Without a doubt, the good news heading into the next millennium is
reassuring, especially the prediction by Dr. Ronald Klatz, president of
the American Academy of Anti-Aging Medicine in Chicago, that the average
lifespan will be hitting triple digits.

   "We know that it's possible to live to be 120, maybe even 150. Half the
people reading this article have a real possibility of reaching their
100th birthdays," maintains Dr. Klatz, who believes we are only 10 years
away from treating and preventing illness on a mass scale by manipulating
genes.

   "Even in an era of cutbacks these technologies are so powerful and so
imposing they will find a way into the marketplace. In the long run,
they'll be a lot cheaper than the cost of disease," says Dr. Klatz.
Already, the Human Genome project, the international scientific charting
of our genetic topography, is continuously uncovering markers that point
the way.

   Eventually, "we'll be able to go in and reset the actual pin switches
inside cells, to hit the on and off buttons," says Dr. Klatz. "For
instance, say you're missing a strand of DNA that makes an enzyme that
breaks down cholesterol and prevents heart disease. We'll be able to
inject that into you so your risk factor will go down to near zero."

   Although startling discoveries are becoming commonplace, Dr. Eugenia
Wang, a researcher in the molecular biology of aging at McGill University
and Jewish General Hospital in Montreal cautions that scientists can't
wave a magic wand to heal all illness.

   "There isn't just one gene that controls how long we live, it's a
complex mix of genetic and other factors. Gene therapy is certainly going
to make a big difference, it's moving at breakneck speed, but I don't want
people to think we're going to find the fountain of youth," Dr. Wang says.

   It's a safe bet that average life span, now 77 years in Canada, will
continue to increase, but not necessarily at the rate it did this century,
when better nutrition and living conditions made the big difference.

   What's most important now, says Dr. Wang, is improving the quality of
life rather than extending it, by tackling age-related diseases. If a
solution to osteoporosis is found in a few years, as expected, that will
be huge news, she says.

   The molecular understanding of crippling neural disorders like
Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and multiple sclerosis is expanding so fast that
there are real hopes for controls, even a cure.

   Effective solutions with drugs, surgery, biomedical treatments and even
prevention for some of these diseases are probable within a decade, says
Geraldine Kenney-Wallace, a scientist and past president of McMaster
University in Hamilton.

   "Five years ago, I would not be as confident about seeing results in
this area as I am today," says Dr. Kenney-Wallace, now a senior fellow in
the University of Toronto's management faculty. "The potential is there
for all kinds of breakthroughs we can't even imagine."

   Many of the biggest discoveries come from treatments designed for other
conditions. Dr. Klatz puts a lot of faith in hormone replacement
technology to tackle problems such as Alzheimer's in women, which tends to
worsen with a lack of estrogen and cardiovascular disease, which rises
significantly when estrogen replacement is stopped.

   The success of Prozac and related anti-depressants promises more so-
called designer drugs to redirect the misfirings of the brain that affect
mental health.

   But what's especially exciting to Fraser Mustard, president of the
Canadian Institute for Advanced Research in Toronto, is the clear
connection emerging between stress and its direct impact on physical well-
being.

   He points to stark evidence in Eastern Europe where a decade ago, the
gap in life expectancy compared to the West was only about a year. Today
it's nearly 10 years, a consequence of economic upheaval, Dr. Mustard
believes.

   Other research, particularly the Whitehall civil servants study in
Britain, is showing that workers closer to the bottom of the seniority
pyramid with little control, not the supposedly overtaxed leaders on top,
have substantially higher rates of heart attacks, cancers and other
debilitating diseases.

   There is also evidence, still in its infancy, linking coping methods
learned in childhood with adult physical illness.

   In the 21st century, these findings will have a huge impact on health
care and how companies structure their work forces, Dr. Mustard says. Not
only lives, but millions of dollars in lost productivity are at stake.

   Medical science may be widening its embrace of holistic and preventive
measures but cures for cancer, for instance, are as elusive as ever.

   Despite some successes, the cancer mortality rate has remained pretty
constant for the past 50 years, Dr. Mustard says. "The underlying
biological understanding of the process is becoming more sophisticated but
there's a huge way to go in both prevention and treatment," he says.

   Hopes for an AIDS vaccine or effective control with AZT were recently
crushed, though there are some new therapies on the horizon. WF10, which
will be distributed in Canada by Dimethaid Research Inc. of Markham, Ont.,
pending more testing and government approval, works by stimulating the
body's immune system to fight off the invading virus.

   Initially WF10 will be used to buy some extra time in cases of full-
blown AIDS, but the aim is to eventually get it approved for earlier
stages of HIV, says Dimethaid president Rebecca Keeler.

   Dimethaid is currently conducting patient trials of its arthritis drug
Dimethaid-D, which is rubbed into affected areas, rather than taken
orally. It alleviates pain quickly by working with the internal cell
transport system, while reducing traditional side effects, Ms. Keeler
says.

   Increasing the body's ability to protect itself is one of the most
appealing developments in medical research. But alarm is rising over just
how vulnerable we are to deadly infectious diseases that are becoming
immune to antibiotics and anti-viral drugs.

   "Many organisms are 100 per cent drug resistant and, unless we make
some major changes in government policies and medical practices, we're
tempting fate in a scary way," says Laurie Garrett, author of the new
book, The Coming Plague.

   Antibiotics have been so overprescribed that bacteria have been
encouraged to mutate to keep up. Now we're locked in a race to come up
with new drugs in time to prevent global epidemics of even such routine
bugs as staph and strep. Plus, a lack of knowledge in developing countries
and even among doctors in the West is increasing the risk of spreading
these diseases, Ms. Garrett says.

   To Dr. Klatz, such concerns are grossly inflated, given the
possibilities of genetic engineering and medicine's record this century of
overcoming deadly diseases.

   "We're doubling our biological knowledge every 3-1/2 years. There isn't
a day that goes by without some kind of new discovery. That's all pretty
hopeful stuff," Dr. Klatz says.

   Yet there is enough concern about Ms. Garrett's prognosis that the U.S.
government, the National Institutes of Health and the U.S. Army have asked
to be briefed. A national committee of experts is now monitoring
infectious diseases at the request of the White House.

   "The paradox," says Ms. Garrett, "is that we're making fantastic
innovations that look like Star Wars in gene therapy, Alzheimer's, non-
surgical methods to repair heart disease and so on, but they're not doing
anything for infectious diseases."

   We may be pushing the throttle of technology full speed into a
promising future but we still can't outrun many of the rogue afflictions
we thought we'd have licked by now.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              360 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 13, 1995 Friday

LENGTH: 1427 words

HEADLINE: Tobacco use linked to genes   Addiction-related studies show men   to
be more sensitive to nicotine than women

BYLINE: STEPHEN STRAUSS; GAM

BODY:

   BY STEPHEN STRAUSS
Science Reporter
 The instinct to smoke may be more fixed in people's genes than the urge
to drink heavily.

       Although no specific genes related to smoking have been identified, a
surge of research in Canada, the United States and Europe has turned up a
number of startling, genetically rooted findings:
. Men are more sensitive to nicotine than women.
. The ability to smoke a little without becoming addictive may run in
families.
. Smokers are more sensitive to nicotine than non-smokers.
. Smoking may protect against some of the effects of genetically linked
diseases, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.

   In short, after decades of being ignored, interest in the possible
genetic roots of tobacco smoking has become a hot new area of addiction
research.

   In looking at the life histories of identical and fraternal twins in a
number of countries, two St. Louis researchers have arrived at a most
surprising conclusion.

   "It is arguable that the case for a substantial genetic influence on
smoking is even stronger than the case for such influences on alcoholism,"
Washington University School of Medicine researchers Andrew Heath and
Pamela Madden argue in a recently published book.

   Collectively, the studies of twins suggest that slightly more than half
the reason a person smokes can be linked to genetic factors; only a bit
more than a third of alcohol use has a statistically demonstrated genetic
correlation.

   First proposed in the 1950s, the theory of a genetic link to smoking
has lain dormant partly because, as Dr. Madden observes, "for a long time
no one took nicotine seriously as a drug."

   The "geneticization" of smoking produces findings that are both
intriguing and contradictory.

   Kenneth Perkins, a psychologist at the University of Pittsburgh, has
conducted a number of studies that seem to show that men, on average, are
more responsive to nicotine than women. For example, when given a small
nasal spray of nicotine - five, 10 or 20 parts per million - only men were
able to tell a placebo from the drug.

   Prof. Perkins argues that this finding would provide a partial
explanation for some studies showing that nicotine-based therapies - for
example, a skin patch or chewing gum - are less successful on women than
men. Surveys suggest that 7 to 23 per cent fewer women than men quit after
using such a patch.

   On the other hand, about 5 per cent of all smokers appear to be
constitutionally able to start and stop smoking at will and without any
ill effects. University of Michigan psychologist Ovide Pomerleau believes
that "the ability to smoke without developing dependence may run in
families."

   He points to a number of studies by University of Pittsburgh
psychologist Saul Shiffman of what are called "chippers" in the addiction
literature. This research has shown that, although close relatives of
chippers are as likely to have smoked as relatives of heavy smokers,
chippers' families smoked less, were chippers more often themselves and
were more successful at quitting.

   Exactly what genetic factors give this protective coating are unclear.
It was long thought that the non-addictive relationship to smoking of non-
smokers and chippers grew out of the fact that their bodies were less
tolerant of nicotine than addicted smokers. Recent research has stood this
finding on its head. Chippers and people who smoked five times as much as
them have about the same nicotine-tolerance levels.

   Indeed, Prof. Pomerleau's own research has shown that after heavy
smokers quit they soon become more sensitive to nicotine than non-smokers.
"When they start smoking again, they report that it is like the first time
they ever smoked."

   The fact that addicted smokers are more sensitive rather than less
sensitive to nicotine "turns upside down your grandmother's smoking cure,
which had you being sent behind the barn and forced to smoke a whole bunch
of cigarettes," Prof. Pomerleau says.

   One curious gap is that there appears to be no studies that have looked
specifically for differences in how nicotine affects different ethnic
groups, even though a genetic basis for differences has been well
established in animals. For example, in experiments with strains of rats,
clear variations in their brains' reactions to nicotine have been noted.

   The lack of cross-ethnic research contrasts starkly with studies in
alcohol where, for example, it is well known that many East Asians have a
gene mutation that prevents them from metabolising alcohol. This creates a
characteristic red flush on their face.

   Nonetheless, University of Michigan epidemiologist Naomi Breslau has
reported in the journal Behavior Genetics recently that her study of 1,000
young people shows that whites are significantly much more likely to start
smoking and become addicted than blacks.

   But in an interview, she notes the environmental effects that could
cloud any effort to directly tie smoking to genes. "Smoking has become
largely a phenomenon of the lower classes. People who don't go to college
smoke in large numbers - do you really mean to tell me that is genetic?"

   Among the most controversial work are a variety of studies that link
the benefits of smoking to the negative effects of more classically
genetically associated conditions. In these instances, smoking becomes a
kind of medication for a genetic defect. Dr. Pomerleau believes tobacco's
soothing effect may partly explain why there is such a strong correlation
among smoking, depression, anxiety and adult attention-deficit disorder.
"It's self-medication. People have a disorder and they are treating it
themselves in a certain way."

   Scientists recently have found a beneficial relationship between
smoking and a delay in the onset of diseases, such as Alzheimer's and
Parkinson's, for which certain families are known to carry a defective
gene or genes. This protective effect lies behind an effort by several
drug companies to come up with a chemical that mimics nicotine's
protective effect on brain cells without carrying all the negative health
risks associated with smoking.

   If there has been a surge in interest during the past five years about
the genetics of smoking, the future promises to be both much more
interesting and confusing. Because smoking is almost surely a multigene
effect, the genetics of the habit may fracture into the genetics of
various parts of smoking. For example, Dr. Madden notes that there well
may be separate genetic pathways that moderate people's likelihood to
begin smoking and their innate abilities to stop.

   Where to begin looking is an issue. Dr. Pomerleau is part of a
multisite proposal that, among other things, wants to look for specific
gene mutations that separate smokers and non-smokers. At the top of the
list would be the half dozen or so genes that already have been identified
and that control nicotine receptors in the brain in some way.

   Other work may focus on how frequently smokers carry mutations
associated with disease genes with which smoking has been connected
statistically.

   The clinical implications of a deep genetic understanding of smoking
and smokers is almost what you would like it to be. "Does it mean that one
could use gene therapy (the insertion of a non-mutant copy of the gene)
for substance abuse?" Prof. Pomerleau asks. "That is potentially so."

   More likely, given the complex genetics of smoking, what will be
searched for is drugs that work on the genetic susceptibilities of
individual subgroups. If people are predisposed to a heart rush when they
smoke, give them something that dampens that. If they have trouble
metabolizing the nicotine and so it stays in their system a long time,
give them something to speed that process up.

   But, whatever their role, genes won't be the only answer. Says Dr.
Madden: "I don't think that being genetically predisposed to something
seals your fate, just in the way of being environmentally disposed - let's
say having cigarettes available - does not seal your fate."

    Smoking out the addicts

      The higher their education, the less likely people are to become
dependent on cigarettes. A U.S. study looks at the lifetime prevalence of
smoking and nicotine dependence by race and education (rate/100).
....................................Nicotine
........................Smoking...dependence  Race
White.....................41.3........22.6
Black.....................29.9.........9.3  Education  Less than high
school.....78.4........51.4  High school...............55.2........27.4  Part
college..............41.1........21.0
College...................19.6.........9.5   Smoking daily for one month or more
in lifetime.  Source: Naomi Breslau, Henry Ford Health Sciences Center

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              361 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 12, 1995 Thursday

LENGTH: 73 words

HEADLINE: MARKET MOVERS   Theratechnologies (ME)

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   $2.95, up $1.05
 The shares got a nice nudge yesterday, likely on word from the Montreal-
based biotechnology company that a UCLA School of Medicine study has
"confirmed the critical role played by the Vpr gene in the replication of
the HIV virus." Theratechnologies has been researching the use of gene
therapy for HIV since 1991. Results of the study appear in the Journal of
Virology's October issue.

    Stephen Northfield, Allan Robinson, wires

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              362 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 4, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 905 words

HEADLINE: Middle Kingdom   Body Works   Health & Fitness   Trying to make
strides in genes

BYLINE: WALLACE IMMEN; GAM

BODY:

   BY WALLACE IMMEN
Medical Reporter
 EVERY day it seems, researchers announce another genetic finding that
promises a new cure for disease.

       And they may be only scratching the surface. "We are underestimating
the importance of genes in the development of disease," said molecular
geneticist Dr. Alan Bernstein of the Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute
at Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto. "How well - or how badly - we age is
probably genetically determined as well," he said, although it may take
years to piece together the puzzle.

   In short, then, genetic therapy - replacing faulty genes with ones that
function properly - represents the future of medicine.

   But for all that doctors hope to one day accomplish with gene therapy,
"it's important to remember that we're not doing it yet," cautioned Dr.
Robert Hawley of Toronto's Sunnybrook Health Science Centre.

   The reason is simple: Scientists are only now learning how to alter
with any sort of precision these tiny regions at the centre of cells.

   Here's a short guide to understanding some of the key issues they're
trying to resolve.
. Targeting: This means getting bits of new genetic material into the
right place in the genetic code, and it's a major challenge.

   Dr. Hawley, an associate professor of medical biophysics at the
University of Toronto, draws an analogy with the space program. Before the
space shuttle, astronauts in the Apollo program could only splash down in
the ocean somewhere in the vicinity of a ship. Similarly, early attempts
to insert new genes have no way of controlling where a gene will land amid
the body's three billion nucleotides - structures made of amino acids that
are basic building blocks of the more than 60,000 genes that make up the
DNA code.

   There is a promising new technique to bring in the payload to the right
place in the DNA, but it's not efficient enough at the moment for gene
therapy. So in the meantime, genes are being introduced using viruses.
. Retroviruses: These organisms, such as the AIDS virus, crash into DNA
and stay there, permanently adding genetic information, said Dr. Hawley.
Tests done mostly on mice have used versions of these viruses that are
made to self-destruct after they bring in the payload.

        . Adenoviruses: Another courier device uses a weakened form of other
viruses, such as those that cause cold-like symptoms. They don't reproduce  in
tumour cells but can temporarily introduce a gene in the right place to  help
faulty cells restore their ability to fight cancerous changes.

   Many people think of gene therapy as meaning a correction of inherited
genetic defects, and more than 4,000 conditions are known to be caused by
genes that malfunction from birth. However, there problems here too.
. Germ-cell therapy: Replacing a problematic gene in an egg or sperm cell
before conception raises such complex ethical questions that this research
has effectively been banned worldwide.

        . Somatic cells: These will be the focus of gene therapy for at least
the foreseeable future. They are body cells other than egg or sperm cells,  and
research breakthroughs on many fronts are being reported regularly,  but at this
point most of the research is still being done in animals.

   One trial is under way in Vancouver of a technique that uses DNA to
treat skin cancer.

   Other tests being done with humans, however, are "marker trials." At
the Toronto Hospital, patients are receiving genes that don't actually
change the function of cells, but their continued presence in cells
indicates that they can become permanent enough parts of the genetic
structure to reproduce when cells divide. Follow-up tests would use the
same technique to insert therapeutic genes.
. Stem cells: These are an important early target of trials in gene
repair. The little-understood cells within the bone marrow may represent
only one cell in 10,000, but they are the parents of blood cells that
develop with a wide range of different functions. Altering only a few stem
cells may create a generation of new cells with healthier characteristics.
Ultimately, they could correct an entire range of inherited blood
diseases, but the daunting problem is getting introduced genes to function
the way genes in a normal cell do.

   One goal of gene therapy is to treat cancer by helping the body fight
its own battles. Such immunotherapy will try to get a gene to kick-start
the patient's own immune system to fight disease.

   One of a gene's basic functions is to secrete substances that regulate
cell function. In corrective gene therapy there are two possibilities:
Find the switch and turn a gene on or off, or replace the defective gene
with one that is better behaved. These are both technically daunting
tasks.

   Cancer-causing genes can act as accelerators or brakes to the function
of a cell, Dr. Hawley explained. A newly evolving theory of cancers is
that a combination of changes creates the medical equivalent of cutting
the brake lines of a car and sticking the accelerator to the floor. Cells
then begin to reproduce and behave in ways uncontrolled by the normal
genetic etiquette.

   There are more than 100 clinical studies under way worldwide in gene
therapy for everything from AIDS to cystic fibrosis to rheumatoid
arthritis. When one of them actually proves to offer a safe, effective
method to treat disease, rest assured that the doctors who discover it
will quickly let us know. There are likely to be several Nobel Prizes at
stake for those who succeed.

   Body Works appears each Wednesday.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              365 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 9, 1995 Saturday

LENGTH: 146 words

HEADLINE: Slippery slope

BYLINE: Susan Hudson; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   Re Parents Get Help From Genetic Counsellors (Sept. 3, 4):
   We are fortunate that the likes of Vincent van Gogh, Virginia Woolf and
Robert Schumann, to name a few, were born in a more innocent time. If they
had been screened for the manic depression gene(s) it is possible we would
not now enjoy the fruits of their creative geniuses.

       While genetic therapies lag behind the discovery of new genes, the
delay is temporary. In the meantime, where is the public debate
surrounding prenatal genetic screening? Quietly and effectively, abortion
appears to be the accepted therapy of choice. I am distinctly
uncomfortable with the overtones of population selection based on a
science in its infancy and reject the notion that these lives lack value.

   We abhor the idea of terminating a pregnancy based on gender, but how
far away are we really from the slippery slope?
 Susan Hudson
  Toronto

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              367 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           August 30, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 426 words

HEADLINE: New blood plant soon to be obsolete, critics tell Krever

BYLINE: CP

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   Canadian Press
  TORONTO
 Two former officials of Connaught Laboratories have urged a federal
inquiry to scrap plans for a $200-million blood plant that they say will
quickly be outdated.

       William Cochrane and Alun Davies testified before Mr. Justice Horace
Krever yesterday that he should recommend killing the Halifax plant in his
final report to the federal government.

   "There has to be some very real examination about . . . investing
hundreds of millions of dollars in a new facility where the technology has
been going for 25 years," said Dr. Cochrane.

   The former chairman of Connaught Laboratories Ltd. (now Connaught
BioSciences Inc.) said the new plant will be shoved aside by rapidly
advancing technologies almost as soon as it's finished.

   The 19-hectare plant is to use human blood to manufacture various blood
products. But Dr. Cochrane said the future lies in synthetic blood
products, which are safer because they are designed to not carry killer
viruses. Dr. Cochrane is an international investment consultant in the
health-care area. He is also a director of Monsanto Canada and MDS Health
Ventures.

   Mr. Davies, Connaught's former president, now heads Hemosol Inc. of
Toronto, a biotechnology company that has developed a synthetic blood
product and is racing to be first in what has been dubbed the "artificial
blood" market. Hemosol's largest shareholder is MDS Health Group Ltd.

   The plant is expected to create about 400 jobs in Nova Scotia and pump
$1-billion into the provincial economy. It is to be built by the Red Cross
and the pharmaceutical giant Bayer Inc. and open in 1999.

   Dr. Cochrane, also a former president of the University of Calgary,
said the money earmarked for the blood centre should help develop new gene
therapies to treat diseases such as hemophilia, or new synthetic blood
products, he said.

   But the Red Cross adamantly defended the plant. "Dr. Cochrane is
welcome to his view, but I don't think there are many experts who will
agree with him," spokesman Ken Mews said.

   The plant's technology wouldn't be outdated for 20 years and there's no
way a company as savvy and as huge as Bayer would get involved with
something it wasn't sure would be successful, he said.

   Dr. Cochrane and Mr. Davies ran Connaught during Canada's tainted-blood
scandal. The Toronto-based company supplied the Red Cross with blood
products used by hemophiliacs until 1987.

   It got out of the blood business after a power struggle with the Red
Cross over who should make blood products, just as the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was about to seep into the country's blood
supply.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              373 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 7, 1995 Monday

LENGTH: 688 words

HEADLINE: MIDDLE KINGDOM   Science Fare   New headway on baldness

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   The Economist
 CURES for baldness have usually amounted to little more than a glib pitch
followed by a swift exit to the next town. Even modern treatments such as
Minoxidil work well for only a few balding men. And since scientists still
have little understanding of what makes hair grow or fall out, these
limited remedies have been discovered only by accident. Minoxidil, for
example, started as a drug for lowering high blood pressure.

       Now help for the follically challenged may be at hand. Recent
discoveries in the biology of baldness could even lead to a genuine cure.
Two such advances have come from cancer researchers working with
chemotherapy patients whose hair drops out. Robert Hoffman and Lingna Li
of AntiCancer Inc. in San Diego have found a way to push genes into hair
follicles, which is likely to be a crucial part of gene therapy for
baldness. And Stuart Yuspa and his colleagues at the United States
National Cancer Institute have begun to zero in on the elusive "hair-
growth factor," the biochemical signal that tells normal skin cells to
form a hair follicle and sprout.

   According to a report in the July issue of Nature Medicine, Dr. Hoffman
and Dr. Li have not yet actually tried to make hair grow - they do not yet
know which genes do that - but they have had spectacular results in hair
colouring. Their treatment takes the form of a cream to be rubbed into the
skin. In the cream are microscopic fat balls called liposomes that
surround the cargo to be delivered to the follicle. Once at a target cell,
the fat is absorbed into the cell's outer membrane, depositing the cargo
inside.

   For colouring hair, Dr. Hoffman and Dr. Li loaded up their liposomes
not with genetic material but with melanin, a black or brown skin pigment.
Hair growing from follicles transplanted to sponges soaked in nutritious
gels darkened when the liposomes were applied. So did white mice when the
scientists massaged them with liposome cream - the melanin turned the
mice's hair dark from the roots up, an effect that lasted for several
weeks. There were no apparent side-effects, and the liposomes were very
specific in delivering the melanin just to the follicle; the mice's skin
did not change colour. Dr. Hoffman believes this treatment could be used
on people within two years.

   The procedure so far is expensive, since it has to use a large amount
of genetic material. And because the new genes were effective only
briefly, the treatment might have to be repeated at least weekly.
Nevertheless, Dr. Hoffman thinks human trials for genetic baldness
treatments are no more than five years away.

   Treating baldness will be more difficult than colouring hair, however.
The genes that account for hair growth remain unknown. This, however, is
where Dr. Yuspa's work on hair-growth factors may come in.

   Dr. Yuspa draws on decades of research showing that a certain group of
cells, the papilla cells, located deep in the skin, are responsible for
ordering other skin cells to form hair follicles and grow hair. Dr. Yuspa
and his colleague Ulrike Lichti have come a step closer to identifying the
chemicals that papilla cells exude to convey their instructions. If they
learn how papilla cells give orders, they may be able to issue their own,
reactivating hair follicles and so restoring hair. Bald men's hair
follicles do not stop producing hair entirely; but the hair they produce
is almost invisible. The test is to make the hair fuller and more visible
again.

   Other researchers are looking for the genes that lie behind both
baldness and hair growth. Now that a delivery vehicle exists, Dr. Hoffman
predicts a race to find the best genes. One early candidate could emerge
from the laboratory of Pragna Patel, a molecular biologist at Baylor
College of Medicine in Houston. Dr. Patel recently reported a gene that
caused members of a Mexican family to grow thick, dark hair everywhere
over their faces, except on their lips and eyes. Dr. Patel surmises that
she has stumbled on an ancient gene that has been switched off at some
point during evolution and accidentally reactivated in the family.
Identifying and sequencing the gene could lead to other genes linked to
hair growth.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              381 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 15, 1995 Saturday

LENGTH: 454 words

HEADLINE: AIDS therapy to use baboon marrow

BYLINE: GAM

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   Reuters News Agency
  WASHINGTON
 A radical experiment to try to save the life of a dying AIDS patient by
giving him a baboon bone marrow transplant got backing yesterday from a
U.S. team of health advisers.

       "I am going to die anyway. Let's get on with finding some answers about
this disease. If this saves me, then I got lucky," said Jeff Getty, the
37-year-old man who has volunteered to be the first to undergo what his
own doctors describe as a "long shot" therapy.

   Although this is not the first time animal cells or organs will be
implanted in a human, cross-species procedures are rare and controversial
because they can expose people to viruses or other disease-causing agents
found in animals.

   Even human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which leads to AIDS, is
thought by some to have originated in monkeys, although it is not known
how it was spread to humans.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration still must approve the
experiment, which will be done on only one person. But a team of
researchers hopes to perform the transplant on Mr. Getty in early
September.

   Members of the FDA's Biological Response Modifiers advisory panel are
pessimistic that this will save the life of Mr. Getty, who has been ill
for 15 years but whose health has now deteriorated.

   Satisfied that scientists at the University of Pittsburgh and the San
Francisco General Hospital were taking the necessary steps to limit the
public health threat of exposure to new animal viruses, the panelists
ultimately decided the decision should be left to the patient and his
family.

   Reached at his home in California, Mr. Getty said he knows his time is
running out, and he said he is willing to take his chances.

   "I face a greater likelihood of dying if I do not do something. I'm in
late stages AIDS now," said Mr. Getty, who harshly criticized the FDA for
taking more than a year to review and evaluate the preliminary research.

   "I think this is going to be an incredible long shot, but we may get
some answers about AIDS. Maybe we'll find out why baboons aren't
susceptible to AIDS and can use that to design a gene therapy for humans,"
  he said. "I am just one AIDS patient, but I represent thousands and
thousands."

   HIV attacks the human immune system, leaving the patient vulnerable to
a host of infections and diseases.

   A bone marrow transplant from another human would not help, since those
cells would become infected too. But baboons are not susceptible to HIV.

   The hope is that by implanting specially treated baboon bone marrow
cells into an AIDS patient, it will become the foundation for a rebuilt
immune system and start producing the white blood cells needed to ward off
infection and disease, explained Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, one of the chief
researchers designing the experiment.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              382 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            June 28, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy trials begin using human subjects   Cancers fought by
inserting new material into genetic code of   cells

BYLINE: WALLACE IMMEN; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   BY WALLACE IMMEN
The Globe and Mail
  TORONTO
 The Toronto Hospital is starting Canada's first human trials of gene
therapy to battle two deadly forms of cancer.

       One trial will involve 20 people with multiple myeloma, a blood disease
similar to leukemia, and another will enroll 10 Canadian patients as part
of an international trial of a brain tumour treatment.

   Both tests use recent findings on the inserting of material into the
genetic code of cells, known as DNA, to alter the course of diseases.

   A 36-year-old father of four from Fort Erie, Ont., was the first
patient to receive altered cells in an operation on Friday, Dr. Keith
Stewart, clinical director of the hospital's gene transfer trial, said
yesterday. Multiple myeloma is a cancer of the blood-producing bone marrow
cells. It kills about 1,000 Canadians each year, about 2 per cent of all
cancer deaths, Dr. Stewart said. Victims generally die within five years.

   The man's marrow cells were removed and a new gene was inserted into
the DNA of some of the cells that form new blood cells, known as stem
cells. If these genes are reproduced in succeeding generations of blood
cells, doctors can use them to plan clinical trials of the technique to
fight a number of inherited diseases and recurrent cancers that are
difficult to eliminate surgically, said Dr. Ian Dube, who is leading the
research team.

   A cancer-fighting gene could theoretically continue to reproduce in the
body for years. In tests on animals, including dogs, Dr. Dube proved the
technique safe, and two years after similar genes were added to the stem
cells of dogs, 5 per cent of the altered cells are still reproducing.

   The researchers found a way to get marrow cells to grow at a normal
rate in culture dishes and expose them to a retrovirus, a form of virus
that affects the genetic material. The virus, inactivated so it doesn't
cause disease, attaches itself to marrow cells and inserts the gene.

   In this test, the gene is a marker, an inactive gene whose reaction to
antibiotics shows whether it still exists after a cell divides. After the
safety of the technique is proved on humans, the hope is that more
aggressive genes that halt or reverse the progress of the cancer can be
inserted, Dr. Dube said.

   The operation itself is standard treatment for myeloma, which is more
common than leukemia but slower to develop. It involves removing bone
marrow to protect it from damage during radiation treatment and then
replacing it. The insertion of altered genes is the new step, Dr. Stewart
said. This is the first trial in Canada involving genetic material
inserted by viruses.

   The gene being studied in a second trial will also be inserted with a
retrovirus, this one a debilitated form of the simplex virus that causes
herpes.

   Groups at Toronto Hospital and the University of Montreal are planning
to co-operate with teams in France to treat a total of 70 people with
glioblastoma, a brain tumour that tends to recur after surgery.
Glioblastoma kills about 1,500 Canadians a year.

   Surgery can reduce the tumour but some cancerous material can't be
removed because it spreads tentacle-like connections through brain tissue.
The surgeons will inject the remaining cancerous cells with a form of
herpes virus. The virus can't reproduce but it can transfer a gene that
produces a chemical that reacts to an antiviral drug.

   Fourteen days after surgery, the patient begins receiving injections of
this drug, ganciclovir, which should block the replication of the
cancerous cells, causing them to die, said Dr. Ab Guha, a neurosurgeon on
the research team headed by Dr. Mark Bernstein.

   "It is known as a suicide gene," Dr. Guha explained.

   A key question is how much the treatment prolongs the life of patients.
"It is the main type of brain tumour in adults and the survival rate
remains dismal," he said. The average length of survival for patients
after discovery of glioblastoma is 15 months.

   "This is very exciting stuff, but it holds threats as well," warned Dr.
Bertrand Dickens, a professor of medical law and ethics at the University
of Toronto. "We are tinkering with the human blueprint irrevocably and
forever," he said during a conference on gene therapy in Canada that ended
in Toronto yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              383 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            June 28, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 58 words

HEADLINE: The Nation   Canadians in gene therapy tests

BYLINE: GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   TORONTO
 The Toronto Hospital is starting Canada's first human trials of gene
therapy to battle multiple myeloma, a blood disease similar to leukemia,
and to treat brain tumours. Both tests involve DNA modification. In
myeloma patients, a new gene is being inserted in stem cells that make
blood in the hope that they will reproduce in blood cells.

    Page A6

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              384 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              June 23, 1995 Friday

LENGTH: 775 words

HEADLINE: Gene discovery could be clue in cancer treatment   Works as check
point to stop mutated cells   all over body from growing, dividing

BYLINE: WALLACE IMMEN; GAM

BODY:

   BY WALLACE IMMEN
The Globe and Mail
 Scientists have located a gene that helps prevent the formation of
abnormal cells and may provide an important clue in developing treatments
for cancer.

       The AT gene acts as a "check point" that prevents imperfect cells from
dividing, as they do when cancerous, said Dr. Zach Hall, director of
neurology at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., which
financed some of the research.

   The 1 per cent of the population that inherits a mutated form of the
gene from one parent is at higher risk of developing tumours and cancers
caused by radiation, according to an international study reported today in
Science magazine.

   Just knowing the gene's role role means researchers can use it to
develop possible cancer therapies.

   The gene is found in most cells, and if mutated it can allow cells
anywhere in the body to develop abnormally, Dr. Hall said. "This gene is
not solely responsible for human cell reproduction, but it is is an
important link in the chain."

   A blood test, similar to DNA testing, can be developed to detect the
mutation, although the development will take several years because the
gene is a long, complex chain of chemical molecules, Dr. Hall said.

   Researchers estimate that the risk of breast cancer in women who have
the ATM (for AT mutated) gene is at least four times higher than in the
general population. That means the gene may be responsible for about 8 per
cent of all breast cancers, making it a more important genetic risk for
breast cancer than a gene identified last year.

   However, the estimate is controversial because it is from a study of a
small number of women and may be revised after a larger study, said Dr.
Stephen Meyn, a geneticist at Yale University.

   An immediate U.S. research program is being planned to study the gene
in women from families that have a high incidence of breast cancer.

   In normal growth, the gene checks for damage in the DNA, the molecular
blueprint in the nucleus of a cell. If the gene detects a problem, it
tells the cell to stop growing or dividing until repairs are complete. If
the gene receives conflicting information or damage can't be repaired, it
may allow the cell to commit suicide.

   While having an ATM gene creates a higher risk of radiation mutation,
there is no scientific evidence that the low-dose radiation in routine
mammography is a cause of breast cancer, Dr. Meyn noted.

   Researchers have been searching for the ATM gene for more than a
decade. Co-operating teams in Israel, Turkey, Italy, Australia, the
Netherlands, Britain and the United States reported their findings jointly
in Science.

   Each team looked at specific regions of the large number of genes in a
section of the genetic structure known as Chromosome 11. A group at the
Sackler School of Medicine in Tel Aviv was first to find the aberrant
gene, which is unique to people who develop the extremely rare disease
ataxia-telangiectasia.

   Children with the disease inherit copies of the mutated gene from both
father and mother. Their cells grow abnormally, causing a combination of
development problems and brain-cell death that means they seldom live past
the age of 20. The disease affects about one child in 40,000.

   Officials at the National Cancer Institute said the finding could lead
to treatments for the disease with gene therapy - which involves replacing
affected genes in vital areas with ones that work correctly.

   Now that researchers know which gene to study, they want to find out
how it knows that DNA has been damaged and how it puts cell division on
hold while the damage is repaired.

   The gene controls the production of a protein very similar to a protein
that affects growth in yeast cells. It tells the cell to make the protein
if it detects no DNA damage.

   "The hope is we can find a way to intervene" to prevent abnormal cells
from reproducing, Dr. Hall said.

   Research has so far identified 35 genes that can lead to the
development of cancer when they malfunction. Hundreds of other suspects
are under investigation among the 5,500 genes that scientists have so far
identified in human DNA.

   "We've gone from knowing virtually nothing to development of genetic
therapies in about 10 years," Alan Bernstein, a University of Toronto
molecular geneticist, said yesterday.

   Cancer genes fall into categories according to their function. The ATM
gene reported today is known as a mismatch repair gene, involved in
quality control in the reproduction of DNA. Oncogenes affect how a tumour
divides and grows, while suppressors limit cell growth.

   "Some genes can even say 'I don't want you to live. Die,' " said Dr.
Bernstein, who is director of the Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute at
Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              387 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 31, 1995 Wednesday

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: Gene for rare dwarfism tracked   Pycnodysostosis research might
identify Toulouse-Lautrec   malady

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   Reuters News Agency
  WASHINGTON
 Two U.S. research teams say they have found evidence of a gene believed
to cause a rare form of dwarfism that may have afflicted French artist
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec.

       The discovery may lead at last to a definitive posthumous diagnosis of
the tiny, tormented painter, known for dark portraits of Parisian cafes
and cabarets in which he often made his subjects look more deformed than
he was himself.

   Scientists at New York's Mount Sinai Hospital, tracking the disorder in
an Israeli Arab family, and a separate team at the U.S. National
Institutes of Health, studying a Mexican family, have found genetic
indications, called markers, for a form of dwarfism known as
pycnodysostosis.

   They have not yet isolated the gene itself.

   The scientists hope the research, presented in the June edition of
Nature Genetics, will lead to a prenatal screening test and even some day
to corrective gene therapy. They also hope it sheds light on disorders
involving bone formation.

   "The goal is to understand, besides the historical aspects, the
mechanism of the disease and mechanism for remodelling bone," Dr. Mihael
Polymeropolous at NIH said yesterday.

   The historical aspects are also tantalizing. As far back as 1962, two
French doctors, Pierre Maroteaux and M. Lamy, theorized that Toulouse-
Lautrec, who died of alcoholism before his 37th birthday, suffered from
pycnodysostosis.

   Dr. Bruce Gelb, working with Dr. Robert Desnick at Mount Sinai, said
the painter's relatives have thus far not seemed eager to exhume his
remains for research. But since there was a fair amount of inbreeding in
his family of French aristocrats, genetic tests on his cousins' surviving
children could determine whether the pycnodysostosis mutation runs in the
family.

   A Toulouse-Lautrec biographer, Julia Frey of the University of
Colorado, questions in an accompanying essay in the journal whether his
short stature was caused by this particular genetic defect or had some
other origin.

   He had some of the characteristics of pycnodysostosis, including
shortness and a tendency to bone fractures, but he did not display some of
the other telltale marks, such as a bulging, misshapen skull or receding
chin.

   Whatever the artist's physical problems, Frey does not make him sound
appealing: "He had persistent toothaches, along with frequent respiratory
illnesses and sinus problems, including an habitual characteristic sniff,
and an embarrassing tendency to drool."

   Toulouse-Lautrec, who lived from 1864 to 1901, was best known for his
prolific production of posters and paintings of Parisian nightlife in the
1890s. In less than 20 years he produced more than 737 canvases, 275
watercolours, 368 prints and posters, 5,084 drawings, a few bookbindings,
ceramics and stain-glassed windows - and approximately 300 pornographic
works.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              390 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 13, 1995 Saturday

LENGTH: 118 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST   BUBBLE-BOY BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   Three babies who two years ago were given manipulated genetic material to
help them overcome immune-system deficiencies are now making some of that
gene themselves, says Donald Kohn, director of the gene-therapy program at


   Children's Hospital in Los Angeles. The children, born in May and June of
1993, were diagnosed with the "bubble-boy" disease before they were born,
giving doctors time to come up with a plan to insert the missing gene into
some of their cells. The disease is caused by the absence of a gene that
makes an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or ADA. It was the first
attempt to treat a disease at birth with gene therapy. The children, the
eldest of whom will be two this week, are developing well.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              393 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 16, 1995 Thursday

LENGTH: 428 words

HEADLINE: The rights of parents

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   A judge in Ontario ruled this week that the father of a child conceived
through artificial insemination is the legal father even though the child
was conceived with another man's sperm. The mother had challenged the
paternity of her estranged husband and tried to deny him access; she
claimed she was the sole parent. Had she had her way, the father would
have had no rights to the child.

       Sensibly, the judge ruled that the man was the legal father. He decided
that the child was entitled to a father. Had he blocked access, the child
would have been raised exclusively by the mother. That would have
delighted her but affronted justice. Indeed, it would have created two
victims: the father (who was married to the mother) and the child (who
would had only one parent). Instead, the court properly recognized a
father's right to a child and a child's right to a father - assuming that
fatherhood could be established, as it could here.

   The case speaks to the evolving ethics of reproductive technology and
their uses in asserting parenthood. In this instance, artificial
insemination was a convenient rationale to deny a father rights to the
child of whom the couple had agreed - in writing - that they would both be
parents. The court prevented that, and in so doing has sustained normal
order in this shifting world. It makes clear that a woman who wants to
separate her child from her former husband, whatever her doubts about his
character, cannot call into question his biological fatherhood.

   In-vitro fertilization, gene therapy, sex selection and surrogate
motherhood have all unleashed changes said to threaten our ethical and
legal thinking. A royal commission in 1993 warned of the commercialization
of reproductive technology and recommended that surrogate motherhood be
banned, sex-selection clinics be closed and the sale of human sperm,
embryos and fetal tissue be prohibited.

   The government hasn't acted on the report, perhaps because it feels no
popular desire to establish a large regulatory regime as the royal
commission recommends. Good. Perhaps it senses that there is no place for
government in questions so intensely private. It would prefer to allow
things to take care of themselves, as they apparently are.

   The decision in Ontario calms the waters. By whatever means children
are conceived, the rights and responsibilities of parents - or those who
have arranged through mutual consent to be parents - fall within the
familiar landscape of common and family law. The advance in reproductive
technology may be one of those cases where far more solutions are created
than problems.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              395 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1995 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 31, 1995 Tuesday

LENGTH: 208 words

HEADLINE: NEWS BRIEFING   Gene therapy used to fight AIDS

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   WASHINGTON
 In the first attempt to fight AIDS with gene therapy, scientists said
yesterday they have fired fake viral genes into the blood cells of three
infected volunteers.

       The goal is to flood vulnerable cells with slightly askew versions of
one of the virus's own genes, hamstringing its ability to manufacture new
copies of itself. Scientists plan to try this novel approach on 12 people,
and they hope to know within six months whether it works.

   That researchers would even consider tinkering with the genetic
blueprints inside healthy blood cells demonstrates their frustration at
controlling HIV, the AIDS virus.

   The virus has eluded everything scientists have come up with in
billions of dollars of research. No treatment yet developed can clearly
slow its destruction of the human immune system.

   Because of this, researchers are also cautious about predicting whether
their latest approach, for all its novelty, will turn out any better.

   "With HIV, it's hard to be too optimistic about anything," said Dr.
Gary Nabel. "There are so many ways this virus can defeat us."

   Dr. Nabel, a researcher at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the
University of Michigan, described his work at an AIDS conference sponsored
by the American Society for Microbiology. AP

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              402 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 17, 1994 Saturday

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: Operation uses gene therapy for ulcerated leg

BYLINE: GINA KOLATA; NYT

BODY:

   GINA KOLATA
THE NEW YORK TIMES
 A revolutionary operation last week in New York, involving the formation
of natural shunts around a blocked blood vessel, could usher in the use of
gene therapy for vascular disease. If the surgical technique is
successful, it will enable some heart patients to grow their own bypasses.

       The operation, in which genes were inserted into the ulcerated leg of a
man whose body would not accept bypass surgery or balloon angioplasty, was
conducted by cardiologists Jeffery Isner and Robert Schainfeld, and
molecular biologist Kenneth Walsh of St. Elizabeth's Hospital in New York.

   Their technique is a spin-off from cancer research in which doctors
noticed that tumours use a substance called vascular endothelial growth
factor, or vegF, to grow blood vessels. Other workers found that vegF
helps fetuses develop vessels.

   The discovery of vegF gave Dr. Isner an idea. Doctors have long known
that some patients naturally form bypasses around blocked arteries.
However, most people do not produce these collateral arteries or do not
produce enough of them to divert blood. Perhaps, Dr. Isner reasoned, if he
supplied vegF genes to the smooth muscle cells lining an artery wall next
to a blockage, the genes might entice new blood vessels to grow.

   Muscle cells are an ideal setting for gene therapy. One of the most
difficult aspects of the treatment is finding a good way to get genes into
cells. Muscle cells are among the few that take up so-called naked DNA,
genes that are not packaged in viruses or wrapped in membranes. Once these
genes get into cells, they remain active for a few weeks, directing the
production of proteins.

   It was hoped that in the same way vegF genes would remain active long
enough to promote the formation of new blood vessels.

   After much research on animals, Dr. Isner and Dr. Schainfeld applied to
the U.S. National Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug
Administration for approval to try the gene therapy on patients. They
wanted to start with patients who had blocked arteries in their legs and
who, for various medical reasons, were not candidates for bypass surgery
or balloon angioplasty. These patients, unlike people with blocked
coronary arteries, cannot be treated with drugs. No drugs are effective
for their condition. Instead, they face amputations of their legs, a
procedure that is very risky. Dr. Isner says that 20 per cent of them die
in the hospital and 40 per cent are dead within a year of the surgery. Dr.
Isner says these are the patients who have the most to gain and the least
to lose from gene therapy. He estimates that 50,000 to 60,000 patients in
North America each year have such severe blockages in their leg arteries
that they have constant and unrelenting pain in their legs or have ulcers
on their legs that cannot heal.

   The first patient selected for the program fitted the profile
perfectly. Michael Ruo, 54, of Foxborough, Mass., is an overweight smoker
who says heart disease runs in his family. Eleven years ago, blood flow to
his left leg was obstructed by plaque; his doctors corrected it with
bypass surgery. Six years ago, he had triple bypass surgery on his
coronary arteries.

   Last April, he nicked his right ankle and noticed the cut would not
heal. The wound became an open ulcer and, after undergoing unsuccessful
surgery to correct blood flow in the leg, he was referred to Dr. Isner's
program.

   The challenge for Dr. Isner was to find a site in which to insert the
genes. His team had to locate a place in the artery next to the blockage
that was wide enough to inject the genes and that had intact and healthy
smooth muscle cells. Unfortunately, Mr. Ruo's main artery was unusable for
gene therapy and the decision was made to introduce the genes into a much
smaller artery.

   In a delicate procedure supervised by Dr. Walsh, genes were inserted on
the surface of a balloon. Expecting that just 1 per cent or less of the
vegF genes would actually be taken up by the cells, the researchers used
16 trillion genes, a seemingly enormous number but less than a drop of
liquid in a tiny test tube. After the gluey gene fluid was dry, the
balloon was sheathed, deflated and drawn into the artery, stopping at the
exact spot in the branch where the genes were to be left. Dr. Isner
slipped off the sheath and inflated the balloon for six minutes while the
muscle cells took up the genes.

   Now the operation is over but the waiting continues. Dr. Isner says the
real proof of success will be if the patient's ulcer starts to heal.

   He says Mr. Ruo and other patients in the program will not lose much by
participating in the study. "If we don't do this, he is definitely going
to lose his leg."

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              403 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 9, 1994 Friday

LENGTH: 188 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFING   Cystic fibrosis advance

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   WASHINGTON
 Scientists said yesterday they have wiped out certain cystic fibrosis
symptoms in mice, an advance in the search for a cure for the inherited
disease that usually kills its human victims before they reach 30.

       The research, being published today in the journal Science, establishes
for the first time that the disease in mice can be corrected with a human
gene. The work to date focused on intestinal symptoms, and researchers are
now investigating whether a similar approach will work on mice lungs.

   The study "underscores our belief that gene therapy will provide the
ultimate cure for cystic fibrosis," said Robert Beall, president of the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, which funded the research.

   Although the research strongly suggests a cure is feasible, it still
remains a number of years away, Dr. Jeffrey Whitsett, director of
pulmonary biology at Children's Hospital Medical Center in Cincinnati and
the lead author of the Science article, said in a telephone intervew.

   Cystic fibrosis strikes the lungs, pancreas and intestinal tract, and
is the most common genetic disorder among Caucasians, affecting one out of
2,000. Reuter

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              405 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 29, 1994 Tuesday

LENGTH: 1378 words

HEADLINE: THE CHANGE PAGE   When caring has a cost   HEALTH CUTBACKS / With
government-imposed limits on its   budget, Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children
finds it   harder to be an angel of mercy for critically ill babies.   It is
coping through a different type of management

BYLINE: MARGOT GIBB-CLARK; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   BY MARGOT GIBB-CLARK
The Globe and Mail
  Toronto
 INSIDE Sick Children's Hospital, a team of doctors, nurses and hospital
managers is struggling to cut $450,000 in costs from the intensive care
unit for critically ill newborns.

       On this day, a tough issue has hit the table: Should they eliminate the
clinic that follows up on high-risk babies after they leave the unit?

   Gina Brannan, a lawyer and the committee's one parent member, objects
forcefully. Ms. Brannan's three-year-old son spent 10 weeks in a similar
unit after being born weighing less than 900 grams. It was there that she
learned about special physiotherapy after being told Robbie might never
walk.

   "I credit follow-up with solving a lot of my problems," she tells the
committee. "If you don't have the proper follow-up what was the point of
keeping them alive in the first place?"

   Such are the hard choices facing Ms. Brannan and the physicians,
nurses, comptroller and systems specialist who sit around the boardroom
table, setting the budget for neonatal intensive care at Sick Kids.

   Across the hospital, similar committees decide each year how many
patients their programs can handle, what kinds of treatment they will
offer, and how many staff they need.

   Gone are the days when hospitals ran separate budgets for nurses,
dietitians and physicians, no matter where they worked in the institution.
The old system led to territorial conflicts and made strategic planning a
nightmare.

   As health care has run into the wall of limited resources, hospitals
have learned a business approach to planning. The answer at Sick Kids is
program management: Patients are considered consumers of a single hospital
program, such as oncology or neonatal intensive care, instead of users of
diverse services such as surgery, radiology and physiotherapy.

   It is the hospital equivalent of product-line management, says Peggy
Hutchison, Sick Kids' vice-president for patient programs, and her
hospital is considered a leader in this area.

   At the operational level, the program committee for neonatal intensive
care has to find cuts in a budget of $11-million that is already tightly
stretched.

   One floor up from the boardroom, 34 tiny, very sick babies are being
cared for, with another on the way from an out-of-town hospital.
Government funds provide money only for 32, although at times this year
occupancy has risen as high as 46.

   Inside the unit, nurses hover over babies in incubators or on warming
beds, taking minuscule blood samples from heels and monitoring up to nine
types of fluids and drugs being pumped into the fragile bodies.

   They also find time to wind up a music box, adjust a colourful quilt,
soothe a baby in a wind-up swing chair and lower a blind to keep the
morning sun out of delicate eyes.
The budget process begins in September with an early morning presentation
to Sick Kids' executive committee. Chief financial officer Laurie Harrison
expects a $2-million cut in government money for the fiscal year that
begins April 1, 1995. The operating budget is now $240-million.

   Sick Kids also wants to reallocate $6-million to solve problems such as
underfunding in radiology, and to begin new initiatives like lung gene
therapy. (Gene therapy involves introducing new genes into cells to
correct defects.)
   By the time committee members leave the meeting, they have bought into
the reallocation, even though it may mean extra cutbacks in their own
departments. They set out to sell it to the rest of the hospital.

   The cuts are expected to average 4.6 per cent, though different
programs will take different hits - amounts will be decided later.
In the neonatal program, nurse administrator Mary Jo Haddad, an articulate
livewire who runs two critical care units, launches open forums with her
200 staff members. She tells them about possible cuts, and solicits
suggestions on how to hit the targeted $450,000.

   But by October, Ms. Haddad reports back to her program committee that
her staff is finding only small savings after several years of cutbacks.

   "There is lots of frustration. People feel they are working as hard as
they can, that activity levels are increasing and that we are just
accepting it."

   One problem is that neonatology often works with patients from outside
the hospital's region. "We can't continue to support other centres that
are not offering the level of services they should," comptroller Alasdair
Smith says.

   Ms. Haddad explains that the area west of Toronto has had trouble
handling increased volumes, causing some of their babies to end up at Sick
Kids. She predicts this will cost an extra $500,000 this year that hasn't
been budgeted. The committee may need to find nearly $1-million in cuts
instead of $450,000.

   "There are patients we could say no to, but there's an ethical dilemma.
Where do they go?" she asks. Sick Kids treats the acutely ill babies other
hospitals are often not equipped to handle.

   One doctor suggests cutting costs in the transport team, the highly
trained nurses who travel to hospitals to stabilize babies' conditions so
they can survive the move to Sick Kids. Community hospitals might take
over that responsibility, the doctor says.

   "But that would destroy the regional system we've developed," Dr. Barry
Smith, head of neonatology, points out.

   Eventually the group gets around to an issue it has been putting off.
"Are we at the point where we're saying we can't take another cut without
capping services?" Ms. Haddad asks.

   They toss the idea around but reach no decision.
Two weeks later, the committee decides the only way to reach $450,000 is
by somehow capping services. Members go through the activities they would
be willing to support or, if necessary, limit. They decide patients
already at the hospital would be in greater risk if nursing or social work
staff were cut.

   "The dilemma is that capping has a major impact on other hospitals, so
ethically some of us have difficulty with it," Ms. Haddad says. "We've
never cut services before."

   As she speaks, her beeper goes off. Another baby is on its way from
outside the region.
After a few days, the neonatal unit gets good news. It is asked to give up
2.6 per cent of its budget instead of more than 4 per cent. The management
committee recognizes that operations have already been streamlined by
giving staff more autonomy and by collaborating with other hospitals.
Ms. Haddad has been up past midnight trying to make the numbers fit for
the Nov. 23 committee meeting. She proposes that the unit budget for
11,542 patient days next fiscal year, instead of the 12,411 expected this
year.

   But it will mean convincing the Ontario Ministry of Health that it has
to stop the overflow of babies from west of Toronto.

   The average baby's stay on the unit will also have to decline to 9.9
days from the current 10.45. One change that could help is a plan to share
ambulances with two nearby hospitals when babies are sent back to
community hospitals. At the moment, the children and their nurses
sometimes wait hours for an ambulance.

   The new budget could also mean cutting staff, but that's a delicate
balancing act. If nurses leave but have to be replaced, it would take four
months to bring new hires up to speed in this high-tech unit. "One of our
challenges is to maintain honesty to staff without overly dire
predictions," Dr. Smith, the unit head, says.

   It will still take weeks of fine-tuning before the neonatal budget is
approved by the board. As for the follow-up clinic championed by Ms.
Brannan, its resources are frozen. But it survives for another year.

    MEDICAL FILE

      Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto.  . North America's largest pediatric
medical centre.  . Well known for genetic research, cardiology,
hematology-oncology,  orthopedic surgery and neurosciences.  . Staff: 3,787
full-time equivalents (more than 5,000 people including  part-timers.)  .
Patients: About 16,400 admitted a year for 105,000 patient days - plus  290,000
outpatient visits.  . Average stay: 6.4 days  . About 2,250 residents, fellows
and other trainees get some education at  the hospital each year.  . Operating
budget: $240-million for patient care ($270-million including  research
institute).  . About 80 per cent of money from Ontario Health Ministry; 11 per
cent  from research grants; the rest primarily from foreign or out-of-province
patients, and from cafeteria, pharmacy and non-care services.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              406 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 26, 1994 Saturday

LENGTH: 179 words

HEADLINE: NEWS BRIEFING   Gene-targeting technique announced

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   WASHINGTON
 Gene therapy has always had a major drawback - directing the appropriate
disease-fighting gene to exactly the right tissues.

       Now, researchers at the University of California in San Francisco say
they have achieved a laboratory breakthrough: They have modified a
retrovirus so it transport genes into specific human cells for treatment.

   The development has the potential for use in gene therapy for red-blood
cell disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemias - an inherited
chronic anemia.

   Yuet Wai Kan, whose team developed the targeting method, cautioned in
an interview yesterday that the technique - which involves an altered
retrovirus - has been used only in the laboratory and not in humans.

   Many gene therapy treatments rely on taking cells out of the body,
infecting them with genes and returning them. This is the procedure in
bone marrow transplants and in other treatment of some cancers.

   Dr. Kan said his method has the potential of using a syringe to inject
the genes and not having to take cells out of the body. He cautioned,
"This is theoretical." AP

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              408 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 15, 1994 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended

LENGTH: 213 words

HEADLINE: Drug giant forms research network

BYLINE: REUT STAFF

BODY:

   Reuters and staff
 Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., an arm of a giant French drug and chemicals
corporation, has agreed to collaborate with a number of international
institutes and companies to form a research network dedicated to
development of cell and gene therapies.

       RPR, based in Collegeville, Pa., said yesterday that it is investing
$300-million (U.S.) in the venture. The project will involve organizations
ranging from the Rhone-Poulenc affiliate that controls Toronto-based
Connaught BioSciences Inc. to the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory's Human
Genome Center in California.

   RPR, an arm of Paris-based Rhone-Poulenc SA, pointed out that the
figure cited includes some financing for deals that have already been
announced.

   The company also said it has formed a cell and gene therapy division,
Gencell, that will focus initially on oncology, cardiovascular disease and
neuro-degenerative disease.

   Companies involved with RPR in the network include its sister company,
Pasteur Merieux Connaught, and its Virogenetics and Transgene
subsidiaries.

   A spokesman for Connaught BioSciences said the company expects this
initiative to lead to better co-ordination of research and development
efforts, without affecting the autonomy of the Canadian operation or the
role it plays within the Rhone-Poulenc group.

CORRECTION:

    After Pasteur Merieux of France purchased Toronto-based Connaught
BioSciences Inc. in 1989, it changed the company's name to Connaught
Laboratories Ltd. Incorrect information appeared yesterday.
(Wednesday, November 16, 1994)
(Page B2)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              411 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 1, 1994 Tuesday

LENGTH: 881 words

HEADLINE: REPORT ON HEALTH & PHARMACEUTICALS   Genetically, a perfect union
RESEARCH / A model private-public partnership   is creating B.C.'s new Centre
for Molecular Medicine

BYLINE: WENDY STUECK; SPCL

DATELINE: Vancouver BC

BODY:

   BY WENDY STUECK
Special to The Globe and Mail
  Vancouver
 ABOUT 4,000 human diseases are known or suspected to be linked to faulty
genes. With a little help from politics and timing, researchers at a new
centre in Vancouver may someday find the tools to fix them.

       Hiring is now under way for the Centre for Molecular Medicine and
Therapeutics. Slated to break ground next spring near B.C. Children's
Hospital, the centre will focus on finding genetic causes of diseases like
cancer. It will be an expensive search: the province, under NDP Premier
Michael Harcourt, agreed to chip in $9-million to build the centre. Those
funds come from B.C. 21, a $100-milion program launched in May, 1993, to
foster jobs and economic diversity. And Merck Frosst Canada Inc., a
division of giant multinational Merck & Co., came to the table with an
operating funds commitment of $15-million over five years.

   The University of British Columbia and Children's Hospital are the
other key partners behind the initiative. UBC geneticist Michael Hayden
first approached Merck in 1992 with the concept of a research centre, and
now serves as its director. And pediatricians at Children's Hospital - the
sole acute-care facility for children in British Columbia - will bring a
valuable clinical perspective. UBC researchers at the centre expect to
match Merck's contribution by raising another $15-million in research
grants.

   Aubrey Tingle, director of research at Children's Hospital, says the
new centre will push UBC and Children's Hospital to the forefront of
molecular genetics research in North America.

   "The key to future advances in diagnosis, treatment and prevention of
childhood cancers and many other problems is improved understanding of the
molecular structure and function of genes," Dr. Tingle says. "This centre
will serve as a magnet, attracting world-class researchers who will apply
molecular genetics techniques to improve child health in many fields."

   UBC will retain intellectual property rights to any compounds developed
at the centre, but Merck Frosst will have first rights to
commercialization.

   The centre looks like a winning proposition for all the parties
involved. But had it not been for Bill C-91, none would have made it to
the planning table.

   That legislation, passed in Parliament in 1993, extended patent
protection on new drugs in Canada to 20 years. Multinational drug
companies argued that such legislation was essential to protect their
investment in research and development.

   In exchange for the concessions in Bill C-91, the drug companies agreed
to spend more on research in Canada. When the legislation went through,
Merck Frosst scientists were working with Dr. Hayden at a federally funded
Centre for Excellence in molecular genetics. He approached Merck Frosst
with a research centre concept at about the same time as the company was
hunting for C-91-generated research projects, some of which were required
to have a regional component.

   "The timing was very important," says Allister MacDonald, public
affairs director at Merck Frosst. The funds earmarked for the centre
comprise the largest research commitment Merck Frosst has made to date in
Canada. The centre is also a departure for Merck, which typically conducts
its research through wholly owned subsidiaries.

   "For us to take a step like this is outside of our culture, and really
reflects the quality of science that we observed at UBC," Mr. MacDonald
says.

   Dr. Hayden says that research programs at the centre will be
integrated, so that findings made in one area can be quickly applied and
explored in others. For example, should the team working on human
molecular genetics isolate a disease-causing gene, the group working on
molecular physiology could use those findings to determine what aspect of
the gene disrupts normal cellular activity.

   Down the hall, genetic therapy specialists could begin to hunt for ways
to stymie the gene's negative effect.

   It's a multidisciplinary, intensely focused approach that the parties
behind CMMT hope will provide shortcuts on the way to the centre's
ultimate goal: developing new drugs that will prevent or delay disease.

   Dr. Hayden refuses to predict if or when new drugs may hit the market.
Sensitive to early charges that CMMT scientists would be under Merck's
thumb, he stresses that he will set the direction of research, which will
be independent of Merck's corporate goals.

   "Our primary goal is to do world-class science," he says. "On the road
to that, there may be new therapeutic products identified, and Merck
Frosst will have first rights to decide if it wants to go ahead with
commercialization.

   "But (research) goals are up to the director. It's not a contract,
where Merck has said 'please work on this.' "
   After working on the concept for more than two years, Dr. Hayden is
relieved to see it coming to fruition. From a broader perspective, he
hopes the centre will inspire copycat partnerships to speed the fight
against all forms of illness and disease.

   "We're hoping it will be a model for the development of infrastructure
over the long term," Dr. Hayden says. "What's unique about this project is
that it touches so many different aspects of life and science in
Vancouver. It's a true partnership between government, a hospital, a
pharmaceutical company and a university, all coming together with
different resources."

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              412 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 1, 1994 Saturday

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: NEWS BRIEFING   Parkinson gene-therapy findings

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: New York NY

BODY:

   NEW YORK
 Rats with a brain condition resembling Parkinson's disease improved when
a human gene was inserted in their brain cells, a finding that suggests a
possible treatment for people.

       The strategy has also shown promise in monkeys, said researcher Dr.
Matthew During of the Yale University School of Medicine.

   An estimated 500,000 to 1.5 million Americans and at least 70,000
Canadians have Parkinson's disease, which robs people of control over
their movements.

   Like Parkinson patients, the rats lacked a crucial substance called
dopamine in a certain part of their brains. The inserted gene lets cells
make a substance called tyrosine hydroxylase, which indirectly stimulated
dopamine production.

   Scientists used a harmless virus called an adeno-associated virus to
deliver the gene into the rat brain cells. The work is reported in the
October issue of the journal Nature Genetics by Dr. During and colleagues
at Yale and elsewhere.

   Fred Gage, a professor of neuroscience at the University of California
at San Diego, called the findings encouraging.

   At a recent scientific meeting, Dr. During reported preliminary results
showing that the strategy also reduced Parkinson-like symptoms of tremour,
rigidity and slow movement in African green monkeys. AP

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              417 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             August 12, 1994 Friday

LENGTH: 771 words

HEADLINE: AIDS conference lives up to somber expectations   Absence of
breakthroughs, with little hope of any   to come, indicate disease will remain
deadly foe for long time

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   Associated Press
  YOKOHAMA, Japan
 The gist of 3,500 reports this week from the war on AIDS is simple
enough: There is no cure for AIDS, no effective treatment, no vaccine.

       Nor will there be any time soon.

   "Anyone with HIV won't find much solace at this meeting," said Dr.
Mervyn Silverman, president of the American Foundation for AIDS Research.

   The tone of the 10th international conference on AIDS, which concluded
yesterday, was restrained from the start. Organizers warned the 12,000
participants not to expect anything big. They were right.

   After four days of non-stop discussion, the goal of controlling the
human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, seems as distant as ever.

   "Breakthrough findings don't time themselves to coincide with
international meetings," said Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

   But in the field of AIDS, breakthroughs are rare in the months between
international meetings, too. The only one that surfaced since last year's
big meeting in Berlin was the discovery that women infected with acquired
immune deficiency syndrome can avoid passing the virus on to their babies
during birth if they take the drug AZT.

   Even this is a limited victory. Because the medicine is so expensive,
it will not help those living in poor countries, where the disease is most
common. And it may be worthless to even those who can afford it if AZT-
resistant strains of the virus grow dominant.

   If any theme emerged from the conference, it was the need to go back to
basics. Rather than a scatter-shot scramble for new drugs, many scientists
seemed to agree that they need new ideas. And they will get them by
exploring the innermost workings of the virus and the body's complex and
ultimately futile response to it.

   The new head of the U.S. Office of AIDS Research said this will be the
focus of the federal government's annual $1.3-billion AIDS budget.

   "The engine that will drive the entire AIDS research enterprise forward
is basic research," Dr. William Paul told the meeting.

   But scientists have been gathering this kind of information since the
epidemic began. Two of the most talked about subjects at the conference -
long-term survivors and gene therapy - build on the encyclopedic store of
basic knowledge already assembled about HIV virology and immunology.

   While almost everyone who contracts HIV eventually gets sick and dies,
about 5 per cent are still perfectly healthy 12 to 15 years after their
infection. Researchers believe that if they figure out how these people's
immune systems tame HIV, maybe they could turn it into a treatment for
those less fortunate.

   "This is obviously a hot topic," said Dr. David Ho, head of the Aaron
Diamond AIDS Research Center in New York City.

   His preliminary study, presented at the meeting, offers hints of unique
immune system responses in people who carry HIV without harm.

   Other researchers said their decade of basic research into HIV's
origins, structure and life cycle is about to result in human experiments
in gene therapy, the most exotic AIDS treatment yet. The idea is to insert
HIV-killing genes into people's blood cells so they will be able to
protect themselves from the virus.

   No one knows whether this will produce a practical AIDS therapy. Time
and again, the virus has proved to be more clever than the scientists. Its
principal tactic is to evolve mutant genes that make it impervious to new
drugs.

   During treatment, HIV quickly becomes resistant to AZT and all the
other drugs developed so far. No clearly effective new ones were
introduced at the meeting. Doctors still hope that mixing the drugs
together will improve their potency.

   "We will combine them in as many different ways as we can imagine,"
said Dr. Paul Volberding of the University of California at San Francisco.

   However, researchers showed little of the bravura that reigned early in
the epidemic, when many were convinced victory over AIDS was inevitable.

   "It has outsmarted us so far, and most of us would predict it will
continue to," said Dr. Mark Wainberg of McGill University in Montreal.

   For now, many believe that keeping people from contracting AIDS,
largely through condom use, is the only practical way to control the
epidemic, which continues to spread with alarming speed.

   According to the World Health Organization, about 17 million people
have been infected with HIV - three million in the past year alone. Africa
is hardest hit, but the virus is starting to spread in Asia, the world's
most populous continent.

   Clearly AIDS will be a deadly foe for a long time. The International
AIDS Society is planning more meetings like this one through the end of
the century.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              419 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 11, 1994 Thursday

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Gene manipulation discussed at AIDS conference   Newborns appear
likely to be among first subjects   of new approach to fighting disease

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: YOKOHAMA, Japan

BODY:

   Associated Press
  YOKOHAMA, Japan
 The youngest people infected with AIDS will be among the first to receive
its most dramatic new treatment, genetic manipulation that arms blood
cells with a virus-killing protein, researchers said yesterday.

       At the 10th International Conference on AIDS, scientists laid out
strategies for gene therapy. These mostly involve inserting protective new
genes into the blood cells that human immunodeficiency virus infects. The
genes would combat HIV by producing substances to disrupt the internal
workings of the virus.

   HIV kills by taking over a variety of white cells called helper cells.
It turns them into virus factories and then destroys them.

   One gene-therapy idea is called the kamikaze approach. Cells would get
a poison gene that turns on only if the cells get infected, making them
self-destruct before they do more harm.

   Another is to outfit closely related blood cells, called suppressor
cells, with new genes so they will make the proteins ordinarily produced
by helper cells. This way, the suppressor cells will at least partially
take over the duties of their AIDS-stricken cousins.

   Among the gene therapy approaches that appear closest to being actually
used is one for newborns developed by Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal and
colleagues at the University of California in San Diego.

   She said she hopes to begin testing it on infected babies within a year
and eventually to develop a simple AIDS treatment that can be given in a
single injection.

   Dr. Wong-Staal's approach is aimed at babies who receive the HIV virus
from their mothers during birth.

   Doctors would remove blood from the umbilical cord that connected the
baby to its mother. The blood contains stem cells, which ordinarily live
in the bone marrow and make new blood cells.

   They then would give these stem cells a new gene isolated from a virus
that infects tobacco plants. This gene produces an enzyme called a hairpin
ribozyme. It destroys the RNA that HIV uses for its own genes.

   The gene-altered stem cells are injected into the baby, where they
continue to make white blood cells containing the ribozyme gene. If one of
these new cells is attacked by HIV, the gene would prevent it from
becoming established, making new copies of itself and eventually killing
the cell.

   While adults typically live with HIV for a decade, the virus kills
babies much faster. Because of the quick course of their disease,
researchers believe studies in newborns will soon tell them whether gene
therapy has promise as an AIDS treatment.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              431 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             May 21, 1994 Saturday

LENGTH: 1320 words

HEADLINE: Looking death in the eye   HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final
Chapter

BYLINE: DOUGLAS POWELL; GAM

BODY:

   BY SHERWIN B. NULAND
Knopf, 278 pages, $31.50
                           A GENTLE DEATH
 BY MARILYNNE SEGUIN
Key Porter, 249 pages, $19.95
 Review by DOUGLAS POWELL
 MY grandmother ended her own life. After five years of painstaking care
for her husband, who was slowly deteriorating from the ravages of
Alzheimer's disease, she decided that a sixth was not worth facing. Her
death was quick and without warning. One moment we were saying goodbye
before a routine trip to the store, the next I was transferring her from
car to wheelchair at the hospital emergency ward. Within 30 minutes she
was officially deceased, the result of a major pharmaceutical overdose.
Looking back, I've often wondered what I would say to her, given the
chance. Don't do it, life is really okay. You are not alone. Things will
get better. But in reality, life is often harsh, she was often alone, and
the prospects of yet another winter, trekking to the hospital each day to
watch the person she had spent the vast majority of her life with become
even more unfamiliar, meant that things certainly were not about to get
better, at least not in any foreseeable future.

       Physicians would say my grandmother was suffering from depression and
could be treated. Perhaps. But she chose what she chose. For others,
medical technology does not always allow the choice. In Canada, Nancy B.,
a 25-year-old quadriplegic, and Sue Rodriguez, who suffered from the
degenerative wasting of Lou Gehrig's disease, have challenged existing
laws and brought the question of when to say enough is enough to the arena
of public debate. The discussion is welcome and the only antidote to the
private anguish of such decisions, as is forcefully brought home in two
new books.

   Humans have created powerful myths and rituals to accompany death,
writes Sherwin Nuland in How We Die, but perhaps none more bizarre than
the modern hospital, "where it can be hidden, cleansed of its organic
blight, and finally packaged for modern burial. We can now deny the power
not only of death but of nature itself. We hide our faces from its face,
but still we spread our fingers just a bit, because there is something in
us that cannot resist a peek."

   Nuland, a physician who has written several books about the medical
profession and teaches surgery and the history of medicine at Yale
University, says this book was written to demythologize the process of
dying, to present it in its biological and clinical realities. The changes
at a cellular and organ level that accompany heart attacks, stroke and
cancer are presented in detail that may be intimidating to the
uninitiated. Then again, people facing life-threatening disease can quite
rapidly assimilate the medical jargon - they have to. Physicians capable
of talking in clear, simple language are rare.

   Nuland is both clear and blunt. He notes that few of the 350,000
Americans who suffer cardiac arrest each year actually survive. And he
includes detailed medical anecdotes such as his first crisis, as a young
intern, when a patient went into cardiac arrest. Nuland opened the man's
chest and began to massage his heart, as was the routine practice at the
time, but to no avail. Suddenly the patient "threw back his head once more
and, staring upward at the ceiling with the glassy unseeing gaze of open
dead eyes, roared out to the distant heavens a dreadful rasping whoop that
sounded like the hounds of hell were barking. Only later did I realize
that what I heard was McCarty's version of the death rattle, a sound made
by spasm in the muscles of the voice box, caused by the increased acidity
in the blood of a newly dead man. It was his way, it seemed, of telling me
to desist - my efforts to bring him back to life could only be in vain."
Or, as Nuland constantly reminds the reader, "we rarely go gentle into
that good night."

   Marilynne Seguin's A Gentle Death is an attempt to help ease that
journey for patients and their families. Seguin, a registered nurse for
more than 30 years as well as a founding member and executive director of
the Toronto-based Dying With Dignity, tells how she, like Nuland, was
trained to prolong life at all costs.

   Experience has taught her to question prevailing attitudes of the
medical establishment and she stresses that patients must become informed
and responsible for the medical decisions that affects their lives. In
presenting the many examples of people approaching death whom Seguin has
cared for, a common theme emerges: Many wish to be at home, surrounded by
the noise of children - the noise of life - rather than the sobering
silence of loneliness.

   Both books try to dispel the hero myth, the one where the nurse or
physician is never to allow the patient to lose hope. Yet hope and wishing
for miracles get in the way of true discussion; it robs people of their
death. Nuland confronts this reality head-on when he describes how, when
his brother Harvey was diagnosed with bowel cancer in 1989, he himself
made "a series of mistakes. . . . I became convinced that telling my
brother the absolute truth would 'take away his only hope.' I did exactly
what I have warned others against." Harvey was enrolled in an experimental
therapy that showed initial promise but in the end increased and prolonged
his anguish. Eventually, Harvey returned home to die.

   These two books are part of an expanding public interest in death.
Certainly part of that interest can be attributed to the demographics of
baby boomers. The group that first discovered drugs, free love,
parenthood, the mid-life crisis and menopause has now discovered death.
And along with those who want to face biological realities there will be
those who desire to live beyond their biological means.

   Nuland writes that we are currently in the vitamin era, following
previous attempts to prolong life through the pseudo-science of monkey
glands, mother's milk and (King David's attempt) sleeping between two
virgins. Coming soon will be expanded attempts to prolong life through the
mass availability of human growth hormone, derived by genetic engineering,
and gene therapy. Only "accurate knowledge of how a disease kills," writes
Nuland, "serves to free us from unnecessary terrors of what we might be
fated to endure when we die. We may thus be better prepared to recognize
the stations at which it is appropriate to ask for relief, or perhaps to
begin contemplating whether to end the journey altogether."

   Which leads to the hotly debated topic of physician-assisted suicide
and the right of rational individuals to decide how and when to end their
lives. At this point the two books differ strongly. Nuland approves of
Living Wills and other means of instructing physicians what treatments to
withhold in the face of terminal illness, but he strongly disapproves of
physician-assisted suicide. Seguin, whoever, sees no distinction. Much of
her book is devoted to a frank discussion of the practical advantages and
limitations of such approaches. Nuland, however, fails to come clean on
the topic, when he writes in passing, "Like so many of my colleagues, I
have more than once broken the law to ease a patient's going, because my
promise, spoken or implied, could not be kept unless I did so."

   Seguin states quite clearly that many physicians have engaged in such
activity, so why not create clear, legally binding rules, as has been done
in the Netherlands? One Dutch physician, in describing The Netherlands'
law last year in The New York Times, said society needs a counterweight
for the enormous technology of modern medicine. But more importantly, he
said, the new law gives patients a chance to take leave openly of their
children, grandchildren, and others. That openness seems crucial to
further public discussion of death and dying. I am still not certain what
I would say to someone who is about to wilfully leave this earth on their
own accord, like my grandmother, but both books provide unique and moving
insight into such conversations.
 Douglas Powell is a graduate student at the University of Guelph.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              433 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 10, 1994 Tuesday

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: Gates gets biotech stake

BYLINE: DJ

DATELINE: New York NY

BODY:

   Dow Jones Service
  NEW YORK
 William Gates and Paul Allen, grandfathers of the digital revolution,
have joined a new fight: the genetic revolution.

       The college dropouts who co-founded Microsoft Corp. in 1975 have
invested $5-million (U.S.) each in Darwin Molecular Corp., a closely held
Seattle biotechnology firm involved in the fast-growing field of gene
therapy.

   With the help of sophisticated computer programs, Darwin plans to
decode the genetic map of the human body to identify the genes associated
with specific diseases. Ultimately, the company hopes to use this
information to develop new drugs.

   While a relatively small sum for a deep-pocketed investor such as Mr.
Allen, the $5-million bet on a young biotechnology firm is indicative of
his eclectic investment style.

   In addition to keeping large positions in a number of technology
companies, Mr. Allen owns the National Basketball Association's Portland
Trailblazers, as well as a valuable collection of Jimi Hendrix memorabilia
that he plans to eventually turn into a museum.

   For his part, Mr. Gates still has much of his money tied up in
Microsoft. Nonetheless, the Microsoft chairman isn't entirely without his
diversions. Recently, he launched Continuum Productions Corp. to amass the
electronic-reproduction rights to art treasures around the world.

   In March, the high-school pals and onetime business partners joined
forces to help finance a wireless network venture, but this is apparently
the first time they have teamed up in the area of biotechnology.

   Mr. Gates has a substantial position in Icos Corp. of Bothell, Wash.,
which is developing treatments for a variety of inflammatory diseases. And
in 1991, the youthful billionaire donated $12-million to the University of
Washington to establish a new department of molecular biotechnology.

   While Mr. Allen has never publicly disclosed any of his investments, he
does hold stock in several privately held biotech startups, according to
his spokeswoman, Susan Pierson.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              437 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              April 8, 1994 Friday

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: AIDS virus causes cancer, research shows   Findings could lead to
safer ways of treating lymphoma,   Kaposi's

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: San Francisco CA

BODY:

   Associated Press
  SAN FRANCISCO
 Researchers have found that the AIDS virus directly causes cancer, and
the discovery offers a possibility of better treatment for both diseases.
It also raises doubts about the safety of some new forms of gene therapy.

       The results, being announced today, could lead to safer ways to treat
certain forms of cancer in patients with acquired immune deficiency
syndrome, said the study's authors, Michael McGrath and Bruce Shiramizu of
the University of California at San Francisco.

   "This is the first direct evidence that we have a human virus causing
cancer through some mechanism - not just indirectly by immunosuppression,"
Dr. McGrath said.

   Cancers, including lymphoma and Kaposi's sarcoma, have long been
associated with AIDS. But most researchers have thought the cancers were
opportunistic, taking advantage of weakening of the immune system as a
result of AIDS, rather than being caused by the virus itself.

   The study found that when the AIDS virus inserted its genetic material
into a cell's DNA, it apparently switched on a nearby cancer-causing gene,
starting up a less common variety of lymphoma called non-B-cell lymphoma.

   The scientists spent two years reviewing 30 lymphoma cases, and found
four in which the AIDS virus inserted itself into the same spot in a
cell's DNA. Dr. McGrath said the researchers now have additional examples,
and estimated that up to a third of non-B-cell lymphomas in AIDS patients
show similar results.

   The study is to be published next Friday in Cancer Research, the
journal of the American Association for Cancer Research.

   Dr. William Blattner, chief of the viral epidemiology branch of the
National Cancer Institute, hailed the finding as an important step in
understanding how a retrovirus, the class of viruses that includes the
AIDS-causing human immunodeficiency virus, can cause cancer.

   "This has been seen in animal retrovirus, but it's the first example of
an insertional retroviral situation in man," he said.

   Dr. Dawn Willis, a virologist and scientific program director for the
American Cancer Society, called the study "a very exciting finding."

   She said the link between AIDS and cancer was always considered
indirect because no one had ever found HIV in a cancer cell. The discovery
could suggest research in tracing the role of viruses in other cancers.

   Dr. Shiramizu agreed. "It definitely leads us in some directions.
Lymphomas, Hodgkin's disease - right now we don't know what's causing
them." Now that researchers know where to look for viruses, further
discoveries are possible, he said.

   But the study also casts a cloud over the goal of creating an AIDS
vaccine from a form of HIV. The study authors and other scientists fear
such a vaccine could trigger cancer genes while halting AIDS.

   More broadly, the study raises questions about the use of any
retrovirus in a vaccine, as well as their increasing role in the new field
of gene therapy. Retroviruses can be used to carry a gene into an organ to
correct its functioning.

   "This causes a lot of concern over the use of retroviruses for anything
- for vaccines or even gene therapy," Dr. McGrath said. "Hooking up a gene
to a retrovirus and then infecting human cells might risk cancer."

   Dr. Shiramizu emphasized that the study doesn't show the exact role of
the AIDS virus in causing cancer. Until that is determined, he said, long-
range questions are still speculative.

   Dr. Blattner agreed that the implications for a future AIDS vaccine are
worrisome. "If this insertion was to take place, understanding the
mechanism would be very important in considering a future vaccine," he
said.

   Dr. Irving Chen, director of the University of California at Los
Angeles AIDS Institute, called the study very important, if confirmed.

   But he said it is important to know how often the virus-caused cancer
occurs, and how long it takes to develop. That could determine whether a
future AIDS vaccine is worth the cancer risk.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              443 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              April 1, 1994 Friday

LENGTH: 1034 words

HEADLINE: Genes replaced in new therapy   Quebecker first to undergo
experimental   treatment for inherited disease

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
Medical Reporter
 In a major leap forward in the new field of gene therapy, U.S. medical
researchers have demonstrated that they can remedy an inherited disease by
inserting correctly working genes into patients.

       "This is the first step toward proving the principle of gene therapy in
humans," said Dr. James Wilson, who led the researchers at the Institute
for Human Gene Therapy at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center in
Philadelphia.

   As the name implies, gene therapy involves the replacement of either
defective or missing genes with properly working ones. Until now, such
experiments have been only partially successful, working for relatively
brief periods of time.

   The results from the experimental therapy are being published today in
the scientific journal Nature Genetics.

   The first patient to undergo the treatment is a 30-year-old woman from
Quebec City who is afflicted with a rare deadly genetic disorder called
familial hypercholesterolemia. She essentially lacks a gene that enables
the liver to cleanse the blood of low-density lipoprotein, often referred
to as the "bad" form of cholesterol.

   Those who have this disease end up with excessive levels of cholesterol
clogging their blood vessels and usually die very young from heart
attacks.

   The Quebec woman, a mother and part-time cashier who wishes to remain
anonymous, suffered her first heart attack at the age of 16. She had
coronary artery bypass surgery at 24. Two of her brothers had the disease
and died of heart attacks in their 20s.

   Her long-term chances of survival were not good - at least until she
underwent the experimental gene therapy.

   Dr. Wilson said she displayed "overwhelming courage" during the
procedure. A portion of her liver was surgically removed and the
researchers inserted properly working genes into its cells that were then
transplanted back into her body.

   Before the therapy, her cholesterol levels were about five times higher
than normal. Within the first four months after treatment, they had
dropped by 20 per cent.

   Dr. Wilson stops short of calling the treatment a complete cure,
because not all of her liver cells now contain the gene. But he believes
enough of them have been treated to do the job safely and effectively.

   "You could call it a partial cure," Dr. Wilson said in a telephone
interview from his Philadelphia office. He added that cholesterol-lowering
drugs, which had little or no effect on the woman before the experimental
procedure, can now be used to further reduce her cholesterol levels. That
has brought them down to between 25 and 30 per cent of the previous level.

   Equally important, the experimental therapy, which was performed in
June of 1992, seems to be having a lasting, and possibly permanent,
effect. For the past 21 months, her cholesterol levels have remained
"significantly decreased . . . with no unexpected or adverse side
effects," Dr. Wilson said.

   Although hypercholesterolemia is a relatively rare inherited disease,
Dr. Wilson believes that the treatment could have broad application in
other disorders in which faulty genes are to blame.

   Genes, the blueprints of life, determine the characteristics of each
human being, from eye colour to the inner workings of organs. If a gene is
defective, it can lead to a birth deformity or a predisposition to a
particular disease.

   For years, researchers have thought it possible to cure many inherited
disorders if only they could replace bad genes with good ones. The big
challenge has been getting properly working genes into the specific cells
where they are needed.

   The first gene-therapy experiments involving humans were performed in
September of 1990, on patients suffering from an inherited immune disorder
called adenosine deaminase deficiency. Blood cells were removed from these
patients, given a correctly working gene and then injected back into their
bodies.

   The success of these experiments proved temporary. The treated cells
floated through the patient's bloodstream for a while, with the new genes
doing their intended job. Then the cells, like all other short-lived blood
cells, would break down and disappear. That means the patients would have
to keep receiving infusions of treated cells, usually once or twice a
month, to remain healthy.

   In the latest research, the patient required just one treatment with
gene-altered cells. The treated cells and their new genes seem to have
taken up permanent residence in her body.

   To achieve these ends, the researchers removed about 15 per cent of the
patient's liver. Using a liquid enzyme solution, they broke it down into
its individual cell components. The cells were carefully distributed into
about 1,000 petri dishes.

   The new genes were added by way of genetically engineered viruses that
had had their own genes removed and replaced with the desired human ones.
These viruses acted as biological transporting vehicles, latching on to
the liver cells and "infecting" them with the cholesterol-lowering genes.

   At this stage, the treated cells resembled a liquid solution. The
researchers injected them into a vein that feeds directly into the liver.
The cells settled into the liver capillaries, where they began functioning
as normal healthy liver cells.

   In particular, the gene produces a protein that sticks out of the
surface of the cell, "ready to grab on to the bad cholesterol as it passes
through the liver."

   Since the Quebec patient, the Philadelphia researchers have treated
four more patients with equal success, Dr. Wilson said.

   The patients will require medical monitoring throughout their lives to
ensure that the new genes continue to work. And they will likely need
cholesterol-lowering drugs. But Dr. Wilson said "we hope this will improve
their prognosis."

   This type of treatment could be used in other inherited illnesses,
including muscle disorders such as muscular dystrophy, he said. "You can
remove muscle cells, grow them, put new genes in and put them back into
the muscle."

   Before the Philadelphia researchers carried out their experiments, they
first had to win the approval of the National Institutes of Health, which
monitors and regulates attempts to manipulate human genes in the United
States.

   Dr. Wilson noted that the genetic changes in these patients cannot be
passed on to their descendants.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              455 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1994 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           January 26, 1994 Wednesday

LENGTH: 1064 words

HEADLINE: MIDDLE KINGDOM   How bad genes can be made good

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   A TOUCH OF GENIUS: Canadian researchers have come up with a better way of
applying gene therapy, which could be used to treat many blood disorders,
AIDS and even cancer.
 BY PAUL TAYLOR
Medical Reporter
  Toronto
  CANADIAN medical researchers think that they have overcome a major
obstacle in the use of gene therapy, a procedure that holds promise for
treating a wide range of blood disorders, including sickle-cell anemia,
thalassemia, AIDS and other diseases of the immune system. As well, it
could have broad applications in cancer treatment.

       Gene therapy, as the name implies, involves the replacement of either
defective or missing genes with properly working ones. Genes are the
blueprints of life and determine all of a person's characteristics from
eye colour to inner workings of organs. If a gene is defective, it can
lead to a birth deformity or a predisposition to a particular disease.

   However, researchers still face many challenges in getting properly
working genes into the cells where they are needed. And recent attempts to
"fix" defective genes have met with only partial success.

   Now, however, Canadian researchers have devised a novel approach for
getting the job done.

   The Canadian team, which included researchers with the Toronto Hospital
and the University of Guelph, removed bone-marrow cells from dogs,
inserted new genes and then injected them back into the animals, where
they took up permanent residence and began working properly.

   Previously, gene transfers had been temporary affairs. The treated
cells would float through the patient's blood stream for a few months,
then break down and disappear, so repeated treatments were necessary.

   Although the Canadian tests were done on dogs, the researchers believe
that their method should work in humans.

   Results from their experiments, published in the January issue of the
Proceedings of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences, are attracting wide
attention within the genetic-research community.

   "I think this is very important," says Donald Kohn, associate professor
in the department of pediatrics and microbiology at the University of
Southern California's school of medicine.

   "We are all basically working on the same problem - trying to treat
genetic diseases by putting missing genes into bone-marrow cells. And the
major problem is that we cannot do it very efficiently."

   Dr. Kohn is a pioneer in the field of gene therapy and played a role in
the first experiments involving humans two years ago.

   Ian Dube, who headed the Canadian research team, says up to 5 per cent
of the cells in the blood carried the new gene two years after the
transfer was completed.

   "The best anyone has been able to get before this is way less than 1
per cent by nine months - and by one year there is virtually no sign of
it."

   The Canadians' success was based on their ability to get the genes into
specific bone-marrow cells - namely stem cells, the ones that produce all
the different components of blood. In theory, at least, if a gene can be
inserted in these cells, it will be reproduced every time new blood
components are made.

   That means a missing or therapeutic gene product could be delivered to
any part of the body though the bloodstream, said Suzanne Kamel-Reid, co-
director of the research team at the Toronto Hospital.

   It sounds simple enough, but it is extremely difficult. There are
thousands of stem cells, and at any given time only 50 to 100 are actually
producing blood components. A transferred gene could end up in a non-
functioning one. So the challenge was to get the genes into these
"cycling" stem cells.

   To get around the problem, the researchers considered why the body has
such a large reserve of unused stem cells.

   "We have that large reserve because sometimes crises occur and we need
to call on these stem cells to suddenly give us more blood cells," Dr.
Dube explains. "One thing that is clearly known to trigger those stem
cells into cycling is if we suffer a major blood loss."

   Dr. Dube, a staff scientist at the Toronto Hospital, said the
researchers decided to try to mimic a huge blood loss outside the body.
Bone-marrow cells were removed from the dogs and put into laboratory
dishes, where they were allowed to grow at a normal rate. As the culture
continued to grow, the researchers kept removing cells from the dish. This
action apparently tricked the remaining cells into thinking that there had
been a huge blood loss, and they all began to produce new blood cells.

   New marker genes were inserted into viruses that were then added to the
tissue culture over a period of three weeks. The genetically modified
viruses then invaded the cells, bringing with them the new genes, which
incorporated themselves into the cycling stem cells. Then the treated
cells were injected into the dogs, where they stayed in the bone marrow
and continued to produce cells expressing the new genes.

   Not only did the method work, it did so even though the Canadian team
challenged a standard procedure in conventional gene-therapy research:
They did not use irradiation therapy on the dogs before injecting the
treated cells. Dr. Dube says researchers usually use irradiation to kill
off the existing bone-marrow cells so the new ones won't face any
competition.

   But the Canadian team found that irradiation was unnecessary; the cells
took hold without it. Indeed, the irradiation may have actually hindered
the chance of successful recovery for the previous subjects of gene
therapy.

   Eighteen dogs have undergone the treatment and "none of them were
harmed," says Stephen Kruth, a veterinarian and associate professor in the
department of clinical studies at the University of Guelph.

   Michael Baker, president of the National Cancer Institute of Canada,
said the new technique for gene transfers should have "special
significance" for genetic blood disorders and cancer treatment. He noted
that researchers hope to combat cancer by genetically altering the body's
disease-fighting immune cells in the bloodstream.

   "We are very hopeful our approach will have application for treatment
of human diseases," Dr. Dube said.

    HOW IT COULD WORK ON HUMANS

      1. Small amount of bone marrow removed.  2. Bone-marrow stern cells
activated in long-term cultures.  3. Genetically modified virus added repeatedly
for three weeks.  4. Modified virus carrying human gene fuses with stem cells.
5. Stem cells carrying new gene are collected.  6. Genetically corrected stem
cells injected into patient.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              459 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 2, 1993 Thursday

LENGTH: 1148 words

HEADLINE: Proceed with care indeed

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   THE desire to regulate new reproductive technologies is quite
understandable. Since the birth in 1978 of Louise Brown, the world's first
"test-tube" baby, reproductive science has galloped forward in a
bewildering number of fields, from in-vitro fertilization to gene therapy
and sex selection. A feeling has taken hold that scientific progress is
outrunning our ethical and legal thinking in these fields, that new
technologies are spreading before we have had a chance to weigh their
implications for society. It is natural, then, that the Royal Commission
on New Reproductive Technologies should have titled its report Proceed
with Care. For care is clearly required if we are to cope with the epochal
changes unleashed by these new techniques.

       But in drafting regulations to protect society, policymakers must also
be careful not to violate the rights of individuals. The desire to have
children is one of the strongest in the human experience, and the decision
to do so one of the most personal and private. Before the state intervenes
in that decision in any way, it must show powerful evidence that doing so
is necessary for the greater good. Before it curtails access to techniques
that allow childless couples to have children, it must prove conclusively
that those techniques cause serious harm to individuals or to society at
large.

   It is here - in the sphere of individual rights - that the Royal
Commission has failed. If adopted, the 293 recommendations in its 1,275-
page report would create a heavy-handed regulatory regime that would
effectively cut off many infertile Canadian couples from new techniques
and technologies. Overseeing this regime would be a reproductive Big
Brother, the National Reproductive Technologies Commission, with wide
authority over reproductive research, sperm collection, storage and
distribution, prenatal diagnosis and "assisted conception services."

   The Royal Commission would make it a criminal act to advertise or
accept a fee for arranging a surrogate birth. It would heavily discourage
private surrogacy arrangements in which no money changes hands. It would
limit access to IVF services to women with blocked fallopian tubes, a
measure that might cut in half the number of women using the technique. It
would ban couples from choosing the sex of their child through a form on
artificial insemination.

   Right from the beginning of their report, the commissioners make it
clear that the rights of individuals - in this case, childless individuals
- are not their priority. Individual autonomy is only one of eight ethical
principles that they chose to guide their work. (The other seven are
equality, respect for human life and dignity, protection of the
vulnerable, non-commercialization of reproduction, appropriate use of
resources, accountability, and balancing individual and collective
interests.) And even this lonely principle is weak in the knees.

   "By individual autonomy," says the report, "we mean that people are
free to lead their lives, particularly with respect to their bodies and
their fundamental commitments, such as health, family, sexuality, and
work. Clearly," it continues, "this is not an unqualified principle.
Individual autonomy does not include the freedom to harm others, to use
force to coerce them, or to undermine social stability. Moreover,
restrictions are sometimes placed on people's freedom of action if it is
determined that they lack the competence necessary to make reasonable
decisions."

   If this were not paternalistic enough, further qualifiers follow. The
commissioners gratuitously reject a "rigid insistence on individual
rights" and "the view, sometimes expressed, that liberal democracy differs
from some other forms of government because individual rights always take
precedence over the interests of the collectivity."

   The commissioners' bias against individual rights is coupled with an
equally wrong-headed prejudice against commerce. "Canadians told us they
do not want market forces to determine how reproductive technologies are
used in Canada," the report says. "Introducing a profit motive to the
sphere of reproduction is contrary to basic values and disregards the
importance of the role of reproduction and its significance in our lives
as human beings."

   Leave aside for a moment what would have happened if this principle had
been applied to the birth control pill, a new technology, introduced by
pharmaceutical companies soley for profit, that fundamentally altered the
pattern of human reproduction. Think, instead, of what it means now. If
the commission has its way, IVF clinics will not be able to operate on a
for-profit basis as doctors do. That means fewer IVF clinics, less
research and one less channel for childless couples.

   Surrogate mothers - assuming surrogacy is allowed at all - will also be
prohibited from accepting money. Again, why? Where is the harm? Who
exactly suffers when a woman accepts money from a childless couple to bear
their biological child - money that she may need to defray lost work time
and other costs of pregnancy? If it is wrong for couples to pay surrogate
mothers, is it wrong to pay adoption agencies? Is adoption also "injurious
to human dignity"?

   Both IVF and surrogacy have their problems, of course. As the
commission points out, IVF is not very effective for women that have an
infertility problem other than blocked fallopian tubes. In surrogate
motherhood, the main problem is custody. But is it a reason to prohibit
the practice? Would it not be better to establish firm custody rules like
those that govern adoption?

   The commission is on firmer ground when it recommends a ban on prenatal
tests that determine the sex of a fetus, allowing parents to abort if it
is the "wrong" kind. But even here its reasoning is confused. If it is
repugnant for a woman to have an abortion because she does not like the
gender of the fetus - and it surely is - why is it acceptable to abort if
the fetus will interfere with career or other life plans? Why is a woman's
right to control her own body paramount when it comes to abortion, but
secondary in surrogate motherhood?

   At present there is no abortion law in Canada and no significant
political movement to pass one. By letting the old abortion law, we have
essentially said that abortion is a private matter, left exclusively to a
woman, her conscience and her physician. Perhaps that is as it should be.
But if so, how can we then turn around and treat conception as matter not
between an individual and his conscience, but between and individual and
the state? Why should there be a virtually unlimited right to abort a
fetus, but not to create one?

   In a field as full as ethically murky as reproductive technology, there
is bound to be confusion of this kind. But the commission's confusion is
made far worse by the contradictory and heavily coloured ethical
principles that it chose as its compass. After four years and $28.2-
million, Canadians had a right to expect much better.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              461 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 20, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 879 words

HEADLINE: MIND & MATTER   It's time we started   questioning conventional
scientific wisdom

BYLINE: MARY GOODERHAM; GAM

BODY:

   BY MARY GOODERHAM
THE auditorium is hushed, a single light illuminating the man wearing
formal dress standing on the stage. By his side is a linen-covered table
filled with oddly shaped flasks, a microscope and Bunsen burner. The
elegant figure gives a signal to the projectionist on one side of the
room. Immediately, squirming bacterial microbes that have earlier been
culled from the air and encased between two glass slides are projected on
a screen.

       "I think we've had quite enough of poetry, enough fantasy and enough of
intuitive solutions," he says, his voice agitated. "It is time for the
true method, that of science, to assert and exercise its rights."

   It is April 7, 1864, the speaker is Louis Pasteur, the lecture topic is
the myth of "spontaneous generation" of bacterial life and the audience is
le tout Paris. These socialites, aristocrats and journalists are gathered
at the Sorbonne to hear the bacteriologist explain his revolutionary germ
theory of disease.

   When the lights rise it is 1993. The speaker is Bruno Latour, a
professor of philosophy at the Centre de Sociologie de l'Innovation at the
Ecole des Mines in Paris, the auditorium is a University of Toronto
lecture hall and the audience is 250 academics from around the world
gathered to study how achievements such as Pasteur's fit into our lives.

   Dr. Latour, like Pasteur, is a French scientist. But he is a social
scientist, a philosopher decidedly more comfortable analyzing the meaning
of the 1864 address than he is considering the implications of multiplying
mold cells. His work - including a book on Pasteur - explores the extent
to which successful science is a closed institution, operating apart from
society. "We need to bridge the gap between the general culture and the
kinds of things scientists do," he says.

   In recent years the study of science and technology has moved into the
sphere of philosophers, historians, sociologists, anthropologists and even
political scientists. Pasteur, who revolutionized the scientific method in
medicine, agriculture and industry, is seen as a pioneer by social
scientists for a number of reasons. The 19th-century bacteriologist was
extremely skilled at scientific rhetoric and well understood the art of
presentation. Whether or not his work had validity, he was able to explain
it to his rapt audience as though it were fact, his credibility enhanced
by his impressive display of beakers, slides and microbes.

   Pasteur's spectacle at the Sorbonne came at an ideologically charged
time. The idea that each microscopic creature had parents and could itself
reproduce - and therefore might be controlled by science - was seen as an
affront both to God and King. A week after Pasteur's elaborate theatre of
proof, Felix Archimedes Pouchet, director of the Rouen Museum of Natural
History and a proponent of the theory that bacteria enter the world
spontaneously, gave an equally enthusiastic lecture.

   Their conflicting papers were reprinted in the newspapers of the day.
Pasteur's theory eventually won out, but it took decades to convince the
medical community of its validity, a time during which thousands of people
fell prey to treatable infections.

   The events of 1864 continue to illuminate today's culture of science.
Society in 1993 is just as mystified by the methods, meaning and
implications of gene therapy, particle acceleration and human-embryo
cloning as it once was with the notion of germs carried by atmospheric
gases.

   Understanding how science operates isn't easy. Regrettably, the public
and the media accept conventional scientific wisdom as the final word.
Though massively financed by public money, science escapes the public
scrutiny that all other institutions - notably the political system - must
bear. Thus, it is a members-only club, where risk-taking and free-thinking
are not encouraged. Entry into a discipline such as physics is barred to
those who question its laws and traditions.

   For instance, the work of Robert Root-Bernstein, an associate professor
of physiology at Michigan State University, rocks the foundations of this
closed system. He theorizes that AIDS is caused not only by HIV but other
factors that are currently not part of the scientific inquiry into the
disease. But the research effort - and dollars - focuses on HIV. Dr. Root-
Bernstein, who trained as a philosopher and historian of science, believes
the process of scientific discovering involves considering all possible
explanations of a phenomenon. This was what Pasteur did - in his case,
successfully - but only after using unusual tactics to get his point
across and spending years convincing a skeptical medical community.

   With our massive scientific and technological institutions becoming
more complex, a contemplative public and critical media are essential, Dr.
Root-Bernstein says. He calls the contextual understanding of science "the
art of seeing for yourself."

   And as science increasingly becomes part of everyday life, lay people
will have to grapple with its risks and ethics. In a society where many
citizens tap into powerful technologies through personal computers,
membership in the club is growing. The day when people are prepared to
think deeply about the meaning and expectations of scientific discoveries
will be the day that science ceases to be detached from society and
becomes part of it.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              462 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           November 13, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 335 words

HEADLINE: Researchers foresee heart-disease vaccine   Experiments using 'gene
therapy'   show ability to reduce cholesterol

BYLINE: COX

DATELINE: Atlanta .bany

BODY:

   Cox News Service
  ATLANTA
 Researchers are rapidly moving toward the day when they may be able to
vaccinate a person against heart disease.

       Scientists meeting here note that dozens of experiments are under way
to treat, perhaps even cure, several diseases by inserting genetically
altered genes and cells into the body to produce proteins that prevent
disease.

   Those diseases range from AIDS to cystic fibrosis.

   A vaccine based on the same concept could be available in the lifetimes
of most people living today to prevent heart disease, said Dr. Sanders
Williams of the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

   He said that immunizing people against heart disease may sound like a
"grandiose concept" right now, "but we can now envision a day when that
may happen." He spoke at the annual meeting of the American Heart
Association in Atlanta during a session titled Gene Therapy for
Atherosclerosis - How Soon?

   Dr. Williams said recent experiments with rats and mice showed that
genetically altered cells were able to dramatically reduce levels of
artery-clogging cholesterol - by more than 40 per cent - in the animals'
blood. However, the cells shut down after a few weeks.

   "That's a problem we're going to have to overcome, and we think we can
do it," he said.

   In another experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, doctors
already are using "gene therapy" in an attempt to lower cholesterol levels
in people who suffer from excessively high levels of the substance in the
blood because of a genetic defect. The results look promising, said Dr.
Elizabeth Nabel, associate professor of internal medicine at the
University of Michigan.

   She said that a more immediate use of gene therapy in heart disease
will be to prevent restenosis, the rapid buildup of material in arteries
shortly after they have been treated by angioplasty.

   Dr. Nabel also said that researchers have produced genetically altered
cells that, when inserted into the body, grow inside blood vessels and
might one day be able to repair damaged arteries.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              468 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 14, 1993 Thursday

LENGTH: 1305 words

HEADLINE: B.C. scientist awarded Nobel   Honouring of biochemist called UBC's
greatest day

BYLINE: ROBERT MATAS; GAM

DATELINE: Vancouver BC

BODY:

   BY ROBERT MATAS
British Columbia Bureau
  VANCOUVER
 Canada's newest Nobel Prize winner, biochemist Michael Smith, attributes
his discovery in DNA-based chemistry to an idea tossed around during a
coffee-break discussion.

       Most important scientific discoveries are not planned, Dr. Smith told
reporters yesterday a few hours after hearing on the radio that he and
U.S. scientist Kary Mullis were awarded the Nobel Prize for their
contributions in the field of DNA-based chemistry.

   "There's been a lot of pressure lately on science to be highly
strategic," Dr. Smith said, but most discoveries are achieved "by people
looking at something they're interested in and making an observation which
may not have been directly connected to what they are looking for."

   Dr. Smith, director of the Biotechnology Laboratory at the University
of British Columbia, is being honoured for developing a crucial technique
used in genetic engineering called site-directed mutagenesis. He is the
first UBC professor to receive a Nobel Prize.

   His discovery "without doubt revolutionized basic research and entirely
changed researchers' way of performing their experiments," The Royal
Swedish Academy of Sciences stated in announcing the award.

   With characteristic humility, Dr. Smith, 61, minimized his insight into
the functioning of DNA, genes and the proteins produced by genes. "It was
not profound," he said, "but we were in a position to do it before people
realized it could be done or it might be important."

   An avid fisherman and skier, Dr. Smith dismissed the suggestion that he
may be a brillant but eccentric scientist, toying in the field of genetic
engineering. "I probably have quite a low I.Q. I don't consider myself to
be a very bright person," he said.

   However, his colleagues were effusive in their praise. Dan Birch, a
vice-president at UBC, said the international recognition "couldn't happen
to a nicer guy."

   He said Dr. Smith is not only a distinguished scientist who has
received more than 14 academic awards and distinctions, but also a mentor
for young scientists. The Nobel Prize winner reflects the ideal of what a
unviertsity stands for, he added.

   Martin Hollenberg, dean of the university's school of medicine,
described Dr. Smith as an "inspirational scientist." The award marks "the
greatest day" in the university's history, he said in an interview.

   Ronald Kluger, a member of the University of Toronto chemistry
department, said in an interview that Dr. Smith was widely acknowledged in
Canada for his research.

   "Canada knew who he was and the federal government respected him
highly," he said. He has a tremenduous breadth and depth of knowledge and
is very enthusiastic about his work, he added.

   Dr. Smith's brillance was to realize that biological systems are
chemical. He used chemistry to change biological systems, Mr. Kluger said.

   Previously, researchers could only study DNA but could not change it.
They were limited to dealing with accidental changes, which happen
naturally. Dr. Smith's work enabled them to take a piece of DNA, change it
chemically and generate a mutation which could be used to test their
hypotheses.

   "It was a whole new way of doing things . . . allowing scientists to
solve a lot of mysteries about what is important in proteins," Mr. Kluger
said.

   Congratulations and praise continued to roll in to Dr. Smith's
university office throughout the day from colleagues around the world.
Students and staff added their notes of praise to a large white sheet of
paper draped over his office door.

   Dr. Smith's work has allowed researchers to better understand how
cancer and virus genes work, although it has not yet specifically led to
new therapies.

   The research enables scientists to systematically change the properties
of genes. Dr. Smith used an analogy of car repair to explain the
usefulness of his method.

   It's like trying to find out how to repair a car's engine by trial and
error, he said. A blue door is replaced with a green door without
affecting the engine. Then the tailpipe may be replaced with no effect.
Eventually an electric wire leading to the spark plugs may be identified
as the problem.

   Dr. Smith said he developed a method that allows for that kind of
analysis of DNA, replacing little bits in order to search for insights
into how it works.

   Small bits of DNA, chemically synthesized in a test tube, were
deliberately made to be different. The small bits were then put into a
gene which was then placed back in a living system.

   Genes give rise to thousands of different proteins, which go on to make
skin, muscle, hormone and bone. The researchers watched changes in the
proteins as the genes were systematically changed.

   His process has been used extensively by researchers trying to figure
out how disease-producing viruses work. Once they understanding the
functions, they can develop ways to counteract the pathogenic genes. For
instance, once the genes that cause cancer are isolated, the protein of
these genes can be systematically changed to find out what is really
critical to causing cancer. Then drugs can be developed to counteract the
effect.

   Dr. Smith, who was born in Blackpool, England, came to Canada in 1956
and has been working in the area of chemically synthesized DNA since the
early 1960s.

   By 1974, he had isolated genes by chemical synthesis. After further
work, he tried to publish his conclusions, but his first attempt was
rejected by Cell, a highly respected scientific journal.

   Preliminary findings were eventually published in 1978 and the
definitive paper of his work was published in Trends in Biochemical
Sciences in 1982.

   Dr. Smith said he was on a sabbatical in Cambridge, England, working on
other research dealing with DNA, when during a coffee break he had the
idea of working with a reprogrammed synthetic gene. When he returned to
Canada, he and colleagues conducted experiments that substantiated his
theory.

   "No one sat down and said design a specific mutagenesis method. We
wouldn't have done it. We were doing other things and realized it was
something we could apply elsewhere," he said.

   Unlike many scientists who complain about the lack of financial support
for their research, Dr. Smith said he received adequate funds throughout
his career from a federal government agency, the Medical Research Council
of Canada.

   "If there's any inadequacies, it's because of me, rather than the
funding," he told reporters.

   Dr. Smith used the occasion to promote the level of scientific research
undertaken in Canada. "There's a little bit of a tendency to feel that we
cannot do first-rate things in Canada because we're too small," he said.

   The Nobel Prize award indicates, especially to young Canadians, that
they can make their careers in British Columbia and do something that
attracts the attention of the world, Dr. Smith said.

   "This (award) says that the science done here is as good as the science
done anywhere, and you can do science in B.C. as well as anywhere in the
world."

   The Royal Swedish Academy says Dr. Smith's method has created entirely
new means of studying in detail how proteins function, what determines
their three-dimensional structure and how they interact with other
molecules inside the cell.

   Although Dr. Smith did not claim any credits, the academy attributed
several achievements to his work, including improved stability of an
enzyme which is an active component in detergents, enabling it to better
resist high temperatures of wash water.

   Attempts are being made to produce biotechnically mutated hemoglobin
which may give scientists a new means of replacing blood, the academy said
in announcing the award. By mutating proteins in the immune system,
researchers have also come a long way toward constructing antibodies that
can neutralize cancer cells.

   "The future also holds the possibilities of gene therapy, curing
hereditary diseases by specifcally correcting mutated code words in the
genetic material," the academy said.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              469 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 12, 1993 Tuesday

LENGTH: 150 words

HEADLINE: FIRST COLUMN   Two share Nobel for gene work

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: Stockholm SWEDEN

BODY:

   STOCKHOLM
 Researchers Richard Roberts and Phillip Sharp, whose discovery that genes
can be split opened a way toward better treatment of cancer and other
diseases, won the Nobel prize in medicine yesterday. Using a common cold
virus as a model, the two discovered independently in 1977 that a gene can
be present as several well-separated segments. From there, it was a short
step to finding that they can be split and rearranged to remove disease-
causing faults. "The discovery of split genes has been of fundamental
importance for today's basic research in biology," the Nobel institute
said. Some of the 5,000 hereditary diseases - such as leukemia - that have
been identified are caused by errors in the natural splicing process.

    Genetic therapy involves taking a cell from the body, combining it with a
gene and returning it in the hope the two will grow together to produce
the protein the body lacks. Reuter

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              473 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 10, 1993 Friday

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Health experts back experiment on AIDS   Antiviral immune cells
removed,   cultured, then returned to patient

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Associated Press
  BETHESDA, Md.
 An experimental technique that would infuse armies of virus-killing cells
into AIDS patients was approved yesterday by a National Institutes of
Health committee of experts.

       The experiment, proposed by researchers at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center at the University of Washington in Seattle, calls for
removing antiviral immune cells from AIDS patients, culturing the cells
into vast numbers in the laboratory and then injecting them back into the
patients.

   The NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a panel of experts that
evaluates proposed human experiments using manipulated genes, approved the
procedure for use in 15 patients.

   Dr. Phillip Greenberg, one of the Washington researchers, said the idea
of the procedure is to significantly boost the body's defence against the
human immunodeficiency virus, which causes AIDS, and perhaps defeat or
control the disease.

   "What we are doing is isolating cells that have the ability to
recognize HIV-infected cells and then expanding them to large numbers,
literally to a billion cells," he said. "Then we would infuse these back
into the patients," where they would attack the virus.

   Dr. Greenberg said cells selected for the procedure are called CD8
lymphocytes. These are cells in the immune system whose job is to seek out
and kill other cells that have been infected with a virus.

   In the laboratory, he said, blood samples from an AIDS patient will be
processed so that CD8 cells that target the AIDS virus will be isolated
and then cultured into large numbers.

   A potential safety question about the technique is what brought Dr.
Greenberg and his co-investigator, Dr. Stanley Riddel, to the NIH
committee.

   Dr. Greenberg said there is a danger that the augmented numbers of CD8
cells could be so strong that they would cause a dangerous inflammation in
critical organs, such as the lung or brain, that host large numbers of
HIV-infected cells.

   "If you have too strong an immune response against an infection then it
could be a problem," he said. "Ultimately you would like to have a safety
mechanism whereby you could eliminate the cells . . . if they cause too
much of an inflammatory response."

   In effect, he said, the experiment required some way of disarming the
CD8 army.

   The technique the researchers chose as a safety measure was to insert
into the cells part of a gene taken from the herpes virus. This gene
fragment would make the CD8 cells sensitive to the antiviral drugs
acyclovir or ganciclovir.

   Dr. Greenberg said that if the attack of the CD8 cells causes a
dangerous inflammation, then patients would be treated with the antiviral
drugs. The drugs would kill the altered CD8 cells and slow their action.

   Because the technique used manipulated genes in human experiments, the
protocol required consideration of the advisory committee, known as the
RAC. The committee voted unanimous approval. Before the experiment can
proceed, however, it also must be approved by the director of the NIH and
by the Food and Drug Administration.

   The RAC will consider another gene experiment today.

   Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal, Dr. Eric Poeschla and Dr. David Looney of the
University of California, San Diego, have proposed an experiment in which
a lymphocyte that is the target of the HIV virus would be armed with a "
molecular knife" that would prevent the virus from reproducing.

   Dr. Wong-Staal said the technique calls for removing from an AIDS
patient a few CD4 cells, which are the principal targets of the AIDS
virus. Researchers would splice into the CD4 cells a molecule called a
hairpin ribozyme. This is an enzyme that is able to slice up ribonucleic
acid, or RNA. The AIDS virus uses RNA to reproduce itself inside CD4
cells.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              474 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 4, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 222 words

HEADLINE: CF patient is given gene therapy

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: Philadelphia PA

BODY:

   Reuters News Agency
  PHILADELPHIA
 A 32-year old woman with cystic fibrosis received a revolutionary
treatment of human genes yesterday to make up for a deficiency that causes
her disease.

       The procedure was the first performed at the University of Pennsylvania
Medical Centre's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which is conducting one
of two federally approved trials of the therapy in cystic fibrosis.

   "It really went well," institute director Dr. James Wilson said in a
telephone interview.

   He said the patient, a New Jersey woman, received the genes in a small
portion of her left lung.

   The genes, known as a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulators, were embedded in a common cold virus altered to prevent
reproduction. The genes prevent dangerous accumulations of mucus in
several organs, including lungs.

   In cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited disease, the gene
is absent and mucus accumulations interfere with the lungs' function.

   The woman will be monitored to gauge the treatment's effectiveness.
Others in the 20-person trial will receive progressively higher doses of
the genes.

   Dr. Wilson said it would be a year before researchers know enough about
the therapy's effects to consider wider-area applications of the genes.

   A similar therapy was begun on a patient recently by the National
Institutes of Health, he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              475 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 4, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 1053 words

HEADLINE: Medical miracles: few, far between   THE FORGOTTEN PLAGUE: How the
Battle   Against Tuberculosis Was Won - and Lost   PERILOUS KNOWLEDGE: The Human
Genome Project and its   Implications

BYLINE: DOUGLAS POWELL; GAM

BODY:

   Review by DOUGLAS POWELL
HEALTH officials were stunned. In 1989, a man working as a metal grinder
in a shipyard in the town of Bath, Maine, developed a cough and a fever
that would not go away. For eight months the man suffered, going from
doctor to doctor, until finally the correct diagnosis was made:
tuberculosis, The White Plague. In the interim, at least 417 of his co-
workers were also infected with the bacterium .

       Tuberculosis is back, and this time it is resistant to most of the
drugs used to treat the infection. Actually, tuberculosis never went away,
but by the mid-1970s, the disease was confined to poverty-stricken inner
cities and often to newly arrived immigrants. "Nobody in the wealthy West
seemed to die from tuberculosis anymore," writes Frank Ryan in The
Forgotten Plague, "and the disease slipped from the collective
consciousness."

   How soon people forget. In this century alone, tuberculosis has been
responsible for the deaths of approximately 1 billion people. Wherever
humans have gathered in cities, tuberculosis has been present, with
evidence of infection in ancient Egypt as early as 4,000 BC. During the
late 19th century, there was a growing fear that the disease might destroy
European civilization, as a continuous epidemic swept through the major
cities of Europe.

   Ryan, a consulting physician and lecturer who lives in Sheffield,
England, has extensively documented the global efforts to find a cure,
beginning with Robert Koch's identification of the bacterium,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, in 1882, through to the first successful
treatments in the 1940s and the continuing struggle. Three researchers,
working independently in the U.S., Germany and Scandinavia, used a
different branch of science to come up with a cure for tuberculosis. And
in each case, the first results in patients were "truly miraculous."

   But all of these "miracle cures" met with initial skepticism from the
medical community, who were all too familiar with the deadly reactivations
of disease. When one of these drugs, a derivative of aspirin called PAS,
was unveiled at the Nordic Physicians Meeting in the spring of 1946, Erik
Hedvall, a physician from Uppsala, responded with a statement that
resonates today. "Have these people been primed by the drug company which
has no doubt been involved in major expenses developing the drug? It is a
serious case of regret that physicians should lend their dignity to this
type of thing, particularly since the medicinal value of the preparation
is extremely doubtful."

   Although each drug was initially successful, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
soon evolved resistance to all three treatments. Therapies that used all
three drugs together seemed to work much better, but by 1985, the
incidence of tuberculosis was again on the rise in the West, often coupled
with the devastating effects of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
   Ryan's descriptions are unnecessarily convoluted and quotes from the
scientists' personal diaries are far too extensive. In spite of this, The
Forgotten Plague is an instructive work for today as AIDS is scouring the
planet and a new technology, gene therapy, is beginning to revolutionize
medicine in the way that antibiotics did 50 years ago. Successive "magic
bullets" have lowered the incidence of infectious disease only to reveal a
family of diseases encoded in the material of heredity, deoxyribonucleic
acid or DNA, the stuff that genes are made of.

   On Sept. 14, 1990, a four-year-old girl became the first patient ever
to undergo a successful gene therapy when a team of researchers at the
U.S. National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland, infused her with
white blood cells that had been engineered to compensate for a defective
gene that rendered the girl's immune system useless. "Within eight months
of her first treatment, the little girl was going ice skating and taking
dance lessons," writes Tom Wilkie in Perilous Knowledge. "A remarkable
transformation for someone whose life until then had been dogged by the
fear that exposure to even the slightest infection could prove fatal."

   Here again was the same "miracle" cure of the first anti-tuberculosis
drugs. About a dozen gene therapies are now at the clinical stage,
including one for cystic fibrosis, the most common inherited disease among
whites of European descent.

   Behind this new medicine are remarkable advances in molecular genetics,
with the most spectacular yet to come. In May 1988, the $3-billion, 10-
year Human Genome Project was launched, with the stated goal of
identifying all 3 billion letters in the DNA dictionary of human life. But
how will this new knowledge affect human society? Tom Wilkie, science
editor of the Independent newspaper in London since its inception in 1986,
is not optimistic.

   He writes, "The most important question to be posed in the short term
by the Human Genome Project, a question which society has not even begun
to answer, is who else has the right to know what is written in my genes
and who can constrain how I act on that knowledge?"

   Wilkie draws on both the past and the possible to work his way through
some of the more difficult questions posed by the Human Genome Project (in
a language that is sometimes inaccessible, despite claims to the contrary
in the preface). For example, one outcome is that proteins which were
previously rare will now be abundantly available. Insulin for diabetics is
now routinely manufactured using genetic engineering. So are two other
proteins, human growth hormone (HGH) and erythropoetin, the latter of
which increases the number of red blood cells. Besides their medical uses,
these two proteins are now being traded on the black market: HGH has
replaced anabolic steroids as the hormone of choice for athletes, and
erythropoetin, says Wilkie, has been implicated in the deaths of as many
as 18 European endurance cyclists who take it to enhance the oxygen-
carrying capacity of blood.

   Although more than 4,000 single-gene defects - those which could
theoretically be treated with gene therapy - are known to afflict humans,
they are comparatively rare. Whereas cystic fibrosis strikes one out of
2,500 or so in the population, one out of four people in Britain will die
of cancer. More importantly, as the story of tuberculosis cautions,
miracles are hard to come by.
 Douglas Powell is a graduate student in food science at the University of
Guelph.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              476 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            August 31, 1993 Tuesday

LENGTH: 142 words

HEADLINE: Longer life spans envisaged in report

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: London ENGLAND

BODY:

   Reuters News Agency
  LONDON
 Scientific advances and a healthier lifestyle could mean people will
routinely live to 115 years old, a report to a British scientific
conference said yesterday.

       Prof. Grimley Evans of Oxford University said that genetic engineering
and a greater understanding of the aging process coupled with more
exercising and a better environment would considerably lengthen lives.

   In a report to a conference of the British Association for the
Advancement of Science at Keele University in northwest England, Prof.
Evans said a key element would be gene therapy, the technique being
developed for many ills from cystic fibrosis to cancer.

   Prof. Evans said he fears, however, that an increasingly aged
population will continue to suffer from strokes, arthritis and other
painful ailments, although the onset of such illnesses could be delayed.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              481 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 29, 1993 Thursday

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: After all, who would actually choose to be a Republican?   EUREKA!"The
discovery that political conservatism is   determined by the genes opens a
window on a brighter tomorrow

BYLINE: DANIEL MENDELSOHN; GAM

DATELINE: Princeton, NJ

BODY:

   BY DANIEL MENDELSOHN
  Princeton, N.J.
 THE startling discovery that affiliation with the Republican Party is
genetically determined, announced by scientists in the current issue of
the journal Nurture, threatens to overshadow the announcement by
scientists that there might be a gene for homosexuality in men.

       Reports of the gene that codes for political conservatism, discovered
after a long study of quintuplets in Orange County, Calif., has sent shock
waves through the medical, political and golfing communities.

   Psychologists and psychoanalysts have long believed that Republicans'
unnatural and frequently unconstitutional tendencies result from unhealthy
family life - a remarkably high percentage of Republicans had
authoritarian, domineering fathers and emotionally distant mothers who
didn't teach them how to be kind and gentle.

   But biologists have long suspected that conservatism is inherited.
"After all," said one author of the Nurture article, "it's quite common
for a Republican to have a brother or sister who is a Republican."

   The finding has been greeted with relief by parents and friends of
Republicans, who have tended to blame themselves for the political views
of otherwise lovable people - their children, friends and unindicted co-
conspirators.

   One mother, a longtime Democrat, clasped her hands in ecstasy on
hearing of the findings. "I just knew it was genetic," she said, seated
beside her two sons, both avowed Republicans. "I just knew nobody would
actually choose that lifestyle!"

   When asked what the Republican lifestyle was, she said, "Well, you can
just tell from watching TV, like at the convention in Houston: the loud
outfits, the flaming xenophobia, the flamboyant demagogy - you know."

   Both sons said they had suspected their Republicanism from an early age
but did not confirm it until they were in college, when they became
convinced it wasn't just a phase they were going through.

   Despite the near-certainty of the medical community about
Republicanism's genetic origins, troubling issues remain. The Nurture
article offered no response to the suggestion that the startlingly high
incidence of Republicanism among siblings could result from the fact that
they share not only genes but also psychological and emotional attitudes,
being the products of the same parents and family dynamics.

   And it remains to be explained why so many avowed Democrats are known
to vote Republican occasionally - or at least to fantasize about doing so.
Polls show that three out of five adult Democrats admit to having had a
Republican experience. In well-adjusted people, however, this
experimentation rarely outlasts adolescence.

   Surprisingly, some Republican activists hail the findings as a step
forward rather than as an invitation to more conservophobia. They agree
that since Republicans didn't "choose" their unwholesome lifestyle any
more than someone "chooses" to have a ski-jump nose, they shouldn't be
denied civil rights to which normal people are entitled.

   Other Republicans, recalling 19th-century scientific studies that
"proved" the mental inferiority of blacks, find the frenzied search for
the biological cause of Republicanism pointless, if not downright
sinister.

   But for most real Americans, the discovery opens a window on a brighter
tomorrow. In a few years, gene therapy could eradicate Republicanism
altogether.

   If conservatism is not the result of sheer orneriness (as many suspect)
but is something Republicans can't help and probably even don't like,
there's no reason why we shouldn't tolerate Republicans in the military or
even high elected office - provided they don't flaunt their political
beliefs.

   This piece is reprinted from The New York Times.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              482 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 24, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 3898 words

HEADLINE: COVER STORY   Science upends Pandora's box   Why pinpointing genes
redefines disease and health

BYLINE: STEPHEN STRAUSS; GAM

BODY:

   BY STEPHEN STRAUSS
Science Reporter
 IN a coffee shop in downtown Toronto, Michael Burrill talks about what
it's like to be Moses, of a sort. Coughing softly, he reflects on the
promised land he may never enter.

       "We will soon see a cure and control - it is surely coming," he says
matter-of-factly. "The question is, will I be healthy enough to make use
of it?"

   Thin as a slat, Mr. Burrill suffers from cystic fibrosis, and at 28 he
is relatively healthy, if heavily medicated. But the hard truth is that by
the age of 35 more than 95 per cent of people with CF are dead, no matter
how they are treated.

   The end comes when their scarred lungs and digestive tract can no
longer fight off the relentless buildup of mucus that characterizes the
disease.

   Soon, however, this grim fate may not be inevitable, a development that
not only promises salvation for the roughly 3,000 Canadians with CF but
also constitutes an elemental shift in medicine and the way we view
illness. To describe this transformation as a revolution may not go far
enough.

   The rapid progress of genetic medicine underlies Mr. Burrill's
optimism, but it also raises questions - about patents, morality and the
implications of technological advance. These questions also speak to
health-care costs and how we deal with risk in our lives. But perhaps most
important, the genetic revolution signals a redefinition of medicine and
disease and our understanding of how the healthy body functions.

   Not quite four years ago, news media everywhere were trumpeting a
discovery by a Canadian-U.S. team as one of those epiphanies of pure
science.

   Researchers at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto and the
University of Michigan had performed a technological feat extraordinaire.
They had located exactly which of the body's 50,000 to 100,000 genes is
responsible for CF, an inherited disease that afflicts one in every 2,500
Caucasian newborns.

   The task had been more difficult than finding a needle in a haystack,
explained Dr. Lap-Chee Tsui of the Hospital for Sick Children. "At least
you know what a needle looks like," he joked during a press conference at
the hospital.

   However, when pushed to describe the gene's "clinical significance" -
medical code for how basic research translates into benefit for people who
are actually ill - those close to the project resorted to such terms as
"far off" and "uncertain."

   "Conventional wisdom suggests it could take as long as 10 to 15 years
to find a way to correct the basic chemical problem in cystic fibrosis,"
wrote Cathleen Morrison, executive director of the Canadian Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation, which had financed some of the ground-breaking
research.

   Not so.

   Since 1989, the CF gene has gone from being a needle in a haystack to
being an archetype - the one gene that more than any other shows why every
other day there is an excited story in the newspapers or on television
proclaiming some new genetic breakthrough.

   "It is so very interesting that pursuing such a minor disease has
allowed us to be so productive," says Dr. Jack Riordan, a molecular
biologist at Sick Children's and another member of the CF team.

   As productive, one might suggest, as Pandora.
  At first, the rosiest scenario for the discovery's clinical application
envisioned a progression beginning with new medicines to treat specific CF
symptoms and ending somewhere far in the future with a normally
functioning gene being inserted into a person. History has stood rosy
reasonableness on its head.

   In April, the first of a number of clinical trials designed to see if
CF genes can be used directly to treat the sick began in the United
States. Ronald Crystal of the National Institutes of Health, James Wilson
of the University of Pennsylvania and Michael Welsh of the University of
Iowa will spray medication into the noses and lungs of select patients.
The spray will contain a cystic fibrosis gene attached to a cold virus
that has been "disabled" to prevent it from multiplying and causing an
illness.

   The hope is that this "adenovirus," which has a special affinity for
cells lining the lungs and nose, will carry the gene to the lung. The
dream is that the piggybacked gene will "turn on" - that is produce the
protein that CF patients' bodies lack - and thus cure the illness. This is
what Dr. Crystal calls "the gene as drug."

   Human experiments have been authorized because tests with animals and
living cells confirmed that gene therapy works. But nothing is certain,
and a myriad of questions must be answered: How long will the gene stay
turned on, if it functions at all? Will the body's immune system quickly
reject it? Is there such a thing as a gene overdose? Can the gene-bearing
virus combine with other viruses and produce worrisome hybrids?

   Trials have yet to begin in Canada, but there have been discussions
about testing a variant treatment. Not the gene, but the protein it
produces would be directed at affected organs. The model to think of here
is not gene as drug but something like insulin injections for diabetes.
  The way genetics is redefining disease has a human face, and it showed
itself recently at an international CF conference in Madrid.

   A contingent of Spanish sufferers excitedly sought out Dr. Tsui, one of
their scientific heroes, for a group photograph. As they were waiting,
they began describing their ailment to him in words that have yet to make
it into any standard medical text. "We are homozygous DeltaF508's,"
several told him.

   Gibberish to the rest of the world, but Dr. Tsui understood instantly:
they were describing the specific genetic mutation they carry. The term
DeltaF508 connotes a molecular typographical error - a deletion of three
paired chemicals (base pairs) in the CF gene that results in the absence
of the 508th amino acid in the protein the gene produces.

   In identifying with their particular mutation, the Spaniards were
unconsciously making a statement about humankind's future understanding of
any genetically linked disease. Learning that they are DeltaF508 told them
that they are likely to experience a strain of the illness that severely
attacks the pancreas - one of the conditions that afflict CF sufferers.

   But their awareness of genetic disease-splitting didn't stop there.
When Dr. Tsui joined the group in their photo, another teased him: "Bet
you can't guess how many mutations we have among us."

   It was both an inside joke and a reasonable assumption. In 1989, the
people who discovered the gene thought that perhaps six mutations caused
CF. Today, more than 300 have been uncovered (some so rare that they're
restricted to a single family), and the number is growing rapidly.

   Cystic fibrosis is hardly alone in being so complicated. For example,
11 different mutations have been found in only 13 families carrying the
gene for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, commonly called Lou Gehrig's
disease. Also, researchers estimate there may be 3,000 mutations
responsible for the childhood eye cancer known as retinoblastoma. It is
suspected that each mutation produces a slightly different form of a
disease, which may manifest itself in somewhat different symptoms or
progression of the illness.

   A dramatic demonstration of how cystic fibrosis has fractured into
cystic fibroses occurred in March, when U.S. researchers reported that
three of the mutations led to a form of CF so mild that sufferers usually
don't even know they have a disease. Instead of mucus buildup, this form
produces male sterility.

   A cellular analysis showed that sterility-related CF exists because its
mutations produced a partially defective protein.

   In severe cases, the disease occurs because the microscopic channels
that remove salt from the pancreas, lungs and other organs are simply
absent. (Imagine a face without pores.)
   In CF's mild form, the genes create a protein that produces channels
but they don't remove salt very efficiently. (Imagine a face with pores
that are clogged.)
   Yet even this barely scratches the surface of how confusing the
plethora of mutations makes cystic fibrosis, and probably many other of
the estimated 4,000 genetically determined diseases. Of the 300-plus CF
gene mutations uncovered so far, 30 of them have been found in people with
no classical CF symptoms whatsoever.

   It's not that nothing happens. A further analysis shows that the
protein which their CF gene produces has been chemically altered. The
alterations should have some kind of consequence. Therefore one working
hypothesis is that people carrying these "mild-mild" mutations will come
down with other conditions which heretofore have never been associated
with CF.

   Maybe, suggests Dr. Tsui, this will explain a myriad of asthmatic
conditions that so far defy explanation. "What we call cystic fibrosis any
more becomes a big question."
  However, CF's huge mutational range also underscores a non-health issue
that was all but ignored four years ago. In most people, the gene has
nothing to do with illness; it is a "normal" one, which is why Dr. Tsui
insisted that it be named in part for its normal function: salt removal.
Hence, it's known to science as CFTR, for cystic fibrosis transmembrane-
conductance regulator gene.

   Studying it has become a growth industry for biologists who are
interested in normal rather than abnormal processes. How, they ask, does
the protein produce the tiny ducts? How does this salt-removal system
relate to the body's other salt-clearing systems? In quickly coming to
understand what the gene did and how that activity functioned in a normal
body, the CF researchers were miles ahead of most other genetic
researchers.

   The usual situation, says Michael Hayden, a geneticist at the
University of British Columbia, is quite different. Generally, all a
scientist finds is a defect that occurs in patients with the condition.
Everything else is a mystery, he says. "We know nothing about the pathway
which leads to the disease."

   Without an understanding of what is going on, gene therapy is
difficult, if not impossible. For example, the recently discovered gene
that causes Huntington's disease - Dr. Hayden's specialty - is found all
over the body, and yet something in its misfiring produces a deterioration
of the brain, but generally only in mid-life. Without knowing what the
gene is controlling, you can't tell how it has gone haywire.

   "What is significant about what is happening to cystic fibrosis is that
we are at the beginning of the end," says Dr. Hayden, "while finding the
Huntington's gene means we are just at the end of the beginning."

   WHO REALLY KNOWS HOW BIG A RISK IS? The new genetics is profoundly
mathematical. It asks statistical questions about evaluating future
health. If you carry a mutation, will your children get the disease? What
does it mean if your sister or brother has the mutation?

   When the CF gene was discovered, it was widely thought that it would
take six months or a year to develop a reliable test for all the truly
deadly mutations. This would allow geneticists to tell siblings whether
they, too, would be affected. (Classical genetics said they had a one-in-
two chance.) The same test would allow parents with one CF child to
determine, before birth, whether subsequent offspring would share the same
fate.

   Not so. "In our excitement over the new technology, we were greedy,"
says Dr. Riordan of Sick Kids.

   The mushrooming number of mutations means a truly reliable test has yet
to appear and, except in special circumstances, may never do so. "I am not
sure there is light at the end of the (screening) tunnel. We had great
expectations when we started out but I am not sure of them now," says
George Chaisson, associate director of the hospital's research institute,
who has been working on licencing arrangements for the gene.

   Time, money and the genetic unknown have come into play. When the
laboratory at Sick Kids conducts one of its $250 screening tests, it takes
only about 10 mutations into account. This provides a diagnosis that is
80-per-cent accurate for most people found in the Toronto area.

   So not only will mutations be missed in one-fifth of people with
defective copies of the gene, but that figure can be much higher if a
particular family belongs to an ethnic group in which large numbers of
mutations have yet to be found.

   One result is that mass screening for CF has been undertaken only in
countries, such as Denmark, where ethnic similarities mean that very few
mutations occur. Whereas in places such as Canada, not only are relatively
few screenings done (Sick Kids does 500 to 600 a year), geneticists still
find it difficult to translate what the results mean to the patients.

   Dr. Peter Ray, who runs the laboratory, resorts to a magic-marker board
to go through the tangled equations of CF genetics. For example, if
neither parent has a known mutation, a negative test means there is still
one chance in 60,000 that an unknown mutation will cause the disease. If
one parent has a known mutation and the other doesn't, the likelihood is
one in 500. If one parent has a known mutation and the other parent comes
from a family where CF is present in a first cousin, the odds are one in
16. If both parents have the same mutation, the odds are one in four . . .

   How does anyone make sense of a future in which people are presented
with a series of risk analyses for a multitude of diseases? Counselling is
vital, says Dr. Ray, but "at the minimum you would have to test over
300,000 couples in this province for CF. And for that you need a whole lot
of counsellors, and that makes it exceedingly expensive."

   Still, the availability of even an incomplete test inspired two very
different reactions from insurance companies and families at high risk. In
1990, a California insurance company tried to deny coverage to a woman
after a gene test showed she was carrying a CF child. Last September,
doctors in Britain reported that they had tested the fertilized embryo of
a couple who both carried the gene. After it was shown there was little
likelihood the child would have the illness, the embryo was reimplanted in
the woman, who gave birth to a normal baby girl.

   One should remember that this in vitro technology is neither cheap nor
easy, with the entire procedure carrying both a $10,000 price tag and
perhaps a 15-per-cent chance of producing a live child on the first try.

   Finally, a screening of 4,348 Scottish women at a prenatal clinic
turned up four carrier couples, all of whom wanted the child to be
screened. Only one affected fetus was found and its parents decided on an
abortion.

   Is this sort of genetic picking and choosing the way of the future?
Maybe.

   The availability of CF screening, with all its flaws, has spawned a
number of polls asking people what use they would make of the information.
Last year, in a U.S. survey of pregnant women, 98 per cent of respondents
preferred that screening be done before pregnancy, 69 per cent said they
would accept it during pregnancy, and 29 per cent said they would abort a
fetus if they knew it carried CF.

   But the year before, a U.S. survey of parents of CF children had found
that only 20 per cent would abort if a test showed their future children
would be the same. Why the discrepancy? In part it may reflect a family
bond that is stronger than foresight. Another explanation comes from Dr.
Ray (who says Sick Kids screens few pregnant women who already have CF
children): To abort a second child is "like a death wish on the first
one."

   Even without increased abortion, a wholly different sense of child-
bearing comes into play in a world in which genetics allows people to see
the future.

   Torontonian Caroline Donelle, whose daughter Ashley had cystic
fibrosis, decided to become pregnant again after the development of a
partial screening test gave her a choice of what to do. The test told her
that son Nicholas, now 2-1"2, wouldn't have CF. "But then it was like,
'What else could he have?' " she recalls, "because having genetic testing
is like now knowing you are playing Russian roulette."

   Even without counselling, the high cost of screening - the range in
North America is between $100 and $300 (U.S.) to test for up to 12
mutations - would seem to make widespread sampling too expensive for the
health-care system. But maybe not.

   The current process is extremely labour-intensive, so Sick Kids needs a
week to screen a sample. However, Dr. Ray says, advanced technology
employing robotics is on the horizon, and it will mean a cost that's one-
tenth of today's. Even faster may be machines that take DNA readings from
blood or saliva. An automatic sequencing machine developed in Sweden and
installed recently at the Toronto-based Eye Research Institute of Canada
is 100 times faster than previous laboratory screening systems. "You throw
(DNA) in and (a reading) comes out; that is it," says Dr. John Stevens,
the institute's director.
  While technology is bringing ethical problems into the picture, people
at Sick Kids are struggling with yet another facet of their discovery: the
economic payoff.

   That the gene could enrich its finders and their institutions was
apparent from the start. Before announcing what it had found, the
Canadian-U.S. group raced to file a patent on it. The haste was necessary
because a wire service reporter had stumbled upon the story and reported
some of the findings. Officials feared that any further leaks might
jeopardize their patent rights, particularly in Japan and Europe.

   The patent was filed, but that may have been the easy part.

   Later, the two partners held lengthy negotiations over who deserved
what percentage of potential royalties. The Toronto group had done the
lion's share of the searching for the gene, but the Michigan team had
developed a technique that allowed both to beat an English group to the
discovery.

   "The scientists verbally came up with a half-decent split, but the
lawyers . . .," says Mr. Chaisson, as he recalls the "very difficult
negotiations." Michigan wanted a 50-50 division of what people at the time
thought might be considerable income from screening tests.

   Eventually a complicated, sliding formula was drafted, with the initial
split 75-25 in Toronto's favour. After a certain amount of profit, the
share goes to a 50-50 ratio, and at the same time the Canadian and U.S.
branches of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation receive a share of the profits.

   If there are profits to be had.

   The patenting of genes is itself a murky area. A patent is supposed to
be granted when a discovery is of something that's new, useful and not
obvious. Finding something that exists in nature and claiming it as your
own is not the same as making a better mousetrap.

   At one time, simply finding a gene was the result of an intense, multi-
year effort. Now computer-assisted machines are churning them out faster
than people can determine exactly what they do. In 1973, only 25 human
genes were known, but by last year the total had reached 3,618 - itself an
increase of nearly 1,400 from the year before.

   With the machines belching out four new genes a day, "it may be harder
to patent a gene now," says Mr. Chaisson.

   An indication of how contentious this area may become: Last year
lawyers for the NIH in the United States tried and failed to patent
genetic fragments even though no one had the slightest idea what they did
or where they were located. Not original, said opponents.

   Still, while the United States has yet to grant the CF gene's patent,
Sick Kids officials have received unofficial word that it is coming. In
the meantime, the hospital is negotiating with companies who want to make
a product of the CF gene. About 20 want to market screening tests; another
six to 10 are looking at therapeutic applications, and one or two more
want to produce a test to determine whether drugs that might improve the
course of the disease would have any effect.

   While they await the patent, controversy has arisen. Sick Kids will
provide the gene free of charge to anyone doing research, but any
application - even one clearly in the interest of patients - is liable to
have royalty claims made against it eventually.

   Andrew Read, a doctor at St. Mary's Hospital in Manchester, England,
received a letter from Sick Kids requesting that he pay $5,000 (U.S.) in
royalties for screening tests his hospital ran.

   This angered British geneticist Martin Bobrow of Guy's Hospital in
London. "They have based the claim on the fact that a native piece of DNA
has been patented," he told New Scientist magazine. "You are not talking
about a product or procedure or a kit. You are talking about a piece of
biological information. I think it is unethical. I think we should tell
them to hop it." The issue is now in hiatus as both sides wait to see
whether a patent is granted in England.

   Despite all their negotiations, neither Sick Kids nor the University of
Michigan has signed a licencing agreement with any of the potential
developers. Part of the problem is that in the more complicated
applications, the gene is just one of many components. "It is like we
designed the inside of the ball-point pen, but you still need something to
enclose it," says Barbara Lavers, the hospital's manager of technology
licencing.

          It may be hard to foresee the future, but clearly the evolution of
genetic understanding and application is just beginning.

   The Canadian Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's once-cautious Ms. Morrison
has sped up her timetable for change: "Things are happening now faster
than anyone could have anticipated." And part of all this is the
realization that CF, albeit an archetype gene in many ways, is just a
piece in a large and increasingly weird puzzle.

   For instance, there are four common genetically determined diseases -
myotonic distrophy, fragile X mental retardation, Huntington's, and
spinobulbar muscular atrophy - in which a handful of mutations appear in
all afflicted people.

   However, when the chemical makeups of these disparate genes were
determined (in the past two years), a striking similarity has been
observed. Precisely the same type of genetic mutation - multiple
repetitions of a three-chemical sequences - appears in all of them.

   Suddenly, says Dr. Hayden of UBC, geneticists are asking whether these
diseases are fundamentally similar in ways that outward symptoms don't
reveal.

   In particular, scientists are wondering whether there is something in
the tripled repetitions which explains why the severity and incidence
rates in some diseases increase as they are passed through several
generations.

   Some forms of very common diseases as theoretically disconnected as
breast cancer and schizophrenia are among those which exhibit bizarre,
trans-generational traits.

   But even with that unexplained, what the still-incomplete genetic
revolution has done is leave a combination of hope and uncertainty in the
minds of those most affected - people with the disease.
 BACK in the coffee shop, Michael Burrill - uncertain whether he will live
long enough to see the CF gene put to good use - believes that people with
his disease face a double future.

   On one hand there is the promised land - a treatment or a cure. "I
think," he says, "that there are kids with CF living today who will have a
normal life."

   On the other there is a period of confusion during which society must
accept the fact that people will have to make a variety of difficult
choices - and none of them will be completely right.

   "I think that if people want to have abortions, that is fine; if they
want to carry a child, that is fine; if they want to manipulate the genes
to stop CF, that is fine as well," he says as he finishes his coffee.

   Then he slowly walks out into a warm summer morning that seems as full
of promise as the cystic fibrosis gene itself.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              483 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             July 10, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 467 words

HEADLINE: Tiny camera takes snaps of early fetuses

BYLINE: NYT

BODY:

   Researchers in the U.S. are experimenting with a minute viewing scope to
examine embryos as young as six weeks. The scope is inserted into the
woman's abdomen through a needle the size of those used to draw blood, and
allows doctors to view an embryo as closely as if the womb had been opened
surgically. By ultrasound examination, an embryo that young would be a
blur.

       Called an embryoscope, the device was developed by Dr. Ruben Quintero
of Wayne State University in Michigan and Dr. E. Albert Reece, of Temple
School of Medicine in Philadelphia. But the idea isn't new. Since the
seventies, doctors have been able to view a second- or third-trimester
fetus by inserting a comparatively huge needle with a viewing device
through a woman's abdomen and into the amniotic sac. However, this too
often causes miscarriages by rupturing the membrane and releasing amniotic
fluid. It is used mainly to take fetal blood samples in cases where a
fetus was at risk of inherited anemia, or when doctors felt they could
save a fetus's life by doing a blood transfusion.

   The technique was originally used in cardiology to see inside blood
vessels. Dr. Quintero, who is an obstetrician at Wayne State's Hutzel
Hospital, believes the technique will ultimately replace ultrasound in
older embryos and fetuses.

   Its latest incarnation began about two years ago when Dr. Reece and Dr.
Quintero were at Yale University School of Medicine. Dr. Reece asked
several instrument manufacturers if they had scopes small enough for
looking at first-trimester fetuses. Initially, he would insert a scope
through the vagina and into a small pocket that forms early in pregnancy
between the inner and outer fetal membranes. However, on the vaginal
route, the scope must pass through an area that contains bacteria and is
very difficult to disinfect. So Dr. Reece, who is now chairman of the
department of obstetrics, gynecology and reproductive medicine at Temple,
realized the safer course was to push the needle into the abdomen.

   "Embryoscopy opens a whole new world, a whole new frontier that we
never had before," he says. "It's just unbelievable. You can make a
diagnosis much more rapidly early in pregnancy and with a high degree of
confidence."

   Between them, Dr. Quintero and Dr. Reece have performed some 75
embryoscopies. In most cases, the embryos and fetuses are at high risk of
genetic defects. Since the genes for the specific disorders have not been
isolated, prenatal diagnosis using chorionic villus sampling or
amniocentesis can not detect the abnormalities.

   The next step will be to use embryoscopy to deliver treatment, medical
experts say. Doctors could, for example, cut amniotic bands, which are
constrictions of the amniotic membrane that deform fetuses. Or, in the
future, they may be able to deliver gene therapy.
  - NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              486 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             June 12, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 66 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST   GENE THERAPY FOR CANCER

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   A gene-therapy technique that boosts the body's ability to fight cancer
is to be tested on the bone marrow of humans. Dr. Albert Deisseroth of the
University of Texas says the tests will involve planting a marrow gene in
a virus that in turn causes the production of high numbers of a kind of
toxin-removing pump. The virus is then implanted in a patient, where it is
hoped it will remove toxins rapidly.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              492 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                              May 11, 1993 Tuesday

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: Gene may control resistance to disease   Discovery proves role of
genetics in illness

BYLINE: ANDRE PICARD; GAM

DATELINE: Montreal PQ

BODY:

   BY ANDRE PICARD
Quebec Bureau
  MONTREAL
 A team of Montreal scientists has discovered a gene that appears to
control the body's resistance against infection, a breakthrough that could
have dramatic implications for treating diseases such as tuberculosis,
leprosy, salmonella poisoning and even AIDS.

       "We've learned about an important mechanism by which normal cells of
the body fight against infection," Philippe Gros of McGill University's
department of biochemistry told a news conference yesterday in Montreal.

   "This mechanism is not the immune system, it's not acquired immunity
you get from the organism, this is the first line of defence against
infection," he said.

   The gene, called Nramp, was discovered and isolated after a decade of
laboratory research with mice. Recently, however, the researchers have
also discovered the human counterpart to the Nramp mouse gene. Their
research was published last week in the medical journal Cell.

   "What this means to the man in the street is that, now that we've
discovered one of the mechanisms by which normal cells come to defend
themselves against infection, . . . we can develop drugs that promote
those functions," Dr. Gros said.

   The research confirms what scientists have long suspected: Genetics
plays a key role in determining resistance and susceptibility to so-called
pathogenic diseases (bacteria and viruses). It also goes a long way toward
explaining why some people seem to resist infection more effectively than
others.

   Emil Skamene, director of research at Montreal General Hospital, said
about half the mice studied carried a defective version of the Nramp gene
and there is no reason to think the proportion is not similar among
humans.

   Put simply, the research found that some mice, even when perfectly
healthy, have cells that do not "see" the initial infection and, as a
result, the cells do not transmit information to the immune system quickly
enough to ward off disease. The other mice have cells that react
immediately, which means the diseases do not get a foothold and even when
their immune systems are damaged (as with HIV), they can still resist
illness quite well.

   Mice are used in the research because the "chromosomes of mice and men
are almost identical," Dr. Skamene said. "Man is really a large Mickey
Mouse, so if you find a gene in a mouse, you can then go find it in
humans."

   The genetic discovery could allow scientists to develop a gene-therapy
treatment, via a simple vaccine, that would give people a natural
resistance to a disease.

   An example would be in the prevention of tuberculosis, a disease that
affects 1.7 billion people worldwide and kills more than three million
people annually. While there is already a vaccine for tuberculosis, it is
largely ineffective, possibly because the defective Nramp gene is not
doing enough work in the early stages of infection.

   The incidence of tuberculosis is also growing tremendously in the West,
largely because of acquire immune deficiency syndrome, which makes people
more sensitive to disease. While the discovery by the McGill researchers
will not have a direct impact on the search for an AIDS cure (because the
disease is one of the immune system), it could help explain why some
people do not contract the human immunodeficiency virus, and could help
people with HIV live healthier lives.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              493 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            April 17, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 2087 words

HEADLINE: FOILING DISEASE   Veggies to the rescue   IT'S STILL NOT COMPLETELY
UNDERSTOOD, BUT CERTAIN   GREENS WORK WONDERS. SOYBEAN, IT SEEMS, ACTUALLY
SUPPRESSES THE GROWTH OF TUMOURS

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER; NYT

BODY:

   BY NATALIE ANGIER
NEW YORK TIMES SERVICE
 CACHED away in the soul of every red-blooded North American who fondly
recalls when carnivory was a virtue, and supper wasn't supper without a
centrepiece of pork chops or prime rib, lies the frail hope that all the
recent emphasis on fruits, grains and vegetables, vegetables, vegetables,
will somehow turn out to be a terrible mistake.

       Well, the time has come to release that hope and give it a proper
burial at last. The truth is that the more researchers understand about
the ingredients of fruits, vegetables, beans and herbs, the more impressed
they are with the power of those compounds to retard the bodily breakdown
that results in cancer and other chronic diseases.

   Beyond the well-known benefits of vitamins and fibre, plant foods are
plush with chemicals that have no nutritional value and yet may impede
cancer at a variety of stages in its slow, savage evolution.

   Most of the experiments performed so far have been done on animals or
isolated cells, and no specific ingredient from fruits or vegetables has
been proved in long-term human trials to prevent or retard cancer. But
biologists are encouraged that many laboratory results are in harmony with
the empirical studies of long-lived populations.

   And just when researchers thought they had a reasonable grasp of the
basic anti-cancer compounds that might be found in a healthy diet, they
have discovered a novel pathway through which ingredients in plants may
help foil disease.

   In the current issue of The Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, scientists from Children's University Hospital in Heidelberg,
Germany, report that they have isolated a compound called genistein from
the urine of people who eat a traditional Japanese diet, heavy on soybeans
and vegetables.

   Through test-tube experiments with a synthetic version of the chemical,
Dr. Lothar Schweigerer, his student Theodore Fotsis and their colleagues,
have discovered that geni- stein blocks an event called angiogenesis, the
growth of new blood vessels.

   That talent could have significant implications for both the prevention
and treatment of many types of solid tumours, including malignancies of
the breast, prostate and brain. Scientists had determined that, to expand
beyond a millimetre or two, a tumour first must foster the growth of new
capillaries to receive the oxygen and nourishment it needs to keep
swelling.

   By inhibiting capillary growth, genistein just may keep nascent tumours
from growing beyond harmless dimensions. The substance is found in high
concentrations in soybeans and to a somewhat lesser degree in cruciferous
vegetables such as cabbage.

   In people eating traditional Japanese food, the scientists found, the
level of the compound in the urine is at least 30 times that of those on a
Western diet. Dr. Schweigerer also speculates that such a diet could
explain why, when Japanese men leave their country for several years to
work, their rate of invasive prostate cancer rises sharply.

   If genistein proves its mettle through testing in animals, it may be
useful, not only as a dietary measure to prevent cancer, but in a
concentrated form to treat tumours already in progress.

   "This is a fascinating report," says Dr. Judah Folkmann of Harvard
Medical School, who has examined how tumours grow. "It's a novel finding.
Nobody has ever suggested before that you could find in the urine certain
dietary factors that inhibit the proliferation of blood vessels, and I
think this work will get wide attention."

   Dr. Folkmann and others view blocking angiogenesis as an ideal sort of
therapy, one that would attack the malignancy while leaving normal tissue
intact. Apart from the sinister demands of tumours, new blood vessels grow
in the adult body only after fairly rare events such as extreme injury,
heart attack or the implantation of an embryo in the uterus. Thus any
compound that blocked angiogenesis would have few side effects.

   Four such blockers are now being tested against conditions such as
Kaposi's sarcoma, a highly vascularized tumour common in AIDS patients.
Genistein would be the first compound isolated from food to be added to
the list.

   In the past there has been little incentive to study cancer prevention
rather than treatment. On average, only about 5 per cent of the
approximately $1.8-billion annual budget of the U.S. National Cancer
Institute has been earmarked for disease prevention, with far more going
toward expensive and high-profile studies such as those on gene therapy,
which, if it works, will take years before being of use to many cancer
patients.

   "It's predicted that we'll end up spending $1-billion on taxol, a drug
that on average adds about five months to the life of an ovarian cancer
patient," says Dr. James Duke, an economic botanist at the U.S. Department
of Agriculture. "I think the country would be a lot better off if we spent
$1-billion on cancer prevention." And that sort of investment demands
greater knowledge of the things people put in their mouths.

   To be sure, some of the benefits of a herbivorous diet are what it
helps one avoid: by taking in lots of fruits and vegetables, a person is
less likely to fill up on fatty foods. "There are not a whole lot of good
things you can say about eating animal fat," says Dr. Daniel Nixon, of the
American Cancer Society in Atlanta.

   THE positive benefits of vegetables are many. For starters, they have
fewer calories than do meats and cheeses, and restricting caloric intake
alone has been shown to reduce the incidence of cancer sharply.

   But there is much more to it. In the course of metabolizing energy and
using oxygen, the body's cells constantly generate hazardous molecules
called free radicals, which can mutate genes and set the foundation for
cancer. Most of the radicals are sopped up by the body's native
antioxidant enzymes, but yellow and green vegetables, as well as melons
and citrus fruits, contain a wealth of such compounds, including vitamins
C, E and beta carotene, the precursor to vitamin A.

   Dr. Allan H. Conney, director of the Laboratory for Cancer Research at
Rutgers University, has also found in animal experiments that rosemary,
green tea and curcamin, the chemical responsible for curry's yellow
pigment, all suppress cancer growth. He says he has evidence that they do
so by acting as antioxidants, neutralizing free radicals before they reach
the cell's kingpin DNA.

   Dr. H. Leon Bradlow of the Strang-Cornell Cancer Research Laboratory in
New York is exploring how chemicals taken from the crucifers - broccoli,
Brussels sprouts and cabbage - may inhibit breast cancer. And Dr. Paul
Talalay at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine is examining how robust
anti-cancer agents found in vegetables seem to stimulate the production of
protective enzymes that detoxify carcinogens and swiftly flush them out of
the body.

   Encouraged as they are by the latest findings, researchers admit that
the field of food analysis is in its infancy. Food is chemically daunting,
with every stalk of broccoli or slice of melon composed of hundreds or
thousands of interacting chemicals. Some plant products may harbour
chemicals that promote cancer along with compounds that inhibit the
disease, and it can be difficult to sort out which class of chemicals
predominates in a given food.

   Beyond its inherent difficulties, nutrition has been viewed as an area
prone to faddishness and charlatanism, another reason traditional
researchers have tended to avoid it.

   "Serious scientists have stayed away from the field because it gets
tied up with all the supplementation people and the anti-aging crowd,"
says Dr. Barry Halliwell of the University of California at Davis, who
studies antioxidant chemistry. "All the hype has made good scientists
wary."

   Considered together, the intricacy and synchronicity of the chemicals
in plants argue firmly against an undue reliance on vitamins and
supplements to compensate for a rotten diet of snacks and french fries. If
scientists have yet to understand all the subtleties of a Brussels sprout,
how can anybody hope to recreate it in a pill?

    The real virtues of edible plants

    Potential cancer fighters in foods

      Although no food or food combination has yet been clinically proven to
prevent or retard cancer in people, animal and test-tube research strongly
suggests that many components have specific biological actions that may  prove
helpful. Scientist suspect that to treat tumours, compounds would  have to be
extracted or synthesized and given in larger doses than those  found naturally;
on the hand, extracts or synthesis might overlook  protective compounds in a
healthful varied diet.  Component.......Possible disease-fighting properties...
Allylic.........may protect against carcinogens by.....
sulfides........stimulating production of a detoxification
..............enzyme, glutathione-S-transferase...........
Carotenoids,..Antioxidants and cell differentiation.......  (Vitamin
A....(cancer cells are non-differentiation agents  precursors)
Catechins......Antioxidants, linked to lower rates of gastro-
(tannins)......intestinal cancer; mechanisms not understood.
Flavonolds.....Block receptor sites for certain hormones that
...............promote cancers...............................  Genistein......In
test tubes, blocks angiogenesis, growth of  ...............new blood vessels,
essential for some tumours  ...............to grow and spread, and deters
proliferation of  .............. cancer cells..................................
Fibre..........Dilutes carcinogenic compounds in colon and
...............speeds them through digestive system; discourages
...............growth of harmful bacteria while bolstering
...............healthful ones; may encourage production of
...............healthier form of estrogen...................
Indoles........Induce protective enzymes....................
Isothiocyanates.Induce protective enzymes...................
Limonoids.......Induce protective enzymes...................  Linolenic
acid..Regulates prostaglandin production..........
Lycopene........Antioxidant.................................
Monoterpenes....Some antioxidant properties; inhibit cholesterol
................production in tumours; aid protective enzyme
................activity.....................................  Phenolic
acids..Some antioxidate properties; inhibit formation  (tannins).......of
nitrosamine, a carcinogen, and affect enzyme
................activity.......................................  Plant
sterois,..Differentiation agents.........................  (Vitamin
D.....................................................  precursors)  Vitamin
C.......Antioxidant; inhibits creation of nitrosamine,  ................a
potentially dangerous carcinogen, in the....
................stomach.......................................  Vitam
E.........Antioxidant...................................
Component............Food sources....  Allylic sulfides..Garlic and onions..
Carotenoids,......Parsley, carrots, winter squash, sweet potatoes  (Vitamin
A........yams, cantaloupe, apricots, spinach, kale,  percursors).......turnip
greens, citrus fruits  Catechins.........Green tea, berries  (tannins)
Flavonolds........Most fruits and vegetables, including parsley,
..................carrots, citurs fruits, broccoli, cabbage,
..................cucumbers, squash, yams, tomatoes, eggplant,
..................peppers, soy products, berries  Genistein.........Found in
urine of people with diets rich in  ..................soybeans and, to a lesser
extent, cabbage-  ..................family vegetables.........................
Fibre.............Whole grains and many vegetables  Indoles...........Cabbage,
brussels sprouts, kale  Isothiocyanates...Mustard, horesradish, radishes
Limonoids.........Citrus fruits.  Linolenic acid....Many leafy vegetables and
seeds, especially  ..................flaxseed.  Lycopene..........Tomatoes, red
grapefruit  Monoterpenes......Parsley, carots, broccoli, cabbage, cucumbers,
..................squash, yams, tomatoes, eggplant, peppers, mint
..................basil, citrus fruits  Penolic acids.....Parsley, carrots,
broccoli, cabbage, tomatoes,  (tannins).........eggplant, pepppers, citurs
fruits, whole grain,  ..................berries.  Plant sterois,....Broccoli,
cabbage, cucumbers, squash, yams,  (Vitamin D........tomatoes, eggplant,
peppers, soy products,  precursors).......whole grains  Vitamin C.........Citrus
fruits, tomatoes, green leafy vegetables,  ..................potatoes.  Vitamin
E.........Wheat germ, oatmeal, peanuts, nuts, brown rice.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              501 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 20, 1993 Saturday

LENGTH: 1094 words

HEADLINE: Premier ends first part of therapy   Bourassa to rest for week, then
return to U.S.   for cancer treatment

BYLINE: ANDRE PICARD; GAM

DATELINE: Montreal PQ

BODY:

   BY ANDRE PICARD
Quebec Bureau
  MONTREAL
 Premier Robert Bourassa returns to Quebec today after the first phase of
his experimental interleukin-2 treatment for cancer.

       He will rest for a week before returning to the U.S. National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., for the second phase of the
treatment. Within two months, doctors will know whether they have
succeeded in slowing the ravages of malignant melanoma, a rare and deadly
form of skin cancer.

   The reason Mr. Bourassa went to the United States is that the treatment
he is undergoing is not available in Canada and his case is considered
urgent. He is being treated by Steven Rosenberg, the world's foremost
expert on malignant melanoma.

   The treatment, estimated to cost $500,000 (U.S.), is not being paid for
by Canadian or Quebec taxpayers. Experimental treatments are not covered
by Canadian medicare, but patients who are invited to the NIH have their
medical expenses covered. Mr. Bourassa is paying for his flights and hotel
out of his own pocket, a spokeswoman said.

   Dr. Rosenberg has not been authorized by Mr. Bourassa to discuss the
prognosis for his famous patient. Medical experts in Canada also refused
to discuss the Premier's case in particular, but they agreed to discuss
the interleukin-2 treatment because they are being swamped by questions
from cancer patients and their families.

   "Cancer patients should not think of this as a miracle treatment," said
Steven Karp, an oncologist and clinical researcher at Montreal Jewish
General Hospital.

   However, interleukin-2 is a promising therapy for malignant melanoma, a
cancer believed to be caused by excessive exposure to the sun. This year,
about 3,100 Canadians will develop melanoma and an estimated 540 will die.

        (Mr. Bourassa was, until his cancer was first discovered in September,
1990, an avid sun worshipper. He went on vacation regularly in Florida and
often retreated to his roof patio at Quebec's National Assembly to  maintain his
dark tan.)     In 1990, doctors cut a small melanoma from the Premier's back,
believing that the cancer was isolated. Late last year, another cancerous
growth was discovered within his chest, and there are signs that the  cancer has
spread.

   Malignant melanoma does not respond to traditional radiation and
chemotherapy treatments, and it is virtually impossible to remove through
surgery, said Walemar Debinski, head of experimental therapies at
Montreal's Hotel-Dieu Hospital.

   "There is really no effective therapy for malignant melanoma," Dr.
Debinski said. "But interleukin-2 is extremely encouraging, though you
have to realize it is still a failure in most patients."

   Still, the treatment, which has been administered to about 150 people
since clinical trials began in 1985, has garnered a lot of media attention
and attracted some of the world's top physicians precisely because of its
good success rate compared with more traditional cancer treatments, and
the potential avenues it opens for the treatment of other illnesses.

   In almost 40 per cent of cases, tumours were reduced by half. In 5 to
10 per cent of cases, the tumours appear to have disappeared altogether.
In fact, a handful of patients have remained in remission more than six
years after being treated with interleukin-2.

   Mr. Bourassa, who is in good health and whose cancer was discovered
early, is considered a prime candidate for success. If the treatment can
slow the spread of cancer to his kidneys and lungs, he could remain
healthy for many years to come, doctors said.

   Dr. Rosenberg started cultivating cells from a tumour removed from Mr.
Bourassa's chest cavity in early January. The next step, the most complex
in the process, consisted of isolating tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) from the sample. TILs are naturally occurring white blood cells
that seek out, penetrate and fight cancer.

   In the laboratory, the TILs are put into a solution with interleukin-2
that makes them multiply. Dr. Rosenberg removed about half a million
lymphocytes from Mr. Bourassa's tumour and will reinject about one
billion.

   For the purposes of the treatment, interleukin-2 is manufactured in a
laboratory by Chiron Corp. of San Francisco. It is also a naturally
occurring substance in the body, but the miracle it performs, particularly
when isolated in the laboratory, is transforming ordinary lymphocytes into
"killer cells."

        (In Canadian trials, patients have been administered interleukin-2
alone because hospitals do not yet have the ability to cultivate TILs, a
situation that will change this summer.)     In some instances, Dr. Rosenberg
also mixes the TILs with a gene called  tumour necrosis factor (TNF), which
increases the cancer-fighting  qualities of other cells but is highly toxic. Mr.
Bourassa is not  undergoing the gene-therapy treatment, which is controversial.

   According to the science journal Nature, Dr. Rosenberg lost $3.9-
million (U.S.) in funding for alleged ethical violations related to the
gene-therapy experiments. The magazine said he was "trying in humans what
he has not yet perfected in the test tube."

   The treatment that Mr. Bourassa is undergoing has already required a
hospital stay of more than a week. The mixture of TILs and interleukin-2
was administered intravenously for eight to 12 hours daily for six
consecutive days.

   Side effects can include bloating, nausea and respiratory and kidney
difficulties, but Mr. Bourassa's office said the only lasting effect he
has suffered is fatigue. Unlike chemotherapy, the treatment does not cause
hair loss.

   When Mr. Bourassa returns for the second round of treatment next week,
he could receive an identical mixture of TILs and interleukin-2, or just
the interleukin-2. There is also a remote possibility that he could begin
the TIL-TNF therapy, but that would indicate that the cancer is spreading
unchecked and his situation is desperate.

   The Premier is not granting interviews to the news media, but just
before his first treatment began he said he was "ready for the fight."

   Doctors cannot judge the effectiveness of the treatment for about six
weeks after it ends, at which time they will report whether the tumours
have shrunk.

   Mr. Bourassa has said repeatedly that he will make a decision on his
political future after analyzing those results.

   Meanwhile, doctors hope that his highly publicized treatment will have
positive repercussions in Canada.

   "Canadian research on molecular targeting such as interleukin-2 is very
advanced but extremely underfunded," Dr. Debinski said. "If our work gets
some attention, and some funding, we could help a lot of Canadians
suffering from such things as skin cancer."

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              505 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 4, 1993 Thursday

LENGTH: 661 words

HEADLINE: Bourassa decides to take experimental cancer drug   Reports that
Premier will quit soon are denied

BYLINE: RHEAL SEGUIN; GAM

DATELINE: Quebec PQ

BODY:

   BY RHEAL SEGUIN
Quebec Bureau
  QUEBEC
 Premier Robert Bourassa has decided to undergo cancer treatment using the
experimental drug interleukin-2, possibly as early as next week.

       Mr. Bourassa is afflicted with the least common and most deadly form of
skin cancer, malignant melanoma, for which he was first treated in
September, 1990. Medical examinations last December found that the cancer
had spread.

   However, Sylvie Godin, a spokeswoman for the Premier's Office, denied
reports that Mr. Bourassa will announce soon that he is quitting politics.
She told reporters yesterday that the Premier will decide his political
future after he has completed the initial phase of the treatment, which
could take up to a month.

   In a telephone interview, Ms. Godin acknowledged that people close to
the Premier are urging him to put his health first and quit now. "But he
has not given it any serious considerations," she said.

   Since Mr. Bourassa underwent treatment in early January for the removal
of a cancerous tumour in his right chest wall, it had been widely assumed
that he would not lead the Quebec Liberal Party in the next election,
which must be held no later than September, 1994. The timing of the
Premier's departure from politics has been the subject of much speculation
in the province.

   A report on Wednesday in Montreal's La Presse that Mr. Bourassa had
decided not to seek another mandate and was preparing to make the
announcement at the next week's caucus meeting in Montreal was firmly
denied by Ms. Godin.

   Nonetheless, the report caused considerable reaction in both financial
and political circles.

   Bank representatives in Toronto called the Premier's Office yesterday
for further information and cabinet ministers reacted vehemently to the
report.

   Deputy Premier Lise Bacon, whose possible leadership ambitions have
been the subject of speculation lately, snapped at the suggestion the
Premier was about to quit politics.

   "I've learned not to believe what is written in La Presse. I was
subject to the same situation last week and this was all lies," Ms. Bacon
said before the weekly cabinet meeting.

   A controversial language debate coming in the spring and the outcome of
the next federal election, in which the sovereigntist Bloc Quebecois could
be poised to make major gains, have created an air of uncertainty within
the provincial Liberal Party. Some Liberals are concerned that a
leadership race in the midst of such political uncertainty could harm
party unity.

   But that decision depends solely on Mr. Bourassa's response to
treatment and his willingness to leave as late as possible.

   The interleukin-2 treatment Mr. Bourassa will undergo is being
administered by Dr. Stephen Rosenberg at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, Md. Dr. Rosenberg is in France and is expected back tomorrow
night, meaning that he could begin Mr. Bourassa's treatment as early as
next week.

   The Premier and nine other patients are part of an experimental gene-
therapy program at the institute that began less than two years ago.

   The treatment involves boosting the body's immune system by extracting
cells called lymphocytes, injecting them with a high concentration of
interleukin-2 to turn them into potent anti-tumour fighters and injecting
them back into the body.

   Some cells were removed at the beginning of January when Mr. Bourassa
was admitted to the institute and they have responded well during the
incubation period, a hospital physician said.

   The treatment is administered in two stages. The patient undergoes five
days of injections followed by a two-day rest. About two weeks later, the
patient must return for another five days of injections, then wait four to
six weeks to see how the tumour responds.

   Clinical studies have shown that treatment with the drug can lead to
low blood pressure, fluid retention, kidney problems, a gain of as much as
10 to 15 per cent of body weight and, occasionally, lung congestion. Other
common side effects include severe malaise, fever, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea and anemia.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              510 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1993 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 25, 1993 Monday

LENGTH: 950 words

HEADLINE: THE HOSPITAL FOR SICK CHILDREN   CF gene research renews hope
Molecular research is going to be one of the key thrusts   of the research
centre for the next decade. It holds huge   promise

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   CAROLINE Dyer clearly remembers when the gene for cystic fibrosis was
discovered at the Hospital for Sick Children in 1989. She had a stake in
the work; her daughter Ashley has the disease, and the family played a
part in the research.

       "It gave me hope for a brighter future for my daughter, for better
treatment, and control over the disease," she said.

   Cystic fibrosis claims the lives of more Canadian children than any
other inherited disease. In children with CF, the secreting glands don't
function properly. The most serious symptom is a thick, sticky mucus that
clogs the airways and lungs and leaves those with CF susceptible to
chronic lung infections.

   To find the gene, researchers studied blood samples from the families
of more than 500 children with CF, all of them patients of the Toronto
children's hospital. Thanks to the volume and quality of the information,
researchers were able to pinpoint the defective gene.

   "The research in this field is absolutely phenomenal," Dyer said. "The
average person does not realize the scope of what's going on out there in
genetics. It's all quite incredible."

   In the few short years since the CF gene was discovered, a test has
been developed to identify carriers, while prenatal testing can show if a
fetus has the disease. Progress also has been made in identifying what the
defective gene does inside the body's cells, giving hope that drugs might
soon be developed to counteract these defects.

   Much of this groundbreaking work takes place in the laboratories of the
hospital's Research Institute. Nearly 1,000 researchers - doctors,
scientists, technicians and students - are trying to find better
treatments and cures for hundreds of diseases. It's the largest
independent research institute in Canada and one of the two biggest in the
world associated with a children's hospital.

   Although researchers are studying a multitude of diseases and problems
ranging from Sudden Infant Death Syndrome to organ-transplant rejection,
the Institute is best-known for its work in genetics. Scientists in the
Research Institute identified several genes in addition to cystic fibrosis
in the 1980s and early 1990s; Duchenne muscular dystrophy; retinoblastoma,
a form of eye cancer; Wilms tumour, a kidney cancer; Fanconi's anemia, a
rare blood disorder; and Tay Sachs, a devastating disease causing
progressive brain damage and early death. The hospital is a world leader
in genetic research, and a key partner in the Human Genome Project, an
international collaboration to identify all human genes, including those
responsible for disease, within the next 10 to 15 years.

   Gene discoveries are exciting, and nearly always make the news. But
discovering a gene is only the first step to eliminating a genetically
caused disease. Once a defective gene is identified, researchers must try
to determine what is causing the problem, which requires close study of
the body's cells. Molecular medicine, one of the main thrusts of the
Research Institute for the next decade, is a key to developing successful
treatments and cures.

   "The past decade has given us an excellent understanding of how the
body works at the molecular level," said Dr. James Friesen, director of
the Research Institute. "Now we must apply this knowledge to treating
disease. If scientists can determine what is malfunctioning in the cells,
then we may be able to develop appropriate drugs to eliminate the
problems."

   Bone-marrow transplantation will be a key tool of molecular medicine.
That's why Dr. Friesen is excited about the new 12-bed bone-marrow-
transplant unit in the new hospital. "We believe it will be possible to
take some of a patient's bone marrow, treat it in the laboratory to
eliminate the genetic defect, and then return it to the patient,
eliminating the disease," he said. The new unit provides the facilities
for this experimental therapy - sometimes called gene therapy - to be
tried in the future.

   Another important aspect of molecular medicine is the ability to
replicate human diseases in mice. Researchers can now produce mice that
have genetic diseases similar to human diseases; Sick Kids researchers are
studying mice that have cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and immune
deficiencies.

   "Sick Kids has the strongest genetic research in Canada and we will be
making a major impact in the '90s," Dr. Friesen said. "The special
advantage of the Hospital for Sick Children is that it is full of
physicians who are interested in finding alternative treatments for their
patients, and scientists who can provide the basic science knowledge to
help find these alternatives."

   At least 100 researchers combine both jobs; these "clinician-
scientists" divide their time between patient care and research.

   Some are working in cancer research. "There have been several exciting
developments," Dr. Friesen said. "For instance, there's a tendency for
certain kinds of cancers to run in families, and researchers have been
able to identify a gene that plays a role. This will be a great help in
the early diagnosis and treatment. If we can nip a cancer in the bud at an
early stage, the chances of successful treatment are higher."

   Other researchers have found that there are tiny molecules in the cells
of some cancers that pump out chemotherapy drugs faster than they can kill
the cancer, causing treatment to fail.

   "The goal is to disable or poison this tiny biological pump to improve
treatment and recovery," Dr. Friesen said. "This is being done with great
success in pilot studies here at Sick Kids.

   "For the last 10 years, we've been building a mountain of knowledge
about how the human body works and what causes disease. These are exciting
times to be in research, as we begin to see the first results of turning
this knowledge into treatment."

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2007


                              526 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 21, 1992 Wednesday

LENGTH: 618 words

HEADLINE: AIDS researcher warns against hope of cure   But treatments might let
infected   lead 'healthy, normal life,' Gallo says

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
Medical Reporter
  TORONTO
 Robert Gallo, one of the world's leading AIDS researchers, says the
public should not expect scientists to find a "cure" for the deadly
disease.

       He said, however, that combinations of different medical treatments
could at least make acquired immune deficiency syndrome a more
controllable illness.

   "I don't think in our lifetime we are going to see science be able to
purge every last infected cell from a person's body, while restoring them
to perfect and complete health," said Dr. Gallo, of the U.S. National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "Rather, I see we will make steady progress in combining different
kinds of approaches to control HIV (human immunodeficiency virus). . . . I
don't see why a person could not live a happy, healthy, normal life."

   Dr. Gallo, who is credited - along with Luc Montagnier of the Pasteur
Institute in France - with discovering HIV, said treatments ranging from
gene therapy to immunity-boosting techniques are being explored.

   But Dr. Gallo, who was in Toronto yesterday to address a biotechnology
conference sponsored by Connaught Laboratories Ltd., is not optimistic
about the development of a truly effective vaccine that could protect all
people against possible infection
   The AIDS virus is continually changing, making it extremely difficult
to produce one vaccine that works for all variations. Nonetheless, he
said, even if a vaccine prevents only some cases, it might slow the spread
of the disease. "We could possibly reduce the infection in the world to
such a level that in time the AIDS epidemic will disappear."

   But before things gets better, most AIDS researchers agree that they
will probably get worse, as millions of already-infected people succumb to
the disease. Dr. Gallo could only speak in general terms about when new
and improved treatments will be available. "Toward the year 2000," he
said.

   In the meantime, he believes that AIDS researchers should co-ordinate
their efforts in the same way a team of researchers toiled during the
Second World War to produce the atomic bomb. "What we need is a mini, not-
so-secret Manhattan Project."

   He also said the recent cases of several dozen patients who appear to
have AIDS-like symptoms without any evidence of HIV infection is unlikely
to change the general direction of AIDS research.

   "It doesn't mean that HIV doesn't cause AIDS," he insisted, noting that
the overwhelming majority of people who have the illness test positive for
HIV.

   He added that it may turn out that the few patients who have AIDS-like
symptoms may suffer from other illnesses that also wreak havoc on their
immune systems, or are infected with HIV, which is "hiding" in their
cells.

   "We are in limbo," he said, adding that tissue from the patients has
not yet been analyzed.

   In another area of controversy, he said all the scientific evidence
seems to suggest that the AIDS virus originated in Africa and humans could
have contracted it from other primates. "If it looks like a duck and
sounds like a duck, it probably is a duck, although you could be wrong. .
.

   "I was in the Brazilian rain forest last week and a monkey jumped on my
head," he said, pointing out that there are many ways in which the blood
of humans and primates could have mixed.

   Dr. Gallo, a flamboyant speaker, talks freely about all issues in AIDS
research except one: the question of who actually discovered HIV.

   Although he and Dr. Montagnier now share the credit, Dr. Gallo has had
to fight off charges that he or someone in his laboratory appropriated the
virus from the French and claimed it as his own.

   "I have no comment," he said when asked about the controversy. "(The
accusations) have nothing to do with science and truth. I would like to be
left to my work."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              527 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            October 16, 1992 Friday

LENGTH: 958 words

HEADLINE: NEW ATTITUDES   Canada's neural network making huge inroads

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   Linda Walters, an Edmonton fitness instructor who was paralyzed five
years ago when a blood vessel in her brain ruptured, is able to get out of
her wheelchair and walk short distances with the help of a walker.

       Treatment for disabilities caused by neurological damage - affecting
mobility, intellectual performance, hearing and sight - is being advanced
by a national research effort in which Canadian scientists are at the
forefront. The Neural Regeneration Network, formed in 1990, brought
together more than 120 neuroscientists from 14 universities to find
treatment and possibly cures for debilitating injuries and disease.

   Walters regained some movement in her right leg but in order to move
her left needs electronic stimulation from a device surgically implanted
onto a nerve behind her knee. By pushing a button on her walker, radio
waves from an external power source direct movement in her left leg.
Walters was one of the first in Canada to receive such an implant.

   A cure for paralysis resulting from spinal-cord injuries, head injuries
or strokes isn't exactly around the corner but it has entered the realm of
possibility. Dr. Richard Stein of the University of Alberta says that
what's important now is enabling a person to walk short distances in
situations where there isn't wheelchair accessibility.

   Scientists, having discovered that damaged nerve cells can grow again
and make connections, are working on methods of at least minimizing the
impact of neurological disorders. However, damaged nerve cells need
stimulus and there's no blueprint to follow.

   "You're talking about 200 billion cells and many of them make many
connections between themselves," said Dr. Albert Aguayo of McGill
University, a co-director of the NR Network, which received a four-year
grant of $25.5-million from Ottawa's national Centres of Excellence
program. "To restore that circuitry is a major challenge."

   Two years ago, scientists in the United States were given permission to
introduce new genes into humans. A four-year-old girl with severe combined
immune deficiency was treated by having copies of a missing gene put into
her white blood cells and her condition improved. More gene therapy trials
have been approved.

   New gene technology, a means of creating tools for cell repair, is one
of six areas in which the network is focused.

   Functional recovery, which basically means electronic replacement
parts, (Walters' case is an example) is another area, and one advancing
rapidly. The others are regrowth and reconnection in a damaged nervous
system (akin to rewiring a faulty circuit), neuronal survival and
protection (a means of rescuing and protecting nerve cells), neurotrophic
factors (food for nerve cells) and identification of molecules that
inhibit regeneration (or preventing barriers to recovery).

   The annual cost of health care and lost productivity due to
disabilities are staggering, in addition to personal and family hardships.
Estimates place the total at more than $21-billion a year in Canada.

   There are some 1,000 persons permanently disabled by spinal-cord
injuries in Canada each year. The cost in lifetime medical expenses for
one patient averages $1.5-million. Spinal cord injuries total 25,000 and
there are four times as many head injuries and eight times as many
strokes.

   The health-care costs of Alzheimer's dementia - there are some 400,000
cases in Canada - amount to $8-billion a year, and it's estimated that by
2040 there will be 1.5 million Canadians with the devastating disease. The
most common result of neurological disorders is hearing loss, with total
cases in Canada numbering some 2.8 million. Other diseases include
Parkinson's disease, Lou Gehrig's disease, depression and schizophrenia.

   Nerve cells that die are lost but scientists are working on
regenerating damaged cells through the introduction of proteins to
stimulate the cells and keep them alive. Still in the early stages is a
cell replacement strategy in which neurons capable of genetically
modifying cells would be introduced into the brain to replace dead cells.

   Techniques being developed to get genes into a specific part of the
body may be valuable in treating diseases such as cystic fibrosis. By
introducing carriers of the normal gene into the lungs of people with the
abnormal gene that causes the disease, the progressive lung disorder may
be alleviated.

   Electronic devices to compensate for lost functions include the
Cochlear prothesis, which has restored hearing for more than 7,000 people
worldwide. Signals are picked up by a microphone, the information is
relayed by radio transmission to stimulating electrodes near the auditory
nerve in the inner ear and activates neurons that sends the information to
the brain as impulses.

   The network's research is also intended to spur the growth of the
biotechnology industry in Canada, regarded as one of the strongest among
half a dozen countries in the world. The network has no parallel
elsewhere.

   "There is obvious potential for the victims of those diseases but for
the country it's fantastic," said Warren Bull, the network's executive
director. "The potential is huge in terms of the social and economic
benefits.

   "If you translate the research into benefits for the victims and it's
done in Canada, it creates a business. (The network has an industry
advisory committee chaired by William Blundell, former chairman of G.E.
Canada Inc. to devise a policy for commercialization).

   "I visualize it as a loop with the federal and provincial governments
funding a network which produces research and technology. If you get that
connected to biotech companies, medical-device companies and the
pharmaceutical companies, and also to the financial community so they're
helping the development, then that'll ensure that the social and economic
benefits are generated."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              536 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                          September 16, 1992 Wednesday

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: Chemist wins Manning award   for work on antiviral drugs

BYLINE: KEVIN COX; GAM

DATELINE: Halifax NS

BODY:

   BY KEVIN COX
Atlantic Bureau
  HALIFAX
 Acadia University administrator and researcher Kelvin Ogilvie, who
developed the first "gene machine" and patented compounds that combat a
wide range of viruses, has won the $100,000 Manning award for innovative
excellence.

       One of the drugs developed by Dr. Ogilvie, ganciclovir, is widely used
to fight infections, such as the life-threatening cytomegavirus (CMV) and
influenza, that invade the body after the immune system has been weakened
by organ transplants or the AIDS virus. Sales of ganciclovir amount to
more than $40-million a year.

   Human trials on using the drug in a type of gene therapy to destroy
brain tumours are expected to begin in October.

   Dr. Ogilvie's antiviral work is an offshoot of his work in molecular
biology in the 1970s, when he worked on the chemical synthesis of DNA
(deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid).

   The invention of the "gene machine" in 1980 to produce DNA and RNA in a
few hours instead of months or years allowed scientists to probe the two
molecules that are believed to be the key to the genetic makeup of the
cells.

   Dr. Ogilvie, 49, has published 150 papers, made 85 presentations on
biotechnology and acted as a consultant for Bio Logicals, a Toronto
biotechnology company. He is now academic vice-president of Acadia
University in Wolfville, N.S.

   Dr. Ogilvie went to Acadia in 1987 after nine years of work at McGill
University. While his job is in university administration, much of his
work involves developing new uses for antiviral drugs and advancing
biotechnology through genetic engineering.

   The proposed use of ganciclovir to destroy brain tumours has caused
some controversy in the scientific community. Some researchers scoffed at
the suggestion that the antiviral drug could be used against inoperable
tumours. But the drug destroyed brain tumours in 11 out of 14 rats in
experiments at the U.S. National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "It (the use of ganciclovir) came as a real surprise to the scientific
community, and quite rightly they are asking serious questions about the
process," Dr. Ogilvie said.

   The Manning award, named after former Alberta premier Ernest Manning,
is being presented to Dr. Ogilvie for both his work on RNA and on
ganciclovir.

   He is not sure which invention gave him more pleasure. "It's awfully
satisfying to know that you've invented something that is saving lives.
That's hard to put second to anything," he said.

   "The drug (ganciclovir) is saving lives around the world. But my goal
in research when I set out was to chemically synthesize RNA and that is
enormously satisfying too."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              544 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 14, 1992 Tuesday

LENGTH: 141 words

HEADLINE: FIRST COLUMN   Gene therapy cancer treatment

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   Scientists in the United States are preparing to make medical history by
using human gene therapy to treat cancer. A research team at the
University of Michigan medical school plans to inject "foreign" genes


   taken from other patients into cancer tumours, in the hope that this will
make the body's immune system treat the tumour as a foreign body and
attack it. "Essentially, what we are trying to do is mimicking organ
rejection," explained team leader Dr. Gary Nabel. Patients terminally ill
with malignant melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer, are being recruited
for the experiment. Dr. Nabel said that while they are unlikely to benefit
from the treatment, if it proves to be safe it can then be used on
patients with less advanced cancers. It will be the first time researchers
have attempted a direct transfer of human genes. Cancer experiment - A8.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              545 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                             April 14, 1992 Tuesday

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Cancer project attempts to mimic organ rejection   Tumours will be
injected with genes from another   person in hope that immune system is spurred
to attack

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
Medical Reporter
U.S. scientists are preparing to make medical history by using human gene
therapy in the battle against cancer.

       The operation itself will be deceptively simple, said Dr. Gary Nabel,
who is leading the research team at the University of Michigan medical
school. Using an ordinary needle, they intend to inject cancer tumours
with genes from another person.

   They hope the patient's immune system will treat the tumour as a
foreign body and attack it.

   "Essentially, what we are trying to do is mimic organ rejection," Dr.
Nabel, told a news conference yesterday. He noted that organ transplants
can fail if the immune system turns against the foreign tissue.

   "We are planning to stimulate the immune system to reject the tumour,"
Dr. Nabel said.

   Between 12 and 15 patients with malignant melanoma, a deadly form of
skin cancer, are being recruited for the experiment, which should begin in
the next two months.

   These volunteers are unlikely to benefit from the treatment. Dr. Nabel
said that only patients who are considered terminally ill will be
selected.

   "We must first determine the safety of the treatment and the
appropriate dosage," he said. If it turns out to be safe, then it will be
tried on patients whose cancers are less advanced and who are more likely
to benefit from treatment.

   Dr. Nabel said that gene therapy is still in its infancy and much more
work needs to be done. It was less than two years ago that a four-year-old
U.S. girl became the first person to receive "engineered" genes.

   In that experiment, some of the girl's blood was removed from her body,
treated with a gene she lacked, and put back into her. The girl suffered
from a rare immune deficiency caused by a defective gene.

   The University of Michigan team plans to go one step further, injecting
foreign genes directly into the patients. More precisely, the genes will
be injected into the patient's tumours. It will be the first time that
researchers have attempted the direct transfer of genes and the first
attempt to treat cancer with gene therapy.

   Genes, - fragments of the complex molecules known as DNA - are the
blueprints for producing certain substances - usually proteins - that
carry out specific functions within the body.

   There are thought to be 100,000 different human genes, arranged along
the 23 pairs of chromosomes in each cell of the body.

   By injecting foreign genes where they are not supposed to be, the
Michigan researchers hope to attract the attention of the body's immune
system.

   The foreign genes will be introduced in a fatty substance that can
stick to the surface of the cancer cells and then be absorbed by them.
Once inside the cancerous cells, the transplanted genes would start
producing proteins that are unlike anything else in the patient's body.

   "We are asking the immune system to recognize a part of the body that
it has not previously thought was foreign," Dr. Nabel explained. In
particular, the foreign genes, which have been removed from other
patients, will produce a protein known as HLA-B7. Dr. Nabel said that this
protein attaches itself to the surface of the cells, making it relatively
easy for the immune system to spot. "We think it will be easy to
recognize."

   Dr. Nabel believes that direct gene transfers could be used to treat a
wide variety of cancers in various stages of development. In time, this
type of gene therapy might be used in combination with other anti-cancer
treatments.

   But it is not without risks. Some of the foreign genes could escape
from the tumour and enter healthy cells of the body, exposing them to
attack from the immune system, as well.

   Furthermore, researchers are concerned that the foreign genes could
enter the cells responsible for human reproduction and be passed on to
offspring.

   For this reason, only patients who don't intend to reproduce will be
taking part in the first rounds of experiments involving direct gene
transfers.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              550 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 22, 1992 Saturday

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Naive about biology

BYLINE: Daniel Promislow; GAM

DATELINE: Kingston, Ont.

BODY:

   While I usually enjoy Thomas Hurka's conttherapy (Fifth Column - Feb.
18). Many are now advocating therapeutic measures to cure such genetic
ailments as cystic fibrosis. Some, including Prof. Hurka, have gone
further. Prof. Hurka advocates "positive gene therapy," whereby we insert
genes for desired traits into an otherwise healthy fetus. He suggests that
it would be good if we became "kinder, more sensitive, and less grasping .
. . by changing our genes."

       While there are good philosophical and historical reasons for quickly
dismissing Prof. Hurka's suggestions, the most damning criticism of his
argument is provided by the reality of genetics.

   Sadly, his biology is naive to the point of absurdity. First, most
behavioural traits are strongly influenced by the environment. A gene for
niceness may exist, but will not guarantee a generation of nice folks.
Second, most behavioural traits are coded for by more than one gene. In
some cases, tens of genes may influence a single trait. Hitting on the
appropriate genes will surely prove impossible. Third, the behaviour of a
gene depends not only on the outside environment, but also on the
environment of the surrounding genes within the body. If we did manage to
find a gene for niceness, the only way to ensure that it always behaved as
expected would be to clone a "nice" individual, so that all the other
genes remained constant. Perhaps most importantly, genes often have more
than one effect (a phenomenon referred to as "pleiotropy"). In many cases,
the beneficial effects of a gene early in life may be detrimental later on
(this is known as "antagonistic pleiotropy"). To take a well-known
example, the same genes that enable a mother to give sufficient calcium to
the growing fetus may increase her risk of osteoporosis later in life.
Under Prof. Hurka's scheme, we should try to put good behaviour genes into
humans to improve society. Imagine if these "beneficial" genes (and who
knows if they really will be?) turn out, as so many other genes, to be
detrimental later in life. In fact, this may not become evident for many
generations. Along with good philosophical and historical reasons for
steering clear of positive gene therapy, biology tells us that the unknown
risk is unacceptable.
 Daniel Promislow
Dept. of Biology
Queen's University
Kingston, Ont.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              551 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           February 18, 1992 Tuesday

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: FIFTH COLUMN   PRINCIPLES   Should we tailor our genes?   Thomas Hurka
weighs the pros   and cons of genetic engineering

BYLINE: THOMAS HURKA; GAM

BODY:

   THOMAS HURKA
 MEDICAL science is busy mapping our genes. Canadian researchers have
recently played a key role in identifying the genes that cause cystic
fibrosis, Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, and myotonic dystrophy.

       Knowledge is power, and we may one day be able to alter our genes. If
this becomes possible, will it be right?

   The less controversial possibility is negative genetic engineering:
repairing a defective gene to stop a specific disease. It can take two
forms.

   In "somatic" gene therapy, you change just part of the body. If a
disease is localized in the bone marrow, for example, you alter the cells
there but not elsewhere, and the change isn't passed on to the patient's
offspring.

   More radical is "germline" therapy: changing the DNA in sperm or egg
cells before they fertilize. If a flawed gene is fixed here, the change is
transmitted to future generations.

   Both procedures have obvious risks: who knows what other effects
changing a gene will have? But these are reasons for caution, not an
outright ban. If we knew that somatic therapy to cure cystic fibrosis had
no side effects, who could be against it? We're pleased to have eliminated
smallpox for future generations; why not also eliminate a genetic disease?

   What's more controversial is positive genetic engineering: using gene
therapy not just to overcome defects but to improve the species, by making
us taller, smarter, kinder. It conjures up visions of the Nazi eugenics
program or Aldous Huxley's Brave New World, where workers are bred to be
happy with menial work.

   With positive engineering, the risks are even greater. The gene for
cystic fibrosis is comparatively simple; that for selfishness is surely
complex. And there are worries about the wrong "improvements" being made:
parents wanting only boys, or intelligence being boosted at the expense of
human feeling.

   English philosopher Jonathan Glover, a cautious proponent of positive
engineering, proposes a "mixed" system to minimize these worries. In his
system, the initiative for genetic change rests with parents, but must
then be approved by a central authority. There are two checks on bad
genetic change: the concern of parents for their children and that of the
state for the social good. The first protects against a race of menial
workers, the second against a generation programmed just to be big money-
makers.

   For many, the objections to positive genetic engineering go deeper.
Isn't it presumptuous, they ask, to think we know what an "improvement"
is, or what makes the species "better"?

   But we do know this when we bring up our children. We give them an
education so they'll understand themselves and the world; we try to make
them caring and responsible. If we can use values in changing our
children's environment, why not also when changing their genes?

   Sometimes the objection is that positive engineering involves "playing
God," or meddling where we shouldn't. This too is a bad argument.

   For one thing, we "play God" every time we avoid a falling rock or take
medicine. We change the course of nature because we don't like where it's
going.

   And in rejecting positive engineering we'd still be making a choice.
We'd be preferring the genetic status quo to any alternative, and why
think the status quo is best? We have the traits we have because they've
proved useful to a bunch of selfish genes. Why think the results of that
process are morally ideal?

   A LOOK around us is hardly encouraging. As Mr. Glover says, a ban on
positive engineering "will seem an acceptable option to all those who can
watch the news on television and feel satisfied with the world. It will
appeal to those who can talk to their children about the history of the
20th century without wishing they could leave some things out."

   Genetic engineering is like nuclear technology: it can be used for evil
but it can also be used for good - in this case tremendous good. We must
absolutely be cautious in trying new techniques. But those techniques may
one day offer a glorious opportunity. It would be wonderful if, through
moral and social reform, human beings became kinder, more sensitive, and
less grasping. It would also be good if we got that way by changing our
genes.
  Thomas Hurka teaches philosophy at the University of Calgary,
specializing in ethics.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              555 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 10, 1992 Friday

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis may be treatable, researchers say   Scientists hope
use of altered common   cold virus will mean disease would kill no more

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   Associated Press WASHINGTON
 Researchers say they may have found a way to treat cystic fibrosis, a
disease that has always been fatal. If the genetic therapy works in
monkeys, human tests will start soon.

       The development delighted some researchers involved in the long fight
against the disease, and one expert in the field said that if the method
works it could mean cystic fibrosis would kill no more.

   "We believe that this provides us with the unique opportunity to
reverse the course of the disease," said Dr. Robert Beall, executive vice-
president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "If this can work in humans
we have the potential to stop the deaths caused by this disease."

   Dr. Beall oversees the foundation's medical and scientific programs.

   Patients might simply use inhalers to get a genetically altered cold
virus into their lungs and reverse the abnormalities that cause the
disease. It is not known how long the treatment is effective, and patients
might have to repeat it periodically.

   The researchers have successfully used the method in test tubes and
have tried it on rats. The results are being published today in the
scientific publication Cell.

   "I have no doubt that, if we were to do the same now in a person with
cystic fibrosis, we could . . . reverse the abnormalities in the lung,"
said Dr. Ronald Crystal, head of the research team at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute.

   Cystic fibrosis, an inherited disorder that affects some 40,000 people
in the United States and strikes one in every 2,000 babies born in Canada,
causes the lungs to produce a thick mucous that eventually damages the
lungs and leads to respiratory failure and death. The average age at death
is 27, Dr. Crystal said.

   New treatments alter or reduce the secretions in the lungs, but Dr.
Crystal's approach represents the first attack on the underlying genetic
cause of cystic fibrosis.

   Altered gene therapy usually involves taking cells from the body,
changing them and putting them But the inside of the lung is too
complicated for such a procedure.

   Dr. Crystal's team altered a common cold virus - "we modified it so
that it cannot cause damage," Dr. Crystal said - to carry the cystic
fibrosis gene into the lungs of test rats.

   The lungs pick up the correct gene, which instructs the cells in the
lining to produce the right kind of protein. That protein, in turn,
ensures that the abnormal transfers of sodium and chloride that cause the
thick mucous do not occur.

   "The animals now express this normal human gene in their lungs and the
gene is making the normal protein," Dr. Crystal said, adding that the
corrected gene was present in the rats six weeks after being injected.

   Dr. Beall said treatment may have to be repeated because lung cells are
replaced every 60-80 days. Dr. Crystal would not speculate on how much
such therapy would cost.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              556 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1992 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 10, 1992 Friday

LENGTH: 529 words

HEADLINE: NEWS INDEX, FRIDAY, JANUARY 10, 1992   SUMMARY   THE NATION

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   The Nova Scotia Power Co., which carries a debt of $2.4-billion, is to
be privatized through the sale of shares starting in June, Premier Donald
Cameron announced yesterday.

    Page A1
Alberta Premier Donald Getty dropped a constitutional bombshell yesterday
by calling for an end to official bilingualism in Canada and to laws that
entrench multiculturalism.
Page A1
About 150,000 Canadian women have had breast implants since the early
1960s, with varying degrees of success and failure. One problem has been
that painful scar tissue can form around them.
Page A1
By appointing Hugh Segal as his new chief of staff, the Prime Minister
appears to have recognized that it is time for an injection of old-time
politics into the problems afflicting his office.
Page A5
An uncertain Liberal Party will vote this weekend on who its new leader
should be for the next Ontario election, but under new voting procedures,
the final decision will likely not come until Feb. 8.
Page A6
Quebec health officials say they will take no special measures to deal
with the meningitis outbreak despite the deaths of two more young people
yesterday and a growing state of parental panic.
Page A7

    THE WORLD

   Canada will contribute an 800-member battalion to a UN peacekeeping
force destined for Yugoslavia if the current ceasefire holds, according to
sources in the Canadian government and military.
Page A1
Despite some grand-sounding documents, President George Bush is ending his
four-day mission to Japan today with more of a whimper than a bang, and
giving a boost to protectionists in the U.S. Congress.
Page A1
Just a month after the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States,
a bitter dispute over naval power between its two most populous members
threatens to burst the CIS apart.
Page A10
Millions of impotent men may be unable to achieve erections because of a
defect in the body's production or use of the chemical nitric oxide,
according to research published yesterday.
Page A10
Three Canadian MPs were expelled from China this week for failing to
behave like "guests," a Chinese spokesman said yesterday. He sidestepped
questions about whether Chinese law had been broken.
Page A10
Serbs in Bosnia-Herzegovina declared their own republic yesterday, raising
fears that the Yugoslav civil war could spread to the centre of the
disintegrating Balkan federation.
Page A10
The South African military provided for the training of Inkatha Freedom
Party members to do political battle with their rivals in the African
National Congress, a former Inkatha member said yesterday.
Page A11
Cystic fibrosis researchers say they may have found a way to treat the
disease, which has always been fatal. If the genetic therapy works in
monkeys, human tests will start soon.
Page A11

    COMMENTARY

    BUSINESS

    THE ARTS

    SPORT

       The great standoff between Eric Lindros and the Quebec Nordiques may be
at an end with Nordiques general manager Pierre Page's declaration that  his
desk is open to offers for the stubborn 18-year-old.  Page C10  The hockey world
may be able to act rationally after all. As the Nordiques  prepare to resolve
the Lindros impasse, the NHL governors in Florida have  finally produced a new
alignment for the league.  Page C10

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              558 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1991 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 5, 1991 Thursday

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Should this inquiry be decommissioned?

BYLINE: GAM

BODY:

   TWELVE years ago, Marshall McLuhan wrote: "In the 1980s there will be a
general awareness that the technology game is out of control, and that
perhaps man was not intended to live at the speed of light." This sense
had by 1989 led to the formation of the Royal Commission on New
Reproductive Technologies, charged with assessing the role in our society
of scientific developments that are growing into areas unforeseen by
present legislation, pushing ethics to their limits.

       But the commission itself appears out of control. There have been
fundamental and seemingly irreconcilable differences of opinion among the
nine commissioners since the beginning, causing the Prime Minister's
Office to issue an unprecedented second Order-in-Council this summer
adding two new commissioners to the inquiry, lengthening its term from two
to three years, and giving more control to chairwoman Dr. Patricia Baird.
At a cost of nearly $25-million (only slightly less than the fractious
Spicer Commission on the future of Canada), including pay for a staff of
70 and about as many outside researchers, the commission is expected to
have difficulty meeting its three-year deadline, may not produce much
original research and will probably present the government with several
dissenting reports. Things have deteriorated to the point that four of the
commissioners are taking the commission to court today, claiming that it
is not being run in the manner in which the law prescribes.

   There has been profound disagreement among the commissioners over the
question of whether these new technologies - such as experiments on
embryos and fetal tissue, fetal diagnoses for genetic defects, gene
therapy, embryo transfer and in vitro fertilization - ought to be used
under controlled circumstances, or banned outright. Disagreements among
members of a royal commission are normal - if there were no differences of
opinion on an issue, we would not need an inquiry in the first place - but
there is no reason that the conflicting perspectives in this case should
have led to such a stalemate. The problems may have been exacerbated by
unnecessary secrecy. Some of the commissioners claim the chairwoman has
refused to consult them in deciding what research is to be done, or even
to keep them fully informed about what research is under way for the
commission and who is doing it.

   This inquiry is important. The questions it was created to ask, the
discussion it was supposed to engender and the answers it was intended to
seek out are all badly needed. The government should try to get things
back on track, but if that is not possible, if the intellectual and
personal enmities among the commissioners have grown so great over the
past two years that the commission will not be able to accomplish anything
of value in its remaining months, then perhaps it ought to be terminated.
We're no longer very good at national commissions on issues of national
importance in this country, are we?

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              561 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1991 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            November 1, 1991 Friday

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Gene   therapy   destroys   tumours   Cancer researchers   test theory
on mice

BYLINE: REUT

DATELINE: Washington DC

BODY:

   Reuters News Agency
  WASHINGTON
 In research that may help lead to a cure for cancer for humans,
scientists have used gene therapy to rid mice of existing cancer by
triggering the animals' own immune system to destroy tumour cells.

       "This is the first time that this type of gene therapy has been shown
to cure an animal of an already established tumour," said Dr. Drew
Pardoll, a cancer researcher at the Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, where the study was conducted.

   Scientists cautioned that the Hopkins findings, which are published in
yesterday's issue of the journal Science, are preliminary.

   "It is feasible to make this method work in human cancer therapy," said
Paul Golumbek, the main author of the paper. "But a number of additional
studies need to be done to establish the effectiveness of this strategy
and develop its full potential for human cancer therapy."

   Until now, most studies have focused on preventing animals from
developing subsequent cancers. In the Hopkins study, however, specialized
immune cells, called T-cells, were activated to destroy existing tumours
without apparent damage to normal cells.

   "If regressing cancer is indeed what they've done, then that's a very
exciting sort of finding," said Dr. Michael Blaese, an expert in gene
therapy at the National Cancer Institute.

   He is part of an NCI team, led by Dr. Steven Rosenberg, which three
weeks ago used gene therapy for the first time to try to immunize a cancer
patient against his own cancer.

   The patient, a 46-year-old man who has an advanced case of skin cancer,
was injected with tumour cells genetically engineered to secrete tumour
necrosis factor, or TNF, a natural protein that kills cancer cells.

   Studies have shown that tumours in TNF-treated mice grow for a short
time and then spontaneously regress and disappear, according to NCI. The
Rosenberg team hopes to replicate this finding in humans.

   In the Hopkins study, researchers took tumour cells cultured from a
mouse kidney cancer and genetically engineered them to secrete large doses
of a naturally occurring chemical called Interleukin-4 (IL-4).

   IL-4 is the substance that stimulates T-Cells, which are not properly
activated in people with cancer.

   Dr. Pardoll likened the inactive T-cells to soldiers who have failed to
get orders from their general. "The body's soldiers may recognize the
enemy but need orders from the general to kill them," he said.

   "In our study, we bypassed the general and signalled the soldiers with
orders (represented by IL-4) to kill. Once activated, the T-cells function
like smart bombs that kill the specific target but leave little collateral
damage."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              576 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1990 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 15, 1990 Saturday

LENGTH: 1135 words

HEADLINE: EXPERIMENT"In a new treatment, scientists are growing   a patient's
white blood cells in the laboratory and   teaming them with a naturally
occuring, highly   potent killer of cancer cells   Designer genes battle cancer

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
The Globe and Mail
 IMAGINE a tiny cruise missile that could be injected into the blood
stream and then zero in on a cancerous tumor - and destroy it.

       Just such a device is under development at the laboratories of the U.S.
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Maryland. But rather than being
made out of metal, explosives and the latest computerized guidance system,
this little weapon is composed of something far more complex - specially
engineered human cells. In particular, scientists are trying to alter the
genetic make-up of human cells in order to boost the cancer-fighting
ability of the body's own immune system.

   Patients with malignant melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer, are now
being selected for the experimental procedure, says Dr. Steven Rosenberg,
who is in charge of the research team. He hopes the patients will begin
receiving the potentially life-saving injections within the next six
weeks. If all goes well, it will mark the first time so-called gene
therapy has been used to treat cancer.

   What's more, it could mark the beginning of a whole new medical era, in
which doctors manipulate genes - the basic blueprints of life - to treat a
wide range of diseases, including diabetes, hemophilia and cystic
fibrosis.

   Dr. Rosenberg cautioned that the cancer treatment "is very
experimental" and will not be ready for "widespread application" for years
to come.

   Even so, the work already done by Dr. Rosenberg and his colleagues
clearly establishes them as pioneers on the frontiers of genetic science.

   The genes, which determine all of an individual's inherited features,
are found within the nucleus of every cell in the human body. In total,
there are 100,000 different human genes. Each one is responsible for
making a different protein, which in turn is used to build a particular
structure or carry out a certain job.

   But if one or more genes is defective, an individual could be born with
a particular disease or be predisposed that they will someday be able to
overcome inherited diseases by replacing bad genes with good ones. Or,
better still, alter genes so they do a better job than nature.

   Earlier this year, Dr. Rosenberg was part of the team that injected a
4-year-old American girl with a transfusion containing a properly working
gene that she lacked.

   The child, the first human to undergo gene therapy, suffered from a
life-threatening immune deficiency syndrome caused by a defective gene.
The functioning gene, contained in the blood transfusion, essentially does
the job her own defective one can not do. So far, she has received three
injections "and she's doing great - everything is going well," says one of
the researchers, Dr. Michael Blaese of the National Institutes of Health.

   The child's inherited defect is quite rare, striking only a handful of
individuals each year. What makes the new cancer treatment so significant
is that this illness kills countless thousands.

   The treatment involves a series of complex steps. It will begin with
the doctors removing a small piece of a cancerous tumour from the patient.
Then they will isolate tumour-Infiltrating Lymphoctyes (TIL) cells from
the sample. TIL are naturally occurring white blood cells that seek out,
penetrate and do battle with cancer.

   In the laboratory, the TIL cells are put into a solution of
interleukin-2 that makes them multiply. The plan is to inject a huge
number of them back in the body to increase their odds of beating the
cancer.

   But before they are returned, the TIL cells are equipped with an extra
weapon - a gene for Tumour Necrosis Factor (TNF), a highly potent killer
of cancer.

   TNF is a naturally occurring protein in the body, but it is produced in
only small quantities because it is so toxic. In large amounts, it can
cause decreased blood pressure, muscle wastage, fever and shock, says Ken
Culver, one of the researchers.

   By using the TIL cells like taxis to carry the TNF gene directly to the
tumours, researchers hope to reduce the substance's toxic effects on the
rest of the body. The TIL cells, in effect, would act like cruise missiles
delivering their deadly payload to the enemy target.

   Of course, both TIL cells and TNF genes are part of the body's own
immune system. But researchers are combining them in a brand new way.

   "It is our goal to develop types of cells that nature would not
normally have provided," says Dr. Rosenberg.

   All this research may sound like the stuff of science fiction novels.
But scientists admit they have a long way to go before they can manipulate
genes with ease.

   Inder Verma, a professor of molecular biology and virology at the Salk
Institute in La Jolla, Calif., says scientists must find ways of altering
genes within human cells.

   In the case of the new cancer treatment, the gene insertion will be
done in the laboratory, where TIL cells are infected with a human-
engineered virus that contains the TNF gene. Once the genetic material
implanted in the virus settles into the TIL cells, they will be injected
back into the blood stream.

   This method would not work for an illness such as cystic fibrosis, in
which defective genes result in the build-up of mucus in the lungs and air
passages. Simply put: lungs cannot be removed, treated with new genes, and
then returned to the body.

   Prof. Verma has been working on new ways of getting genes to the right
place. One possibility is that packets of genetically engineered cells
might be inserted under the skin, where they would act like little
factories pumping out a badly needed protein. But once again, such a
technique would be limited to a few illnesses in which it does not matter
where the protein in produced.

   Aside from the complex technical issues, these revolutionary
experiments also raise ethical questions about the direction of medicine.
There is a risk that some future gene manipulation could go wrong -
altering the human species for the worst.

   For now, at least, the U.S. scientists are operating under tight
regulatory guidelines of the National Institutes of Health, which
prohibits them from making genetic changes that can be passed from one
generation to the next.

   That means they are forbidden from altering the human sex cells - the
male sperm or the female ovum.

   All genetic repair work must be restricted to "fixing" genes within
individuals. If scientists make a mistake, the damage will affect just one
person and not spread to the human gene pool.

   Scientists in other industrialized countries - including Canada - are
also bound by similar guidelines - and they say they are glad to have the
controls.

   "As a scientist, I'm optimistic that genetic research will be
beneficial to people. But I also recognize that we have to act responsibly
in everything we do," says Victor Ling, a research scientist at the
Ontario Cancer Institute and a professor of medical biophysics at the
University of Toronto. "How far we go must be decided by society."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              583 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1990 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           October 17, 1990 Wednesday

LENGTH: 816 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH"As doctors learn how to alter human genes,   science
fiction is becoming science fact, and the potential   power is enormous. But who
will exercise it?   Genetics: the start   of a new era

BYLINE: ARTHUR SCHAFER; GAM

DATELINE: Winnipeg MB

BODY:

   BY ARTHUR SCHAFER
 Winnipeg
   GENETICISTS knew it was bound to happen soon. Now it has. On Sept. 14,
a 4-four-year old American girl suffering from a deadly genetic disorder
became the first human being to receive gene therapy.

       A gene taken from the body of a healthy donor was inserted into the
child's blood cells. As a result, her body should now able to produce a
crucial missing enzyme and her immune system will function normally to
protect her against otherwise deadly infections.

   Now that the medical replacement or repair of defective genes in living
human cells has moved from science fiction to science fact, it is time for
sober assessment.

   It is impossible not to share in the scientists' intellectual
excitement. This is an important medical breakthrough and it could portend
the eventual discovery of effective treatments for many of the 3,000 known
monogenic defects, such as cystic fibrosis and sickle-cell anemia.

   On the other hand, as some have cautioned, gene therapy for the
foreseeable future is likely to benefit only a tiny number of patients.
(Most human diseases result from complex interaction involving both
environmental factors and a plurality of genes.)
   It probably says something significant about our culture that we herald
with great fanfare a medical accomplishment likely to benefit a very few
people, while millions of children die annually from dehydration resulting
from diarrhoea, for want of a simple mixture of clean water, sugar and
salt, which costs less than $1 for each saved.

   But gene therapy, and everything that it entails, has become a force we
must reckon with.

   It is important to note that in the United States, genetic research is
carefully screened by federal regulatory bodies. Permission to undertake
such treatment would not have been given if, for example, the therapy had
involved an alteration to germ-line (reproductive) cells rather than
somatic cells (those that cannot be passed on to future generations).

   In a way, this moral distinction between reproductive and non-
reproductive cells might seem curious. Why should society welcome gene
therapy for children but refuse to accept germ-line therapy for their
parents, which would prevent children from inheriting the genetic disease
in the first place?

   There is an explanation. The great apprehension is that once we begin
to engineer our species by altering reproductive cells, we might succumb
to the fatal attraction of eugenics. The revulsion we feel for Nazi
doctrines of "racial hygiene" makes us rightly suspicious when scientists
(or others) talk of making "perfect babies" or breeding "superior
individuals." To some, it seems a dangerously small step from germ-line
therapy to eugenics.

   Misguided parents who attempt to shape their children into geniuses may
wreck their children's lives, but the harm is limited to their own
children. Who would we trust to decide what makes a "superior" individual?
Is there anyone we would trust with the power to "improve" our species?
Probably not.

   We ought, perhaps, to be grateful that most inherited human traits (for
example, skin color, intelligence and height) arise from the interaction
of more than one gene, and environmental factors as well. Such traits are
likely to remain beyond our power to modify, if not forever, than at least
for the near future. Dr. Frankenstein will have to wait some time yet
before making his curtain call.

   There is every reason to believe that society can welcome advances in
genetic therapy without hurtling down the proverbial slippery slope toward
Nazi eugenics.

   But it is not too soon to begin worrying about some other potentially
harmful applications of modern genetics.

   For example, the Human Genome Project, launched in 1988 with a $1-
billion budget, is soon likely to give us enormous powers to screen for
predispositions toward a variety of diseases. For example, children might
be screened for a genetic predisposition to Alzheimer's disease or cancer,
or manic-depression. If you discovered that your child (or yourself) were
so disposed, you might be able to take a variety of preventive measures -
diet, exercise or whatever.

   But do we really want to force people to live their lives under such a
cloud? Worse still, when insurance companies obtain such information, tens
of millions of people could become uninsurable. When employers obtain such
information, tens of millions of people might become unemployable.

   We are at the beginning of a revolution in human genetics. The new
knowledge we are about to acquire brings with it enormous potential power.
How will this knowledge be shared? In whose interest will the resulting
power be exercised? Society may not be able to regulate the acquisition of
the knowledge, but we can surely regulate its use. Alarmism is an
inappropriate reaction, but it is not too early to be concerned.

   Professor Arthur Schafer is director of the Centre for Professional and
Applied Ethics at the University of Manitoba.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              584 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1990 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 21, 1990 Friday

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find way to attack cystic fibrosis   Canadian, U.S. teams
correct genetic defect in labs   but warn that cure may take years

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

DATELINE: Toronto ONT

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
Medical Reporter
  TORONTO
 Under laboratory conditions, scientists have succeeded in correcting the
genetic defect that causes cystic fibrosis, an illness that kills more
Canadian children than any other inherited disorder.

       Two research teams, working in Canada and the United States, will be
publishing their successful test results in scientific journals - Cell and
Nature - over the next week.

   In their studies, the scientists inserted a normal gene into a cell
taken from a cystic fibrosis patient and demonstrated that the cell could
be made to work properly.

   The announcement represents a major milestone in the battle against
inherited diseases, and it is made just a year after scientists discovered
the defective gene responsible for cystic fibrosis, which afflicts 33,000
people in Canada and the United States.

   From a scientific point of view, researchers appear to be making
incredibly swift progress.

   But they caution that it could take years before this latest
breakthrough can be translated into an effective treatment.

   "There is a big difference between correcting abnormal cells in a lab
Petri dish, and correcting them in a living, breathing patient," said
James Wilson of the University of Michigan, who headed one of the research
teams.

   A safe way must be devised to get the normal genes into those body
cells affected by cystic fibrosis, particularly those in the lungs, he
noted.

   Cystic fibrosis - the most common genetic defect among Caucasians,
affecting one in 2,000 babies - causes mucus to build up and clog the
lungs.

   The mucus traps bacteria and germs, subjecting the person to recurring
infections. Over time, the lungs become more and more damaged, eventually
making it impossible to breathe. Most cystic fibrosis sufferers die before
the age of 25.

   From their earlier research, the scientists knew that the mucus
accumulates because a faulty gene fails to make a protein that is needed
to regulate the flow of water across certain cell walls.

   To overcome this genetic defect, the researchers first had to isolate a
correctly working, or normal, gene. This work was carried out by Lap-Chee
Tsui and his team in the department of genetics at the Hospital for Sick
Children in Toronto.

   The correctly working gene was sent to Dr. Wilson's labs at the
University of Michigan, where it was spliced into a harmless virus.

   Acting like a taxi, the virus was allowed to infect a cell removed from
a cystic fibrosis patient. Once inside the cell, the virus released its
passenger - the good gene - which incorporated itself into the cell's
genetic material.

   The good gene then started producing the protein needed for water
regulation.

   "This is an important step in the development of gene therapy for
cystic fibrosis," said Dr. Wilson, whose research results will be released
today in the journal Cell.

   Another research team, led by Michael Welsh at Howard Hughes Medical
Institute at the University of Iowa, also has been able to do the same
thing. It will be reporting its results next week in the journal Nature.

   "We have shown that we can correct the defect in the cell. Now, we can
begin to explore methods for introducing the normal gene into the airway
cells of the patients," Dr. Wilson said.

   He acknowledges that this will not be an easy task, however. For one
thing, a patient's lungs cannot simply be removed, repaired with new genes
and put back.

   What is more, there is currently no way to control which cells, and how
many of them, would get the gene if it were carried by an "engineered"
virus into a living person.

   "The focus of our work . . . will be the development of a delivery
system that can target certain cells," Dr. Wilson said.

   Eventually, he speculated, the gene might be delivered to cells by
having patients inhale a mist in the same way that asthma patients receive
medication.

   But Professor Tsui noted that any such brave new world experiments
would have to be perfected on laboratory animals before they are tried on
people.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              589 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1990 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           September 17, 1990 Monday

LENGTH: 590 words

HEADLINE: U.S.girl receives 'engineered' genes   Hailed as treatment for genetic
defect

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
Medical Reporter
A 4-year-old American girl has become the first person to receive
"engineered" genes in an experiment being heralded as a major event in
medical history.

       Researchers hope the procedure, known as gene therapy, will restore
health to the child, who suffers from a rare immune deficiency caused by
defective genes.

   They also hope the experiment, in which correctly working genes have
been injected into the girl, will pave the way to new and revolutionary
treatments for a host of other genetic illnesses.

   The procedure itself was a rather simple one - at least the part
involving the child.

   On Friday, she received the engineered or repaired cells during a 30-
minute blood transfusion at the medical centre of the U.S. National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.

   She has returned home with her parents, a hospital official said. Over
the next few months the girl, whose name has not been released, will
undergo frequent check-ups to determine whether the engineered genes have
reversed her condition.

   Because of faulty genes, the child has been unable to produce the
enzyme adenosine deaminase, or ADA, which is critical for the healthy
maintenance of the T-lymphyocyte cells that fight infections.

   "ADA is essential for the life of the (T) cell," Dr. Michael Blaese of
the U.S. National Cancer Institute, and one of the key researchers in the
gene therapy experiment, said in a recent interview.

   "If they don't have it they (T-cells) can't reproduce normally when
challenged by a germ."

   Individuals who are stricken with this genetic defect are doomed to
short, unhealthy lives. When attacked by an infection, their immune
systems cannot muster enough resources to fight it off.

   The intention of the experimental therapy is to provide genes that will
produce ADA so that the girl's immune system can work properly.

   To carry out the experiment, the researchers first removed some T-cells
from the child's blood. In a laboratory, they infected the T-cells with a
human-engineered virus that contains the gene that produces the ADA
enzyme.

   The genetic material from the virus settled into the T-cells,
permitting them to start producing ADA. After the cells had multiplied in
the lab, they were injected into the child.

   Before the experiment, Dr. Blaese said that even if it does work, the
girl will still need frequent injections of genetically engineered cells
during her life.

   "This is a treatment, not a cure," he said, adding that the ADA enzyme
will be produced in her body only while the engineered cells are alive.

   "The question is how long will these treated blood cells live," he
said. They could last months or years.

   In fact, the researchers very deliberately carried out the experiment
in such a way that it will not permanently alter the child's genes or
result in her passing genetically altered material on to any children she
may have.

   Scientific watchdog bodies and government regulators have concluded
that genetic changes must be restricted to repairing genes within
individuals; if a mistake is made the damage will not be passed on to
others. Both government and medical officials are concerned about the
possibility of a genetic-engineering accident forever altering the human
race.

   Dr. Blaese noted that his research team went through a very elaborate
system of review before it was allowed to conduct the experiment.

   It has the blessing of U.S. scientific and government bodies, including
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which granted its approval on the
same day the girl received the genetically engineered blood transfusion.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              595 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1990 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            April 19, 1990 Thursday

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: Redesigned mouse strain   advances gene-swapping

BYLINE: NYT

DATELINE: New York NY

BODY:

   New York Times Service
  NEW YORK
 After years of half-steps, missteps and fears that it could never be
done, researchers have fashioned a strain of mouse harboring a specified
genetic alteration in every cell of its body.

       This is the first reported demonstration that scientists can precisely
swap one form of a gene for another in mammals and breed the engineered
animals through several generations.

   The redesigned mouse represents the most advanced example of a
technique painstakingly developed during the past decade.

   Scientists say the gene-targeting method offers almost limitless
possibilities for analyzing the genes that cause cancer, immune
deficiencies and hereditary disorders such as cystic fibrosis and muscular
dystrophy, and for devising therapies against those and other human
diseases.

   Dr. Leroy Hood, a professor at the California Institute of Technology
and a leading U.S. molecular biologist, said: "It's really an absolutely,
uniquely powerful technique for understanding the role of genes that are
essential to life."

   The approach also has potential application to the nascent field of
human gene therapy, in which doctors hope to treat disease by inserting
new genes into the cells of patients. Researchers say that if they can get
the method to work in humans it will be a vast improvement over current
approaches.

   "The technology is revolutionizing biology," said Rudolf Jaenisch, a
molecular biologist at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and
the senior author of a report being published today in the journal Nature.
"In principle, you can use it to study any gene you have isolated."

   Mr. Jaenisch proposes that his genetically engineered mouse could be
exploited to create new ways of performing skin grafts, bone marrow
transplants and even whole organ transplants.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              597 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1990 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            April 14, 1990 Saturday

LENGTH: 1137 words

HEADLINE: Scientists opening a Pandora's box   by unlocking secrets of genetic
makeup

BYLINE: PAUL TAYLOR; GAM

BODY:

   BY PAUL TAYLOR
The Globe and Mail
 The scientists who isolated the gene that causes cystic fibrosis
inadvertently opened a Pandora's box of social and moral issues that may
be impossible to close.

       The discovery last August immediately made it possible to determine
from a blood test whether individuals are carriers of cystic fibrosis, a
disorder affecting the lungs and digestive system that kills more Canadian
children than any other inherited disease.

   A few U.S. firms lost no time in offering the test to the public. And
one pregnant woman from San Diego quickly learned it can cause more grief
than relief.

   When the test indicated that the fetus she carried would suffer from
cystic fibrosis - the most common genetic defect among Caucasians,
affecting on average one in 2,000 babies - her insurance company
threatened not to extend health coverage to the child, the Washington Post
reported.

   Only after intense lobbying from her doctors did the insurance company
back down and agree to pay medical bills for the child, who will need
life-long care.

   Cystic fibrosis, which causes mucus to build up and clog the lungs and
pancreas, is invariably fatal, although new drugs and improved methods of
treatment have raised the median age of survival in Canada today to the
mid-20s, from 4 years old in 1960.

   The tussle over insurance benefits in the United States is the first of
many conflicts to be expected from the huge advances in genetic research.

   And it will not stop with cystic fibrosis. Over the next decade or so,
scientists are expected to identify the genes responsible for many other
illnesses.

   Their work might eventually make it possible to determine whether
individuals - or their offspring - will suffer from any one of 3,000
inherited disorders. And people will gain a better idea of what diseases
they are vulnerable to as a result of their genetic makeup.

   Such scientific crystal-gazing could play a major role when people
decide whom to marry or what career to pursue. But who will protect the
confidentiality of this personal information? Will people feel compelled
to terminate a pregnancy when a fetus has a genetic disorder? And do
people even want to know their fate?

   "You can come to the conclusion that there is a lot to be said for
ignorance," said Reynold Gold, associate professor of medical genetics at
the University of Toronto.

   "I think we are in danger of telling people things they would rather
not know. . . . People have a right to ignorance."

   Not everyone, however, is convinced that genetic research will
automatically produce a nightmarish world.

   "We are still in a position to make choices that can avoid exploitive
and oppressive outcomes," said Christine Overall, an associate professor
of philosophy at Queen's University in Kingston.

   At the same time, scientists note that their work holds out the promise
of treatments for debilitating diseases.

   "We hope it is going to improve the quality of life in the long term,"
said Lap-Chee Tsui, one of the discoverers of the cystic fibrosis gene and
a senior scientist in the department of genetics at the Hospital for Sick
Children in Toronto.

   Researchers, in particular, will gain an accurate understanding of what
is going wrong in the body when an individual has a genetic disease. "So
if you want to develop a drug to correct a defect you know where to target
it," explained Ronald Worton, geneticist in chief at the hospital.

   And individuals who turn out to be genetically prone to, say, heart
disease or certain cancers can take steps to increase their chances of
living longer.

   In time, scientists might even be able to alter the genes, thereby
stopping a disease before it starts.

   But genetic engineering could lead to disasters once encountered only
in science-fiction novels - a political tyrant creating a master race or a
research accident that forever mutates the human species.

   Most industrial countries - including Canada - are trying to head off
these problems before they arise.

   The Medical Research Council of Canada assembled a committee of experts
to draft guidelines for gene therapy. In a report to the federal
government last year, it concluded that researchers should avoid making
any genetic changes that could be passed from one generation to the next.

   That means scientists will be discouraged from altering human sex cells
- the male sperm or the female ovum - as a way of preventing parents from
passing genetic disorders on to their children, who in turn would pass on
the altered genetic makeup to their offspring.

   Instead, any genetic repair work would be restricted to "fixing" genes
within individuals. If scientists make an awful mistake, the damage will
affect just one person and not spread to the human gene pool, the
committee concluded.

   "Once you alter the genetic structure of human beings, you won't be
able to undo what you've done," said Abbyann Lynch, a committee member and
director of the Westminster Institute of Ethics and Human Values in
London, Ont.

   "In general, it is better to do less than more," Ms Lynch said.

   Other countries are also expected to follow fairly restrictive research
policies when it comes to tinkering with human genes.

   A team of U.S. researchers, for instance, is going through a lengthy
approval process for the first experiment to treat a disease through gene
therapy.

   "I don't think we'll get the approval until at least a year from now,"
said Michael Blaese, a National Cancer Institute scientist.

   Dr. Blaese and his colleagues hope to treat a child with a rare immune
deficiency disease caused by a mutated gene.

   The child is incapable of producing the enzyme adenosine deaminase, or
ADA, which is critical to the healthy maintenance of the T lymphocyte
cells that fight infections.

   "ADA is essential for the life of the cell," he explained. "If they
don't have it, they (T-cells) can't reproduce normally when challenged by
a germ."

   The researchers intend to remove some of the T-cells from the child's
blood. Then, in the laboratory, they would "infect" the T-cells with a
human-engineered virus containing the gene for producing the ADA enzyme.

   They hope that the genetic material from the virus will settle into the
T-cells, permitting them to start producing ADA.

   After the cells multiply in the lab, they would be injected back into
the child.

   "The question is, how long will these treated blood cells live for,"
Dr. Blaese said. "The child might need life-long treatment requiring many
injections."

   But that in itself would be a great improvement because individuals
with such disorders are usually doomed to short and unhealthy lives.

   Meanwhile, the United States government has decided to pour $3-billion
over the next 15 years into a project to "map" all human genes. James
Watson, an internationally renowned scientist who was appointed the
director of the ambitious venture, has compared it to President John
Kennedy's commitment to land a man on the moon.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2007


                              599 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1989 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                           December 30, 1989 Saturday

LENGTH: 1198 words

HEADLINE: THE EIGHTIES: DECADE IN A HURRY   In the eye of biology's hurricane
Scientists gasped at power to reprogram all beings

BYLINE: STEPHEN STRAUSS; GAM

BODY:

   The riddle we can guess
 We speedily despise -
 Not anything is stale so long
 As Yesterday's surprise
 Emily Dickinson
                           BY  STEPHEN STRAUSS
It's tough for a decade's worth of science not to exude the musty odor of
yesterday's surprise.

       Ah, yes, it seemed so exhilarating when those whatchamacallits, those
high temperature superconductivities, or cold fusions, or Supernova
Sheltons 1987, burst upon our consciousness. But if someone wonders now
what happened to all those breakthroughs and discoveries, the answer
usually comes back that scientists are pinching and poking and pondering
anon. The slog is what really happened. The long term. The process of
slowly grinding nature into reproducibility.

   And this process is in some very real sense the key to understanding
why the most important science news of the eighties was so vastly under-
reported. More than anything it was a decade in which biology began to
roil and bubble. The boiling took place along such a wide front of
research that no biological image seems suitable to describe it. Rather it
was like that eerie moment on a Caribbean beach when heavy, slow waves
start to pound the sand. The sky is blue, but bathers know that somewhere
out to sea a hurricane has formed and soon their languid, sunny world will
all but rip apart.

   In the 1980s, biology's storm gathered.

   To illustrate this one is tempted to make a list of amazements. We,
humanity, started to transfer bits of DNA between species in the 1980s.
Snip out that chunk of the genetic code which makes a firefly shine and
paste it onto a tobacco plant's DNA. Grow the tobacco and presto - a glow.
The plant shines and all its descendants will henceforce carry the fly's
glow. Take the gene that allows a flounder to keep from freezing at the
ocean bottom, stick it onto the DNA of canola. Eureka. The rapeseed starts
producing the flounder's personal antifreeze.

   The implications of transformation, of what has been termed biological
alchemy, were only noticed by a few. Biotechnology companies were
beavering away trying to transfer genes which produced natural insecticide
genes or pesticide resistance genes into plants. About this and other
"transgenic" research, Jeremy Rifkin, the U.S. technology gadfly, was led
to declaim: "This is a violation of our species integrity."

   But his view was clearly so narrowly Western as to be laughable. In
terms of natural theology, it seems the Buddhists were right. Every living
thing is just a mutation of every other living thing, and that intimacy is
so profound that at the level of the DNA, frog and man and corn and papaya
tree will lovingly embrace.

   What this all means for where scientists and society go next is beyond
troubling. All that the past decade made clear is that we simply don't
know the limits of transformation. We don't know if we can make pigs with
wings. We don't know if we can make chimpanzees that talk. In the eighties
we glimpsed what our biological alchemical powers might be and came away
stunned.

   Another amazement was the birth of the science of bio-history.
Analyzing how DNA has changed over the eons, geneticists began to
reconstruct the history of species relationships. Armed with so-called
"DNA clocks" scientists asked, are people more closely related to apes
than chimpanzees? Answer: No. Is an extinct hairy mammoth a closer kin to
an Indian elephant than to an African one? Answer: Maybe. Looking at a
certain type of DNA which is passed along only by women, scientists in
California went so far as to suggest that every human on the planet is the
descendant of a mother Eve who lived in Africa several hundred thousand
years ago.

   As the decade drew to a close scientists also divined how to retrieve
and then replicate DNA from things long dead - stuffed birds in museums,
mammoths frozen in the ground for 40,000 years, the extinct half-horse,
half-zebra quagga. We don't yet have the powers to fully resurrect the
departed from their DNA, said biology's new Dr. Frankensteins, but who
knows how the hurricane's winds will blow in 10 or 20 or 100 years.

   Even without the birth of a science of the living dead, the exact same
genetic analysis techniques made headlines when they were repackaged under
the name "DNA fingerprinting." In Argentina the new technology not only
identified children who had been covertly adopted after their parents were
killed by the military government, but announced in the incontrovertable
language of genetic similarity who their real families were.

   Piecing together our genetic jigsaw puzzle seemed more and more the
present and future of medicine in the eighties. Armed with a variety of
technologies that allowed them to break the strands of DNA apart, compare
one person's DNA with another, and ultimately isolate a small bit of the
braided, 3 billion-chemical long chain, scientists embarked on a quest
which might have been entitled: Find The Gene.

   They found some that cause disease. Perhaps the two most famous are
cystic fibrosis and a form of muscular dystrophy. They found others which
are just a cog in some much more complicated process - the body's immune
system for example. The drive to understand the body, molecule by
molecule, led the United States in 1989 to embark on a 10-year, $3-billion
(U.S.) program to map the sequence of all the chemicals that make up a
typical human strand of DNA.

   Interesting, but not the hurricane. The hurricane is what does it mean
when we know many if not all of the genes lying ready to operate in an
unborn fetus. Do we have a child if it will be born with or soon develop
cystic fibrosis? Diabetes? Bone cancer? What is society's, and in
particular the health care system's, responsibility to us if we
consciously decide to have such a child?

   The hurricane is also gene therapy, begun in a very tentative way in
the United States in 1989. In this treatment, a foreign gene is inserted
into a human cell. When put inside the body the gene turns on and produces
a something - cancer antibodies, growth hormone - which the receiver's own
body is not able to provide. We fight genetic disease with a pill made out
of DNA.

   Perhaps the greatest irony of this paean of biological advance is that
when the decade began even more was expected. Following the first
patenting of a man-made life form in the United States in 1980, instant
biotechnology companies extracted hundreds of millions of dollars from
investors with fever dreams of genetically engineered microbes that viewed
all human pollutants as lunch and bacterially produced vaccines that
considered the cold virus their dinner.

   At decade's end only a few products were on the market. Biology was
coyer than expected. Efforts to introduce anything new in the environment
pushed panic buttons in the hearts of people beginning to fear nature
itself was dying. But surely the growth of environmentalism was simply
another face to 10 years pregnant with biological forebodings.

   Microscopic DNA and macroscopic global warming left as their legacies a
more complicated metaphor than first suggested. We have lived through a
decade in which there were two islands, two beaches, two sets of heavy
waves, and two very different kinds of biological hurricanes about to
descend.

   Mr. Strauss is The Globe and Mail's science writer.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              601 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1989 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            December 15, 1989 Friday

LENGTH: 1035 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN THE 1990   Science   THE CUTTING EDGE   Scientists are
coming up with ideas for improved nuclear   reactors, but building a better pig
is proving more problematic

BYLINE: DAVID FISHLOCK; GAM

BODY:

   By  DAVID FISHLOCK
 A United States government invitation for ideas for a smaller, simpler
and safer kind of fission reactor has produced some ingenious new
proposals that could start to be used next year. Present reactors are
cluttered with afterthoughts, mostly added to enhance safety. The new
ideas peel away layers of bad design accumulated through three decades of
rapid development. The world's best-selling pressurized water reactor
(PWR) could now be produced with 60% fewer valves, 60% less pipework, only
half the big pumps and 80% less control cable. A far more practical
proposition.

     An Anglo-American team has invented a new PWR, called the Safe Integral
Reactor. In this design, the team has stuffed the entire primary circuit -
reactor, steam generators, pressurizer and high-pressure pipes - inside a
steel pressure vessel. This makes a reactor simple enough to build in only
three years - most take six - at a price for power that will be
competitive.
 In 1990, the thermionic valve might make a comeback - courtesy of the
solid-state technology that put it out of business. The transistor is not
a solid-state triode but an electronic component with different, albeit
highly desirable, characteristics. Silicon fabrication technology allows
transistors to be micro-miniaturized, made by the million, and packaged as
the ubiquitous chip. But the chip has a weakness. It can be got at by
bolts of electricity that slip into the wiring and short-circuit it. These
bolts can either come down the power line, or out of the blue from a
lightning flash or a nuclear explosion. Defence scientists worry that
their most sophisticated equipment could easily be disabled in this way.
The thermionic valve, on the other hand, is a vacuum device, inherently
"hardened" against this kind of assault. The idea gaining pace in
electronics research is to adapt silicon fabrication technology to micro-
miniaturize old-fashioned valves instead of transistors.
 In 1990, IBM will start making a new generation of silicon chips, with
components of still smaller dimensions than are mass-produced today. The
company will use a machine called Helios, invented in Britain, to make
these submicronstructures. Helios is what is popularly known as an atom-
smashing machine, a plaything of physi cists that is normally so big and
costly only governments can afford it. IBM scientists have demonstrated
that a byproduct of very powerful X-rays, once merely a nuisance to
physicists, is just what they need to pack in still more parts per chip.
 Despite all the publicity given to ceramic superconductors in the past
few years, they will remain a dream. The ceramics cannot carry enough
current to make them useful to engineers. Where ceramics might make a
breakthrough in 1990 is in aviation. Aero engine makers are close to
flying ceramic engine parts for the first time. Rolls-Royce, for example,
believes it now understands many of the hurdles that must be overcome to
make ceramic engine components.
 Airframe makers say that next year there will be a new competition
between metals and ceramic-reinforced polymers such as carbon-fibre
reinforced plastics for major parts of a plane. According to Airbus
Industrie, if technology already used in the vertical and horizontal tail
plane of its Airbus 320 could be applied throughout the fuselage, it could
cut aircraft weight by 35% and cut costs. With the help of MBB, the West
German aerospace group, the plane maker hopes to have just such a fuselage
by 1995.
 The opportunities emerging for biotechnology go well beyond the new,
genetically engineered pharmaceuticals such as interferon, interleukins
and insulin. In 1990, the science could be used for microsurgery aimed
right at a defective gene. Current treatments for most human genetic
diseases are unsatisfactory. Gene therapy is seen increasingly as having
greater promise for treating inborn disorders of the bone marrow, liver
and central nervous system, for some inherited cancers, and for replacing
missing ingredients from enzymes to blood-clotting factors.
 Watch glycobiology, another of the new generation of biotechnologies that
is beginning to lure the medical scientists. An Oxford group headed by
Raymond Dwek, backed by substantial funds from Monsanto, is exploring
unique defects in the body's sugar chemistry, and finding links with such
diseases as rheumatoid arthritis, tuberculosis, cancers and AIDS. This
group has developed a blood test that can pick up arthritis in children
and is beginning to test its first potential therapies. For Monsanto, the
work of Oxford's department of biochemistry is its biggest single academic
investment. This bio-based company believes glycobiology underpins all the
four areas of research - cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, CNS and immune
diseases - of its pharmaceutical subsidiary GD Searle.
 Expect more controls on biotechnology. American experiments in the
genetic engineering of pigs by the transfer of genes to hasten growth and
produce leaner pork are revealing both promise and problems. The promise
is that it works in principle. Transgenic pigs show worthwhile
improvements in daily weight gain and feed efficiency, and have much less
subcutaneous fat. Unfortunately, the transgenic pigs are unhealthy. Their
assorted infirmities include arthritis and ulcers. Such side effects have
helped focus criticism upon what might otherwise have been accepted as a
socially desirable line of research. West Germany has called for a five-
year ban on any release of a genetically engineered organism into the
environment. Britain's standing Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution has also concluded that wide-ranging statutory controls are
justified. The clue to its underlying concern might be detected in the
message from William Stewart, chief executive of the Agricultural and Food
Research Council, who forecasts that the techniques it is seeking to
contain will have as large an effect on society as nuclear fission. They
are already recognized as cheap, readily available and of great commercial
potential. The implication is that it will be in society's long-term
interest to do more to avoid the kind of accidents and "leaks" that have
come to hobble nuclear fission.
 David Fishlock  is science editor of the Financial Times.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007


                              605 of 605 DOCUMENTS


        Copyright 1989 Bell Globemedia Publishing Inc. and its licensors
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Globe and Mail (Canada)

                            January 20, 1989 Friday

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: U.S. approves first transplants of foreign genes into humans

BYLINE: NYT

DATELINE: New York NY

BODY:

   New York Times Service
  NEW YORK
   The U.S. government gave its approval yesterday for the first federally
sanctioned attempt to transplant foreign genes into humans.

       The first of the gene transplants, to involve cancer patients, is
expected within three months.

   The project has been under review by government agencies for seven
months.

   It was given final approval yesterday by the National Institutes of
Health and by the Food and Drug Administration , the two responsible
federal agencies.

        'This is the first time a proposal for gene transfer into humans has
received official approval,' the NIH said in a statement announcing that  the
director, James Wyngaarden, had signed the approval.

   Gene transplantation in humans has long been a subject of debate but
has never been given federal approval.

   Such transplants were tried almost a decade ago, but the scientists
involved were censured for acting without government approval.

   The current proposal by W. French Anderson of the National Heart Lung
and Blood Institute and Steven Rosenberg and Michael Blaese of the
National Cancer Institute, was approved earlier by several advisory
committees of the institutes.

   In the new project, the scientists will transplant a bacterial gene
into disease-fighting white blood cells that have been taken from no more
than 10 patients with advanced cancer and treated in the laboratory to
enhance their natural ability to attack cancer tissue.

   The gene transplants are not intended to affect the cancer treatment,
but are to serve as markers to allow scientists to identify specific white
blood cells from among others of the same types in the patients' bodies.

   The foreign genes are expected to help doctors monitor the
effectiveness of the cancer treatment.

   The white blood cells containing the transplanted gene would be put
back into the patients from which they came and would be the only cells
with the transplanted gene.

   The identification of those cells helping to fight off the cancer could
aid doctors in gauging the effectiveness of the treatment. The researchers
say the risk to the patients would be minimal.

   Successful transplantation of the marker genes would also help
scientists gauge how well human genes function after they are
transplanted.

   Transplanting genes into patients is central to the concept of human
gene therapy, long sought as a way of treating some serious hereditary
diseases.

   In gene therapy, copies of a normal gene would be put into a patient to
serve the biological function that was disrupted or lacking in that
patient.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2007
